 Story_ID: 633248 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers archive. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Ma'am, can you please give us your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: It's [HistoryMaker] Evelyn Brooks Higginbotham, and Evelyn is E-V-E-L-Y-N, Brooks, B-R-O-O-K-S, Higginbotham, H-I-G-G-I-N-B-O-T-H-A-M. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: My date of birth is June 4th, 1945. Speaker 1: And where were you born? Speaker 2: I was born in Washington, D.C. Speaker 1: All right, and what is your occupation and title? Speaker 2: I am the Victor S. Thomas Professor of History and of African and African American Studies, so I'm a historian. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date? Speaker 2: What is today's date? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Today is April the 25th-- Speaker 1: And (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) two thousand thirteen [April 25, 2013]. Speaker 1: Okay, and where are we at, at the present time? Speaker 2: We are at the present time in the office of the chair of the Department of African and African American Studies. I am the chair of African and African American studies at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], so we're in my, my office. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Story_ID: 633249 Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions that I'm compelled to ask you that only require a short answer. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: The first one is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: I love food; there are no favorites (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Probably, I love earth tones, so I love rust and olive greens, those kind of colors. I don't think there's one favorite, but maybe a kind of burnt orange, rust color is, I find, nice. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Summer. Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: I take too few vacations, but I have a home in Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts], and I love Martha's Vineyard. Speaker 1: Okay, and the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: I don't know. I'm not conscious of it, you'd have to ask other people who listen to me, but I'm not conscious of a favorite phrase or saying. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 633250 Speaker 1: I'm going to ask about your family history. I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Albert N.D. Brooks] side, but separately, and then we'll put them together. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: Well my mother's no longer living, but her name was Elaine Campbell Brooks [Elaine Campbell Wells] and she, you know, the Brooks was her married name. My mother, her family comes from Jamaica. Speaker 1: Okay, now let's not get ahead. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Can you spell her name for us? Speaker 2: E-L-A-I-N-E, Campbell, C-A-M-P-B-E-L-L, and then Brooks, B-R-O-O-K-S. Speaker 1: Okay, now what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Yes. Well she was born in New York City [New York, New York] and she was born on December 4th, 1921. Speaker 1: Okay, now, all right, so, how far back can you trace your mother's ancestry and what are the stories on that side? Speaker 2: Not far, and my mother, my mother's side of the family, the Jamaican side, I didn't hear about that nearly as much as my father's side. Both my mother's mother, Titania Campbell, and her father, Charles Campbell, were residents of Jamaica. I believe both of them were from Saint Andrews [Saint Andrew Parish, Jamaica]. They came to the United States with a wave of immigrants from the Caribbean during the late nineteen teens [1910s] and she probably had not been in the country that long when my mother was born. She had a brother. My, my grandmother was a McDonald, and my mother's side of the family had Scottish and, you know, African roots, but I know very little about that side of the family actually. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They are cousins--there were cousins there and the cousins, some of them, have become very illustrious, had become very illustrious in Jamaica. One family, the LeWars, Russell, was my grandmother's cousin. He ended up becoming the first, I think, black town clerk in Jamaica. There's a street named after him [LeWars Crescent, Kingston, Jamaica]. We would visit them but her direct line, I have very little knowledge of. Speaker 1: What is his name, the cousin? Speaker 2: His name was Russell LeWars, L-E-W-A-R-S, and his, he had three beautiful daughters. One was actually Miss Jamaica for the (unclear) world, whatever this world beauty thing is, she was Miss Jamaica. And she [sic. Barbara LeWars Manley] married Michael Manley. She was, I think, his second wife, and then she died young. And then there's another daughter, Marguerite [Marguerite LeWars Gordon] who is still around. I'm not sure if she lives in Jamaica. I--someone at one time told me she was in Trinidad, and there's another daughter, Janet [Janet LeWars], who lives in Jamaica now, but those are the only relatives that I'm aware of in Jamaica. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So there are no stories about life in Jamaica or when the Campbells or the McDonalds were there (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My mother--and, it's really interesting, they came to the United States, and they did not talk about Jamaica that much. My grandmother had a brother, they called him Mack [ph.], and I remember seeing him, he moved to New York too. But they really didn't talk about life there. My father's family was very conscious of its history and, because both my mother and father were historians, both of them taught high school. They were both interested in history, but it's very interesting that my mother did not really share with us good stories about family. I have no idea now. I wish I, I've often wished I could ask her certain questions about people in New York who had the last name Campbell and were they related to, but. Speaker 1: Yeah, there's a Jamaican named Robert Campbell that explored Nigeria with Martin Delany back in 18-- Speaker 2: So, you see (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) fifty-nine [1859], actually. Speaker 2: --he could have been related to her father. Speaker 1: Yeah, he came from Jamaica and taught in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and then he went to Nigeria with Martin Delany, but, but there's all, you know-- Speaker 2: We'll never know (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) you don't know (laughter). Story_ID: 633251 Speaker 1: So your mother [Elaine Campbell Wells] grew up in New York City [New York, New York] and-- Speaker 2: Um-hm, in Harlem. Speaker 1: --in--okay, go ahead (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She lived on, at 323 Edgecombe Avenue, and that was a very bustling area in the '20s [1920s]. I think the NAACP's office [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] was quite near there. I think Jack Johnson had, you know, a place [Club Deluxe] somewhere very near there, in a big apartment, the brownstone, big apartment buildings. I think they used to call it Sugar Hill, something like that. Speaker 1: Was--were there any members of your family associated with the UNIA [Universal Negro Improvement Association] at all? With Marcus Garvey? Speaker 2: You know, I hate to say that I didn't get that information but I will tell you my mother's godfather was a man named Elie Garcia who was very much active with the UNIA. Speaker 1: Yeah, he was the ambassador to Liberia for Garvey when Garvey tried to settle in Africa. Speaker 2: Well, he was my mother's godfather, so I've always thought--and you know when my mother kind of dropped that on me, I, I was well a historian then and I was so elated and I said to her, "Well, you know, was my [maternal] grandmother [Titania Campbell], my grandfather [Charles Campbell] members of the UNIA?" And she just didn't know, but she was quite proud to tell me he was her godfather. Speaker 1: Yeah, he's a prominent figure in the Garvey movement. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Basically handled the delegation that went to Liberia, I think, I believe he was among--Elie Garcia. Yeah, and I'm tempted to ask too the--since your mother was a historian, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean, she, they weren't histor- well, my mother was a history student at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], that's how she met my father [Albert N.D. Brooks] and she got her master's degree at Howard and she worked with an amazing historian named Rayford Logan, and so my mother met my father as his practice teacher. My father was considerably older than my mother, but my father was very active in black history. Now my mother, both of them were in the public school system [District of Columbia Public Schools]. So my mother ended up teaching for quite a while, junior high school [Shaw Junior High School, Washington, D.C.], then high school [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School, Washington, D.C.] and then she went in the '60s [1960s] to the, one of the superintendents of, one of the supervisors of history for the District of Columbia, and she actually--she and another woman, Helen Blackburn [Helen M. Blackburn]. Helen Blackburn was my high school teacher [at Theodore Roosevelt Senior High School, Washington, D.C.]. She had a huge impact on my life, and she and my mother became friends, working together. Actually, I introduced them, but they were very much alike and very solid, knowledgeable teachers. But my mother wasn't active in the black history movement the way my father was. Speaker 1: Okay, she's a student of Rayford W. Logan which is-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --interesting. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And Rayford Logan actually was a peer of my father. My father was considerably older than my mother. Story_ID: 633252 Speaker 1: Are there any stories about your mother's side of the family before we move on to your father's side? Speaker 2: Oh, my father [Albert N.D. Brooks] has lots of stories on his side, but my mother's, I wish I could think of something. Other than the Elie Garcia, I can't think of anything. Speaker 1: Did, did your mother's side of the family know J.A. Rogers [Joel Augustus Rogers] by any chance? Speaker 2: Never mentioned that either. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Never mentioned. But they were very proud of being Jamaican American, and they were part of a group of, a cluster of relatives who came to the United States and so, you know, we had another cousin who lived in, was it Queens [New York] or? I can't remember now, but they were clearly an immigrant community, and they ate Jamaican food, they were very conscious of that identity, very hardworking. My [maternal] grandmother [Titania Campbell] and grandfather [Charles Campbell] broke up though. They didn't ever divorce, but they led separate lives by the time I was introduced to, to them. But my grandmother was an amazing person, very caring, very, a lovely individual. She worked in the Garment District in New York [New York]. Speaker 1: And what did your grandfather do? Speaker 2: I have no idea. By the time I met him, he was older. He was very handsome and that might have been his problem (laughter), but I have no idea what he did. My mother [Elaine Campbell Wells] didn't talk about him as, in those terms, you know. She liked him, she loved him, but she didn't talk about what he did or that kind of thing. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. There are so many people from the Caribbean involved in history in Harlem [New York, New York] in those days, you know, I just--you know, not only Rogers, but Charles Seifert and-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --you know; there's so many of them. Speaker 2: So many. Speaker 1: You know, just-- Story_ID: 633253 Speaker 1: Oh, let me ask you where, what high, high school did your mother [Elaine Campbell Wells] teach at? Speaker 2: She taught at Shaw Junior High [Shaw Junior High School, Washington, D.C.], initially that's where she met my father [Albert N.D. Brooks]. Robert Shaw, you know Robert Gould (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Robert Gould Shaw. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --of the 54th Massachusetts fame [54th Massachusetts Volunteer Infantry Regiment], right? Speaker 2: That's right. So she taught at Shaw and then she taught at Paul Laurence Dunbar High School [Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School, Washington, D.C.], that was--before my mother started teaching there, you know, one of the great elite schools for black people in the Washington [D.C.] area, but by the time she taught there, after integration, it had become a neighborhood school. So she taught there and then she went from Dunbar to the F Street--I think it was on F Street where this supervisory role took place. Story_ID: 633254 Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, so my father's name was Albert, and then Neal, N-E-A-L, and then Dow, D-O-W, Brooks, and he went by the name, Albert N.D. Brooks. So it's A-L-B-E-R-T, N-E-A-L, D-O-W, B-R-O-O-K-S. Neal Dow was a famous 19th century temperance man, and I think he was the governor of Maine [sic.], and my grandfather, who was a minster and very much an active member of the Anti-Saloon League, named my father, his youngest child. His middle name was Neal Dow, so my father was Albert N.D. Brooks, and he was truly a great man. He was, both my parents were the inspiration for my being a historian, but my father was the reason I am the kind of hist- you know, what I focus on, African American history, and he was indeed amazing. Speaker 1: Okay. Now Neal Dow, I mean, people, there hadn't been a lot of people we've interviewed that refer to the temperance movement. That was a huge movement. Speaker 2: It was huge. Speaker 1: Yeah, in the first part of the century. Yeah. Speaker 2: In the 19th--and in the 20th century. By the time they got to the 20th century, it was very, you know, they called it Prohibition and it, you know, but, but even before that, you know. But my grandfather--see my father was born in 1897, so he was a peer of Rayford Logan's. They both went to the predecessor of Dunbar [Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School, Washington, D.C.], it was called M Street High School. Speaker 1: Well let me just do this systematically now-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and I won't get--so your father was born in 1897. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: What's his date of birth? Speaker 2: August 26th. Speaker 1: Okay, and where was he born? Speaker 2: He was born in Washington, D.C. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And his father was great, so I need to talk to you about his father. Speaker 1: Yeah, and his father was a reverend, right, Reverend--? Speaker 2: Reverend Walter Henderson Brooks, and he was Walter H. Brooks, that's H-E-N-D-E-R-S-O-N. And I hate to tell you, I don't know the exact day of Walter Brooks' birth, I can get that, but I know he died on July 7th, 1945. He lived to be--and he was born 1851. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, he was born 1851, he was born a slave in Richmond, Virginia, and his father was another great man. Speaker 1: So this is your great-grandfather? Speaker 2: Grandfather, um-hm. Speaker 1: Your great-grandfather, now what is he-- Speaker 2: No, my grandfather was Walter. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: My great-grandfather's name was Albert Royal, R-O-Y-A-L, Brooks [Albert Royal Brooks], and he was a slave in Richmond, and his wife, who's also an important figure, actually, was Lucy Goode, G-O-O-D-E, Brooks [Lucy Goode Brooks], and she was born September 13, 1818. The reason I know her birth date is because my daughter [Nia Higginbotham] was born on September 13th, so they share the same birthday. I have--don't have the dates for Albert, but I'm sure they're easily gotten, but he would have been probably born around the same time, 1818, or earlier. Speaker 1: So they were born in Richmond. Now can you go back even further? Speaker 2: I can't go back farther--I've never tried to go back further than them. I, I have cousins, a cousin who works at the Library of Congress [Washington, D.C.], Joe, Joseph Brooks, he is working on the family history, so he may have gone back. I need to find out, but I've always grown up knowing those names. Story_ID: 633255 Speaker 1: And there's another name that I haven't given you, and that's Eva--her name started off, Evalin, E-V-A-L-I-N, Holmes, H-O-L-M-E-S, Brooks. Eva was Walter Brooks' [Walter Henderson Brooks] wife. And her father (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So that's your [paternal] grandmother? Speaker 1: That's my grandmother. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And my father [Albert N.D. Brooks] named her--me, after her, only he spelled it the more traditional, Evelyn way, but she, but her name was E-V-A-L-I-N, and then they called her Eva Holmes, Eva Holmes Brooks, and her father was her adoptive father because her, her real father was a slave- her biological father was a slave owner, but her mother married the man who raised her as his daughter, and she did grow up as a child with him, his name was James Henry Holmes and James Holmes was the first black pastor of the First African Baptist Church in Richmond, Virginia. Speaker 2: So he was the first pastor of the First African (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Of the First African Baptist Church. The First African Baptist Church in Richmond, Virginia, and there's still the landmark on, I think it's Broadway, or Broad and--Broad Street, or Bro- Broad Street, maybe, in Richmond. But he, well of the church that he led because there was an earlier church, the slave church, and that slave church was led by a white man named Robert Ryland, R-Y-L-A-N-D. And Robert Ryland was a, what we--he was a slave owner and he was a slave minister but he was one of the kinder masters, so he would--it was illegal to teach the slaves to read, but he definitely shared books with them and he, he gave my grandfather an appreciation for books. And Robert Ryland led the church for a long time. When the Union Army came through Richmond in 1865, they threw him out, the Union Army did, and the slaves themselves brought him back in, or the ex-slaves. But then right--not, not long after, at, maybe a year, '67 [1867] at the very latest, and maybe earlier, James Holmes had been a deacon under him and then he was installed as the minister. So some of those very first efforts where the, where there's the discussion during Reconstruction about the war--I mean about Reconstruction rather, about Reconstruction and about whether blacks should vote and how they should vote, those early meetings were held at the First African Baptist Church. And so my grandfather would have been, you know, the church where that would have been, he would have been a pastor at that time. There is, the new church, there is a stained glass window and his picture is in the stained glass, James Holmes. So my grandfather, who was, his is an equally interesting story, but my grandfather marries his daughter, and he becomes pastor of the Second African Baptist Church in Richmond, before he comes to Washington, D.C. So that's on my grandmother's side and that's about all I know of her. I have her photograph but that's about all I know of Eva. It's a- it's Walter Brooks' side that has the really detailed information. Story_ID: 633256 Speaker 1: And I grew up, you know, hearing these stories. And I must tell you, you know, you have this sense of legacy. I mean, not all the Brooks have it, 'cause my daughter [Nia Higginbotham] doesn't even have it, but I grew up feeling, not like I was somebody special, I didn't, I didn't get that, but I felt like I had a mission. You know, these people left me with a mission and that, one of those missions was definitely to, for our people to know our history. And it's, it started with my father [Albert N.D. Brooks], who worked with Carter G. Woodson for decades, and ran the association office in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] after Woodson died and pretty much was the glue that held them together. I'll give you the booklet when my father died and they talked about all he did after Woodson died. But my, my father was one of these people who, like me, he was--or I'm like him, he just worked from morning 'til night. So, you know, during the day, he's teaching and then later he becomes a principal of the Garnet-Patterson Junior High School [Washington, D.C.] and he, he's a principal, and it's Henry Highland Garnet and I forget who the Patterson is [James Patterson], but he's a principal and then as soon as he leaves work, he goes to the association office. I, it's ASALH that they call it now but in those days we called it the Association for the Study of Negro Life and History [Association for the Study of African American Life and History]. So my father would go to that office every day after work and on Saturdays and so he would take me as a child to the office, and I'd watch him work and I'd watch, you know, the, the two office women, wonderful, Mrs. Miles [Willie L. Miles] and Mrs.--I'm going to blank on her name, it'll come back to me, but he would work, they put out the Negro History Bulletin [Black History Bulletin], you know, he'd be in touch with Charles Wesley [Charles H. Wesley] and all, Rayford Logan and all these people would come to my house that I met, [HistoryMaker] John Hope Franklin when I was about five years old. Benjamin Quarles [Benjamin A. Quarles], I, you know, they were all around my life growing up. So my father was very active in that movement, but he would, how he shaped me, now, and I have a sister [Elaine Brooks] who is not like this at all, so, you know, it's--. But he shaped me with these words, he would say, "We do what we do to disprove the lie, the Negro has no history, or none worthy of respect," and, I mean, if I heard that once, I heard that almost every day of my life. Story_ID: 633257 Speaker 1: He [Brooks Higginbotham's father, Albert N.D. Brooks] would talk about his family, and so talking about his family gave me this sense and it's just illustrious. I mean, his fa- if you go back to Albert Royal, who he's named after, Albert Royal Brooks is a slave and there's a write up on him somewhere, so I need to get this right and I might not have it right, but he was owned, I want to say, by a Presbyterian minister, and when we meet again I'll have the facts straight, but I, I'm--but he was owned, I believe, by a Presbyterian minister who, and he was a pretty well treated slave in the sense that he had more freedom, I think, than a lot of slaves. He was the driver. And so as a driver he would take him, the owner, around, and so he had the opportunity to be, you know, a--have a certain amount of freedom doing errands because there is a case where he is caught without his pass, and he has to prove that he has the right to be out there by his master and he proves it. His mother, I don't what his father's name is, but his mother's name was Peggy Henderson, and she is defined as a pure African, and he is defined, Albert, as African. And so Albert Royal Brooks marries Lucy Goode Brooks. Now Lucy Goode Brooks is owned at, at this time by the, this would have been in the 18--you know, '50s [1850s]. He's, she's owned by the German consulate. I never would have thought of, you know, the Germans, but her owner is a man named Daniel Von Groning. Speaker 2: By the German consulate. Speaker 1: Consulate, um-hm (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So I guess even the consulates could take advantage of slavery existing in this (unclear)-- Speaker 1: As long as you were white. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So he, Albert, in 1862, is able to buy her freedom and he's able to buy the freedom of the child she's carrying, but none of the other children. Now I've not known, and I need to find out, how he was able to buy her freedom. I'm not sure, was he a slave by then? Did he--but his master, Albert's master, had a tendency to give him more--I think some slaves, people write books on slaves in the city argue, you know, Frederick Douglass was a slave in Baltimore [Maryland], and there was a certain level of, just more flexibility and keeping a certain amount of money. But he did buy her freedom but he wasn't able to buy the rest of the children except the one she, she had, and he had several children. So Walter remained a slave and the sister, Margaret Ann [Margaret Brooks], was sold into slavery, sold outside of Richmond [Virginia], rather. They're all slaves. Walter worked in a tobacco facul- factory but that is the story growing up that we were told, and the haunting loss of Margaret is forever with us, you know. I-- Speaker 2: That's the sister that was sold? Speaker 1: That's the sister who was sold into Tennessee, and the mother was just destitute. She was trying so hard to find her daughter, the whole family was, and my [paternal] grandfather, as late as the 1930s, is still trying to find what happened to her, you know. So, I think I read something about the '30s [1930s] where he said she died in Tennessee but we've been looking for her, you know. They just, but her, they--and in 1862, I mean, the sad thing about it is that I've always known the story of Margaret, and there's even a photograph of Margaret and I've always known that she, unlike another sister and Walter Henderson [Walter Henderson Brooks], and there was a brother, Robert Peel Brooks, that she was the only one that was snatched from the family. She was older and, you know, I think they just saw her as good for slavery, but--I shouldn't say good for, they were all slaves, but she was, the family had never been broken up until then. Speaker 2: But her value may have been such that they, they really couldn't resist, you know, selling her. That, that was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, but just think about that moment when they're selling her. The war [Civil War] is on so if they, you know, it's just so heartbreaking because the war is on and she was so close to freedom but she just could never live or be there long enough to enjoy it. But Walter Brooks says, he writes, 'cause he writes about himself and Carter Woodson [Carter G. Woodson] writes about him and he, and he is--oh, stop. Story_ID: 633258 Speaker 1: Make that point. This is 1862, this is before the Emancipation Proclamation, but as you were saying, the Emancipation Proclamation only applied to? Speaker 2: The states in rebellion. And so if you were in a state, like Virginia, in the capital of the Confederacy, which Richmond [Virginia] was, there wasn't going to be any acknowledgement, or, you know, obeying Lincoln's [President Abraham Lincoln] Emancipation Proclamation. My [paternal] grandfather [Walter Henderson Brooks] was not freed until the troops came through Richmond, and he even talks about watching the troops come through Richmond, it's, you know, breathtaking. Speaker 1: Now let's hold that for a second, but I just wanted to point out that Tennessee was a border state in the sense that it wasn't committed to secession but you had slavery in Tennessee and, which was tolerated through the end of the war [Civil War], right? And so, until the-- Speaker 2: You had slavery in Maryland, you had slavery in Missouri and Kentucky. In fact, that's one of the reasons the Thirteenth Amendment had to be ratified because otherwise you had slavery still, and there were thousands of slaves that were still--who were not only slaves in those border states, but slaves of the Indian [Native American] nations. You know, there were, there were slaves in Oklahoma. They had to do a different deal even with the Chicopee and the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you could be, be sold from Virginia, a slave state, to a, a border state, you know, in Union control, and this transaction would be legal all the way through, you know, to where we-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --went. Okay, so now you said your, this is your (unclear)-- Speaker 2: You know, we're just raising, I'm just thinking about this now because it's interesting. She could have been sold to somebody in Tennessee but the other side of it is that, the way slavery operated, she could have been given as a wedding present to the owner whose family wants to go to Tennessee because the war isn't touching--well the war is not touching them the same way it's touching Richmond and lower South, and it's not--well, you know, that was a reality that they, they faced. But slaves were moving west, and Virginia was a feeder, it had always been a feeder for the domestic trade. In fact, the big slave trading companies, when we think of, I (laughter), when I talk about my, this to my students, I said think of this as the commodities market. You know, they had big merchandising companies; this wasn't small business. And they would sell those slaves and Richmond was one of the places and they'd go south and west, so. Speaker 1: Now this is big business, supported by insurance companies-- Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: --and investors and-- Speaker 2: Exactly, investment companies. So, so they did that. So she was lost to the family, and so every Brooks at least, and, you know, my father [Albert N.D. Brooks] and that side, I think almost everybody in our family knows who Margaret Ann [Margaret Brooks]--they might not remember Alberta [Alberta Brooks], but everybody knows who Margaret Ann is. Story_ID: 633259 Speaker 1: Then, the war [Civil War] ends, and so when the war ends and Walter [Brooks Higginbotham's paternal grandfather, Walter Henderson Brooks] is free and his brother [Robert Peel Brooks] is free, and the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now this is, now let's not get past the description of the fall of Richmond [Virginia]. I wanted to hear, I want to hear that, what, what-- Speaker 1: Well, no wait, well I shouldn't s- you know, he just talks about how, you know, what a wonderful moment it felt, the freedom, and to watch the troops coming through. His father ends up--Albert Royal Brooks now, the father of Walter, ends up having a delivery, called a hack, hack service, so he gets his own delivery service. But the, the really interesting part about this is that Albert Royal Brooks serves on the first petit jury to try Jefferson Davis, and this is the first petit jury, it's the first integrated petit jury in the United States, and so Jefferson Davis is supposed to be brought to trial, that never happens. He is not, and I forget exactly what the legal definition, I think I wrote somewhere once that he was pardoned, and I, a person wrote me back and said, no he wasn't pardoned, there was some other thing, and maybe it was under the amnesty, I forget how he is freed. But Jefferson Davis never actually has to go to this trial. But this petit jury is formed and the pho- and it's photographed and there are about four black people on this jury, and that's how I very first saw Albert Royal Brooks. I saw a photograph of him that a cousin of mine had, and it was just a face, like a, almost like a cameo, and I could tell she got it from somewhere because it was, you know, where's the rest of his body? Where's the rest? And then she showed it to me and now I see it in lots of things. I, I brought a copy of it. I downloaded it from the NY- New York Public Library digital--there's a photograph of it so I'll point him out to you, it's in books on Virginia, but he was serving on that petit jury, so that was pretty amazing. And then he, I, I know very little of him after that, and very little of the other children. Story_ID: 633260 Speaker 1: I will tell you this though: Lucy Goode Brooks, whom he [Brooks Higginbotham's paternal great-grandfather, Albert Royal Brooks] married, how she comes into history, and I did not know this until relatively recently. She opens an orphanage for children [Friends' Asylum for Colored Orphans; Friends' Association for Children, Richmond, Virginia], black children who are orphaned, you know, after the war [Civil War], and she opens this orphanage with, I think women from the Friends service. Speaker 2: With the Quakers and Society of Friends [Religious Society of Friends]? Speaker 1: Um-hm, I think so, I think that's how she does it because my grandfather was a Baptist and there was much about Baptist history in Richmond [Virginia] going on at that time, and I write about it in 'Righteous Discontent' ['Righteous Discontent: The Women's Movement in the Black Baptist Church, 1880-1920,' Evelyn Brooks Higginbotham], but she wasn't identified with those women. Had she been identified--although she is, I do mention her in 'Righteous Discontent' actually, because they talk about a Lucy Goode, but--Brooks, but not as a leader of this school. That, that comes out later, this orphanage, and in fact they have now a historic landmark to her in Richmond. I'll show you the, the, the piece on that too. It was, the landmark was done a few years ago, but in the 21st century. So I'd like to think that I have in me people who tried to do something beneficial for society, you know. She was somebody who wanted to make a difference in the lives of young people who had no homes. And Walter Brooks [Brooks Higginbotham's paternal grandfather, Walter Henderson Brooks], one of the things I--I feel very attached to him, he's very, you know, a religious man, but he also was a historian in the early journals of Negro history [The Journal of Negro History; The Journal of African American History]. He has an article on the, the first black Baptist churches that are founded in South Carolina. Speaker 2: Yeah, there's a, I think there's a controversy about whether they were founded before the A.M.E. church [American Methodist Episcopal] or not-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --there's that-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Well they argue that the, there's one in Petersburg [Virginia] and I think it's called, it's the Gillfield Church [Gillfield Baptist Church] also? There's one that's founded like in the 1720s. And the, my grandfather's article, 'The Priority of the Silver Bluff Convention' [ph.], I believe that is also prior to the story about the founding of St. George's--oh well the, the founding, rather, Bethel [Mother Bethel African Methodist Episcopal Church, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] from St. George's [St. George's Methodist Episcopal Church; Historic St. George's United Methodist Church, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. But he wrote two articles on that, and so I remember when I wrote my book on women in the black Baptist church, I definitely thought of him. I felt as though I were walking in his footsteps, as well as my father's [Albert N.D. Brooks] footsteps. I mean, one of the, one of my proudest moments about being Dr. Brooks [HistoryMaker Evelyn Brooks Higginbotham] is because that's what they called him. So I like that. Of course, then it went to Higginbotham, which is also a great man, but, but I did have a great affinity to who they were and what they represented, again, not, not from position of elitism, but from a position of, these people really made a difference in the world. I wanted to be, I wanted to carry that legacy. So I tried to find out a lot about them. Story_ID: 633261 Speaker 1: So Walter Brooks [Brooks Higginbotham's paternal grandfather, Walter Henderson Brooks] ends up going with his brother, Robert Peel Brooks, to Lincoln University [Lincoln University, Pennsylvania]. Speaker 2: Now Walter Brooks' brother is Robert Peel Brooks-- Speaker 1: Um-hm, he's the first black man (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) named after-- Speaker 1: Yeah, he is. Speaker 2: --Robert Peel-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --the founder of the bobbies in England? Speaker 1: Yeah. Yeah. Speaker 2: Founder of modern policing, the Englishman. Speaker 1: Well, that's his name, and he-- Speaker 2: Robert Peel, okay. Speaker 1: --ends up becoming the first black lawyer to pass the Virginia bar, and he does that, I think, in like the 1870s. He's mentioned in Clay--I'm blanking on Clay's name, the book, 'Emancipation' ['Emancipation: The Making of the Black Lawyer, 1844-1944,' J. Clay Smith, Jr.], but-- Speaker 2: So that's Lincoln in Pennsylvania, again, or? Speaker 1: Yes, in Pennsylvania, but Robert Peel Brooks dies early. He goes to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] for something and he catches the flu and he dies. So he, his greatness is never achieved, but he is the first black man to pass the bar in--the Virginia bar, he's a lawyer. Now, Walter is a minister so he goes to Lincoln, and Lincoln is a Presbyterian school so he first thinks about being a Presbyterian. I mean, I guess he's, well he grew up as a Baptist, but he, he did flirt a little bit with being a Presbyterian minister. He is there in the same years as Francis Grimke, the famous James Francis Grimke [sic.], and Archibald Grimke, he's there with them, they become friends. In fact, Walter Brooks, I believe is the one who performs the marriage of Francis Grimke and Charlotte Forten [Charlotte Forten Grimke], and he's also the one (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So this is in the eighteen seven- '70s [1870s], right? I guess, right? It had to be in the eighteen seven- Speaker 1: No, he, he's there in 1868-- Speaker 2: Eighteen sixty-eight [1868]. Speaker 1: --because I have at home-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --a petition that they signed, it's a copy, so I can see Robert Peel Brooks' signature and Francis Grimke and Archibald and they are, they have a petition for the ratification of the Fifteenth Amendment. So this is, I believe, 1868. Speaker 2: The school is only about twelve years old at this point. Speaker 1: It was founded, I think, in 1853, something like that. Speaker 2: Fifty- yeah, I thought it was like '56 [1856]-- Speaker 1: Well, it's in the '50s [1850s]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Okay. Speaker 1: It's founded in the '50s [1850s], so it's not that old. Speaker 2: And that's, you know, it's not that, not very, the school's not very old. Okay. Speaker 1: Unh-uh, and my grandfather was, for many years, its oldest alumnus. So he would go back there every year, and the year he died he went there and spoke. Speaker 2: So do you know the year he graduated from? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But I can find that out easily enough. Speaker 2: So he decided not to become a Presbyterian and-- Speaker 1: Somewhere along the way, he went back to his Baptist roots and he became, you know, he became a Baptist minister, so--because by the time he gets to--in the 1870s, working for the American Baptist Home Mission Society [American Baptist Home Mission Societies] as a, he's working with, I don't know if it's, if he's just simply a missionary or if he's attached to something, but he is working there in Louisiana. Story_ID: 633262 Speaker 1: As I'm writing 'Righteous Discontent' ['Righteous Discontent: The Women's Movement in the Black Baptist Church, 1880-1920,' Evelyn Brooks Higginbotham], my, my book on the women in the black Baptist church, I learn a lot about him. So, you know, it was just shocking to see him in Louisiana, and that's where my Aunt Julia was born, my father's sister was a woman named Julia Evangeline Brooks [Julia E. Brooks], and she is one of the incorporators of Af- Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.], but she was, and for also many, many years, the vice principal at Dunbar High School [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School, Washington, D.C.], and for many years the--when people talk about Dunbar, they always remember her (laughter) you know, people from that earlier generation. I think she was rather strict. But Walter Brooks [Brooks Higginbotham's paternal grandfather, Walter Henderson Brooks] was--he had ten children, so his oldest son was a man named Warren Randolph Brooks [Warren Brooks, Sr.]. And Warren Randolph Brooks had children, and his most--oh he had several illustr- one of his children is named Warren [Warren Brooks, Jr.], after him. Another one--and he's a physician in, he's probably retired now, but he's a physician in Los Angeles [California]. And then another one of his sons was named Walter Brooks, Walter Henderson Brooks [Walter Henderson Brooks II], and Walter Henderson Brooks lived exactly the same years as Walter Brooks, and he died exactly on the same day (laughter), day, as Walter Brooks. Isn't that just something? I don't think he was born on the same day, but they were both ninety-four and they both died July 7th. So, but his, the youngest of Warren's children is a man named Elmer Brooks [HistoryMaker Brigadier General Elmer T. Brooks] and Elmer is--you, you've interviewed Elmer for The HistoryMakers. Elmer is a general in the [U.S.] Air Force. He was a-- Speaker 2: Oh, I did--yeah, in Las Vegas [sic. Rockville, Maryland], I remember. Speaker 1: Did you do that in Las Vegas? Speaker 2: I think he was living in Las Vegas. Does that sound about right? Speaker 1: He was in Las Vegas for a time (simultaneous), Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah that's him, right. Speaker 1: But, I mean, he lives in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] now-- Speaker 2: Does he, okay. Speaker 1: But Elmer Brooks has been everywhere. He went to a base in Kansas [McConnell Air Force Base] where he was not wanted and turned that whole base around, you know. He has been in the Air Force. He's retired now, but he's amazing. So he's my first cousin. So he is the child of Walter Brooks' first child--Walter Henderson Brooks' first child, and I am the daughter of Walter Henderson Brooks' last child. And there's about, oh, there's many decades between them, now, and they had the same mother, they had the same mother. So let's say Evalin [Eva Holmes Brooks] started with Warren, probably she was in her early twenties and, by the time she had my father, she was in her forties but. And they're all interesting. I mean, my father had a sister five years older than him, and her name was Antoinette Mitchell Brooks [sic. Antoinette Brooks Mitchell], and she married a man named Louis Mitchell who was a drummer and brought jazz to Europe. They are really, he had all kinds of jazz groups. They moved to France in the--right after the war [World War I, WWI] and stayed there until the '30s [1930s]. So when Carter G. Woodson writes a, the introduction to my grandfather's book of poetry ['The Pastor's Voice: A Collection of Poems,' Walter Henderson Brooks] 'cause that's the other thing he wrote poetry, and my grandfather writes the introduction to it, he says the names of the children and then he'll say, "And Antoinette Mitchell of Paris, France," that's really funny, but those, their papers are in the Library of Congress [Washington, D.C.], Louis Mitchell and Antoinette Mitchell. He was, as I was growing up, I had no idea Louis Mitchell was such a noted jazz artist. You know, he would have been probably a little, he was very risque for my grandfather's, he wouldn't have wanted his daughter--he was a gambler, a drummer, a, you know, he was out there but she was time enough for him (laughter). But my father was the youngest and he married my mother [Elaine Campbell Wells] who was twenty-four years his junior and that's how I can have a grandfather who was born a slave, and a father who was born in the 19th century. Speaker 2: So, Albert Brooks, your father, Albert N.D. Brooks-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --and-- Speaker 1: And he was named after his [paternal] grandfather, Albert Royal Brooks. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Okay. Story_ID: 633263 Speaker 1: Now where did your father [Albert N.D. Brooks] go to school? Speaker 2: My father went to school, and you know, I have to find, I don't know where he went for elementary school, but he went to the M Street School [M Street High School, Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 1: Okay, that's for high school? Speaker 2: Um-hm, that's the predecessor to Dunbar [Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School]. Now it's either called the M Street School, or even prior to the M Street it was called the School for Colored Youth [Preparatory High School for Colored Youth]. So, but he went to the exact same school, and in the exact same class as Rayford Logan. And I had Rayford Logan for a teacher and professor at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], and my mother [Elaine Campbell Wells] had Rayford Logan as a professor. Speaker 1: Now did you, your [paternal] grandfather [Walter Henderson Brooks] know Dunbar? I'm pretty--I just wonder? Speaker 2: Paul Laurence Dunbar? Speaker 1: Yeah, um-hm. Speaker 2: I bet he met him, and--I bet he did. Speaker 1: I know he worked at the Library of Congress and lived in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] for a while-- Speaker 2: Probably. Speaker 1: --you know, and, 'cause he traveled a lot and he's from Dayton [Ohio], which is my hometown, but he's, he lived here, you know-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --he lived in D.C. for-- Speaker 2: Right, and then the poetry part of it because my grandfather loved poetry and he wrote; he was a writer of poetry. So they, I'm sure he would have known him because he certainly knew Frederick Douglass, and there was you know correspondence between him and Frederick Douglass. Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: So my grandfather went to Lincoln [Lincoln University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania], and he left Lincoln and went to Louisiana. He went from Louisiana to Richmond [Virginia], back to Richmond. I think this is the way it went. He was at the Second Baptist, Second African Baptist [Second African Baptist Church, Richmond, Virginia] and then in 1882, he was called to Nineteenth Street Baptist Church. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Eighteen eighty-two [1882]. He ca- was called to Nineteenth Street Baptist Church in Washington, D.C. and he pastored that church for sixty-three years. He pastored it 'til he died in 1945. So from 1882 to 1945 he was in that pulpit. Speaker 1: Now Nineteenth Street Baptist Church, well I suppose it's on 19th Street (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's now on 16th Street. Speaker 1: But it's--now, it's on 16th? Speaker 2: Yes (laughter). But it was-- Speaker 1: Is it northwest, or? Speaker 2: Um-hm, northwest. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Both were northwest. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And they grew up there, and I want to say T Street, but I have to get the right--because he had his own house. He didn't get a parish. They bought a parish house for him on the Howard University campus, or near, in that LeDroit Park area [Washington, D.C.], and it still has his name on it, but he wanted his own place. He liked the idea of having a certain level of independence. And so he, he bought his own house, and that was where h- where my father grew up. Speaker 1: And where was his house? I mean-- Speaker 2: I have the address but I don't, in my memory. Speaker 1: All right. Was it near the Howard campus or around? Speaker 2: No, the parish house that they first got him when he first came was very near the Howard campus, and they even have a Brooks Baptist fellowship at the Howard campus, it probably started in his day. And the house has a landmark on it that says, you know, Walter H. Brooks, but that house, I don't know if the church continued to own it or did they sell it to Howard, but the house--pastors have lived in that house, not necessarily pastors of the Nineteenth Street Baptist though. Speaker 1: Okay, but you don't remember where your grandfather's house was? I mean-- Speaker 2: Well I have the address of his own house that he bought for his family. Speaker 1: Was it near the Howard campus? Speaker 2: No, it wasn't, unh-uh. It was more near, it's what they call Foggy Bottom [Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 1: Oh, okay, he was downtown, you know. Speaker 2: Um-hm, 'cause that's where the church was. The church was like 19th and I [Street] so the house, so the, you know, in those days it wasn't what we think of as Foggy Bottom today. Speaker 1: Right, right, right. I know it had, during those days, I mean, foreign visitors were surprised that black people lived so close to the White House [Washington, D.C.], right, you know. Speaker 2: Well, they used to sell slaves near the Capitol [U.S. Capitol, Washington, D.C.]. Story_ID: 633264 Speaker 1: So your father (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So he [Brooks Higginbotham's paternal grandfather, Walter Henderson Brooks] comes to Nineteenth Street Baptist Church [Washington, D.C.] and then he is--amazing. I was looking at one of the, the books on the Atlanta conference [Atlanta compromise] books of Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois]? And they talk about the church there and I can't remember, it's probably on the Negro church, but they talk about how it was such a big church and how it was so strong and one of its great claim to fa- fames is that the founding of the National Association of Colored Women [National Association of Colored Women's Clubs] in, it's either 1896 or 1897, I'm blanking which one, it was done at that church, that event was held at that church. So there's a photograph of all these women and there he is standing and there's an article saying something like, you know, "I wanted to do something for women." Nannie Helen Burroughs, who was a great leader, she was a member of his church. He was a father figure to her. Speaker 1: Now that's one of the great figures in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] history. Speaker 2: She really is, and how I got interested in her, I like to say I discovered Nannie Helen Burroughs to people who didn't know about her because, although she died in something like 1962, it's amazing how scholars had, and all these women's historian- nobody knew anything about her. And when I was in graduate school [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], and this was in the early '70s [1970s], women's history was growing and this is a story for another meeting, but women's history was growing and we as graduate students, led by [HistoryMaker] Rosalyn Terborg-Penn and Sharon Harley, we were just graduate students, we decided that we were going to go into this field and pioneer it, and Rosalyn and Sharon really were the two to do it because Rosalyn's dissertation was on the vote for women, and she and Sharon, while graduate students, put together an anthology and so they asked, you know, well who wants to write for this anthology? And I said I wanted to, and I thought, well, I'd do it on Mary Church Terrell because she was one of Dr. Logan's [Rayford Logan] favorites. Mary Church Terrell and Mary McLeod Bethune; he loved both of them, and I thought I'd do it on her also because she's, she was a name everyone knew in Washington and she was famous. But my mother [Elaine Campbell Wells] said to me, "There was a woman at your grandfather's church, you should write about her, her name was Nannie Helen Burroughs, and people don't know about her now but she was great." So I said okay. And then I discovered her, I discovered her papers at the, I had the school to turn the papers over to the Library of Congress [Washington, D.C.]. I, you know, read, you know they have a picture of her, at least they used to have it in the museum, I don't know if it was the Smithsonian in Anacostia [Anacostia Neighborhood Museum; Anacostia Community Museum, Washington, D.C.], I forget this area, but she had in her bedroom, she had a photograph of my grandfather there and she wrote once--I read this in a, in a, one of these repositories, I think it was the Southern Baptist Convention, but it's amazing the white Baptists have so much of our, of our records, and, yeah, it's because they saved them. We, we didn't save them. 'Cause a lot of it's just correspondence and things like that. It's not like they took them from us, but they saved these (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, this is correspondence between the individual churches and-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and the Southern Baptist Convention? Speaker 2: Yes, and individuals and I forget, she's writing to a woman in the, who's one of the Southern Baptist auxiliaries. Speaker 1: (Unclear) I don't know, this is kind of inappropriate at this time probably, but do you, when was the National Baptist Convention founded with the-- Speaker 2: It was founded in 1895, but there are predecessors to it. So the very first National--it's called the American National Baptist Convention, it's founded in 1880 and it actually had women on its leadership and it was led by a man named William J. Simmons of Kentucky. He was a great man. He wrote the book 'Men of Mark' ['Men of Mark: Eminent, Progressive and Rising,' William J. Simmons and Henry McNeal Turner]? Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, that's right. I see his engraving in my head. Speaker 2: Yes, yes, and he was a friend of my grandfather's. Then in 18--you know, so they come, it's American National Baptist first and then it was the American Foreign Mission [sic. Foreign Mission Baptist Convention] and, you know, and then there's a third one, oh, the American Baptist Educational--the American National Baptist Educational Convention [sic. National Baptist Educational Convention]. Those three conventions merged in 1895 to form the National Baptist Convention, USA [National Baptist Convention, USA, Inc.]. And when they formed--they weren't incorporated when they first formed and they also, they also did, the women fell out, off the radar screen. So it was in 1900 that Nannie Helen Burroughs, and she's just a young woman, she's only like twenty-two years old, and she gives that speech, how the sisters are hindered from helping. I don't think she was even in the 1897 or 1896 meeting. She may have been, but she would have been a teenager when, or just barely, like 1920 when the National Association of Colored Women are founded, but I think that probably had a great impact on her. And so she became great and she was the, she had, you know, her funeral in that church was great. No, she didn't have, did she have her funeral there? Because by then my grandfather was gone but she loved him. He was like a father. She didn't have an active father in her life, and so when her mother [Jennie Poindexter Burroughs] came from Virginia there, they became in that, became members, and she was just great, great, great woman. Story_ID: 633265 Speaker 1: But he [Brooks Higginbotham's paternal grandfather, Walter Henderson Brooks] was so, (laughter) he was in so many things. There was something called the Afro-American Council, which was during the Booker T. Washington years. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's Timothy Thomas Fortune, yeah, right. Speaker 1: Um-hm, well he was the chaplain of that group. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And he was, I found a document just recently about a statement, people were upset about Plessy [Plessy v. Ferguson, 1896], he was at that meeting, you know, he just shows up. There's another W.H. Brooks in New York [New York], he's not that person, so sometimes you have to be careful about confusing them, but he is very active in all of these things. He's close friends with Francis Grimke, who was just amazing. He performed the funeral service for Francis Grimke's mother, Nancy Weston [Nancy Weston Grimke]. So he's very close to all of them, and he heads the Nineteenth Street Church [Nineteenth Street Baptist Church, Washington, D.C.]. There is one split during his time of the formation of Berean [Berean Baptist Church, Washington, D.C.] and the, the way the story is told is that this lighter skinned contingency of the church feel he's too dark. In fact, there he is. Can you see? It's, well you put your stuff in front of it, but his photo--there's a picture of him. When I spoke at Second Baptist they gave me an older picture. You'll--we can see it later but he was a race man. I mean, he was very conscious of, you're working with Carter Woodson [Carter G. Woodson]. Carter Woodson would have been his junior, so Carter Woodson very much looked up to him and you see it in the way he writes the introduction to my grandfather's book of poetry and that, my grandfather's very active with the association. So-- Speaker 2: So, so what was the name of your grandfather's book of poetry that-- Speaker 1: 'The Pastor's Voice' ['The Pastor's Voice: A Collection of Poems,' Walter Henderson Brooks]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: 'The Pastor's Voice' (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And Woodson wrote the intro? Speaker 1: He wrote the intro. Speaker 2: All right. Story_ID: 633266 Speaker 1: Yeah, this is (laughter), this is a lot, this a powerful history here. Speaker 2: Yeah, and, and it's, it makes me, you see what I'm saying? I mean, all these personalities, I identify with. I feel like I am, you know, I'm supposed to walk in their steps, I'm supposed to keep that, what they believed in alive, you know, so I, I like to learn as much as I can about them. I always discover new things about them. Speaker 1: Yeah, your [paternal] grandfather [Walter Henderson Brooks], I mean, by holding the convention where they formed the na- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) National Association of Colored Women [National Association of Colored Women's Clubs]-- Speaker 1: Yeah, that was a big de- Speaker 2: That was a big deal. Speaker 1: --that's big in those days 'cause a lot of times even the abolitionists, in the abolitionist movement, I mean, women weren't allowed to speak at these, you know-- Speaker 2: Right, well, in Baptist churches-- Speaker 1: --and sometimes or be members, sometime-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --or certainly not the preacher or, you know, that's-- Speaker 2: Yes, well, there, as I write about it in 'Righteous Discontent' ['Righteous Discontent: The Women's Movement in the Black Baptist Church, 1880-1920,' Evelyn Brooks Higginbotham], the, there were a cadre of ministers. William J. Simmons was another one, very supportive of women's rights and they, the women argued that the obstacles that we face at the end of the twenty- at the end of the 19th century, this is the nadir. They're so great, you need us, women have to be partners with you; you can't do this on your own. And there were people like William J. Simmons who saw it because the school that he headed [Kentucky Normal and Theological Institute; Simmons College of Kentucky, Louisville, Kentucky], these women were, they were the fundraisers. You know, I always like to tell when I used to give speeches about 'Righteous Discontent' and I would say, I looked at the minutes of the National Baptist Convention [National Baptist Convention, USA, Inc.] and its predecessor conventions, I look at the minutes of the women's groups and I always say, either the men are really modest about what they did because the women are really doing the work. They are truly raising the money, keeping things going; it's just amazing what they're doing. The men make wonderful speeches, and it's very good if you were doing intellectual history just to get a sense of what their thoughts are, but when you see how those institutions got built, 'cause the church was our most important institution. It was the place where we held political rallies, as I talked about in, for James Holmes' church [First African Baptist Church, Richmond, Virginia] but many others. It was the place where Ida B. Wells had her, you know, press 'cause, 'cause the person with her was a minister. It was the place where our insurance companies came out of. We had the first insurance company that came out of Florida out of a church [Afro-American Industrial and Benefits Association; Afro-American Insurance Company, Jacksonville, Florida]. They staged boycotts. There's a great boycott of the segregation laws in 1906 and, that's coming out of a church, Bethel in Florida [Bethel Missionary Baptist Church, Tallahassee, Florida] so, I mean, our churches were our public spaces because the traditional spaces that everybody else went to, restaurants, their newspapers, their libraries, they weren't open to black people. So our churches were the only institutions, the schools, these schools are founded, places like Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] and Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia], they're founded in church basements, then they, you know, later get, get to be big but there are black people today in America who were, when they talk about their elementary school training, they'll say, "I was trained in the basement of a Baptist church in Arkansas," or some church in some place, you know, because those schools weren't open to black people, you know, so they had to go to places that created opportunities for them and the government wasn't giving any welfare out and the government wasn't giving any entitlement grants out and so we took our pennies and our dimes, and it was just amazing the level of giving and sacrificial giving that our people did to create these institutions within our churches. And so our churches became so utterly important to us. And, you know, when I read, just recently, I wasn't looking for Nineteenth Street Baptist [Nineteenth Street Baptist Church, Washington, D.C.] when I came across Nineteenth Street mentioned in the Atlanta conference, like 1905 or 1906, and not only do they talk about the work that they're doing and that the money that they've raised, but they had a medical clinic and their medical clinic is written about in The Voice of the Negro in 1904. It's just amazing. You know, we were a resourceful people. Story_ID: 633267 Speaker 1: And so Walter Brooks [Brooks Higginbotham's paternal grandfather, Walter Henderson Brooks] was one of these kind of, you know, just visionaries, progressive--in this era of progressive leaders in, in church leaders. Speaker 2: And you were saying that there was a Berean church [Berean Baptist Church, Washington, D.C.] that broke off because of skin color? Speaker 1: Yeah, they thought he was too dark (laughter). Speaker 2: (Unclear) hear this stuff, you know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The church wanted a lighter minister, I guess a lighter, I guess the rainbow coloring of the church itself was too much as well. Speaker 2: Well Washington, D.C. is, is often described as a place where color-- Speaker 1: Used to matter. Speaker 2: --consciousness and degra- skin degradation, paper bag test and all that sort of thing like is--. And, you know, in some parts of the country nobody thinks that's important but it seems as though it might have been and it seems to have been used as an excuse for why the Deltas [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority, Inc.] were formed, you know, away from the AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I've heard that story. Speaker 2: But they didn't--both groups denied that-- Speaker 1: I've heard, I don't know if that's true. Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: --both, both groups officially deny that story, why-- Speaker 1: Yeah, I can see why 'cause I think there are too many exceptions to the rule. But I mean Nannie Burroughs [Nannie Helen Burroughs] was clearly, you know, a brown skinned woman. Well, she wasn't in any of the sororities, but I don't know if--the story about Berean, I believe, is true. Now the paper bag story, you hear about it, but I've never actually seen an actual case that that happened. So, you know, where you could cite in at the time that that was going on. I hear people talk about it in scholarship today, but if there's actually a footnote where it says in 1991, you know, this happened, I've never actually seen that footnote. Speaker 2: Yeah, I've never either. Speaker 1: But the, and unfortunately, when they moved from 19th Street to 16th Street, a lot of those records were just lost; it's heartbreaking. So we'll not know whether that was written up but that story has been around enough, and I might even be able to find something about it in Washington newspapers. Speaker 2: Oh I know there is a documented story about Marcus Garvey visiting a big church in Detroit [Michigan], I can't think of the name of the church. It wasn't Second Baptist [Second Baptist Church of Detroit], I know that. I think it was Bethel A.M.E. [Bethel A.M.E. Church] where Robert Bagnall was a pastor, and he asked Garvey to, you know, go towards the back of the church because he was too dark. He didn't know who he was, but he said, "You're too dark to sit in the front." Now this is actually true and it's written in some of the Garvey histories, you know. But, so that kind of thing did happen. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: And so. Speaker 1: Um-hm. I think Nineteenth Street [Nineteenth Street Baptist Church, Washington, D.C.] saw itself as a progressive church. You know, it saw itself as a church where people were doing things for the race, you know, at the end. I mean, even, even later I found out--Charles Drew [Charles R. Drew] was a member of the church, much later. In fact his sister Nora Drew [Nora Drew Gregory] was a member of the church 'til she died. Wiley Branton, he was such a great lawyer. When he came to Washington, he was a member of that church. This would have been much later, but it had progressive people and it did progressive things. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 633268 Speaker 1: Now your father's story, your father grows up in this enriched environment. Speaker 2: He does. Now he's not, he would have definitely disappointed my grandfather's--with regard to his middle name because my father was much more social. I mean, he was very committed to the cause but he definitely drank socially. My [paternal] grandfather [Walter Henderson Brooks] was a very strict, very strict prohibitionist, he was, and being that way also put him in contact with people, like the chief justice of the United States, Charles Evans Hughes. They, he has correspondence with my grandfather because they're in the National--Nor- what's called the Northern Baptist Convention [American Baptist Churches USA], and they, you know, Charles Evans Hughes is an anti-saloon guy, so he writes to him. I found a letter, it was, what, fifteen years ago where my grandfather's writing to Charles Evans Hughes saying, you know, "I really need you to help my son, Albert [Albert N.D. Brooks], get a job." This is like around 1915 or so, you know, "I really need you to help my son get a job." I remember as I was telling my daughter [Nia Higginbotham], now, my father could be like that, look what he turned into, you know, there's hope for everybody. But I think my father may have been thinking about the law, but my grandfather was very strict so here's a good story about, that's not as nice, I think, about my grandfather to be honest. So my father was a member of Dunbar [M Street High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School, Washington, D.C.], and Dunbar sends its students to all these great schools. So Charles Houston [Charles Hamilton Houston] goes to Amherst [Amherst College, Amherst, Massachusetts], Dr. Logan [Rayford Logan] goes to Williams [Williams College, Williamstown, Massachusetts], my father goes to Dartmouth [Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire] and my father is in the class of 1919, although he doesn't finish there (clears throat) 'cause he goes to the war, and then he finishes at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], but he is still in, once you're in the class of 1919, you're always in the class. But he goes there for several years before he joins the [U.S.] Army, but he--my grandfather expected him to be a physician (clears throat) and my father did not want to be a physician. I mean, he just really didn't have the stomach for it. I don't know if it was a biology class where they had to dissect something, but he just couldn't do it. And my grandfather said he would not pay for my father's tuition, so my grandfather just stopped paying for his son because his son wasn't going into the field he wanted him to go into. But his daughter, my grandfather's daughter, Julia Brooks [Julia E. Brooks], she then paid for my father's tuition. And my, I think Julia was born around 1870-something, so see she was like twenty years older than my father, so she was settled and she could afford to do it. Speaker 1: Now what did she do for a living? Speaker 2: She was an educator. She was the vice principal, remember, at Dunbar High School. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: And she has, and she's also famous for being one of the incorporators of Alpha Kappa Alpha [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.]. Speaker 1: Right. Okay. So, when your father finished up, had he been pursuing history as a major at Dartmouth? Speaker 2: Probably, because he didn't like medicine. So, you know, or science. So he went to Howard, he became--he did history. He left, he graduated from Howard and went to uni- it's either NYU [New York University, New York, New York] or Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York], got his master's in education (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So when did he come out of Howard? Speaker 2: I don't remember exactly when he came out, like maybe-- Speaker 1: 'Cause it was after World War I [WWI], when he came-- Speaker 2: No, no, it was after World War I because he went into the war, so that interrupted his education. I want to say like maybe '22 [1922], '23 [1923]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But he's actually on the Harvard--on the Howard football team. There's a great photograph of him on the Howard football, football team in the Moorland-Spingarn Research Center [Washington, D.C.]. Story_ID: 633269 Speaker 1: Okay. Did he discuss who was teaching history at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] when he was there, and who he studied under? Speaker 2: No, no. And by the time, you know, all the historians are his peers. My mother [Elaine Campbell Wells] talked about the important people in her life at Howard. So Rayford Logan was one. Another man, Charles Thompson [Charles Henry Thompson], and Charles Thompson was the editor of The Journal of Negro Education, he was amazing also. I'm just now learning about Charles Thompson, but he was also really quite extraordinary, but he was one of her professors. There was another one she talked about, I'm blanking on his name, but he was also an educating--educator person, Doxey--not Doxey Wilkerson [Doxey A. Wilkerson], who was it? She knew Doxey Wilkerson, but it wasn't him. Speaker 1: It seems like Hansberry [William Leo Hansberry] would have been there when (unclear). Speaker 2: Yes, yes, she talked about him. She talked about him. Merze Tate, she talked about her. Speaker 1: Oh, Merze Tate? Speaker 2: Um-hm, M-E-R-Z-E, and Hansberry, she definitely talked about him. But her favorite was Rayford Logan. Story_ID: 633270 Speaker 1: So your father [Albert N.D. Brooks] goes on to get his master's [degree] at-- Speaker 2: I think it's NYU [New York University, New York, New York]. Speaker 1: NYU. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. And then he, and then he teaches at Shaw [Shaw Junior High School, Washington, D.C.] and then he becomes the assistant principal at Banneker, Benjamin Banneker [Benjamin Banneker Junior High School; Benjamin Banneker Academic High School, Washington, D.C.] and then he gets his own school, Garnet-Patterson [Garnet-Patterson Junior High School, Washington, D.C.]. So my, my father is--John Bracey [John H. Bracey, Jr.], John Bracey the historian? He taught John Bracey. John Bracey always says he learned black history first from my father and, you know, Negro History Week [Black History Month] was a big deal, it was a week then, then in those days. Speaker 1: Well John Bracey, you're right, he's co-author of 'Black Nationalism' ['Black Nationalism in America'], I know is one of the books (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, with August Meier. Speaker 1: Yeah, Rudwick [Elliott Rudwick]. Okay. Story_ID: 633271 Speaker 1: Now is there a story about how your parents met? Speaker 2: Yes. They--well, she--my mother [Elaine Campbell Wells] credits Rayford Logan for introducing them. I'm not sure that he had marriage on his mind when he introduced them because he was introducing my mother to my father [Albert N.D. Brooks] to be his practice teacher, so she came there considerably younger to be his, the practice teacher who works with the senior teacher in the classroom, and they fell in love and were married. But Rayford Logan, by the time, you know, they're all quite married and adults, he, he always took credit for introducing them. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So is there a story about how they fell in love or anything? Did they tell the story about their first date or? Speaker 2: No, my mother just said that, you know, she was so much younger that her--and my father had been married before, and I think my father was somewhat of a playboy so I don't think that my grandfather thought maybe this was the best situation. And so when they went to tell him-- Speaker 1: This is your mother's father? Speaker 2: No, Walter Brooks [Walter Henderson Brooks]. Speaker 1: Oh, Walter, okay. Speaker 2: Yes, Walter Brooks, 'cause he did perform the marriage ceremony, and he gave her a piece of advice, you know, like, "Do you know what you're getting into? This man is much older," blah, blah. But then, she said that he gave her a scriptural message like, you know, you have to cleave to your husband if this is what you want. I think he was testing her on some level just to see if she knew what she was doing because he was twenty-four years her senior. I remember my mother told me she went to my Aunt Bertie's husband's death--funeral. He was, and my Aunt Bertie, Alberta [Alberta Brooks Terrell]--all these names are in the family because my father's sister, Alberta, was named after my grandfather's sister, Alberta [Alberta Brooks]. But Alberta was married to a man named William Terrell who worked in the post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service], but he was the brother of Mary Church Terrell's husband, Robert Terrell [Robert H. Terrell], who was the judge. But my mother said that when they had to go up to the casket and she walked up with him that you could just hear the Brooks going (makes sound) (laughter) 'cause she looks so young. But it was a big family. We seem to be getting smaller but--at least my, father's side. My cousin, Elmer [HistoryMaker Brigadier General Elmer T. Brooks], Warren's [Warren Brooks, Sr.] son, that group just keeps multiplying and multiplying but they'll keep that Brooks name going forward. Story_ID: 633272 Speaker 1: I think I may know the answer to this already, but when you think about your parents' personalities, their proclivities, their sense of humor, how they walk, talk, how they look, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: I look like both of them, I actually do. I look like--when I was growing up, I used to think I looked like my father [Albert N.D. Brooks]. One of the reasons is that I'm tall and the Brooks men are tall and he was like 6'3", and as I was growing up, I always thought I looked like him but as I got--and my mother used to always say, "You look just like your father." But as I've gotten older, I definitely look like my mother and, and I know I look like my mother because people who haven't even met me have sometimes said to me, I got on a, I remember in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] on an elevator and the man said, "Are you Elaine's [Elaine Campbell Wells] daughter?" (Laughter) So, yeah, I look like both of them. I take after, personality wise, more my father. Now it's interesting, and this I think has something to do with me again. But my father was a, as I told you, he was a scholar, he was very committed to, he wrote a lot of those articles in there but he was so playful. He was such a playful person. My mother was not the playful one. In fact, she was the older, emotionally, of the two of them, so he might have been older in years but she was clearly the more mature. So, he was much more of a, a fun person. You know, so even when he's taking me to the, you might say, well going to the association [Association for the Study of Negro Life and History; Association for the Study of African American Life and History], you know, which was Woodson's [Carter G. Woodson] home, actually, after Woodson died, he just turned this thing--going to there on a Saturday, I wouldn't think that was playful, but it was, I mean, it was actually fun going there with him, you know. So he was--and just a, he had a sense of humor. He had a looseness about him, and my mother was much more, you know, I don't know, maybe it's the Jamaican part of her, I don't know, but she was more, much more conscious of having things right, and having things--. I remember when we were young, growing up in Washington, my sister [Elaine Brooks] and I, they used to have something called debutante balls. Now we went to public schools all the way, but they had debutante balls and my mother and father were in clubs. It was a really big thing in D.C., these social clubs, and they played bridge and they were very much, you know, social people. And so, there were these debutante balls and my mother went to my father and she said, you know, "The girls need to come out, to be deb- ." He just said, "Absolutely not; we're not about that." So he was very clear about where we were, what we were supposed to be doing with our lives. And, you know, so you think about a teenager who had friends who were going to these balls, I never wanted to do this kind of thing. You know, it, when he was, "Absolutely not," I never took it as a challenge to what I wanted to do. I was right there with him: "Absolutely not; this is not what we're about," you know. So I, I, I know I get my personality from him. Story_ID: 633273 Speaker 1: How many siblings do you have? Speaker 2: I have one sister. Speaker 1: One sister. Is she older or younger? Speaker 2: She's one year older. Speaker 1: One year, okay, and what's her name? Speaker 2: Her name is Elaine [Elaine Brooks]. We do, our names are very much recycled, so I'm named after my grandmother, both grandmothers [Titania Campbell and Eva Holmes Brooks] actually, and she's named after--her name is Elaine Alberta. She's named after my father [Albert N.D. Brooks] and my mother [Elaine Campbell Wells]. She did not pursue academia the way I did, and she retired from the post office [U.S. Postal Service]. Speaker 1: Okay. Now when you, so you're, when you were growing up, your household consisted of your mother, father and you and your sister? Is that pretty much it? Speaker 2: Um-hm. My grandmother would come down and spend time with us. My mother wanted so much for my grandmother to move in with us, but my grandmother was from New York [New York] and there was no way she was leaving New York City. And we had a beautiful house and she had a, an apartment. It was pretty spacious, though, in, on Edgecombe Avenue. There was no way she was leaving Edgecombe Avenue for us. She was a real New Yorker. Story_ID: 633274 Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: Wow, earliest childhood memory. I don't know. I think, it wasn't that early I don't think when I--I remember being in elementary school and writing a poem that my father [Albert N.D. Brooks] put in the Negro History Bulletin [Black History Bulletin]. I remember being so surprised that he did that. I don't re- I mean my very early, you know, I went to a school named Lucy Slowe School [Slowe Elementary School, Washington, D.C.] and Lucy Slowe was, Lucy Diggs Slowe was a black woman who was an educator, she was at Howard University [Washington, D.C.], she was great. She, they have the, one of the dorms is named after her. I remember being conscious of who Lucy Slowe was. Speaker 1: That's S-L-O-- Speaker 2: O-W-E. Speaker 1: --W-E, right. Speaker 2: Yeah, Lucy Diggs S-L-O-W-E. In fact, somebody's just written a book about her because they just emailed me about it 'cause they had read something where I said I went to Lucy Diggs Slowe School. So I remember my first grade teacher, you know. I remember learning to write. I don't have this picture with me but, I'll bring it, but one of my, like my first grade pictures, I look at it, I look like, I think, a young intellectual in the picture, although my friends say, "That's not a pen, that's crayon," (laughter). But I, my early memories are about school, you know, the really young ones. Speaker 1: Okay, now we always ask this question (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, I was a runner; that's one of my great memories in elementary school. I was a runner. I, later even, I ran the quarter mile. I did, I ran really, you know, I could have gone to Tennessee State [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State University; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee] and these schools but, you know, I wasn't going to do that 'cause I was in academics. But my, one of my absolute fondest memories is me in the fifth grade. I was the only girl on the football team and that's because I ran faster than any of the boys. And so there was this, this one moment on the playground where the two teams were, you know, I had gotten the ball and I was running through and there were the opposing team, you know, converging on me, and I ran so fast that I ran completely through their converging and made the touchdown. And when I was walking home--this is, I'll never forget this as long as I live, 'cause we still lived in Brookland [Washington, D.C.], so this would have been like 1954--and I'm walking behind these little boys who are all my age, and they said, "Did you see that girl?" (Laughter) "Did you see that girl run?" So, that's probably my best early memory (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, now were you all playing touch football or? Speaker 2: Well, they, I mean these are like nine and ten year olds-- Speaker 1: So you're all playing tackle? Speaker 2: No, we weren't playing tackle. Speaker 1: Touch, okay. Speaker 2: Touch football. Speaker 1: All right, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, and you catch the ball and you run, tag, or something like that. The catch is that nobody touched. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I ran through. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They used to fight over who would, whose team I would be on (laughter). Story_ID: 633275 Speaker 1: You were talking about where you grew up. Speaker 2: I grew up in two places. So, the first part of my life was in Brookland [Washington, D.C.], and it was not far from where Rayford Logan lived. We lived at 1256 Kearny Street. In fact, I lived just a few doors up from Sterling Brown [Sterling A. Brown], the poet. He lived, I think, two to three doors from me on the same side of the street, and I believe that house used to be owned by Lucy Slowe [Lucy Diggs Slowe], I believe. That's one of the stories that I remember hearing or else she was nearby but I believe it was because it was the house with a second lot and they said that the second lot was for her playing tennis, but-- Speaker 1: Now there's a residence hall named for her, too, at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Lucy Slowe Hall [Lucy Diggs Slowe Hall]. Speaker 2: Lucy Slowe Hall, um-hm. Speaker 1: Yeah, there's Tubman [Harriet Tubman Quadrangle], Slowe, different (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 'Cause I went to Lucy--exactly. And I went to Slowe School [Slowe Elementary School, Washington, D.C.] and I believe I lived in the house that Lucy Slowe owned. When she died, I think, they sold the house to my father [Albert N.D. Brooks]. So, I grew up in that house 'til 1956. Then in 1956, my parents were debating whether to make the house bigger or move, and it was right after, you know, well not long after integration. And so, in upper Northwest Washington [D.C.], these white neighborhoods were just clearing out. And so we bought a house, my parents bought a house at 1700 Decatur Street Northwest in Washington and that is near the park [Rock Creek Park, Washington, D.C.], near Carter Barron Amphitheatre [Washington, D.C.], they used to call it the Gold Coast, and we moved there in December, 1956, and that house is still--it's my house now. Now, my sister [Elaine Brooks] had the 1256 Kearny Street house. My mother [Elaine Campbell Brooks] didn't sell it when we moved. So the 1256 Kearny Street house was my sister's but she ended up not being able to keep it so my mother sold it in 2003. But, 1700 is still my home. Story_ID: 633276 Speaker 1: Now we always ask this question: what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Wow. Sights, smells. I grew--so my earliest memories are in Brookland [Washington, D.C.] and there were just so many interesting people. I mean, it was a community where you were a black person, but you didn't think of being discriminated against in that neighborhood. So, for example, right around the corner from me was a man named McGuire [Robert G. McGuire, Jr.] who had the McGuire funeral home [McGuire Funeral Service, Inc., Washington, D.C.], and he had a son named Mickey [Robert G. McGuire III], that's what we called him. He died, actually, in the '70s [1970s] in Hilton Head [Hilton Head Island, South Carolina] in a car crash, and he has a son named John [John McGuire] but they were really amazing and Mickey went to Dartmouth [Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire]. But, who else? But there were people who just lived around the neighborhood. Some had more means than others, you know. Some were more affluent. I remember, here's a story about my father [Albert N.D. Brooks] that I remember when I was still living in Brookland, so I was probably ten, nine, and I got a bicycle for Christmas and there was a young woman who was, she didn't have a lot of money and she lived a few blocks down, but she went to school with me and she came over and she wanted to ride this bicycle, I had just gotten this bicycle, and she got on the bicycle and she didn't know how to ride it and she ran into a tree and the bicycle was bent. My father was so angry with me and he told me he was not going to ever buy me a bike if I was going to let other people ride it. And I'll never forget, I told him, I said, "I don't ever want a bike," and I have never, (laughter) from that day, ridden on a bike. But that made a difference in my life because I was conscious of people who didn't have what I had. You know, I was really conscious of people who had less and we were all there together so you could see the people who had something. I mean, we weren't rich, but you could see the people who had something from the people who really didn't have as much. Speaker 1: Now I guess in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] as well in other parts of the country, the black community in those days had everybody on the same, you know-- Speaker 2: We did. We didn't know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) doctors, factory workers, everybody in the same-- Speaker 2: We were all there, we were all there. I was in the Brownies and all this kind of stuff. I did not know racism from a personal standpoint at that time. Even when they integrated, 'cause I was in school when they integrated, but I went to the black schools so I never, you know, it didn't--I remember being aware of it that--Noyes [Noyes Elementary School, Washington, D.C.], which was the white school in Brookland. Some of the people who lived in a certain part would go to Noyes and I remember thinking, I'm glad I didn't have to go to that school. But the other thing I remember about that neighborhood, it looks so similar to the way it used to look when I think about it. My mother [Elaine Campbell Wells] had the most beautiful garden. She liked to garden, I get that from her. And there were so many great people that lived there. There was a man named Herman Branson, he was a professor of physics at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], I think it was physics. Speaker 1: Right, (unclear) yeah. Speaker 2: And he ended up, he was in this club, they had this social club, and all these people were really, they turned out to be great people, actually, like him, 'cause he ended up being the president at Lincoln in Pennsylvania [Lincoln University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania] and that's what I got from him, a copy of that petition that I'm talking about. He had it framed. It's not the original but it's a copy, and he had it framed and given to me, but. It was just really an interesting group of people. Story_ID: 633277 Speaker 1: But where I remember racism, I think my first memory of racism, and it's a memory I'll never forget. I was looking at television and there was a commercial that came on for a park called Glen Echo Park [Glen Echo, Maryland], and you could just see the kids sliding down and on the rides and we used to go to New York [New York] and go to Coney Island, so I knew, you know, how great it was to go to amusement parks. And it was, we have something right here, you know, we don't have to go to New York and my mother [Elaine Campbell Wells] had, that's when she had to tell me, "This is not--you cannot go," and that was an eye opener. But it's not something that stuck with you in the way that a daily pain would stick with you. It's a memory that stuck with me, that's for sure, but it wasn't a pain--because my whole world was insulated by white people--I mean by black people. In fact, I mean, when I went to high school, by the time I got to high school, my neighborhood was changing. So when we moved to, to upper Northwest [Washington, D.C.], we were the second black family in that block, but there weren't kids so you didn't, you know, I--there wasn't a real sense of it. And then there were some black young people, a few blocks down, but I--it's not like you saw a lot of white kids walking around. And so, I went, I did my last year, I went to Sl- I still took the bus, went to Slowe [Slowe Elementary School, Washington, D.C.]. And then when I went to junior high, I went to MacFarland. By the time I went to MacFarland Junior High School [MacFarland Middle School, Washington, D.C.], there were still white people but just a few. You still had, you had white teachers, but I don't think the school was more than 30 percent white. Integration just really, I mean that--it moved fast into being black. By the time I went to Roosevelt [Theodore Roosevelt Senior High School, Washington, D.C.], there were a few white people, but just a few, although teachers, the principals, you still had white there. Story_ID: 633278 Speaker 1: Well let me ask you about grade school now. Where did you start grade school? At--? Speaker 2: Lucy Slowe [Slowe Elementary School, Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 1: Lucy Slowe, that's right, and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's where I fin- I went through the whole thing. Speaker 1: Yeah. So it was like, was kindergarten there too and every- ? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. So-- Speaker 2: Mrs. McDonald [ph.], she was my kindergarten teacher. Mrs. Williamson [ph.] was my first grade teacher. I can remember my second grade teacher was, I believe, Mrs. Smallwood [ph.], and she actually recognized me. I went to something in the 20--the 2000s and she said, "You look so familiar." And I said, "What is your name?" And when she said, as soon as she said her name, I knew who she was. And then I had a wonderful fifth grade teacher, named Mrs. Howard [ph.]. I had Mrs. Pitts [ph.] for fourth grade. I remember the names of the teachers; they had an impact on me, and I loved school. So, Mrs. Walker [ph.] was my sixth grade teacher. Then I got to junior high. Now junior high I remember was in a new landscape because that's in upper Northwest [Washington, D.C.], and in junior high, I, you know, first for all young people, you have to deal with the, that you're taking many classes. You don't just have that one teacher. And, but I had white teachers there. There was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So this is about nineteen fifty-- Speaker 2: This was-- Speaker 1: --what? Speaker 2: --like '58 [1958] maybe. Speaker 1: Fifty-eight [1958]? Okay. Speaker 2: By then, Washington [D.C.] really had been transformed. Speaker 1: (Unclear) so you're about thirteen then? Are you talking about thirteen? Speaker 2: Okay, then '57 [1957]-- Speaker 1: Fifty-seven [1957]? Speaker 2: --'cause I was twelve when I went to-- Speaker 1: Okay, so that's 1957? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Right. Okay. And what were you saying about-- Speaker 2: But it would have been like '57 [1957], '58 [1958], you know, that academic year? Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because '56 [1956], '57 [1957] I was still in Lucy Slowe. Speaker 1: Okay. So '57 [1957], '58 [1958]-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --at MacFarland Junior High School [MacFarland Middle School, Washington, D.C.]? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And see like for MacFar- I have no idea, it was probably a general or something, I have no idea who MacFarland [Henry Brown Floyd MacFarland] was the way I understood Lucy Slowe [Lucy Diggs Slowe]. Now I went to Roosevelt [Theodore Roosevelt Senior High School, Washington, D.C.], so I did know Theodore Roosevelt [President Theodore Roosevelt, Jr.] because we were the Rough Riders so that was, you know. But Lucy Slowe, you had a real sense of--that you were going to a school that was about you in a lot of ways. Story_ID: 633279 Speaker 1: That's got to be an interesting--a different experience. There's so many people that I interview on this side of the, the room, I always ask them who their school is named after. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And half, well most don't know, you know, even if, if it's a local hero in a little town in Mississippi-- Speaker 2: Unless it's Dunbar [Paul Laurence Dunbar]. Speaker 1: Yeah, unless it's somebody like-- Speaker 2: Booker T. Washington. Speaker 1: --Dunbar or Booker T. Washington, right. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: But so many people don't know and never thought about it. But you, you have the presence of mind, I guess your father [Albert N.D. Brooks] being a historian, your mother [Elaine Campbell Wells] schoolteacher here too-- Speaker 2: But you know when (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and you live in a neighborhood [Northwest, Washington, D.C.] where there are-- Speaker 2: No, but this is really an important point because when Henry Louis Gates, Jr. [HistoryMaker Henry Louis "Skip" Gates, Jr.] and I did the 'African American National Biography,' one of the points that I was making in there is that when I moved here, I would drive to a church in downtown Boston [Massachusetts] and I would drive down something called Melnea Cass Boulevard, all the time. It was only when I was doing this that I realize who Melnea Cass was. And I often say to people, you, we need to tell our children about these people because there's a certain pride to living on a street that you know who this person was, you know, and, you know, when I'm in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] and I'll see something like Anthony Bowen homes [Anthony Bowen Houses], all of a sudden I know now who Anthony Bowen--. You know, so I think even for me as a historian, a lot of those names just went over my head. You know, like I knew Shaw [Shaw Junior High School, Washington, D.C.], I knew what Shaw [Robert Gould Shaw] was from the history part of it, and I knew Sumner [Charles Sumner], I knew what Sumner School [Charles Sumner School; Charles Sumner School Museum and Archives, Washington, D.C.], who that was named after. Speaker 1: Yeah, there's so many places around here that are named like Sumner, Richard Henry Dana [Richard Henry Dana, Jr.], see where there's Dana Street [Cambridge, Massachusetts] out there-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --who was a, the defen- he defended Anthony Burns in the big (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Right, it's a huge, huge-- Speaker 1: All this, so many things, yeah. Speaker 2: There's so many things. But, but that is the difference, I think, a Dana versus a Sumner. Sumner (unclear) goes on to be a national figure. So like Theodore Roosevelt [President Theodore Roosevelt, Jr.] is a national figure. But we have these local heroes and they are truly heroic figures and they make a huge difference and one could argue that Lucy Slowe [Lucy Diggs Slowe] had a national prominence in, among black people, but not, you know, just broadly speaking. And how we lose these people to history and that's how we lost Nannie Helen Burroughs to be honest, that's how we lost her because she was so famous and then how could you die in '62 [1962] and now it's less than two decades later and young people don't even know who you are. I find that troubling. In fact I have a friend, Sharon Harley, who was in graduate school with me [at Howard University, Washington, D.C.], and one of the people who was active in the founding of African American women's history--well she did her dissertation on the schools, I mean, on Washington, D.C.--women in Washington. So she did a lot of interviews with women in, what do you call them, nursing homes, and she said it was amazing to her. She, those black women in those nursing homes, they did not know who Mary Church Terrell was, but all of them knew who Nannie Helen Burroughs was. So that says something about a certain type of women because she was looking at women who weren't elite, you know, but they all knew who Nannie Helen Burroughs was, but these were women in their eighties and nineties, you know, and here we are. Just, it's just amazing how people get lost to history. Speaker 1: It is, it is. So, so, but you're so conscious of it, these names, though, this is just great to hear. Speaker 2: Yeah, but, I, I mean just like when my mother told me who, when she told me who Elie Gar- I didn't know who Elie Garcia was. She had to tell me but she didn't tell me enough, then I had to actually look him up, you know. Then he did get into some trouble, though. But it was interesting, you know. There's so much that we could actually know about these people so it is my goal to help us know (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 633280 Speaker 1: Did you have good history instruction in elementary school and in-- Speaker 2: I did, I had excellent. This is why I'm saying, some of these segregated schools were tremendous. You know, I often tell this story that when I am speaking to older people from the South and I make comments about our students don't know black history, the first thing they say is: "We had black history." In those segregated schools, Carter G. Woodson marketed his books down there, they knew their history far better than let's say a person like my mother [Elaine Campbell Wells] who went to an integrated public school, you know, with some number, P.S. 123 or something in New York [New York]; she didn't get black history. Or somebody growing up here in Boston [Massachusetts] might not have gotten black history. But it's interesting how people in the South, a lot of those people got black history. Speaker 1: And here you are, your father [Albert N.D. Brooks] is a volunteer with the association [Association for the Study of Negro Life and History; Association for the Study of African American Life and History] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Didn't get paid a dime. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And was just so committed to this, and absolutely put in as much time, if not more time there than he did in the school [Garnet-Patterson Junior High School, Washington, D.C.], and he was committed to his school but he just spent hours-- Speaker 1: I think Carter Woodson died in '50 [1950], right? I think 1950, I believe it was. Speaker 2: It was '50 [1950], '51 [1951] from what I understood, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, yeah. And so did (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And my father was working with him before then. My father started working with him like around '26 [1926], so he had been working with him. And when he died, my father, you know, he knew how to just run that office. In fact, when he died, the articles in the Negro History Bulletin [Black History Bulletin] about him will talk about his, how financially he really kept it afloat but then he died in 1964. So see, I was only eighteen, nineteen when my father died and he, he died before I turned nineteen, and he had that lasting an impact on me. Speaker 1: So you would actually go to the office, you knew the personnel there and, you know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, absolutely. Mrs. Miles [Willie E. Miles] and Mrs. Lincoln [ph.], that was her name, yes. I would go to the office, they knew me, all those historians knew me, I went to, I would, you know, watch him, he, in our basement, sometimes he would put the copy, he'd have it all cut out on the floor, I'd be down there watching him do that. Speaker 1: So he was the editor of-- Speaker 2: The Negro History Bulletin. Speaker 1: --the Negro History Bulletin. Now that's the magazine-- Speaker 2: The magazine for-- Speaker 1: --of the organization that has the popular stories, you know-- Speaker 2: That's it. Speaker 1: --a little bit different from the journal [The Journal of Negro Education] which has the-- Speaker 2: With the scholars-- Speaker 1: --scholars', yeah, articles. Speaker 2: He was the secretary treasurer of the entire organization. So he had to pretty much keep everything together. After he died, Charles Wesley [Charles H. Wesley], they brought him back from Ohio to run it, but he was the major figure before Charles Wesley took over. Story_ID: 633281 Speaker 1: So I would go to those association meetings [of the Association for the Study of Negro Life and History; Association for the Study of African American Life and History], you know, I would be with my father [Albert N.D. Brooks]. I remember, it was a little bit embarrassing. We'd go, we'd drive, 'cause he liked to drive, he'd drive across country, he had this button, I'm a Proud American, and it would have Mary McLeod Bethune's picture on it and Frederick Douglass' picture, and [President] Abraham Lincoln and then Carter G. Woodson and we'd go in these restaurants, these white people would look at us and he was just so oblivious, you know, and I'd be cringing, you know, don't call this attention to us, 'cause I know the people were wondering what is this that you have on? But he'd do this all through the '50s [1950s], into the '60s [1960s]. He didn't take us south. We rarely went more south than Virginia 'cause he didn't want to expose us to racism, so we didn't go there. And we really didn't have family. It's not like we had family, either down, lower than Virginia. Virginia's the South, but I don't remember, I mean, you could, I guess, pretty much have a tank of gas that, or you'd know where to go, but we didn't travel into the South. But we traveled. He took us north to Maine and to, all the way across country to California 'cause a segment of the Brooks move to California so we drove and went to all the traditional--Yosemite Park [Yosemite National Park, California] and, you know, Yellow- what's it? Yellowstone (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Stone, yeah. Speaker 1: --Park [Yellowstone National Park]. We did all that as a family. We were close. Story_ID: 633282 Speaker 1: Sounds like a wonderful upbringing, a lot of-- Speaker 2: I, I do. I mean, it's interesting though. My sister [Elaine Brooks] and I are so different. It just shows you how one--and this is not saying that there's something wrong with her, but it just shows you how I, I mentor students and I remember telling, taking a young woman to something that I was doing in Dorchester [Boston, Massachusetts] and she, I was talking about my, you know, why I loved history and she said, "You know, yeah, I could see why you would love history, because of your upbringing." And I said that's true, but it doesn't necessarily work that way because my sister doesn't love history. In fact my sister went, when we moved to this house in Northwest Washington [D.C.], we had a choice of two schools to go to. So one high school was Roosevelt High School [Theodore Roosevelt Senior High School, Washington, D.C.]. Roosevelt High School was predominantly black, and the other school was Western High School [Washington, D.C.], which is now the Ellington School of the Arts [Duke Ellington School of the Arts], but in those days it was Western, and that was predominantly white, but she choose that school. It was a much longer--I could walk, she could catch the bus but I think it, I think going there, I think had she gone to Roosevelt, her life would be different (laughter), but she went to Western. Speaker 1: Yeah, well, it's lucky for us that you have like a deep appreciation for this history, and it seems like--now did you really like have a sense of that continuity when you were a ki- little? Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Absolutely. I always knew I wanted to be a teacher, and I always knew I wanted to be a history teacher. Story_ID: 633283 Speaker 1: So here's one of my eighth grade stories. When I was in the seventh or eighth grade, it must have been the eighth grade, because we stayed in high--junior high [MacFarland Junior High School; MacFarland Middle School, Washington, D.C.] to the ninth grade, it switched like right after I left but I used to take Latin and I had a white teacher, she's a very good teacher and we were on a track system. And so we had an honors track, a regular track, a general track and a basic track. So the honors were for people who, you know, were really, I guess, smart kids, and the regular was for people who were--I mean, I'm sorry, academic, that's what it was called, academic track, was for people who were going to go to college. And the general was for people who probably wouldn't go to college but maybe would get vocational skills and the basic was for people who, I think, they saw as pretty much unskilled workers, okay. So, I'm in the eighth grade and I love Latin, so my Latin teacher tells me that there is a young woman who is in the general track and she takes, she's finished one year of Latin and I finished, I'm finishing two years of Latin, and this girl is finishing one year of Latin and she's saying, or she's had a semester, I forget how it goes, but whatever this woman said, she said to me, "If she doesn't take whatever that next year of Latin is, she won't be able to go to high school in the academic track. So, could you teach her Latin over the summer?" So I was thirteen years old, I taught this girl Latin over the summer. This girl was smart so it was more than just my being a teacher but I knew when I taught her--well actually I used to teach my dolls, I just knew I wanted to be a teacher (laughter). You know how you have a calling, it was my calling. But my first human subject was Wythea [ph.], that was her name, she was my, my little student. And she came back and she was so glowing. I made such a great impression on that Latin teacher. I could have asked that teacher for anything, but she was, it was my first real feeling that I knew this was my calling. Speaker 2: Now that's so sweet, taught your dolls (laughter). Speaker 1: I taught the dolls. I tell my students now, I can teach anybody. I can teach somebody who's in--I mean, I haven't really done elementary school but I always say, there's no concept that you can't teach somebody. Now you go in more depth, but there's no concept that you can't teach somebody so you can teach somebody who's, you know, a genius, or you can teach somebody who is in junior high school, but they can learn it. They don't learn it with the same amount of complexity but they can learn it. And I think it helps because when you teach, and I, well, you know, I've taught in a lot of different places so be--at one point in my life, I was teaching at the University of Maryland, College Park [University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland], and they had such a range of students. I mean, I had students who were as smart, if not smarter, than any student here [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and then I had students who were--especially some of the athletes, could barely read. I mean they were, when I taught at Maryland, I think my daughter [Nia Higginbotham] was in the fourth grade, she was reading better than some of them. So, but you still have to teach them. Story_ID: 633284 Speaker 1: Now junior high school [MacFarland Junior High School; MacFarland Middle School, Washington, D.C.], now is this when you wrote the poem that was published in the Negro His- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was either--I think it was elementary school [Slowe Elementary School, Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: I really do think it was elementary school. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: 'Cause I think I'd given up some of my poetry by the time I got to junior high school. Speaker 1: Now your father [Albert N.D. Brooks] had, I guess, one of the more exciting jobs dealing with the magazine in terms of dealing with photos and things like that. I mean, now I know, Negro History Bulletin [Black History Bulletin] is big for photographs and engravings and that sort of thing. Speaker 2: Um-hm, but they had history. I remember the first article I ever read on the soldiers in the Union Army was there, was there, so I would have been in junior high school when I read it, and it was about 186,000 soldiers who were in the Union Army and thirty thousand soldier- [U.S.] Navy, seamen were in the Navy and I remember thinking, nobody, you know, most people would never know this so this magazine is really important. And then, by the time I got to college [University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] and black studies had hit, I already knew history. You know, I felt like I, I'd already had an advantage with that but because we were asking for an integrated approach, an interdisciplinary approach, I knew there was great value and I always--I mean, I was very outspoken for black studies when I got to university, but I, I knew I came in with an advantage with the black history part of it. Story_ID: 633285 Speaker 1: Well tell us about high school. Now this is Roosevelt High School. Speaker 2: Roosevelt High School (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Is this-- Speaker 2: I had-- Speaker 1: --Theodore Roosevelt High School [Theodore Roosevelt Senior High School, Washington, D.C.]? Speaker 2: Theodore. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We were the Rough Riders. So I went to Roosevelt. There's not a lot to remember about Roosevelt. This was, my best memories of Roosevelt were my history teacher, Helen Blackburn [Helen M. Blackburn]. Helen Blackburn was married to a man named Armour Blackburn [Armour J. Blackburn] and at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] they have something called the Blackburn Center [Armour J. Blackburn University Center]. Well she was his wife, and she was a great history teacher, a great history teacher. And so we, you know, I learned a lot. Then I had English, an English class where, by the time, like late '50s [1950s] or early '60s [1960s], there was so much happening with civil rights that one of the wonderful things about her is that we read all those traditional Western books. We read Shakespeare [William Shakespeare], we read all that, but we read James Baldwin, you know, so I really appreciated being able to get an education that was with the breadth that I could appreciate because I believe in the richness of the Western canon, I do. I believe people should know 'The Iliad' [Homer] and 'The Odyssey' [Homer] and all those great things, but they should also know Richard Wright and Langston Hughes as well. And I don't think you do well if you don't know one half of that. I don't, I wouldn't think a person is particularly literate because he or she didn't know, they knew everything in the Western canon and didn't know anything about black people. I don't consider that particularly illiterate just as, you know--. Okay. Speaker 1: Oh, I wanted you to finish your sentence, that's all. Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Just, just because there are people who say, you know, now in a lot of schools they'll read Toni Morrison, but they don't read Homer. Well, I, I agree, they should read Homer, but they should read Toni Morrison. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: So that's where--I was really blessed with my education because I, when I first left junior high [sic.], I went to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] and when I went to Howard, I had Toni Morrison for a teacher. So I had Toni Morrison for a teacher, I had Rayford Logan for a teacher, I, I was really--I, who could have better? Story_ID: 633286 Speaker 1: Reverend Walter Henderson Brooks, he is at that time probably early in his pastorate at the Nineteenth Street Baptist Church [Washington, D.C.], and that was probably taken around 1870--well, maybe even before his pastorate because it looks like it, probably in the 1870s, it could be early 1880s. Speaker 2: And that's your [paternal] grandfather, right? Speaker 1: That's the same picture, same, around the same age, so probably early 1880s. Speaker 2: That's him as a younger man, so that probably was taken while he was with, in Louisiana with the American Baptist Home Mission Society [American Baptist Home Mission Societies], or he could have been in there. Speaker 1: That's my grandmother and that's Walter Henderson Brooks' wife, her name was Eva. Her children understood her as Evalin, but that's the youngest when she was probably nineteen or so. That's her as a young adult. Well, I'm telling it to you backwards as you're taking it but this is how she looked at the time of her death, that last one. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): On the left, far left? Speaker 1: Yeah, the far left is what she looked like at the time of her death. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: Okay, so this, these are different pictures of Walter Henderson Brooks. He was being honored at an event in New York [New York] and you can see how he looked coming right out of slavery. That's how he would have looked as a slave, right at the moment of freedom. There he is as a graduate of Lincoln [Lincoln University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania] in 1872. There he is, where it says, the semi-centennial, so he's been there about fifty years and that is how he looked when he died. Speaker 2: And that is the memorial service for someone, well it's a memorial service but he's been dead, but Reverend James H. Holmes is the father of Eva Holmes Brooks, my grandmother, and he would be my grandfather [sic. great-grandfather] on my grandmother's side. So he was the pastor from 1867 to 1900 but there's something about the service. Could you open it up? It's in 1944 so I'm not quite sure what the service is. Oh, that is James Holmes so that's a good picture. So there--I think they're just remembering their former pastors and so that one, the man on the left, is James Henry Holmes. Speaker 1: Are you related to Joseph Holmes Borders? Speaker 2: I don't think so. There's a William Holmes Borders. Speaker 1: He was pastor of Wheat Street [Wheat Street Baptist Church] in Atlanta [Georgia]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Right, I read about him, but I don't think so. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Oh, it is, okay. Well that's my sister and me. I'm probably two, she's probably three there. Speaker 2: And what's your sister's name? Speaker 1: Elaine [Elaine Brooks], like my mother [Elaine Campbell Wells]. Speaker 2: That is the petit--now you can actually get that online 'cause if you just look up petit jury, Richmond, Virginia, but the key is that you want to remember, see the circle? Did that come out on your picture? That's Albert Royal Brooks, where the circle is, and he sat on that jury. That's the first integrated petit jury in the United States. Speaker 1: And that is the wedding license of the, yeah, for my grandfather, Walter H. Brooks, he was thirty-three years old when he married Evalina Holmes, as it's written there, age twenty-one. They got married on the 21st of April, 1874 in Virginia. Speaker 2: And that is the papers. Those are the papers of manumission, the papers that my grandmother, Lucy Goode Brooks, [paternal] great-grandmother, Lucy Goode Brooks, is bought, her freedom is bought for her by her husband. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Von Groning [Daniel Von Groning]. Speaker 1: Those are actual manumission papers. Speaker 2: Yeah, bill of sale for the-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: And you can see that my grandfather got that. It looks like he bought-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Fifty cents paid. Speaker 2: Yeah, in 1922 it looks like. Speaker 1: And this is my husband, Leon Higginbotham [A. Leon Higginbotham, Jr.]. This is a young picture of Leon when he first went on the court [U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania]. He was the youngest judge, or the next to the youngest judge, to go on the federal bench. He went on it thirty-five years old. This is Leon as he looked when he died in 1998. Speaker 2: Oh, and that is an event that took place in 2008. They honored Lucy Goode Brooks for the work that she had done and that picture where we're uncovering that is the historic landmark which is on the site where the orphanage was formed. The school still exists, it's called the Friends' school [Friends' Asylum for Colored Orphans; Friends' Association for Children, Richmond, Virginia], something like that. Speaker 1: And that is when I first came to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], the dream team. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Dream team. Speaker 1: Yeah. Well not when I very first 'cause Cornel [Cornel West] came after I came. But that's what we called us, the dream team, when Skip [HistoryMaker Henry Louis "Skip" Gates, Jr.] was building the department [Department of African and African American Studies]...