 Story_ID: 261563 Speaker 1: My name is Julieanna Richardson and I'm the interviewer and Neculai- Speaker 2: [OFF-CAMERA VOICE]: Burghelea. Speaker 1: Burghelea--how do they--okay is the--we'll just have that spelled--is the videographer. And I'd like you to start out--we start out by slating the interview, so I wanna-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --have you start out by stating your name and spelling it for us including your middle name. Speaker 2: Okay. I'm [HistoryMaker] Arthur H. Harper. I go by Art Harper, A-R-T-H-U-R, Henry, H-E-N-R-Y, Harper, H-A-R-P-E-R. Speaker 1: Okay. And can we have your date of birth? Speaker 2: Sure, December 3, 1955. Seems like a thousand years ago. Speaker 1: Okay. And you're--you're young. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: And, and the location? Speaker 2: The location was Trenton, New Jersey. Speaker 1: Okay. And your occupation--well, the--today--also, this location here. Speaker 2: This location here, we're in Stamford, Connecticut. I currently am employed by GE [General Electric] and I--I'm the president and CEO of GE Equipment Services [Stamford, Connecticut]. Story_ID: 261564 Speaker 1: I usually ask five questions of everyone. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: They're little People magazine-ish, short answers. Speaker 2: Okay. Okay. Speaker 1: Your favorite food? Speaker 2: My favorite food, wow. My favorite food is any kind of steak (laughter). Speaker 1: Favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Fall. Speaker 1: Favorite color? Speaker 2: Black. Speaker 1: Favorite place to vacation? Speaker 2: Maui, Hawaii. Speaker 1: Okay. And do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: It's the golden rule. Do unto others as you would have them do unto you. Story_ID: 261565 Speaker 1: And I want to take you back to your childhood. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: And I'd like you--can we start on, you know, give a--us your mother's name-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: --and what you know about her growing up. Speaker 2: Sure. My, my mother, her maiden name was Eleanor Graham [Harper], and she, she didn't graduate from high school. She started out early in her life as a maid, which she used to remind us of, my brother and I of. She was--she was one of those people that, you know, you--once you knew her for two minutes, you felt like you'd known her for a long time and a lot of people, you know, said they felt very comfortable and warm around her. She, she had a tough early life. You know, she had to go out and work early. As I said, she was a maid. She did a number of other, I guess, jobs like that. She never forgot that. She never forgot how difficult it was as an African American woman, but she instilled in myself and my brother this desire to, to want to, to be--to do good. She always talked about doing good. And she used to tell me, you know, back then I was Artie [HistoryMaker Arthur H. Harper] as a little kid, she'd say, "Artie, when you grow up, do good." And I didn't understand what that meant until much later in life, but she was right. So, you know, she, she lived until she was sixty-one. She passed away very quickly from cancer. You know, I--obviously I miss her, but she gave me--she gave me this desire to, to do--to wanna do good. She gave me a desire to always be honest. She gave me a desire to always try to treat other people the way I want to be treated and that was--that was her message. Speaker 1: Now, where was she from? Speaker 2: She was--she grew up in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. And, you know, her family had moved to Philadelphia from the South we think around some place in Georgia. But, but she grew up her whole life really in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, and spent all her time there, New Jersey, that area. Speaker 1: Did she--do you remember any stories she told you about her growing up? Speaker 2: Well, she grew up with, with two sisters and--I'm sorry, three sisters and two brothers, and she was--she was not the oldest but I think she was the second oldest. So all of her stories were about how her, her grandmother--her mother, my grandmother, who I did remember--I do remember. She passed away when I was about five or six, but I do remember her and, you know, and spending time with her. But my mother's stories were all about how her mother had instilled the values in, in both she and her sisters and brothers, and it was all about kinda the love--it was all about they didn't have anything, but they had love and, and how they interacted and how she and her siblings all were kinda getting into mischief and doing things together and learning. It was all about--it was all about a poor but loving family, so those were the stories. Speaker 1: Okay. And you don't know how her family came to move from Georgia to-- Speaker 2: No, I, I, I-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I really don't-- Story_ID: 261566 Speaker 1: Now, your father, his name. Speaker 2: Yeah. My father is Joseph Harper. And my father grew up in, in Harlem, was, was born and grew up in Harlem, New York [New York], born in 1918. So he, he had a pretty, pretty wild youth. He, he, he told me a lot of stories about what it was like growing up in Harlem in those days. His memory of Harlem back then, though, was it was--it was a very vibrant place. It had a lot of, of artistic talented African Americans. It was--it was alive as he recalls it from his youth. My father then eventually joined the [U.S.] Navy, was in World War II [WWII], told me a lot of stories about being the Navy and World War II, got out and came back, used his GI Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944] to, to get a, a certificate, a degree as a mechanical engine--as a mechanic, actually, an aircraft engine mechanic. He was the first African American to work for Pan Am [Pan American Airways] he tells me in New York--in New York City [New York, New York]. They wouldn't let him work on the engines, though. They told him that, you know, we couldn't allow passengers to see an African American working on the engine, so they said we'll pay you mechanics wages, but you have to be a bag--baggage handler, and he couldn't deal with that. So he, he left. He spent a little bit of time sort of traveling the country as a professional gambler and he tells me a few stories about that. He--but he got--he, he eventually came back to the area, met my mother [Eleanor Graham Harper]. They got married and he ended up going back to, to becoming a mechanic. He ended up working for [The] Boeing [Company] and retired from Boeing as a mechanic. Speaker 1: Now how did your parents meet? Does--do you know how--that story of how they met? Speaker 2: They, they would--they would only share little pieces of it. We never got the details around it. We--I know my father met my mother in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. I, I--what we know is, he was at--they were at a party and, and he was introduced to her, and was immediately, I guess, taken by her and, and kept coming back to court her, and eventually, I guess, got, got what he wanted and, and they married. Story_ID: 261567 Speaker 1: The Henry, the middle name, where does that come from with you? Speaker 2: My grandfather on my father's side was named Henry [Harper], and so I carry my grandfather's name there. Speaker 1: Did your father [Joseph Harper]--you said he shared some stories with you about being in the [U.S.] Navy. Do any of those stories stand out, you know, particularly? Speaker 2: I--two stories that I recall him telling me about how--these were stories--my father was very big on telling to my brother and I to deal with the world the way it is and don't, don't get hung up on, on being a victim. He was very big and he drilled this into us, and it's something I've come to really believe in, to never be a victim. So his stories were about what it was like to be in the Navy in World War II [WWII] during a time when he was the only African American on the ship, and two stories I remember. One, he tells me about a storm, big storm, and apparently when they had these big storms, some--someone would have to go out. If the ship was in trouble, someone would have to go out on the deck and I guess secure--I've never been in the Navy, but I guess secure, secure the, the ship. And this was something no one ever wanted to do, but what you did, I guess, was they would send a team out, and the team would all tie themselves, I guess, together and sort of, you know, they were all there to, to protect each other. And he tells a story about one night there was this terrible storm and he was selected to go out as, as part of this team and nobody else--none of them would tie onto him. And so he was out on the ship and he almost went overboard, and he said someone else who, who was not on the team actually came out. They--the, the team actually came in and I guess said he's gone. And, and someone else came out and found him sorta hanging over the edge and pulled him in, and so he--he's told me that story many times. The other story he's told me is my father has a, actually has a scar on his wrist and I didn't under--didn't--never knew where the scar came from, and the story there is he was--he was a--he was in boxing. He was a boxer in the--in the Navy as part of their recreation. And apparently he won one of the--one of the titles within however they had their tournaments. And one of his own shipmates who was unhappy about this actually, I guess, a couple days later while they were out working tried to hit him with--I don't know, with something, and it--and it cut his wrist. And he said that, that person never got any discipline, they stayed on the ship, he stayed on the ship. But he told those stories to us to tell us--the stories themselves sound--you know, both stories are terrible, but his point of those stories was, look, that's how bad it was, but I found a way to not only survive but move on. You gotta--as you grow up, you're gonna have difficulties. You're gonna see things, you know, that are not fair, they're not right, they're not just, but you gotta find a way to move on. And he kept saying, look, as bad as it was for me, it's gonna be better for you, but when it's ugly, when it's not right, when it's not fair, don't be a victim. That was the point of those stories that I recall. Speaker 1: You know what's interesting about that is that your mother [Eleanor Graham Harper] is do good, the message there-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and then don't be a victim. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You know? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But it was a positive, you know? Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 261568 Speaker 1: Look, my earliest memories of growing up were, were kinda two, two things as I think--when I think back. One is that I, I was blessed that I had this great family. I had my, my mother [Eleanor Graham Harper] and my father [Joseph Harper], I had a brother, and still have-- Speaker 2: Older brother? Speaker 1: Younger brother. We're, we're within two years of each other, though. And so I, I--what I remember was this family that--a lot of love, a lot of, you know, a lot of discipline, a lot of--a lot of sort of raising of these two, two boys to be good men. That's the one side. On the other side, what I recall is, is, you know, the first four or five years sort of just thinking everything was great. And I do recall sort of at about five or so--I think I was five or six, sorta realizing that, that, you know, one, I was different, that being black, being an African American was different, and other people saw it differently, and other people would treat me differently. And that in addition to that that we were a poor family. And so, so my early recollections are those kinda two things. It's one of this great family that--and, and at that point before then, so not knowing anything, but just, I'm like everyone else in the world and I've got this great family. And then sort of also realizing, well, I am different. I'm, I'm black. I'm African American. Other people are gonna treat me differently because of it. Oh, by the way, we're poor, so they're gonna treat you differently because of that. So that's my earliest recollections of, of my childhood. Speaker 2: But I want--I wanna explore that a little bit. You're saying that--now, you, you were born in Trenton [New Jersey] you-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --said? Okay. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Do you know how your parents came to live in Trenton? You know-- Speaker 1: No. I--you know, I, I know that, you know, there was a--there was a point in time, very early, when my, my parents split up for a while when I was--I was very young, probably two or three I guess, and I ended up spending some time, my brother and I with, with our grandmother in Harlem [New York, New York]. But my father and mother got back together when we were about six, five, something like that. And so, you know, I think at that point when they got back together, they decided let's, let's get--let's not go back to--let's not go to New York [New York], let's not go to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], and why they chose Trenton, I don't know, but somehow they chose Trenton, New Jersey. Story_ID: 261569 Speaker 1: You're saying at five or six was your earliest memories-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --about that period. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Now, what was your memory of knowing--I mean, give me a family memory of, you know, of love. I mean, what, what, what particular story comes to mind about that? Speaker 2: I will--I recall--I recall two stories. One is a situation where my--where I remember going to school. I remember being sort of bullied and I remember a kid beating me up. And at that point in my life I, I, I didn't fight back and I got beat up. And so I come home sort of crying. In fact, my younger brother fought him. I didn't fight him. And, and I remember coming home, you know, in tears. My mother's [Eleanor Graham Harper] reaction was, you know, sort of it's okay, don't worry about it, you know, but you gotta stand up for yourself. My father's [Joseph Harper] reaction was why are you crying? You didn't stand up for yourself. You didn't--you, you didn't--you allowed this kid to fight you, you didn't fight back, probably politically incorrect today but, but his view was you gotta learn to fight back. You gotta land stand--learn to stand up for yourself and you can't be a victim. My brother had already figured that out I guess. So, you know, that's one story. And, and, you know, I remember my father spending about an hour with me just talking to me and I don't remember all the words, but what I remember is you got to learn to stand up for yourself. You have to--don't ever let anybody, you know, do that to you and you don't fight back. The other story I, I remember, probably about the same time, was my father had this thing, he still has it today, that he couldn't eat dinner--we had all--the whole family would always sit down every night for dinner together. Okay, so we wait for my father to come home from work and then we would sit down to dinner, and he wanted to talk about what happened, you know, to each of us. But he couldn't dinner without bread. If there was no bread, we wouldn't have dinner. And so my job was, we lived, you know, about a mile and a half from this little store, and my job was to make sure there was bread. So if there wasn't bread, my job was get the money, get on the bicycle, go down to the store, bring, bring the loaf of bread back. And to do this, I had to--I had to drive under this overpass for, for the highway. And one day, my mother says, oh my God, it's--you know, we don't have any bread and your dad--your father's about to come home, you gotta go get some bread. So I jump on the bicycle and off I go and--to get this bread. And I get the bread and I'm coming back, and right as I come through this overpass, a carload of, of kids, white kids came through and they threw a Coke [Coca-Cola] bottle, which hit me in the head, knocked me off the bike, cut me, but what I remember, that, that hurt, obviously, but they called me nigger, okay? That was their whole thing. And they, they laughed and they just yelled at this and, and it reverberated in this overpass. So I get up and my bike's broken. The--I fell on the bread, so there was no bread. And what I recall is going home crying, and but what I was crying mostly about was I didn't have the bread, and I told my parents what happened. And my--and I was just crying about this, and my mother started crying. And my father, you know, basically said, look, they have a problem. I didn't--I actually at that point in my life didn't know what nigger was. I didn't know how people used that ugly word that I hate to ever use, but that's what they used. And my father's point was, look, never let anybody else define who you are. They have this problem. They don't like you because you're black. They don't like you because of a lot of other things. If you ever let anybody else define who you are, then you will give in to their problems. Don't ever do that. And he was just--he just hammered that. And I--I'm a firm believer in that now. And since that moment, I've never let anybody define--try to define who I am. It's, it's gotta be--it's gotta be on my terms. Story_ID: 261570 Speaker 1: How did the poverty part come in there? Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: I mean the--you're--and you're talking about-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --you said--still five or is that a little later in-- Speaker 2: You know, I, I think that's a--that's at the point when I started to realize that we were really were--you know, we were poor. I, I started to realize as you--as you--you know, I, I started to notice other things. I started to notice shows on television, things that other people had that we didn't have. I started to travel beyond the neighborhood and say, gee, these--this, this neighborhood looks a little different. Going to school, you started to see kids who had different clothes and--you know, so I, I think it was--it--that's where it sorta started, where I started to realize, you know, there--there's two things here. There's one, that, that I'm black and other people have some issues--have issues with that, and the other is we're poor, and, and, and I started noticing differences. Speaker 1: Now, what--when you--well, let--let's--the block you lived on. What-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Do you remember the address of your--you know, of the, the house--the place you lived? Speaker 2: Well, most of these memories are in--are in Pleasantville, New Jersey-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and we lived in the--obviously the, the black section of town. And it was--it was down in Brown Street. It was 32 Brown Street. Speaker 1: Okay. And was it a neighborhood? Was it a community? Was it a block? Can you tell me about-- Speaker 2: It was--it was a--it was a--it was a community, but it was rural, so it was-- Speaker 1: It was rural, okay. Speaker 2: It was rural, so it was--it's outside of Atlantic City [New Jersey]; it's about six miles outside of Atlantic City. It was a community and, you know, it was--it was a lot of fun. I remember that. There were--there were a lot of kids and we were always in trouble, we were always doing things together, riding our bikes together, you know, crawling through the woods together, doing little things that kids do. But I also remember it was a community in that, you know, sort of every parent or all the adults looked out for all the kids. And so you, you felt like you had like ten mothers or ten uncles or whatever. You knew if you were doing something and the neighbor saw you doing it, they were gonna tell your parents or at least you, you thought they were gonna tell your parents. So it was--it was a--it was a community where you had a lot of people who I think all knew that they were, you know, had, had very little, but what they were giving to the kid--their own kids and the kids in that community was, was love, was direction, was a sense of you gotta--you gotta grow up to be more than, than, than this location, that, that, that where you are today should not define where you're gonna be tomorrow. Speaker 1: Now, this is Pleasantville you-- Speaker 2: This is Pleasantville, New Jersey. Speaker 1: And it's how far from Trenton [New Jersey]? Speaker 2: Oh, Pleasantville is in south Jersey-- Speaker 1: Oh, south--okay. Speaker 2: --so it's down near Atlantic City. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Now the, the other thing, can you take me--now, how long did you live in Pleasantville? Did you-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I lived in Pleasantville--I graduated from [Absegami] High School [Galloway, New Jersey]-- Story_ID: 261571 Speaker 1: Tell me what sights, smells, and sounds remind you of your growing up in Pleasantville [New Jersey]. Speaker 2: Sights would be, you know, this was a, a rural area, so lots of trees, pine trees, dirt, lots of sounds, lots of kids laughing, you know, lots of yelling of parents down the street for kids to come back. You know, a lot of laughter, a lot of laughter. You know, and kids yelling and screaming and doing all things that kids do, that's what I remember most there in my early years. In my later years, and, and this is now, you know, in the--I graduated from [Absegami] High School [Galloway, New Jersey] in 1974, so now if I go into the '60s [1960s], so junior high or early high school, you know, the sounds were different. They, they gone from lots of laughing to lots of anger. There was much more anger. I, I recall by the time I was in high school a--sort of--every--the papers called it sort of a race fight between the black kids and the white kids, but it was--you know, it was really a clash of, of African Americans. They rezoned school district, they changed who went to what school and you suddenly had groups of African Americans going to schools that hadn't had many African Americans, and there were fights. There were--you know, there was a lot of pushback. The Vietnam War was going on so there was, you know, a lot of anger around that. So, you know, in my later years--and I actually was a very angry--I grew up to be a very angry person, young man, almost militant, you know, because my view at that point as a teenager was--by then, I had come to the belief that I had potential. I believed that I had some--I had been given some gifts and--but I was concerned. I thought I'm never gonna be able to use these gifts, that I'm, I'm, I'm living in this world where because I'm an African American, because I'm black, I'm not gonna get a shot, and, and I was very angry about that. And I think in my--as I--as I got into my teens, you know, as a--as a youngster, I didn't wanna fight and didn't even know how to fight. By the time I was a teenager, not only did I know how to fight, I was anxious to fight and, and I did my fair share of it to be honest. So I was just, you know, at that point feeling like, you know, the world is against me. I wasn't gonna be a victim. I had gotten my father's [Joseph Harper] message and my mother's [Eleanor Graham Harper] message, but I didn't know how to fight back in any other way than to just be angry and, and push. Story_ID: 261572 Speaker 1: What elementary school did you go to? Speaker 2: I went to a very tiny elementary school. Speaker 1: The name? Speaker 2: Oh, I wanna say Farmington Elementary [School, Pleasantville, New Jersey], very tiny, 95 percent African American. Speaker 1: And this is in Farmington [New Jersey]-- Speaker 2: Well, this was still-- Speaker 1: I mean Pleasantville [New Jersey]. Speaker 2: --Pleasantville-- Speaker 1: Pleasantville. Speaker 2: --but Farmington was right-- Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: --right nearby. Yeah. Speaker 1: And do you remember, you know, your experiences in elementary school? Speaker 2: I remember--I remember--and I can't recall her name; I've tried many times. I remember a principal. This is a very small school. I mean, I, I--I'm gonna guess probably didn't have more than 150 kids in school and maybe 200, but small school, but an African American principal who was very, very strict, at least that's my recall, but just cared a lot about the kids. And her punishment was that when you did something wrong, her--she had two, two punishments that we all hated. One was that you'd take a spoonful of cod liver oil. I remember that smell, okay. That--but more than that, I remember the taste because I, I, I got my--I earned my unfair share of the cod liver oil, so I remember that. And I remember the other one was her punishment was that you would stay after school, but you would do more work. So her punishment for if you--if you're not doing well in school was you're gonna do more work. You're gonna work harder at it. It wasn't detention or expulsion, it was stay here and work harder. Story_ID: 261573 Speaker 1: What was the young Art Harper [HistoryMaker Arthur H. Harper], what was he like? Were you--you know, 'cause you--were you shy? Were you--you know, how little boys they say-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --have a lot of energy. I mean-- Speaker 2: Yeah. I, I was--I've always been the--I'll go very young, pre-high school, I think I was always more the, at that point in my life, much more the bookworm. I was sort of the quiet one. I, I loved--I've always loved math. I've always loved chemistry, so I, I--science. So I was always into that. I was very curious. I was always very curious. I was always experimenting, trying different things. I remember once building this rocket, you know, reading in, in some magazine how to build this homemade rocket. And I actually built it and I fired it off and it, it took off and went right through the laundry my mother [Eleanor Graham Harper] had hanging out on the clothesline back in those days, and that was (laughter)--created a big problem. So I was--you know, I was this curious kid, somewhat quiet, always reading--I read a lot, loved to read. My grandmother--I remember my grandmother reading to me. I remember my mother reading to me, so I've always liked to read. That was sort of the pre--I'll say maybe even pre-mid school. By the time I was, I don't know, maybe twelve or thirteen, I, I, I started to change. I became much more interested in athletics, found out I had some skills there, played baseball, ran track, I was--it was a field event. Story_ID: 261574 Speaker 1: Was he technically inclined like you too? Speaker 2: My brother was--yes. But he was much better--my brother was and still is much better with his hands at anything. I, I can't build anything, okay? He can build--I, I think he could build a house if he wanted to. So he, he loved reading too, still does, studied to be a mechanical engineer, decided in his junior year after doing very well, he didn't want to do that and went to do something else. But he's much more mechanically inclined and physically inclined than I am in terms of building things with tools. Story_ID: 261575 Speaker 1: Let me ask you to talk about sort of family times, what--you know, anything significant around, you know, birthdays or celebrations or just, you know, things that you remember, just some anecdotes. Speaker 2: Well, I--you know, I recall--I recall very early on visits that we would make to my grandmother's house in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], and, and I remember--what I remember about those trips-- Speaker 1: This is your mother [Eleanor Graham Harper]--on your-- Speaker 2: This is my, my-- Speaker 1: --mother's side. Speaker 2: --on my mother's side. So what I remember about those trips were that, you know, my brother and I would pile in the backseat of the car and my parents were in the front, and I--we would have these great discussions or they would have these great discussions; we were just listening as kids. And they would discuss the world, what was going on in the world. And they'd have discussions about--usually about what was happening in, you know, either some big event around the world or something that was going on in the U.S. that, that involved African Americans, and, and I remember listening to them have those kind of discussions about how the--while the world was getting better, there still were some big issues. And then I recall--and I used to love listening to my parents have these debates about, you know, what was the right solution to these problems. Then I would always love the fact that at the end of that, we arrive at my grandmother's house and she was--my nickname for her was Ga [ph.] at that point; I was very young. And I always remember that she--she'd always welcome my brother and I, you know, with big hugs and, and then she'd always give us, you know--her big thing was pound cake and, and fruit cocktail. You know, that was the--we, we used to--you know, we'd just wait for that. But I, I remember my, my grandmother, you know, also trying to talk to my brother and I always about what life was gonna be when we grew up and, and how we should try to be as, as men. We were too young to understand that, but--and it's very little that I can recall, but, but those were special times to me because, you know, I, I always loved seeing my parents interact and, and loved listening to them talk about what was going on around the country and the world, and, and then interacting with my grandmother and my brother and I, so that--that's one memory that, that I have. Story_ID: 261576 Speaker 1: Now, did your brother and you get along? Speaker 2: We're like a lot of brothers. We, we--yes and no, okay (laughter). There were--I think growing up we, we always had this, no matter how much we fought and we fought like all brothers fight. We loved each other but we I think at times hated each other. But if anyone touched him, I was gonna be there and if anyone touched me, he was gonna be there as a--and as we grow--as we grow older, we always had each other's back and we still do. But I think, you know, through, through our early years, we fought a lot. I think by the time we were in middle school and, and leaving middle school, we, we stopped doing that and spent a lot of time doing things together because we were close enough in age, within two years, so usually we had the same interests. We played football together, we ran track together, we went--you know, we, we went to the same schools together, so that was great and we are very, very close today. Story_ID: 261577 Speaker 1: How old were you when [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] died? Speaker 2: I was--I was--you know, I remember I was what my-- Speaker 1: Maybe eight or? Speaker 2: Yeah, about nine years old-- Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: --I guess, something like that. Speaker 1: And do you remember where you were when that happened? Speaker 2: I remember being in school for some special program. I don't know why I was there because it didn't happen in a normal time and I remember people being upset about it. I remember coming home and my--and having my mother [Eleanor Graham Harper] and--you know, really crying about this. I didn't understand what was going on really until my father [Joseph Harper] sort of explained it to me and then I remember--here's the thing I remember most about it is not the event as it happened because I just didn't--I didn't know what was happening really. But what I remember was the, the news, watching the news with my parents and seeing what had happened and hearing the commentary, and, and hearing them talk about how awful this was and what, what were the implications of that, that's what I recall. Story_ID: 261578 Speaker 1: Your community that you're growing up, it's part, part--is it--like your school you said was 95 percent black. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, most of the community. Speaker 1: Most of the-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And so the community was mainly black? Speaker 2: The community was black. Speaker 1: Was-- Speaker 2: The school was predominantly black. I, I went through-- Speaker 1: And teachers? Speaker 2: --almost all--most of the teachers were, were black. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I went, you know, to a high school for me. I went to predominantly black schools. In high school, it changed. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: High school was different. Speaker 1: Now junior high, was that seventh and eighth or--and ninth grade or-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Well, it was--it was sixth, seventh, and eighth. Speaker 1: Sixth, seventh, and eighth. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. And what, what was the name of that school? Speaker 2: I--you know-- Speaker 1: Do you-- Speaker 2: I don't even recall (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, no problem. Story_ID: 261579 Speaker 1: That was around the time then that you said you started getting involved in sports and playing-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: And, and--but you're not angry at that point yet. Speaker 2: I think I was beginning to be angry. Speaker 1: Now why was--what is this about besides puberty, what is making you angry? Speaker 2: What was making me--what was--what was beginning to make me angry was I was starting to realize that the society we lived in was not fair and--to anyone who was black. I didn't understand it all, but what I could--what I was starting to see was it's a--there are two worlds and it was--that was starting to dawn on me. I was also starting to get a message from people in the community. I--at that point, I was--I was growing up and I was--I was very much into books. I was usually the smartest kid in the class, so I was having these big aspirations of I wanna be, you know, a doctor or I wanna be a lawyer or I wanna be this, and I was starting to get feedback that said, Art, Artie [HistoryMaker Arthur H. Harper], maybe that's not gonna work. Maybe you can't do that. I was--I was getting those messages. Speaker 1: Who was giving those messages to you? Speaker 2: You know, it was every--it was people who cared actually who were trying to adjust my expectation level-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --so I wouldn't be hurt. And they were basing that on their, their life experience. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And, you know, when I was probably saying things like I wanna be president or I wanna be, you know--I wanna own this or do that, and I think they were saying in their life experience that wasn't possible for a black person in America at that time, and so they were giving me feedback, trying to adjust my expectations. And after a while, I started realizing that, you know, people are telling me I can't do this and I can't do that. And then I started noticing, gee, I--and I don't see anybody who looks like me doing those things, and that was starting to--I think--I think that was what was, was starting to make me angry. And I know as I got older, that made me very angry. Story_ID: 261580 Speaker 1: Who was influencing you there? Is it still your parents [Eleanor Graham Harper and Joseph Harper] or were there other people in the community [in Pleasantville, New Jersey] that you looked up as, you know, role models and was this--I'm trying to get a sense of the community. Small town, were there people like--did--was the doctor black, the mini-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I mean--okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean you had--in that community, you had the, the typical, you know--you had--you had-- Speaker 1: Teachers. Speaker 2: --teachers, you had some doctors, you had--you had people who owned their own stores. You, you had--you had some of that. Even though it was a--in a--in a very poor area but, but, you know, you saw that this was a community--it was a--it was a self--almost a self-sufficient community and, and you had--the richest African American I recall at that time in that community had a--had a sewage treatment company and, you know, he lived--he lived pretty large at, at least compared to everybody else there. Story_ID: 261581 Speaker 1: Now was your family a churchgoing family? Did--was there a church part of-- Speaker 2: My, my family was, was very much into it, but my father [Joseph Harper] who was raised as a Catholic and my mother [Eleanor Graham Harper] who was raised as a--as a Baptist became Muslims and so we went to the mosque, okay? We went to the, the Nation of Islam. Speaker 1: So why did they become Muslim? Speaker 2: Oh, they became Muslim when, when I was very young, you know, very early, when they got back together, when they got back together, so-- Speaker 1: Did you--did they ever--did you talk about ever why they did that? Speaker 2: Yes. I--I'd ask them a lot about that. Story_ID: 261582 Speaker 1: They [Eleanor Graham Harper and Joseph Harper] have this conversion. Speaker 2: They had a conversion and from, from Catholicism and, and Baptist to, to, to Islam, to Muslims, then in the--in the Nation of Islam back then. Speaker 1: You--do you remember anything, any reaction from your--you know, either grandparents, you know grandmothers? Speaker 2: Yeah, I--well, I remember a reaction from a lot of the family. There was a lot of, you know, what are you doing? Why are you doing it? How could you do it? In some ways, in some parts of the family, it was a little bit of, you're now, you know, out of this part of the family. And others, they, they, they didn't go that far, but it was always a little bit of distance. I think that just people, you know, the family just not understanding what was going on. And, you know, at that age, early on, I didn't understand what was going on either. I just knew it was--suddenly things were different. And, you know, that's--but that's--that is--you know, that's how I grew up. Speaker 1: But this is my question, so in the little town [Pleasantville, New Jersey] you grew up there was a--you know, they had a--I mean, a mosque? Speaker 2: In Atlantic City [New Jersey]. Speaker 1: Oh, in Atlant- okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So do you remember going to the mosque and-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah, oh yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, can you-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah. I remember that a lot. Speaker 1: Can you talk about that? Speaker 2: Sure. I--you know--you know, the thing that I, I guess a lot of people who say, well what was it really like? Well, what it was really like was it was all about--it was all about black people doing things for themselves. It was all about if you were a man, a young man, it was all about growing up to have respect for yourself. It was all about growing up to, to, to be a man. It was--there was a lot of teachings that said you are equal to or in some cases better than other people. You know, it was--it was--it was all about creating this positive image. It was all about doing for self. It was all about if we can't live, you know, together in the society, let's find a way to live over here separately, but do it with class, do it with style. You know, there was a lot of discipline instilled. There was a lot of, of rigor around--you know, a lot of rules, I remember that. And--but it was--it--in a lot of ways when I look at what have I taken from that, what's made me successful today, a lot of it came from that and my father and, you know. I didn't agree. Obviously I'm, I'm not--but as I got older I broke away when I got a chance to do that, but I have to say a lot of the positive things that, that was being taught and it was being pushed around not doing drugs, respect for yourself, respect for, for the women in the community, being a man, accepting responsibility, being accountable, taking care of your family, you know. Those kinds of things, you know, are, are sort of mainstream American values that I don't think a lot of Americans would, would associate with, with that--the Nation of Islam, but that's what was being taught. Story_ID: 261583 Speaker 1: This was also a time when the Nation [of Islam] was very political-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: --in many ways. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: Very much so. Speaker 1: --very active in terms of, even it's car- you know, building things. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: You know, whether there were the shops that sold, you know, the-- Speaker 2: They were building, they, they--well, as you know, in Chicago [Illinois] they had this--they had this, this mosque [Mosque Maryam, Chicago, Illinois], they had the school [Muhammad University of Islam], they had shopping--a little shopping center at one point. They were buying farm land. You know, there was--it was all about building positive things for African Americans in the community. The press--you know, you, you always see the, the, the rhetoric on the news and they always pick the--you know, the, the--some of the worst statements to do, but what the organization was about was trying to create this environment to say if you--if we can't get along together, here's how to build a, a community of black people that respect each other and, and respect others. So that's what I remember. There are parts of it I didn't agree with and still don't agree with, but I have to say those pieces of it I took with me. Speaker 1: And what were some of those parts that you didn't agree with and, and-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --that you had? Speaker 2: You know, it, it evolved as I got older. I think at a very young age, what I liked was this message that, hey, if you're black, you're at least as good as anybody else 'cause I was getting different messages that said you're not as good as anybody else. Where I started disagreeing was when the message went to you're better than those people, and then I started wondering even as a young teenager, well, wait a minute, I didn't like it when I felt that way, why would I impose that on someone else? So that was--that was sort of my first, you know, question mark about it. I--as I evolved, got older, I started questioning could you ever really live--if we're all Americans, can you ever really live in America in a segregated situation and ever have--and ever feel like that is an equal situation? How's that gonna work? Okay, I, I, I just couldn't work that out in my head, so I started questioning that. And then just the religious part of it, you know, I--as I got older and older, I started questioning that. So, you know, it, it evolved over time, but--and I--and, and when I got a chance, I broke because I--the gap was too big, but, but there were pieces of it that were good. Speaker 1: Now, when did you break? What year? What age? Speaker 2: When I--when I left high school [Absegami High School, Galloway, New Jersey]. Story_ID: 261584 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was your mother [Eleanor Graham Harper] then subservient? You know, there is this whole thing about the women being subservient to the men or was that-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: No, I'm just asking. Speaker 2: No, the reason I laugh is because of-- Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: --is because I think--I think what people have read about--and my brother and I still laugh about this because you see--you used to see the sisters with the white robes and the--and everything and, and in all of the--all of the publicity was they were subservient and everything like that. Well, let me tell you, as soon as we got in the car to go home or we got in the house, it was my--it flipped, okay? It was--my mother ran the house, my mother set the rule (laughter). I mean, that's the way it worked. By the way, it works that way in my house, too. So, no, it really wasn't like that. I think that was the--that was the perception, that was the media hype about it. And, and in public, what, what you saw is you saw these scenes with all the women sitting on one side and all the--all the men sitting on the other side, so, you know, it sorta fed to the perception. But no, that's not really the way it worked. Speaker 1: Now, the, the other thing, do they--you had Bible--did you have Bible study? I'm just trying to understand the structure. Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. Speaker 1: Bible--you did have Bible-- Speaker 2: I had--I had--I--well, now, I had Bible study, Quran [Koran] study. I, I did--I did--I did both. I mean, it was all a part of--it was all a part of that. I mean, a part of their--that whole teaching was, was to, to--always to compare the Bible and the Quran. And so I think--I think part of it was that, you know, they were preaching to people who were familiar with the Bible and unfamiliar with the Quran, so the way the bridged it was you start with the Bible and go there. So that's--so I, I--you know, I, I, I read--spent a lot of time reading the Bible and at that point in my life a lot of time reading the Quran as well. Story_ID: 261585 Speaker 1: Any discussion of who were the leaders in--you know, in, in--you know, in the Muslim faith at that time-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Well-- Speaker 1: You know, the black Muslim-- Speaker 2: Eli-- Speaker 1: --I mean-- Speaker 2: Elijah Muhammad-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --was running--was running it and when we would go out to Chicago [Illinois] in February, February 26th, okay, every year-- Speaker 1: Isn't that-- Speaker 2: Saviours' Day. Speaker 1: Saviours' Day, yeah. Speaker 2: And we would go out there and, and so, yeah, so you had Elijah Muhammad was running it. You had at that time, Malcolm X came through and I remember Malcolm X when he was in the Nation of Islam, he came through. [HistoryMaker Minister] Louis Farrakhan was--came up behind him and I remember him. You know, I remember when Muhammad Ali came into it, so I, I grew up in that period in that organization. Speaker 1: And that--do you remember any stories around any of them or any, you know, discussion about them or-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: Because this is the-- Speaker 2: --I remember hearing-- Speaker 1: --this-- Speaker 2: --them all speak. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: I remember hearing them all speak. Speaker 1: Can you--can you tell me your impressions of them at that time? Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I remember-- Speaker 1: Like Elijah Muhammad, do you remember-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I, I, I remember him. I--what did intrigue me was this was the only place where I saw black men who were standing up and speaking their mind and, and I saw leaders. I saw--I saw leaders is what I saw. I didn't--I knew I was attracted to something about them. I--as I've gotten older, I realize it was leadership. I saw leadership. Now whether I say I agreed with what they were saying or not, what I--what I saw and what I was attracted to was their leadership. They, they had a commanding presence. They had people who wanted to follow. They, they were creating a vision of the future that was different and that people wanted, and, and they had this magnetic power, and, and that's what I recall. And they all had different styles. I mean, Elijah Muhammad's style was different than Malcolm's style. Speaker 1: So can you talk a little bit about that? Speaker 2: Well he was--you know, he was pretty small in stature, and, and he was elderly, okay? And so--and he had a, you know, a, a--you know, smaller voice. And, and yet he had the--he could convey his passion about his--whatever he was--his point versus say I recall Malcolm who was--even, even--this was before he had left when he was younger, you know, this young, charismatic, tall, good looking. You know, so he had a different physical presence and he was--he was a lot louder in his delivery. He was a lot more physical in his delivery. He was a lot more aggressive in his delivery. But both would get the same kind of result. Malcolm eventually went further. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: He went further. Speaker 1: He went further. Speaker 2: So, I, I just--I, I recall that. I, I was--it was the only time where I saw at that point in my life black men who I thought were, were not afraid to confront the society outside of the black community as men, okay? And that, that was--that impacted me. That impacted me. Speaker 1: Now, what, what, what--how old are you at this point? That's what I'm-- Speaker 2: Oh, no. I--you know, this was most of my, you know-- Speaker 1: Growing up. Speaker 2: --through growing up. Story_ID: 261586 Speaker 1: You're existing in a, you know, a black school, black world, black teachers-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay, but in the North, do you think your experience mirrored that of someone growing up in the South sort of? Have you talked to people-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I've--look, I don't really know, but my, my guess is gonna talk to other people. I think the--I, I don't think the experience is exactly the same. I think that in the South it was--it was a lot more-- Speaker 1: Conservative? Speaker 2: --open. No, actually I think in the South, I think--I think-- Speaker 1: You're talking about the racism. Speaker 2: I'm talking about the racism. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Are, are you talking about-- Speaker 1: I was talking about, you know, people who grew up in a black environment, you know, and really--were you interacting much with whites sort of-- Speaker 2: At that point--not until--not until high school for me. Speaker 1: Okay. Now where did you go to high school then? Speaker 2: The high school, I went to--at that--at that time when I went into high school, they were rezoning and they, they had a problem in that they had too many students and, and one high school. And their solution was, okay, they've--they--we're gonna build a new high school, but that's gonna take two years, so they decided to take this one high school and create another high school, virtual high school, and for, for a couple of years, they actually ran shifts through high school. So one, one school which was Absegami High [School, Galloway, New Jersey], you, you went from 8:00 'til I think 12:30 or something, and then the next group came in from 12:30 to 4:30 or whatever, and then the next year, you'd flip. So I went--I started out in, in, in one school and graduated out of--started out in Oakcrest High School [Mays Landing, New Jersey] and graduated from Absegami High School, never leaving the building, okay? Because you started out at one high school and in the middle, they decided to do this, this split and I end up in Absegami, okay? Speaker 1: And they changed the name of the school? Speaker 2: Well, they built another high school, okay, and some students got to go to that new high school two years later, and the Absegami, the group that became Absegami High stayed where they were. I stayed where I was. Speaker 1: Now how do you spell Absegami? Speaker 2: A-B-S-E-G-A-M-I, I think it is. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Named after an Indian [Native American] tribe or something. Story_ID: 261587 Speaker 1: How did you change and, you know-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --sort of become a--you're--become angry? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You're involved in sports; that had started already. Speaker 2: I'm involved in sports. I--by high school--by high school, I, I recall, you know, going to my counselor and trying to decide, do you take college prep courses or do you take these other courses? And I remember the counselor telling me--I said I wanted to take college prep courses and they were telling me, well, maybe you shouldn't do that. Maybe you should take shop or something else; I can't recall. But they were discouraging me from taking college prep courses, and pretty strongly discouraging me. I, I--you know, one of the things that I've noticed as I've gotten older is that when I'm challenged--when someone challenges me and says you--I can't do it, it really energizes me to, to try and prove them wrong. It energizes me to, to go forward. At that point, I didn't understand it; I just knew I was mad. So their view was you, you can't do that. I told 'em, well I wanna do it, and, and I did. You know--so I remember that part of high school. I remember, you know, that there was huge racial tension between the white kids, the black kids in high school because-- Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: You'd, you'd put new groups of students together. Most of the black kids, we hadn't--we hadn't spent much time with, with, with anybody other than our community [in Pleasantville, New Jersey]. You know, little, little trips out, but it was, you know, like a little excursion out and back to the village. So we, we--you know, we were, were all thrown in the situation that was new. So high school for me was you'll remember the, you know, the taunts, the fights. I remember, you know, when I got into college prep, I suddenly realized, hey, now, now I'm even--you know, where are all my buddies, okay? Where is all the black kids 'cause there weren't many of us there. Most had gone the route of the shop class or whatever, and, and so that bothered me. You know, I, I was going through this time where--also with my parents [Eleanor Graham Harper and Joseph Harper], I, I was starting to--the gap on my beliefs about reli- the religion and, and, and the Nation of Islam was different. I didn't like it. I wanted--quite honestly, I, I was trying to break away and I couldn't, so there was tension with my parents around that. There was--there was, you know, this tension of just being a teenager and trying to find out who I am and then the tension of, you know, everyone telling me what I can't do, and even when I force myself in to do it, I find out I'm, I'm one of only one or one of only two. That--and, and the outside world was becoming--starting to become visible to me and I didn't see--you know, even though I didn't--I wanted to do these things, I--when I looked forward, I didn't see people who looked like me doing what I said I wanted to do. So I was starting to feel like maybe they're right and maybe I'm wrong and I'm--and I'm not happy about that. So I--that's--that was part of the rage that was growing I guess inside. Story_ID: 261588 Speaker 1: Suddenly you had this population growth and, and you had too many kids for the high school. And what had happened was you had, I think, a large number of, of African American kids that started growing in this community and, and so they weren't ready, the school district hadn't, hadn't planned right, I guess. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So they suddenly have too many kids at one high school. They decide to build a new high school, but, but their solution for two years was that we're gonna create two--a new high school, so we start with Oakcrest High School [Mays Landing, New Jersey], we create this new one, Absegami High School [Galloway, New Jersey], and what we're gonna do is, we're gonna have both of 'em use this one facility until the new one is built. At the end of the day, what it became was the new one went to, to most of the--most of the white kids (laughter) and the old one came to, to the black kids. But for a couple years, and I was there in that period, you had--you had two things. You had these two groups both using one facility and you--and you--and the way they did it, you also had--some of the black kids had to be in the--in the one school with, with a lot of the white kids and a few of the white kids had to be in the school with a lot of the black kids. So you, you basically had a bunch of kids who hadn't really grown up in their communities used to each other, and that, that was a problem. You also had--because of this, you had--and I don't think they planned it right, you had this turnover. Literally, it's like a shift change in a factory now where, you know, one group is leaving and the other group is coming in. Well, we all went to school, you had to ride buses, so we'd all arrive on the bus and be getting off and they're, you know, coming onto the bus. So you had a period of time where you had these big groups passing each other there. And, you know, we, we--I remember once there was a big fight. They called it a riot or, you know, race riot. It was--I don't know maybe it's the closest you could get in the high school, but it was a pretty ugly thing. I mean, a lot of people hurt, police had to come out and, you know, settle the whole thing, but it was all these kids basically not knowing how to get along. Good news is back then it was mostly just hitting, you know, fighting. It wasn't guns and everything else, but it was ugly. But that was the high school. Story_ID: 261589 Speaker 1: Are the teachers both black and white at the high school at that point? Are you-- Speaker 2: The teachers--the teachers were mostly white because, because it had--remember, they put both these schools [Oakcrest High School, Mays Landing, New Jersey; Absegami High School, Galloway, New Jersey] together in one facility so the teachers didn't change. So you had--you had some, some black teachers, but it was predominantly white teachers. Speaker 1: So are those teachers that--are any--you're--are you still a good student at this point? Speaker 2: At this point--I, I was always a good student. I was always a good student, but, but I'm, I'm--I was--I used to be this, at a very young age this very quiet, good student. Now, I'm becoming more vocal good student and, and, you know, challenging good student, and, and unhappy good student. But I'm also becoming an athlete, you know, so I'm starting to--I'm starting to change, morph, and, and grow. And, and I'm challenging everybody in terms of, you know, their thinking. I, I--challenging my parents [Eleanor Graham Harper and Joseph Harper] in terms of, of their choice of the religion [Nation of Islam]. I'm challenging, you know, some of my teachers on why do they think I can't, you know, do certain things, you know. And I'm, I'm challenging members of the community on, on why do we always have to be separate, you know? I, I was really going through--fighting, going through a lot in my mind around, you know, who would I--who did I wanna become? And I guess it kinda went back to my father saying never let anybody else define who you are. I think I was trying to define myself at that point and, yeah, I, I wasn't--I wasn't very soft about it then. Story_ID: 261590 Speaker 1: Were you active in school activities or what-- Speaker 2: Not in high school-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --other than sports, in sports. Speaker 1: Sports. Speaker 2: Sports. Speaker 1: And then sports were--your sports of choice were? Speaker 2: Football. I played football and-- Speaker 1: What, what position did you play? Speaker 2: I played linebacker-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --'cause I, you know, that was a nice-- Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: --position when you're angry. And, and, and I, I was on--in track and field but I was--I did discus and shot put. Speaker 1: And do you--do you remember being moved by the 1968 [Summer] Olympics [Mexico City, Mexico], you know, when--I mean, do you-- Speaker 2: Yeah, with the--with the--with the fist. Speaker 1: Right, right, right. Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I remember that a lot. In--and-- Speaker 1: Juan Carlos [sic. HistoryMaker John Carlos]. Speaker 2: I felt proud when they did it and surprised at the reaction, that people were so mad about it. But that, that was part of the emotion of that time back in the '60s [1960s]. Story_ID: 261591 Speaker 1: So who are you looking up to at this point though? Speaker 2: You know, at that point in my life, I was--I was searching because I, I saw a lot of people that were, were leaders out there but I didn't see--I couldn't see anyone that was do--that, that really appealed to me. I, I was searching for something else. I, I was--it was confusing time for me as a kid. You know, I liked a little bit of a lot of people, okay, but I didn't--but there wasn't any one view or one philosophy that I said, that's what--that's what I wanna be. Speaker 1: So were you reading? Were you--was this internal or were you talking with friends or were you part of groups? Speaker 2: No, this was-- Speaker 1: I'm just trying to under-- Speaker 2: At this point for me, this was a very, very--this was a very internal retrospective process for me. This was me reading a lot. I, I was very interested in that point in--starting, starting to be interested in different philosophies of life, you know, so at that point, I discovered people like [Mahatma] Gandhi and, you know, I, I started reading, you know, different philosophies. I was just trying to figure out--you know, I had all these people saying what I couldn't do and I had others trying to, you know, point me in a certain direction and, and I wanted something bigger. And so for me, that was just a confusing time through much of, of high school. Speaker 1: Okay. But your parents [Eleanor Graham Harper and Joseph Harper] are holding a tight rein, your mother. Are they--are they struggling-- Speaker 2: Both are holding tight reins. They're, they're--they are firmly--actually, my, my mother as I recall in the later years had the same doubts and questions about the religion [Nation of Islam]. My mother was--would listen to me. My mother would encourage me to, to think on my own, be my own person. My father was firmly committed and, and, you know, I respect him for that. But I was--you know, I, I, I was different. I was--I was moving away. I was developing. Story_ID: 261592 Speaker 1: What are the courses that you're gravitating to in school? Were they the-- Speaker 2: College prep, math-- Speaker 1: Math? Speaker 2: Math and chemistry. Speaker 1: Math and-- Speaker 2: Math and chemistry I all--I've always loved. That was--that was what I loved. Speaker 1: And did you have any teachers that--you see, that's what--so your teachers, did they nurture you along and see the talent or were you just-- Speaker 2: No, I think--I think up until--I think where I began to get, you know, I think--I had a lot of encouragement early on by these teachers in, in say elementary school [Farmington Elementary School, Pleasantville, New Jersey]. Middle school sorta I--happened for me. High school, I, I can't--you know, I, I remember having an African American history teacher named Mr. Sutton [ph.] and Mr. Sutton, at the beginning of the year, remember not really understanding his whole approach. By the end of the year, what I understood from him was that he, he, he--his big thing was you have to earn respect and so he--his message to students was if you behave a certain way, you show me you don't respect yourself, and if you don't respect yourself, no one will respect you. And, and so I remember that message from him and taking that with me. But I have to say in high school for me, it was such a confusing time. There weren't--there weren't a lot of teachers there. The teachers inf- did influence me. They influenced me by telling me what I couldn't do, which, which became a challenge. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so my biggest mem- remembrances or, or, or memories of high school are you can't do college prep and I did college prep, you shouldn't go to this college and I did, you can't graduate from this place in this time, it's too difficult, and I did, you know? So it was the--what I recall are the challenges that were issued and, and they influenced me that way. Speaker 1: And this is all coming internally then, you know? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And so--now did you have partners in crime with other friends? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: It was you? Okay. Speaker 2: No. No. I was--look, I had--my brother understood me. My brother understood where I was at. I think he was going through a similar process on his own. But it was--you know, it was--I was also sort of misunder- I shouldn't say misunderstood. It was also tough when you're in, in--at that point, I--I'd gone through--once I got to high school and I go into college prep and there are a few other African American, a few of my buddies, okay, the, the kids I, you know, spent all the early years with, they weren't in the class with me, so they didn't know what was going on there. They--okay? I think it's why I got into sports 'cause I could go back and play with them on the team. I could hang out with them on the team but I couldn't see--I didn't see them during--all day during classroom time. So we, we still kept our bond on the football field or out on the--on the--on the track field, but I felt fairly isolated, you know, to a--to a large extent. Speaker 1: So, but no--but at least you ended up on--you know, on the college-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --prep track. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You know, there are--you could've been the-- Speaker 2: My father [Joseph Harper] insisted--my father insisted-- Speaker 1: Oh, I see. Speaker 2: --that, that, that I take--he, he was always talking about taking--you gotta go--you gotta do better than I did. Progress is you doing better than I did. And so he was--he had always pushed this, you're gonna go to college. By the time I got to high school, I, I was--I believed and wanted to do college prep and go to college, so that was fairly easy for me. And I came home and said I wanna play football and he said fine as long as you stay in college prep. Well, that was easy. I said okay, fine. So that's what I did. That's what my brother did. Story_ID: 261593 Speaker 1: But there's no one influencing you, no other mentors, people you're looking up to at that time? Speaker 2: My father [Joseph Harper]. Speaker 1: People-- Speaker 2: You know, still I, I think-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Even though at that point, you know, I'm, I'm-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: You know, there's a lot of tension because he, he, he has one set of beliefs, I'm, I'm moving in a different direction, and I'm challenging him because I'm-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --I'm this (laughter), you know, I'm this growing young man. You know, he always pushed in an--he always instilled in me to be my own person. He always instilled in me to be a man of honor. He always instilled in me to work hard for what I'm gonna get and, and he always instilled in me to not be a victim. So all those things are, you know, are help--are, are helping me. I will say that as a--as a I think junior or senior [in high school], I can't recall, my father when he understood that--he said, what do you wanna do? And I said I think I wanna go be an engineer, and I had no idea what an engineer did, okay? I just knew that I liked chemistry and I liked science, so I--someone told me, you know, engineers do that. He, he actually got--brought home a--an African American engineer who worked with him at [The] Boeing [Company] and I, I remember him coming there, coming to our house. I remember he had this very nice car, okay? I remember he, you know, he, he seemed like this very well prepared, you know, person. I, I, I liked his style, liked how he approached me as, as a--as a kid. And I remember asking him, you know, what does an engineer do? And he described what he did, you know, and how he helped design the planes and, and, and what his job was and how he was able to take care of his family, you know? And, and that impressed me, so I decided with that one little interview that, you know what, since I like chemistry--'cause I asked him, I like chemistry, he said, well, you can be a chemical engineer, and that was what got me thinking. I had no clue what a chemical engineer did, but I decided I--I'm gonna go study chemical engineering. And when I went to my guidance counselor and said I wanna go to college and I wanna go study chemical engineering, their view was that's too difficult, so don't do chemical engineering and, and do you really want engineering in general and, and oh, this school [Stevens Institute of Technology, Hoboken, New Jersey] is just too difficult. All those things became for me a challenge, so I said I'm gonna go study chemical engineering, I'm going to this school and, and, you know, that was my, my view. Story_ID: 261594 Speaker 1: And that school was-- Speaker 2: Stevens Institute of Technology [Hoboken, New Jersey]. Speaker 1: Now, talk about that school and how you had-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --identified it. Speaker 2: Stevens--well, it was--it was easy in how I identified it. There were a number of schools I wanted to go to. I wanted to go--I wanted to come out to California. I wanted to get as far away from home as I could but that's where the reality kicked in. We didn't have any money, okay (laughter), so I quickly realized I couldn't go anyplace further than I could drive to from home, and so that became my, my, my target zone. I said, I--I'm gonna have to drive to this college and be able to drive home. I can't--we don't have--I don't have any money, so we don't have enough money to fly. So I, I started looking and, you know, I remember looking at a number of schools in that--in the Northeast, and Stevens was one of them. And what I remember about it is--at that point about it is it was small, it was in New Jersey, it had a very good reputation for turning out engineers, it was within a couple hours' drive from home [Pleasantville, New Jersey], and I thought, this one is looking pretty good. So I decided that's where I wanted to go. I learned it was--it was a--it was--at that point and still is, fairly highly ranked, tough school, but I, I decided I wanted to go there. Speaker 1: And so you go there. Now, you're still--how far is Hoboken [New Jersey]--it is a--no-- Speaker 2: Hoboken is right across the, the [Hudson] River-- Speaker 1: I know, but-- Speaker 2: --from Manhattan [New York, New York]. Speaker 1: --you know, this is what I find so-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: New Jersey is such a small state-- Speaker 2: Small. You could drive from the-- Speaker 1: --and it has all these cities in it (laughter). Speaker 2: Yeah. You can drive from--you can drive from the top of, of New Jersey in about three hours, three and a half hours, okay? Speaker 1: I know, but you hear about-- Speaker 2: So-- Speaker 1: --all these, you know, cities-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and I get them--you know-- Speaker 2: It was--it was--it was about two and a half hours away from home. Speaker 1: But at least you're away. Speaker 2: I'm away. Speaker 1: You're away. Speaker 2: I wanted to be away but I knew I needed to be close enough to, to be able to drive to it. So I, I graduated [from Absegami High School, Galloway, New Jersey] and I went there. Speaker 1: Do you-- Speaker 2: It, it changed me. Story_ID: 261595 Speaker 1: Can you describe your first year [at Stevens Institute of Technology, Hoboken, New Jersey]? Speaker 2: I'll describe my first day. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My first day, I got in a fight, my first day, moving in day literally. We were moving in, we get there, I, I get to the room first. There was two people to a room, the dorm room. I get there, two people to a room. I'm there and we're unloading, my parents [Eleanor Graham Harper and Joseph Harper] were there, and the next--my, my roommate and his family arrive, white family, and they walk in and I could see immediately they had a problem. I mean, they, they were very polite and very nice, but you could tell there was an issue. And there was a little family huddle and, oh, excuse us, we need to go do something and they disappeared, never came back. And suddenly about an hour later, hour and a half later, a new family comes in, Hispanic, and I said--and they said hi, we're--you know, we're here and I'm your roommate and I said well, I--there was somebody else here and he said yeah, he and my roommate who didn't wanna be my roommate are roommates, and we're--now, we're roommates, so great. So, so our parents get us situated and both leave and what I recall is, is next door, there was a guy playing some, some rock music, very loud, okay? And I--you know, it was just--I just didn't--I hadn't heard that music, I didn't like it, I--it was--and it was too loud. And I went next door and I said, could you please turn the music down. And he sorta was nice, but I walked back, he turned it up. Well, this--you know, when you're that age, this became a little problem, I'm trying to get him to turn it down, he didn't, long story short, we get in a fight over this, okay, literally a fight. And so I haven't even been in the place a day and I get summonsed up to the, you know, the, the, the campus headquarters and I go up there and there was a--there was a professor there, and he called me in and he looked at my transcript, and he said, look, he said you look like a--he asked my story, I told him what happened. He said, look, you look like a, a really good student and you look like you have a lot of potential. He said, what you're gonna learn here is that you're gonna have to learn to deal with a lot of things that are different. And he said you gotta decide whether you're gonna make an effort to learn to do that or not. And he said, now other people are gonna have to make that effort to learn to, to deal with the things you make different, but he said, you know, as you go through the rest of your life, you're gonna have to have a choice. Are you going to fight the system that is there? Or are you gonna get into it and make it better? It's up to you. So I'm gonna forget this happened, but if it happens again, you're out. So that--I remember that 'cause, 'cause it all happened on day one. And that was--that was something that, you know, I thought about later a lot, about his thought--his comments. Story_ID: 261596 Speaker 1: College for me was a major transformation. Now I'm--now I'm out, I'm on my own, I'm almost an adult, but I think I am an adult, and I--the first year [at Stevens Institute of Technology, Hoboken, New Jersey] was, was tough because I, I also realized that, gee, you know, I was used to being usually the smartest kid in most of the classes. Now, I'm with kids that are--they're, they're better prepared, they went to better schools, they're better--you know, I really scrambled to catch up in, in my freshman year. And I also realized that, gee, I'm on this campus and trying, trying to study engineering and become an engineer, and there were a very small group of African Americans on the campus. And so my first year, I struggled. My second year, I, I started hitting my pace. I started to--you know, I realized that, gee, you know, by working harder, I caught up. And, you know what, by working harder, I'm starting to move ahead in some cases here. And then I decided that, you know, this thought about am I gonna just fight everything from the outside or try to get inside and fix it or make it better, let me try it. Let me at least just try it. And so I, I, I started getting involved in some campus activities. I started with the Black Student Union. I got involved in the Black Student Union in my sophomore year in a big way. I mean I kinda gone--you know, I participated in my freshman year. My sophomore year, I started really getting involved. By the end of the--end of the, the year, you know, people were asking me to become an officer. You know, I think I was a secretary or something in the Black Student Union. And I started getting involved in a couple of other activities and I started learning that, you know, I could get along with other people, but, you know, I had to--I had to understand them, where they were coming from and they had to try to work to understand me. So it really started changing me. I'm also going through a period now of I've broken away, I'm my own person, what is my--you know, what are my beliefs for life? And I, I went through a whole period where I read almost every religious book I could get my hands on, trying to understand, you know, which one is the right one. I read a lot of different philosophies, trying to understand which one is the right one. So I was really growing as a--as a person or trying to grow as a person. By my junior year, I really was starting to think differently about the world now. A lot of the anger had been transformed into energy. I, I, I still wanted to change things, but I didn't wanna do it, you know, by just--by just violent, you know, physical push. I wanted to change it by, by trying to take all my skills and abilities and, and apply them to whatever institution or whatever organization I was involved in. I, I was starting to believe that I had some leadership skills. I was starting to believe that I could--I could change some things. I'd had little successes and little things on the campus and, you know, that, that, that the Black Student Union wanted to change or another organization wanted to change. By my senior year, I, I had decided that, you know, I'm going to, I have potential, I have some gifts in, in terms of my talent. I need to find the best ways to apply those gifts and talent. I need to, to be the best--whatever I'm gonna do, I'm gonna be the best that I can be at it and, and that--that's how I left. So I entered as this sort of angry young high school graduate. I left as this sort of person saying I--I'm going to try it, you know, on the other side and I, I--I'm gonna see if this--if, if what has worked here, little things that have worked here in college can work there. Story_ID: 261597 Speaker 1: How large was the black student population of, of-- Speaker 2: Oh, we were--we were less than a hundred total, the whole--the whole campus. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: We, we were--when I was a freshman, the Black Student Union had something like thirty to forty members. Speaker 1: And, and how, how large was the, the campus? Speaker 2: Oh, the campus is--then, it was about 4000, three, three, 3500, something like that. It's a small campus. Speaker 1: And were--just so--the [Stevens] Institute of Technology [Hoboken, New Jersey], what was its focus? Was it-- Speaker 2: Engineering. Speaker 1: Totally in-- Speaker 2: All engineering. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know, pretty much, it was--it's--it was--it was a--it had started out as a mechanical engineering school and it was--it's, it's an--it's a--an engineering school pretty much. Today, they've--you know, they've grown into, you know, IT [information technology] and, and software technology and things like that, but it was then this pretty hard core engineering. Speaker 1: Now what, what does a chemical engineer do? Can you--can you tell me-- Speaker 2: I haven't done it in so long that I'll--but-- Speaker 1: Well, I mean, but at the time-- Speaker 2: You know-- Speaker 1: --because you said-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --that the person from [The] Boeing [Company] is-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Do you remember his name? Speaker 2: No, I don't. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No, I really don't, unfortunately. Speaker 1: But that was pretty--I mean, your father [Joseph Harper] was really-- Speaker 2: My father was very smart-- Speaker 1: He was-- Speaker 2: --and very insightful and that had a big impact on me. You know, chemical engineering, I, I graduated and I actually went out and became a process chemical engineer for the first couple years of my career. Speaker 1: Now, what year--let, let--I just wanna get-- Speaker 2: Seventy-eight [1978]. Speaker 1: --you-- Speaker 2: Wait, okay, but you graduate from high school [Absegami High School, Galloway, New Jersey]-- Speaker 1: Seventy-four [1974]. Speaker 2: --in 1974. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Okay, and then you enter that fall-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --and then you graduate-- Speaker 1: I graduated four years later. Story_ID: 261598 Speaker 1: Which for me was a major part of hitting this challenge because what I remembered was being told that chemical engineering was too difficult-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --the school [Stevens Institute of Technology, Hoboken, New Jersey] was too difficult, and even if I went, I probably couldn't graduate in four years, so for me, you know, that was the hurdle. It was you're gonna get this degree, you're gonna do it in four years, and so I did. And, and, and now I go to work for then Conoco Chemicals [Continental Oil Company; ConocoPhillips] and, you know, I had already done some, some work in the summers as I was going to college as a process chemical engineer and I was--I, I realized when I was doing that that I really didn't wanna be a true process chemical engineer. Speaker 2: For, for those neophytes-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --what is a true process-- Speaker 1: I'll give you an example, as you drive by like all these refineries, the big refineries or you see these big plants that look like refineries, those are, are designed and run by chemical engineers, so, so you've got people there who have designed the equipment, you've got people there who keep that--the process going, you got people who run that facility day to day. And, and I had gone to work in, in two summers between my junior, sophomore--junior and sophomore year and then my, my senior and junior years, out doing summer work in Monaca, Pennsylvania, as a process engineer, so I had a couple pieces of equipment that they had me monitoring and I would walk out there, you know, three, four times a day and take measurements from the equipment, make sure things were flowing right, make sure everything was okay. And one day as I'm doing that--all the engineers told me--this was in the summer, so all the engineers told me that I had to wear a leather jacket when I walked in the plant. And remember this is back in the--this is in the early '70s [1970s]. I'm still in--still in college, I'm doing summer work. And I, I said why do you have to do that? And they said, well, you'll see. And so I'm walking with my little leather jacket in July, a hot day, and my--and my hard hat and glasses, and something dripped onto my shoulder and it started crackling right away. And that--you wore those leather jackets--today, you can't do that. This is--OSHA [Occupational Safety and Health Administration] has changed everything, but back then, that's how you know if some acid dripped on you. And it, it gave you enough time to get that off before it hit you and burned you. So that's why all these engineers had all these ratty old leather jackets back, back 100 years ago. So I--so this dripped on me and, you know, I get it off and I get the little shower you're supposed to do and I'm okay, but I realized right at that moment, I don't wanna do this for the next--you know, I don't wanna do this my whole career. Speaker 2: But you like--you like the discipline of what engineering brought in terms of-- Speaker 1: I love the discipline--I love the discipline of what engineering brought. I love the way it helped me learn to think about problems. I love the math part of engineering. But what I had also learned through college is that I, I enjoyed working with people more than I did working with, with things and equipment and machines, and that if I wanna make a change, it was all about people. It wasn't about things or machinery, and so I learned it--you know, if you wanna change things, all the influences about how you deal with people. So I, by the time I graduated, realized I really wanted to do something in business but not chemical engineering, but that was my start. And so I came out of, of school with this--that degree, wanting to go do something in business. Story_ID: 261599 Speaker 1: But how many black graduates were in your class? Speaker 2: I--you know, I don't--I can't recall the exact number but it, it was probably--the graduating class was something like three or four hundred I wanna say and I would say maybe half, maybe half, something like that. Speaker 1: Okay, so that's large then. Speaker 2: Yeah. But remember, you've re--you've redistrict and changed-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --the school thing, so-- Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: --yeah, it, it was about half. Speaker 1: But, no, I'm talking about out of Stevens [Institute of Technology, Hoboken, New Jersey]. Speaker 2: Oh, I'm sorry--I'm sorry. Speaker 1: No, that's what I was gonna say-- Speaker 2: I--I'm back on high school [Absegami High School, Galloway, New Jersey], sorry. Speaker 1: No, no, no. Speaker 2: I, I skipped back. Speaker 1: We, we-- Speaker 2: Sorry. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: No, out of--out of Stevens when we graduated with--for chemical engineering, there was about six of us. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Six or seven of us, that was it. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay, so this is 1978-- Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy-eight [1978]. Speaker 1: --and this is a time period that there are, you know, opportunities opening up-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --you know, really, even in corporate America-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --this is sort of the--or people going to business school and coming out, right? Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: Okay, now you--so are people knocking at your door to hire you or-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I do recall that I had--I applied for--I took nineteen interviews, nineteen interviews and I got eighteen offers and I got one rejection. And, and what I recall about this was--so that was--that was a surprise to me that, that I could get, you know, that many--that many offers. But I, I--at that point, I think, you know, was--I'd done--I'd done not just the successful academic side. You know, I graduated, but I'd been involved in a number of activities on campus [at Stevens Institute of Technology, Hoboken, New Jersey] and I was starting to--starting to, you know, branch out and, and try other things. So I lead two or three organizations on campus. Black Student Union was one, but the other two or so were, were not predominantly African American; it was mostly white. Speaker 1: What were they? Speaker 2: One was called the Triangle Association [ph.]. It was--it was--I'm just trying to remember now what we were involved in. But it was--it was a group of the student leaders who had gotten together to sort of form some thoughts around what should happen on campus. And so it was sorta your--all the leaders there and they voted me to, to be the president of that one year. I'd been involved in, in a couple of other, you know, organizations there and been a leader or one of the leaders. So I think--I think when I went out looking for jobs, I, I was surprised that I got this many offers. But I think--looking back on it, I think what, what the employers saw was they saw this, this black kid who was trying to--you know, trying to play in, in, in the broader, you know, sort of campus community, and I think that's--that was part of, you know, in addition to I--yeah, I graduated, I think they, they were looking at that. Story_ID: 261600 Speaker 1: So I got eighteen offers, one rejection. It bothered me after a while why I got the one rejection, and there's a funny story about that in this office if you wanna hear that later. Speaker 2: Yes, I do. I wanna hear it. Speaker 1: You wanna hear it later or, or-- Speaker 2: Okay, now. Well, I mean did it happen then? Speaker 1: No, it, it, it--well, remember, 1978, so I get a rejection. Three and a half years ago I moved to this building that we're in today and for a couple of weeks here, there was something about this build--this particular building that sorta haunted me. And then I realized after about three and a half weeks, I was talking to someone and I said, what was this building before GE [General Electric] bought it? And it turned out that I realized I had interviewed in this building somewhere back in this part of the building and this was the business at that time that rejected me. So here it was all these years later, I didn't get the job with them, but, you know, I, I got the building somehow, so it's the way I think about it. But at that point, it, you know, I was wondering why did they reject me? Speaker 2: Now, did the other black students who graduate with you [from Stevens Institute of Technology, Hoboken, New Jersey], did they have some more offers? Did they end up with-- Speaker 1: Everybody at that time got jobs. It was-- Speaker 2: But did they have that-- Speaker 1: There, there were very-- Speaker 2: --many offers? Speaker 1: --very few--there were very few African American or at that time black chemical engineers in the whole of the U.S., so everybody got jobs. I, I was blessed to, to have a, a large number of offers, but everybody had multiple offers. Not everybody had that many offers. Speaker 2: Now, what was your--how well were you in--you--what, what did you graduate? Did you--were you an A student? Speaker 1: No, no. Speaker 2: You weren't? Speaker 1: No. I was--I was like a, you know, a B student-- Story_ID: 261601 Speaker 1: How do you end up choosing Conoco [Continental Oil Company; ConocoPhillips] then? Speaker 2: I--they didn't make me the biggest offer, but I went with them because what I--by then, what I had realized was that, you know, I have to go--I have to pick the place that I think as a black person coming in I'm gonna have the best chance to succeed, to, to, to at least show--I just--all I wanted was an opportunity. I--but I--but I knew that I had to go to a place that was as close to a meritocracy as I could find, and that was a part of my screen. It was--it was which one of these places, you know, are gonna give me a fair opportunity to show what I can do. And if I'm not good, they'll cut me, but if I am good, they'll give me a shot. And so that was part of my, my, my evaluation screen. They didn't offer me the most money, but what I saw with them, was they were an oil company and they had this sort of oil company mentality. They were a little bit of cowboys and they're--they were growing very quickly. They had younger managers. They had African Americans who I did see, no engineers or, or people doing what I was doing, but I saw some people who were there doing different things, running customer service, you know, in service, customer service departments. So I thought this company just has the best feel to me in terms of me being able to show what I can do, and if I show well, they'll give me a shot, so I went with them. Speaker 1: So the, the--are--did you move to Texas? Is the-- Speaker 2: Actually, I went to Texas. They were based in Houston [Texas] then. I went there for training for about two months and then I went to Ponca City, Oklahoma, for three months. And then I went--then my first assignment was actually to California, to Southern California. Speaker 1: Okay. Now this is--the world has opened up to you in many ways. You're no longer, you know, the New Jersey sort of focus-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And, and so--and--now when you're hired into Conoco, are there a lot of African Americans coming into the workforce? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: No, they're not. Speaker 2: No. No. There was--I was hired in. And, and actually at this point, I, I hired in there and I was--I was a, a, a trainee. They, they weren't sure whether I was gonna do engineering or do technical sales. You kinda came into this program and they would evaluate you. And I remember I was in a class of I think ten or twelve people, all male, I was the only African American. And the first day there, they had a--someone who had been there a long time who was--who was an ex senior leader who was on his way out the door and his job was to work with these trainees. And he came in and I've never forgotten this. He, he walked in and he said, well, boys--he said boys, you know, to the whole group--well, boys, welcome to the real world. He said two words of advice. Never dip your turtle in mud from the company pond and never cheat on your expense account. And, you know, those have actually been two good points of advice for my whole career. But that's how I started and, you know, we--from there, I, I became a--I did in--inside technical service, customer service, then, I did tech service, then I became a salesperson. Speaker 1: And did you know that you--what was the first saying thought? Don't tip your-- Speaker 2: Don't dip your turtle in mud from the company pond. Don't have affairs-- Speaker 1: Oh, 'cause I'm-- Speaker 2: --with people that you work with. Speaker 1: I see. Don't tip your mud in the company pond? Speaker 2: In the company pond. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Now, when you--did you like Southern California? Speaker 2: I loved it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I loved it. Speaker 1: And, and so did you know that you would have your personality--do you think that the sports training helped you with the sales? Do--I mean, I'm just trying to-- Speaker 2: No, I think--I think what helped me with, with the sales side of it--going to Southern California had a huge impact on me. It opened my world. I'd never been to, to the West Coast. I'd, I'd never been any further west than Chicago [Illinois] (laughter), okay? So going out there was a completely different world. I had no clue that it didn't snow every December everywhere in the U.S., okay? Story_ID: 261602 Speaker 1: I'm single, I'm out there [Southern California], I've got a job, you know. And I had a--I worked for a very--probably my very first corporate mentor and sponsor. And I worked for a, a guy, he would--he had been with the company [Continental Oil Company (Conoco); ConocoPhillips] for, I don't know twenty--over twenty-some years. He was extremely experienced. He was this, the, the regional sales leader. He'd been offered a lot of jobs to move to Houston [Texas] and be a bigger leader, never wanted to do it. And he, he took me under his wing. He decided that he wanted--he thought I had some potential, he thought I had some talent, and he decided that he wanted to coach me on not just how to sell, but how--what really happens in, in, in corporate America. He was white, he was Republican, he was--every part of his background was so different from mine and yet this, this guy, you know, really influenced me in a--in a--in a big way and gave me an awful lot, and really sorta got me started in my career. So I was very fortunate to have landed in his office and--but that's where I landed. Speaker 2: And what was his name? Do you-- Speaker 1: His name was Bob Means [ph.]. Speaker 2: Okay. And did he end up rising up in the-- Speaker 1: No, he, he was at the end of his career. Speaker 2: He was at the end. Speaker 1: He was at the end of his career. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And he was--you know, he was very happy. He was very successful within the company, but he never wanted to go beyond--he never--didn't wanna leave Southern California, didn't want to go, go to headquarters job, loved selling, was a--was a great salesperson. He was the sales--regional sales leader, very involved in local, you know, Republican politics in Southern California at the time, which was all new to me. And, yeah, but he, he just--he was a great teacher. And if he liked you, he would sorta take you under his wing and, and teach you. He told me I was the first black, you know, salesperson ever in his office, so, you know, he, he--once he decided he wanted to help me, he really taught me a lot of things that I've carried forward from then. Speaker 2: So what are some of the things he taught you? Speaker 1: Well, he taught me about--you know, he, he was the first one who taught me about unwritten rules of, of a company, that there are always these written rules, but there are unwritten rules that are both a part of the culture. And, you know, remember, I'm brand new, right out of school [Stevens Institute of Technology, Hoboken, New Jersey], but, you know, I would wanna do something one way and I'd go into see him and he'd say, you can't do that, Art [HistoryMaker Arthur H. Harper]. And I would say, why not? It's--you know, I, I can just do--he said, no, you, you don't understand the unwritten rules. This is how it works here and you gotta be sensitive to how it works here and you gotta think about things a certain way. He taught me that. He taught me the, the--about what a network is and the value of building a network and how important that is, and how you gotta do that. He, he taught me about, you know, accountability, you know, in terms of delivering on, you know, what you commit to in your job. So, you know, he was--he was really good. He, he, he took me on sales calls, he let me see him in action. He also taught me things that I didn't know I needed. For example, going out to dinner at a restaurant with customers and looking at the table setting that I'd never seen and not knowing which fork do I take and which--you know, I didn't know those things. He, he just--he, he taught me all those things. So he taught me, you know, the, the hard skills, the soft skills, and, and he, he started educating me around company culture, that every company has a culture and, and you've gotta understand that culture if you wanna succeed there. Speaker 2: And what do you think he saw in you? Do you know or was it the right-- Speaker 1: I--you know, I--I've wondered that. I've asked that question. But, you know, I, I always have--you know, my father [Joseph Harper], I've, I've taken from my father this desire to always wanna be the best and from my mother [Eleanor Graham Harper] to do good, to, to, to do good. And, and so I've to just--whatever I'm doing, try to be the best at it, and I think he saw that in me. I think he saw that I was trying to learn. He saw I was trying to improve. I think he saw--you know, and I asked a lot of questions at that point in my career, yeah. I, I think that's probably what he--what he saw. Story_ID: 261603 Speaker 1: You were there like five years, right? Speaker 2: I was in--I was there-- Speaker 1: What-- Speaker 2: --in that particular role for--yeah, I was at Conoco [Continental Oil Company; ConocoPhillips] for five years-- Speaker 1: Five years. Speaker 2: --total, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, five years. Speaker 2: Yeah. Not all in Southern California-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --but, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Oh, they moved you around? Speaker 2: I moved--I moved in the last couple years to Detroit [Michigan]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and, and had--and was--had my first real total sales role in Detroit. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: So I, I left Southern California and went there in the last two years, so about--the first three years training plus Southern California, and then up to Detroit. Speaker 1: Okay. And now, had--you hadn't--had you gotten married at this point? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: You're single. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. And, and so in the, the sales, are there things that you learned about salesmanship from him-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --that have stood the test of time? And I'm wondering-- Speaker 2: Absolutely. The--what I learned from, from Bob [Means (ph.)] that I--that, that is a universal truth is that, you know, what Bob was good about was under--was listening to his customers first. He would first listen and he would ask questions to find out what was the customer's problem and then he would give that customer the solution to that problem, okay? And that is a universal truth in, in selling and in a lot of--in a lot of just relationships I think between people when you're trying to, to, to convince someone or, or put a point across. So he understood that you had to think about it from the customer's perspective, how they saw it, what was their problem, what--how did they view value versus what I--what I was trying to do as a--as a young salesperson, let me tell you everything about this product, let me tell you the eight things it will do for you. He knew that it didn't matter; seven of 'em didn't matter, but one would matter to you and one would matter to somebody else, and maybe two to someone else. And the trick was unders- listen to your customer, understand their problem, and then give them the solution that fits that problem. Don't give them all the rest if they don't need it. So he, he was very good about that. He also taught me--gave me this first concept of touch with people and that has been--that has served me extremely well, it's something I believe in, it's something I try to do. I think it's--I think that when you--when I look at, at, at leaders or managers, and I think there's a difference between a leader and a manager, few of them have touch. People need touch. People--they--we crave touch and we, we can sense when someone gives us high touch and we can sense when someone gives us low touch, and we gravitate towards people who give us high touch, and so I saw that from Bob. He, he, he had that and I, I try--I've always tried to copy that. Speaker 1: So, you mean just touching people? Speaker 2: Not physically. Speaker 1: Not-- Speaker 2: Not, not, not physically so much. I mean, that may be a part of it, but people can sense when you really are--when you really care about them. It, it may be a physical touch on the shoulder, but it may be are you really looking them in the eye when you talk to them? Are you listening to them when they talk to you? Are you--are you trying to--do you really care that you're interacting with this, this, this human being? And, and I think people sense that. They sense whether you have touch with them. Whether--do you care? It's, it's, it's a--it's a way of saying do you care? And too many--I think too many leaders or managers, you, you get a very cold feeling when you're with 'em. You know, they don't--you, you can talk to them, you don't know whether they really heard you, you don't know if they really care. You know, I--it's--but, but this--touch is a--you have to really work to learn how to do that. But when you see people who have it, you always know it. You always know it. It's the way they shake your hand. It's the way they, they pay attention to you. It's the way they, you know, sort of treat you while you're with 'em. It's different and he had that and I, I--that's something I've tried to work at. Speaker 1: Did you have it and it just had to be cultivated or did you not understand it and, and, and modeled your behavior after him? I think they're two-- Speaker 2: I think--I think--it's a great question. I think looking back on it, I had--I, I had the beginnings of it. I, I think that was my--more my style. That is what I'd always wanted to be. That's what I--that was my comfort zone. I didn't know how to use it. I didn't know what it was and, and I think what I saw with him is that he had cultivated this. He, he had recognized it and he had developed it, and, and then he started talking to me about it and it's something that has never left me. But, yeah, I--it, it was--I think if I didn't have it before I met him, it probably wouldn't have registered with me. It probably--I probably wouldn't have noticed what he had, but I immediately could tell this is a guy with touch. When you were with Bob [Means (ph.)], when I was with Bob, I felt like I was important. I felt--as a person, not, not--you know, I just felt like he, he--when he would sit down and talk to me, I felt like he really was talking to me. And, and he--and it wasn't just he was checking the box that day. And I think his customers felt that and he had the best rapport with customers of anybody that, that--in that company [Continental Oil Company (Conoco); ConocoPhillips] at that time. Story_ID: 261604 Speaker 1: You said when you moved to Detroit [Michigan] and it was all sales, what was that--were you on commission? I mean, was that--was it all sales or was it base plus commission at-- Speaker 2: No, at that time--at that time, it was-- Speaker 1: And what were you selling [for Continental Oil Company (Conoco); ConocoPhillips]? Speaker 2: I was--I'm now selling specialty chemicals. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I'm selling specialty chemicals. Speaker 1: So it's business to business. Speaker 2: Right. So it's--so it's business to business and I--and I'm selling the big three. I'm selling GM [General Motors Company, Detroit, Michigan], Ford [Motor Company, Dearborn, Michigan], and Chrysler [Corporation; FCA US LLC, Auburn Hills, Michigan]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and, and all of their suppliers, and, and that was my, my territory. I liked it because, one, it, it did build on my--at least some of my, my training. This was a--you're selling chemicals, I'm a chemical engineer, at least I understand this. I'm dealing--I'm selling to engineers, we're talking, you know, about a lot of technical terms. And so I enjoyed it. It, it was--and I--you know, now I'm in Detroit. I'm out--I'm in one of the chocolate cities at that--as it was called at that time. So I, I enjoy the fact that, hey, I'm, I'm in Detroit, I, I--so culturally, I'm able to go out and meet people and do things, and that's, that's great, but I'm now trying to sell to these--to the auto producers. And, and I learned a lot. Speaker 1: And what did you learn then? Speaker 2: You know, I learned that--that was a time when, when Chrysler in particular was in deep trouble-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --and I still recall, you know, the signs as you drove in-- Speaker 1: That's right. That's right.- Speaker 2: --you know, will the last person--you know, you, you drive in the parking lot, they had signs up around Chrysler that said will the last person turn off the lights. And, you know, there were--there were--there were jokes about that. And, and I remember, you know, watching, thinking this was a great company and look at what's happening to this company. And that was the first time I realized that, you know, great companies don't last forever, that if you--if you--if you lose your, your, your ability to win in the marketplace, you can go under. And so I, I, I was really curious about how--what was going on there and what was happening. I watched--I saw how people were impacted by, you know, all the decisions to shut this plant down, cut this back. So I learned a lot watching that whole thing. I also saw how all of Detroit was dealing with it, you know, a city that was so dependent on one industry. So those are lessons that kinda stuck with me. Story_ID: 261605 Speaker 1: At the same time all that was going on, you know, Du- DuPont [E.I. du Pont de Nemours and Company, Wilmington, Delaware] bought Conoco [Continental Oil Company; ConocoPhillips]. Speaker 2: That's what I was wondering. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. DuPont-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --bought--buys Conoco. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And, and I remember going to--now I'm--now, my group is the first group that gets integrated into DuPont. And that was the first time where I really started to understand what Bob [Means (ph.)] had been trying to tell me. Bob, Bob Means was teaching me every company has a culture. You have to understand the culture. You have to fit in that culture to succeed. Intellectually, I got it. But, I, I didn't have it here, really. When, when we became DuPont, I got it because now I had to go to a meeting with--in Wilmington [Delaware] and, and--the first integration, and I started to see, oh, they do everything different. They run the meetings different, they, they--you know, the way they talk to people is different, the rules are different, everything is different. That's when I really started to see that, you know--what, what he meant by there's a culture--different cultures. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And what I learned was that culture didn't fit me as well as the Conoco culture did and I wasn't as happy there, and that was the time at which I decided, you know, I need to leave there and, and go somewhere else and came to GE [General Electric]. Story_ID: 261606 Speaker 1: Now, how did the GE [General Electric] opportunity come? Speaker 2: It came because I was in--I was there and I was take--I had taken some business away from GE (laughter) and--some market share and I'd gotten a phone call--and, by the way, the GE product was actually better, but I was able to, to sell my product over their product. And I got a phone call from the GE folks at that time that said, you know, you really--if you're--if, if you're good enough to do that, you ought to come work with us. And, and I sorta dismissed that at that point, but later as I saw the culture wasn't fitting for me, I got another phone call that said why don't you come talk to us? At that time, GE--and I still feel is still that way today, but at that time, it--GE was very clearly by, by far the better company in terms of the products, in terms of people, in terms of what I saw happening with people, and so I decided--when, when I decided to make a change, that was my first choice and I was lucky they thought it was a good choice. Speaker 1: Now, describe the GE you joined at that time and where did you join them? You were--you joined [GE] Plastics, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, I joined plastics. I--I'm, I'm in Southern California-- Speaker 1: Oh, you go--oh, so you go-- Speaker 2: I'm, I'm back in Southern California. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I am--I was in a specialty plastic product called Ultem, which still exists today. It was still in its early stages of being introduced to the marketplace. And so this was--imagine you've got this plastics business that has some very big, sexy products, and then you got this little new product over here that's very, very specialized, highly technical. You--it is an engine--you, you have to be--almost be an engineer to sell it and you have to sell to other engineers, and it's only going in these very complex, you know, high, tough requirements. And so they were putting together a small new group of people that they called field market development specialists, FMDs, to go out and, and, and actually sell this product, and that's what--the group I hired into. So it was--it was a small group of specialty, highly, you know, technical sales folks. Speaker 1: And did you like that? Speaker 2: I did. I, I, I actually did. Speaker 1: But you're without Bob [Means (ph.)], your men- mentor. Speaker 2: I'm without my mentor. That--you know, I, I was very sad to leave DuPont [E.I. du Pont de Nemours & Company, Wilmington, Delaware] not because of, of DuPont but because of the friends I had, mostly on the Conoco [Continental Oil Company; ConocoPhillips] side. And Bob was my mentor, was my first corporate mentor. I could argue that, that, that the brother who told me about engineering back in high school was my first mentor, okay, every other than my father [Joseph Harper], but the first corporate mentor out there was, was Bob. So, yeah, that, that really bothered me that I'm leaving the one person who's kinda schooling me here, but I remember what he taught me, that I had to build a network, it was about people, it was about touch, it was about understanding the other person's point of view, and I carried that with me. Story_ID: 261607 Speaker 1: I had first asked you about Jack Welch and--you know, and, and Lee Iacocca 'cause we're in the '80s [1980s], you know? Speaker 2: We're in the '80s [1980s]. Yeah. You got--well, you got Jack running GE [General Electric] and, and he's into his--I joined in '84 [1984] so he's, he's in the first third of his--you know, he's just--he's the new CEO. Speaker 1: Now-- Speaker 2: He's been there about four years, three or four years? Speaker 1: Now, why was he recruited in? Speaker 2: Jack? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Was he recruited? Speaker 2: No, he--Jack, Jack was in GE. Speaker 1: He was--oh, and he-- Speaker 2: He--yeah, he came up-- Speaker 1: Oh-- Speaker 2: Yeah, he came up through GE. Speaker 1: But he was a new type of leader within GE. Speaker 2: He was a very different kind of leader. Speaker 1: He was a--okay. Can you just-- Speaker 2: Yeah, his style--his style was, was, was different. Look, at that point, I was so new and so early in my career, I, I didn't know what a lot of people were talking about, but--and it wasn't until a couple years later that I actually personally could interact with Jack. But what, what I could see immediately when I came into GE was this was a company--and I was in [GE] Plastics, which was in--at that point a--still, one of the younger businesses, high growth. It was all about expanding, doing more, doing different things. And so what, what I liked about the, the culture in GE is it was a culture where it was very demanding, so it was a lot like sports to me. You were as good as your last game. So this was a place that you--once you committed to a number, you had to deliver on the number. And there was an awful lot of attention around that, you know? Did you make your number this month? Did you make it this quarter? And there was a lot of discipline around, you know, processes around, tracking, are you making it or not. And then what I liked the most is I saw the people who actually could do that and could do it in a way that fit with the culture and the values that GE has, they got promoted. And I thought, this was looking a lot like the Conoco [Continental Oil Company; ConocoPhillips] that I remember. It was--it, it had the--I, I--remember I said Conoco was a lot like--it was this oil company that had a little bit of cowboy in it. What I saw in GE that attracted me was I saw the cowboy, but I saw more discipline, I saw more processes, and I--and I saw, you know, a company that was promoting a lot of different people into different roles. I didn't see a lot of African Americans when I--when I looked up, didn't, didn't see many at all. I saw some above where I was entering and, and that was encouraging, but they were sort of in--at the middle of the organization. I saw none when I looked above them at that point in, in GE, but I liked the idea that if I get out here and put some points on the board, they are gonna notice it 'cause it's part of their culture and they are--they seem to be rewarding people who do that, so let me get in there and see what I can do. Story_ID: 261608 Speaker 1: Now, Jack Welch, wasn't his background sort of like yours, though? Speaker 2: Oh, well Jack was a Ph.D. chemical engineer-- Speaker 1: He was a Ph--okay. Speaker 2: --and, and if you talk to most people, they will tell you he's one of the smartest people they've ever known, so I-- Speaker 1: You, you--oh, okay. Speaker 2: The commonality ends after chemical engineering. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He--he's, he's--he was as brilliant as his reputation. Speaker 1: Okay. But he was a bootstraps guy, right? Speaker 2: You know, I have a belief that-- Speaker 1: Or is--or is that--I'm just trying to under-- Speaker 2: I, I have this--this is Art's [HistoryMaker Arthur H. Harper] personal belief. I have this belief that there are kind of two types of people that I see in corporate America. There are pedigree people and there are mutts. I'm a mutt, so let me start with the mutts. The mutts didn't go to the best schools. The mutts didn't come from, you know, the, the, the families that had all the advantages. They were usually poor or blue collar or--the mutts kinda, kinda came from the wrong side of the tracks in whatever way you, you wanna define the tracks. And if you look at the mutts early in their career, you'd probably never bet on any of 'em. But the mutts somehow found a way to get in the race and start at the bottom of the pile and scramble their way through the pile. Jack used to talk about popping out of the pile. So the mutts kinda start at the bottom of the pile and scramble their way, and when you look at the end of the day, somehow they, they made it to the top of the pile. I'm a mutt, okay? Then you got the pedigree folks who came from--you know, they, they came from the right side of the tracks, family background, you know, was right, best schools, best colleges, well connected, all the right stuff. That--that's the pedigree group. It's not--my view is not that one is better than the other, it's just two different types of backgrounds. And, and it didn't make--you know, if you're--if you're a pedigree, it doesn't make you a bad person, you could be great, and if you're a mutt, it doesn't make you a good person, but I'm a mutt. That's my background. Jack, you know, was a mutt and--by my definition and was a very proud--and was proud of it and would talk about it and talk about his background and, you know, so--yeah. Speaker 1: But Lee Iacocca was a mutt too. Speaker 2: Lee Iacocca by my definition I would say-- Speaker 1: Is a-- Speaker 2: --is a mutt-- Story_ID: 261609 Speaker 1: And you've decided you like corporate America. Now why do you--why do you make that decision? Speaker 2: What I've decided by now is, is that--is that in the capitalist society, the money drives the power; that's what I decided, that, that, that behind whatever power level there was, there was money, and where was most of the money? It was in corporate America. And so my view was that if you--if you--if we can't get--as African Americans if you can't get in corporate America either as entrepreneurs or as business leaders or in some--whatever way you can play, if you're not playing in that arena, you're not gonna have access to money and, therefore, you're always gonna be limited in what you can get done. And so my view was that I was back to that sorta thing of you can play on the outside and fight it or you can try to get in and change it. My view was I, I need to see what I can do in corporate America, didn't know if I would have a chance, didn't know if I could do it, but my view was I have to take a chance to see how well I can go and what I can do inside corporate America, and can I leverage that to, to change things. Speaker 1: Okay. And was there a clear sense of what you had to do? And the reason I'm, you know, asking this, Frank Raines talked, talked in his interview about how they had a group and they would try to figure strategically-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --how to map their way through-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --the company. Was this part-- Speaker 2: Yeah. At that--at that point back then, yes. There were--there were two things going on when I joined GE [General Electric]. One is that, you know, you--I met other African Americans who were different places in, in the company and we were all in the local area. We would get together, you know, at someone's house, at, at--over dinner, you know, anywhere we could get together and just, yeah, try to come up with how does it work, those unwritten rules, how does it work here, what do you do, what do you not do, strategy on getting something done, moving ahead, and we spent a lot of time on that. It was very difficult because, first of all, we were always kind of afraid that someone's gonna look at it and think it was something else. No, no one was gonna look at it and say, hey, they're trying to figure out how to get their career moved forward, it looks kinda like, you know, they're, they're--it's a coup, you know-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --in, in process or something. So that was happening. And the other thing that was happening for me is that I learned from Bob [Means (ph.)] about this thing about networking and this thing about culture and unwritten rules, and so I knew I, I needed to try to learn some things from other people and so I was always start--I was starting to, to have an approach and said I need to look at--I need to try to meet as many people around me as I can and see who will help me, and so I was doing that as well. This was majority people 'cause there weren't that many African Americans there. And I found a couple people who started helping me, so I was working both. This--it was this, this, you know, sort of unofficial, you know, African Americans getting together to figure it out and then trying to reach out to see if I could learn from, from the rest of the, the team. I found both in GE, okay? I found there were people who were--who were coaching me and starting to mentor me and I--and I got help here, and, and that was the process for the first few years. Story_ID: 261610 Speaker 1: And then GE [General Electric] started having--under Jack [Welch]--having diversity meetings, you know, saying we need to really do something about this. We need to do better about that, and out of that came the formation of the African American Forum [AAF]. And once that was formed, now this unofficial process became blessed by Jack so it could come--it, it could be an, an open process that everybody knew about. It was the first forum of its type in GE, so that, that legitimized it and made it, you know--brought it to the forefront. And the second thing that happened is now this, this process could become formalized. And, and there was a mechanism for, for me to meet other African Americans across the company who were--who were in some cases much further ahead in their career. Speaker 2: Now, why did he form that? Why did that--there's a story-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --about how he was at a meeting or something? Speaker 1: There is a story and the story--well, there--there's several stories but, but the one that gets told the most is that he started--he, he had a--he had these diversity meetings, diversity council meetings, and he would have a--you know, diverse groups come in together and then we'd talk about what are the issues and what should be done. And at one of these, he had--he let the groups break out and come back. And so the women came back with here's our issues, we--you ought to do this. The Hispanic group came back with their issues. And the African American group came back and, and by the way, I was not at this meeting, but the person who was at the meeting was Lloyd [G.] Trotter and Lloyd at that time was the most senior African American in, in GE. And so Lloyd came back and with, with the--with the other attendees and, and they were presenting, these are the things we need GE to do, every group, and Jack would listen to that. And then in true Jack form, he would--he would always push back to you. And so after he said, okay, I'll do these things, he started going around the room saying what are you doing and what are you doing? And he went to Lloyd, and when he got to Lloyd, he said, Lloyd, you, you have some factories and how many African Americans do you have running the factories? And he challenged Lloyd. Lloyd said I don't have any and he challenged Lloyd on that. And Lloyd got the point and everybody got the point. He was--so he was challenging everybody on this is what I'll do, but will you do? Lloyd's response is typical Lloyd. Lloyd's response was, he took it as a challenge too, and Lloyd said, okay, I'll fix that but I am gonna take it to another level. And he then pulled together a group from across all of GE of senior African Americans, whoever was senior. Nobody was too senior but he pulled this--from as high level as he could. And, and that was the beginning of the African American Forum. We got together and said we're gonna--Lloyd said we're gonna change this. We're gonna do--I'm gonna fix this with, with my factories, but we're gonna come back to Jack with an even another bigger idea. So we went out and benchmarked some other companies, saw what they were doing, and came back and recommended that we start a group focused on self-help and focused communication to the other leaders across GE, and that was the beginning of the African American Forum, AAF. Speaker 2: And that forum is still in existence, that-- Speaker 1: Still in existence. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Grow--has grown well beyond anything that I think most of us ever thought it would go to. Is--was the--was the first forum of its type in GE who now has three other forums like that. It, it is the model. It's being studied by other companies today. So I--you know, I, I think we're all blown away by how big that has, has gotten and how it's grown and how it's benefitted people. Story_ID: 261611 Speaker 1: Now what is supporting you, you know, you blacks--I mean when you're at this point in corporate America? What is supporting you? Is it more blacks coming out of business school? Is it, you know, black enterprise? Is it--I'm just trying to--is it the-- Speaker 2: At that point at the-- Speaker 1: Yeah, is it the [National] Urban League [New York, New York]? I mean, what is--what are the--you know, because things don't always just change in a vacuum. You know, is it government saying that, you know, if you're gonna do business with the government, you know, you have-- Speaker 2: No, I think--I think--I think that we were very fortunate in GE [General Electric]. I mean, there wasn't--look, Jack [Welch] was--Jack was always very much like my father [Joseph Harper] tried to--tried to, to make me be--Jack, Jack always believed in looking at the world the way it is. He's always talking about the realities of the marketplace. And what I think he saw--that--it wasn't like GE was in trouble on an issue or with, with an organization, but I think what Jack saw, he could see that others were, and he could see what was happening and he could-- Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: --he could see what was going on there. And I think his, you know, his view was we--I as a leader have to do something before I have that problem. So Jack was always trying to--you know, he always had this ability to see what was coming and get out in front. I think he--I think that's what it was. I think he saw that the times were changing and that on this issue, GE was not doing well and, and he was open to it. And, and that was sort of--you know, we were losing more people than we wanted, we had little things, but it wasn't one big thing. I think it was part of his vision of the world's changing on this issue. I, I need to--I need to understand it better. I need to do something, and I think that was sort of the beginning of it. Now, once he started it, the momentum just--it was like a snowball coming down a mountain because, you know, everyone was, was feeding back to him, it's about time, we need to do something, here are the issues, you know, I mean, so I think it--once the door was open, it, it, it all took off. Story_ID: 261612 Speaker 1: You go from being, you know, in [GE] Plastics as this mark- market development specialist, and then in, is it 1987, you are appoint--you're hired as or promoted to district sales manager-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Now, is that much of a, you know, a, a move up at that point? Speaker 2: That was a--yeah, that was a--that was a pretty big move at that point. There were--there were--there was only one other African American within the business who had--who had--who had had that type of role. That was one of the coveted roles within the business on the commercial side. And I went into what was then GE Silicones [Momentive Performance Materials], okay, and did that, and you know, this--that was--that was considered a big move. Speaker 1: Now, what had you done to merit that and-- Speaker 2: Yeah. I, I think--a couple things. I think, one, I had delivered on every assignment, so, so whether I was in--as an FMD [field market development specialist] or, or, you know, a marketing leader, I delivered. The other thing they saw, though, was the--it--they saw my leadership skills. They saw the beginning of the leadership skills. I had started to be known as, as someone who delivers, works well with people, and I was--I was probably the, the de facto leader for the AAF [African American Forum] within plastics, within my business. And no one had--no one had appointed me to that, it just--I had become that, that person. So I think they started to see, here's someone who can get along with, with different people, not just, you know, African Americans or, or other men, someone who can get along with, with people, and someone who can lead, and I could sell. And so I think I--I think those things played in. Speaker 1: So what were your--what were your numbers expected to be and, you know-- Speaker 2: Oh my God, I can't remember the-- Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: --numbers back then, but-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I will tell you that I, I worked in that business for someone who was a--who was Brit--who was a Brit and, and was very much on the right side of the thinking about diversity, and he was happy that I got that job. In fact, he helped me get the job, and then he also became a mentor and a sponsor. Speaker 1: And his name? Speaker 2: Nigel [D.T.] Andrews. Speaker 1: Okay. So you really don't do anything in corporate America without mentors-- Speaker 2: You-- Speaker 1: --and sponsors. Speaker 2: You, you are not going to--you can--my experience is in corporate America like a lot of other organizations, you absolutely are going to need a network, and that network needs to include mentors and sponsors, and there's a difference. You know, mentor can be anyone that gives you help or coaching. A sponsor is someone who can either hire you or influence someone else to hire you, so they're always gonna be above you. Story_ID: 261613 Speaker 1: You're back in California where, you know, you had been, right? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: What--had you left? Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm, I'm in California. Speaker 1: You're California. Speaker 2: I'm still in California. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You're in California. Oh, this is all in California. Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm in California. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, so I'm just trying to track this. So, you're district sales manager [for GE Silicones; Momentive Performance Materials]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Now-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --you then become plant manager. Speaker 2: Right. At the point--by the time I become a district sales manager, I--my, my aspirations were becoming clear to me. I now said I, I like it--not only do I like it in corporate America, I wanna be a general manager, okay? It, it became clear to me that I wanted to be a general manager. And so what I--I, I, I developed a strategy for myself to, to try to get from where I was to become a general manager, and that strategy was this. I, I decided that if you wanna be a general manager, you need to understand what are the skills that general managers have and what do they use--what skills do they use in their job? So I didn't think about it as benchmarking but, but it was benchmarking. What I did is, I, I developed this process that I still use today where I, I once a year think about what do I wanna do ten years down the road? And I actually go through a benchmarking exercise where I think I about who are two people that I know who do that today and do it well? And I try to take an inventory of the skills I've seen them demonstrate, and then I try to compare that to the skills that other people have told me I'm good at. Doesn't count unless other people have seen it. And I always come up with--there are gaps. There are things that, you know, I saw that those general managers were doing, skills that they had that I didn't have. And so my view was if I wanna become a general manager, I need to get those skills and my strategy was then, I'll take any job, okay, almost anywhere that will help me pick up some of these skills, and that was my strategy. Speaker 1: So your skills at that point were to get man--man-- Speaker 2: Become a general manager. Speaker 1: --general manager. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Which mean--let me just understand. In the--so, really as a sales manager, that's not viewed as line I don't--or-- Speaker 2: Well, it is a line. Speaker 1: It is a-- Speaker 2: It's a line job. Speaker 1: It's a line-- Speaker 2: But, but you're only--you know, you're only doing sales. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: I wanted to run a business-- Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: --so I--so that I'd have sales, marketing, everything. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's what I want. Speaker 1: So, so what did--was the--was the--was that a position that--'cause these positions seem to fall in your lap. Speaker 2: Well, these, these were all line jobs and, and I, I, I don't know if--I don't know that any of 'em ever fell in my lap, but what I, I will say is that in my time here, I--it's almost embarrassing to say, but I, I was always asked to do the next job. Story_ID: 261614 Speaker 1: How did I get these jobs offered, it, it started with I always, you know, would deliver on the numbers, so whatever the assignment was, if I had to deliver 100, I wanted to, to deliver 105, whatever it was, so I--it--that was--it always started with that. I always wanted to do that by, by having a team, and I always wanted to try to have a diverse team that would--it was all about the team to me, helping the team win. And, and that was the first part. That was--that was sort of the foundation. But I think what helped us a lot, and you, you asked me this question about mentors and sponsors is, I learned--I--by this time, I figured out that, you know what, I need to work at building a network, that building a network doesn't happen by chance. I need to make as part of my ongoing regular part of my day to day career, the way you manage your career, you have to work at the network, so I started really making that a part of what I did. And I started actually tracking, how much time did I spend networking every month? I still do it. I, I spend four hours a month networking and I track it. And, and so what started happening over time is if you're performing and delivering and your network's growing and so more people know who you are, I, I started to realize that, you know what? Good leaders always know that, that solving any problem starts with getting the right people. And so good leaders are always looking for good people. It's like a basketball team. Everybody wants, you know, the best players. So by always delivering and then becoming better and better known at--amongst a broader audience of leaders in GE [General Electric], I started finding out that, you know, when someone had a new job, you know, open or they had a vacancy, I was on the slate, I'd get the call. And, and I started noticing as my network grew, boy, I got more calls, and--because everyone's looking for the best player. And if you--but it all--it all hinges on you gotta be one of the best players, so that was my focus. It was be one of the best players, always be one of the best at what I did, not just within my business or not just within GE, I wanted to be one of the best at whatever that thing was, and then building my network and that, that has had tremendous benefits over the years. Story_ID: 261615 Speaker 1: When you were plant manager [for GE Plastics]-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --was there any challenge that you faced there, you know, in terms of the, the plastics plant or, you know, environmental issues or things like that? Speaker 2: Oh, we had--we had all of-- Speaker 1: All of those. Speaker 2: --all of the above. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I mean, you have all of that. But, you know, I--I'm a firm believer that any problem in business, half of it is solved if you get the right team on it. And so I spent a--I, I, I--and I--by the way, I learned that from watching Jack Welch and Jeff Immelt [Jeffrey R. Immelt] and a lot of other people too, so, you know, my--a big part of my focus on, on those was get the right people on it and you can solve any problem. We had a lot of challenges. Speaker 1: Okay. But when you were saying that you--you know, there's a difference between managers and leaders-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --what--when did you realize that difference? Because you could be someone who someone wants on the team but it's because you're a good worker and you'll never ever be a leader. Speaker 2: I think I started realizing that probably before I got that, that sales leader's job, but it was right around that time. And, and that--and that thinking has evolved to this thought with me. I think that the difference, the big difference to me is you manage things and you lead people and, and there are some--you know, and we've all worked for them. I've worked for them. I worked for--and what I mean by that 'cause everybody looks at me strange when I saw that. Here's what I mean by that. Every light switch in the world I've ever seen works pretty much the same way, okay? You flip it one way, the light should come on; if you flip it the other way, it should go off. And I could treat every light switch in the world that way. Now, what if I take that same approach to people, I treat every individual exactly the same way? So I think there's a big difference between how you treat things. You manage budgets, you manage schedules, you manage, you know, projects, you manage things, and you can manage--once you learn how to manage a budget or learn how to manage a project or learn how to manage a certain thing, you can do it that way everywhere, not true with people, not true with people. You--with people, you got--you have a team of ten people. You--if you treat every single one like, like you treat the first one, you're not gonna--you're not gonna get an effective result. So with people, it's about--it is about creating a vision. It is about, about getting by in it. It is about telling them, what's in it for them. It is about getting them to want to follow you. And, and so I think you can--look, you can--people will follow you for one of two reasons, okay, either because you--because of fear, okay, you can terrorize them and, and they will follow you as long as you're in power or you can convince them that they should try and follow you or that they wanna follow you. So I've always wanted to, to, to be on that side of it. So, for me, I've worked for people who, who treat every individual the same, and I've also worked for, for people who didn't know how to manage things, okay? I think the great leaders that I've seen have both sets of skills and they know when to do and use which skills. Speaker 1: Okay. So when you say they didn't know how to manage things. They were not good at managing expenses-- Speaker 2: They were great with people--great with people, couldn't manage a project, could never meet a deadline. Story_ID: 261616 Speaker 1: When you took on a new, new job, especially after the point where you become plant manager [for GE Plastics]-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and it's not just sales, it's the whole, you know, operation, what are the--what are the things that you put in--you know, that you would typically look at? Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I, I, I always approach it first from the people side, okay? So the first thing I do when I get a new business or a new group is I, I try to evaluate everybody that's on my team, on my staff, I look at that first. I meet with them individually, I meet with them as a group. I want them to know what my expectations are. I want them to, to know who, who I am and how I think and what I do. So I invest quite a bit of time right up front because my view is that when you get a new job, you got 100 days to, to make some critical decisions. It is like the--it is like the honeymoon period for the president. In those first 100 days, you've got your team's undivided attention. They don't know you, they are a little bit nervous, afraid of you. You have their undivided attention. By the end of the first 100 days, they're gonna know how to manage you, okay? Everybody knows how to manage their boss. So in the first 100 days, you gotta figure out, do I have the right people on my team? What changes do I wanna make? Set the expectations with them, have them get to, you know, feel somewhat comfortable with you, and set a direction, 100 days. So I start with people. Second thing I do is I, I--you know, I analyze all the financials, and, and I decide coming out of that 100 days what sort of strategy we wanna put in place. And then I quickly want to put in what I call rhythm and rigor to make sure that we can track our progress on delivering against whatever it is we're committed to. Story_ID: 261617 Speaker 1: The reason you invest, you said some people do it the other way. Speaker 2: Some people--some people look at the--at the--at the financials first and try to, you know, identify the problem. This doesn't make that approach wrong and mine right, but my view is that people drive the numbers, not--it's not the other way around. In other words, it's the people who spend the money who make the number go the right way or the wrong way, so when you look at a budget and you see this is--here's the problem, well, it's the people who did it. So my view is, I wanna make sure I first got the right people on my team, that I've got the right, you know, talent, that I've got the right headset, that I've got people who believe in what we're doing, and if I have the right people, we--we'll then figure out and change the numbers to go the right way. Speaker 1: Okay. And so--now, explain to me the whole thing of--so you first look--you look at the people, then you look at the numbers. Speaker 2: I look at the people, I look at the financials, and then I set a strategy, okay, a direction; this is what we're gonna do. And then what I wanna do is I wanna put in rhythm and rigor. I'm a big believer that you can--you can change anything in a business if you--if you decide to put in the right rhythm and rigor. Now, what do I mean by that? Well, rhythm is just--it's just like music for me, okay? There's a beat and you gotta hit that beat exactly the same time all the time. Different problems require different rhythm, okay? And I'll explain what I mean. Rigor is about the level of detail. And so there is a problem, I wanna--I wanna change something in a business, I want my sales to go up. I will set a target for that. We're gonna--we're gonna grow it by 20 percent, and we're gonna do these eight things to do it, that's the direction. And now how am I gonna track what we're doing? Well I might wanna review that once a month on the same day every month; that's the rhythm. So I will say, you know what guys? Every Monday, every single Monday, we are gonna review--you know, the first Monday of the month, we are gonna review the sales numbers and we said we were gonna do this, where are we? Rigor is how much detail do I look at in that review, okay? So I got rhythm once a month, rigor, certain level of, of detail. Different problem may require a different level of rhythm and rigor. Today, the way I run my business on a normal basis is every two weeks, every Friday, every two weeks, every one of my businesses comes on and they have about eight to ten pages of detail and every two weeks on Friday, I did it yesterday, we spend an hour by business and we look at what's going on on all these key metrics. That is the rhythm and rigor for that. If there is an emergency problem, I might decide, you know what? Every day at four o'clock, I need to review this, so it's about rhythm and rigor to me after you set the direction, set some targets to make sure. And, and it's a lot like what I learned--it's a lot like, you know, the, the way you teach a child to, to brush their teeth, you know? The person who taught me has used this example. They said, "Art [HistoryMaker Arthur H. Harper], do you remember how you learned to brush your teeth," and I said, "no." And they said, "Well, did you brush your teeth this morning?" I said, "Yes." It's a lot like that. You put the rhythm and rigor in and one day, it's just happening. It, it, it is just a part of how your business runs. Story_ID: 261618 Speaker 1: When did rhythm and rigor come into your, your mode of operation? When did that become-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --a part of who, who you were as a manager and that--well-- Speaker 2: It, it, it came in when I--when I was working--it's always been a part of GE's [General Electric] culture. It's a part of, I think, what Jack [Welch] put in. But where I really, really learned in great detail how to do it was, was in working with [GE] Plastics when I came back over into the plastics side and was working under Gary [L.] Rogers. Speaker 1: And that's in--1991 when you were the plant manager? Speaker 2: When I was the plant manager, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I was--I was now back in Gary Rogers' operation and, and Gary was one of the masters of--one of the best operating people in, in the company, and, you know, he was a master at, at rhythm and rigor and how it works, and I saw it in all its variations. Speaker 1: So you're saying that this is foolproof? Speaker 2: I'm saying that, no, nothing's foolproof, but what I am saying is that if you set a direction for a company and set targets that you wanna hit, the best opportunity for you to, to make that happen is to put some type of rhythm and rigor in, and let me tell you why. Most companies report their results by quarter and so I'm here and I'm running this business, and so once a quarter, I have to roll up the results and we report it. Now, what usually will happen is something's going wrong, okay? We start the quarter, everything's fine, something's going wrong, sales are off or costs are too high, something's going wrong. If I only look at it once a quarter right before I report the results, okay, think about it. By the time I realize there's a problem, there's nothing I can do about it for that quarter. And the reality is probably the next quarter is half way ruined. So, you know, if you're only running a business and you're only looking at, at something once a quarter or too infrequently and you're not looking at the level of detail around that, that measurement, whatever that measurement is, that's where you get in trouble, and a lot of companies are in trouble because they have--they have no rhythm and rigor processes around whatever it is they're trying to drive. I'm looking at my business every two weeks, so the problem comes up, I know it's no more than--you know, at least I found it within the last two weeks. Now, it might've been brewing from before and things I couldn't catch, but at least I'm--I have a chance to catch it, you know, a number of times in that--in that quarter. And, you know, I just think that when you look at well run companies, companies that deliver and companies that everybody talks about and reads about and likes, you're gonna find, you know, some level of rhythm and rigor. Speaker 1: Now, so you--we had gotten into this with me asking you the difference between a leader and a manager. Is the--is this one of the, the, the facets of that? Are you-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I think it is because I think--I think, you know, the best--the biggest leaders that I--that I know or the people that everyone talks about and people admire, they have both sets of skills, and they're very, very much aware of, of when to use which set of skills. And this whole idea of rhythm and rigor, you, you need both sets of skills because you're talking about managing schedules, managing budgets, managing projects, all things, but you're also talking about how am I motivating the team that's doing that? How am I rewarding the team that's doing it? How am I, you know, getting them on board to, to understand the importance of this? How do I give them a sense of urgency? And so to work a process like this, you, you gotta have a little bit of both. If, if you run that process and you can't motivate anybody, you can't line 'em up to wanna do it, it's not gonna work as well, and if you run the process and just beat everybody up one way, that's not gonna work too well. So, you--it is a combination. Story_ID: 261619 Speaker 1: Why were you then chosen to go to Pittsfield [Massachusetts]? Speaker 2: Yeah, to Pittsfield. I, I went to Pittsfield to, to actually then work--that was my first job--this was the, the CPB, crystalline products business. Speaker 1: And what is this crystalline product? Speaker 2: This, this is a--this is a very specialty plastic, a group of plastics used primarily in electronics and automotive applications, okay, connectors, under the hood type applications, computer applications, and I was run--I was brought in to run this business, networking for Jeff Immelt [Jeffrey R. Immelt], who is now chairman of GE [General Electric], and-- Speaker 1: You were network--you said-- Speaker 2: Working for. Speaker 1: Oh, you were working for-- Speaker 2: Actually working-- Speaker 1: Oh, for-- Speaker 2: Actually, actually end up working for him. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: And he was running all of the America's [GE] Plastics business. And, and so that was--that was his--that was my first really sort of general manager's role because now my role was, set the direction for this product line. I owned the product line. I was really more--let's think about it like a brand manager, but I had responsibility for the manufacturing, responsibility for the marketing, responsibility for helping the sales team. I had a--I, I was--I was almost this full general manager, not quite, but almost. And that was a great job. It was also the first global job I had, truly global because I got a chance to--I had to interact with, with a joint venture in Germany and sales people in Asia as well as Europe, so it was great. Speaker 1: And so had you--did--is that the time you worked with him until he became chairman or did you have-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --other inter-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --interactions? Speaker 2: No, I worked for Jeff for two jobs. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I did that role and then I, I took the largest business and most profitable business, still working for him, Lexan, and I did that role both for him and I, I had moved, though, between Pittsfield to Mount Vernon, Indiana. Story_ID: 261620 Speaker 1: When you started, you know, with GE [General Electric], with Ultem, that--wasn't that a specialized plastics, too? Speaker 2: Yeah, all, all of the products are specialized, but this one was a very highly--Ultem was a very highly specialized. Speaker 1: High--so it was more specialized than-- Speaker 2: All, all of them are called--all of them are-- Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: --engineering, engineering thermoplastics. Speaker 1: I see. Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: So, all very specialized. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But, but Ultem was ultra special. Speaker 1: Okay. Can you tell me the his--just how long has [GE] Plastics been plastics? I mean, how long-- Speaker 2: Oh, this business has been around since the, the late '50s [1950s]. Speaker 1: But that's relatively new then, I mean in the whole-- Speaker 2: Yeah, it's a relatively new business. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: A relatively new business. Speaker 1: Okay. And what, what, what came before plastics? Speaker 2: This was--this was actually the result of someone actually looking to--you know, GE, General Electric, GE, someone was looking to invent a, a, a new wire coating and, and didn't invent the wire coating but stumbled upon polycarbonate which became Lexan and, and today, Lexan is, is used in so many applications, your CDs, the plastic there is Lexan in a lot of cases. Water--five-gallon water bottles are Lexan, a lot of 'em. Bumpers on cars are blends of Lexan and other materials. So that's how--that's how it started. That, that then became, look, we didn't get the wire coating, but what do we do with this stuff, you know, and then we discovered it had huge impact resistance, so it became a product. And that be--that became a business. Speaker 1: Now, is that something that came, was developed internally within-- Speaker 2: Internally. This was GE. Speaker 1: Oh, it was-- Speaker 2: It was GE. Speaker 1: Okay, and not--and not and academia then? Speaker 2: This was GE. This was GE scientists and--you know, trying to--it's always been a part of GE. I mean, it's the Thomas Edison legacy, I think. We've always had, you know, a lot of investment for R&D [Research and Development]. Story_ID: 261621 Speaker 1: You moved to Lexan as the business leader. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: That was 1994. Speaker 2: Right. I moved to Mount Vernon, Indiana. Speaker 1: Oh, from Pitt--you are moving then. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay, California-- Speaker 2: Remember-- Speaker 1: --Massachusetts. Speaker 2: Remember what I said in my strategy, though. It was, I need to pick up these skills and as long as I can continue to pick up these skills, I'll take almost any job anywhere, almost. But, but I--my, my, my net was pretty wide. But my whole thing was it was about skill building, that I--that if I built those skills, I, I move in that direction. Speaker 1: So had you turned a business--an opportunity down at this point? Speaker 2: Yeah. I, I--by this time, I turned down I think one or two jobs, but my view of turning down a job, you know, there, there was a lot of--different companies have different rules about this. Within GE [General Electric], there--a lot of people think that if you turn down a job, that's it. You--you've, you've stunted your career or you go back to the back of the--of the line. Maybe that's the case in some cases, but my experience was this. I always--my, my view was if I could pick up these new skills, I'd take the job, but if I couldn't pick up the new skills, why should I take the job? And so my response when I turned jobs down was, look, I really don't wanna do this job, but if the company really needs me to do it, I'll do it. But the reason I don't wanna do it or prefer not to do it is, I don't think I'm gonna pick up any new skills by doing this. And I really--I'm trying to get from here to here. I was always--I, I was very, very consistent and very clear about this. I'm trying to become a general manager, so I don't see how I'm gonna pick up any new skills, but if you really need me to do it, I'll, I'll do it. And in, in all but one case, I got a very positive response to that. It was, you're right, we'll be back to you. And, and it--I don't think it hurt me in my career. One time, the company did say, you--we really need you to do this job. But if you come and do it and get this fix, we'll, we'll come back and move you somewhere else. I said okay and did it. Story_ID: 261622 Speaker 1: Why is the movement every two years? Speaker 2: There, there was--there was a--there was a period of time within GE [General Electric] and that was--that--in that period where there was a huge amount of movement. You had an awful lot of, of--the company was growing. The, the business--[GE] Plastics was growing, it was becoming much more global, there was a lot of new opportunities, and we were moving--you know, we, we had more opportunities than we had talent. And, it, it was a point where if you were good at what you did, you got a shot, and that was--that was the environment I had been hoping GE was gonna be and it proved to be exactly that environment. And so that's a period of time where if you look at a lot of the senior people in GE today who been here twenty years, in that period, you see everybody was moving every couple a years; every two years someone was moving. In some cases, that was--in more than some cases, that wasn't good, I'm saying even for me because you--when you move that quickly, you don't get to live with your mistakes and therefore you don't get to learn. But that was what was going on and the business was growing, and if you were good, you got a shot. Speaker 1: Okay. I see, so it was upward mobility, but it's not like you--'cause I--you know, two years is not enough time. You know, if you're coming into a problem situation you don't even know--you know, I mean-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, you--I--look, I, I think--I think you gotta do three things when you take a--at least my, my goals to do three things when you take a new job. You gotta learn the job, but you gotta actually do the job and then my view is, the right time to leave is when I can look back and say, I made that--I made it better than, than before the first day I showed up, better for the business, the shareholders, and the employees, the team. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: If I can say all three of those, then it's high--it--it's okay to move. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: Some--in two years, it's hard to do all three of those. Speaker 1: Okay. Right, so--but is that still the corporate culture? Do the--people-- Speaker 2: No, no. I think--I think that was a period where that business, plastic, was growing like crazy. And, and when you see a business is growing like crazy, you get that kind of movement. The best people--it doesn't happen for everyone, but, but the best performers, you'll see them moving very rapidly. When, when the growth slows down or the business get--you know, gets to a certain scale, you see that kind of movement slowing down. And, you know, that--you don't have that kind of movement today. In fact, we're working to, to put more stability in. People don't wanna move that often these days, so we're, we're trying to create roles for people to stay four, five years. Story_ID: 261623 Speaker 1: Lexan was in, you said in-- Speaker 2: That was Indiana, that job. Speaker 1: Where in Indiana. Speaker 2: That was in Mount Vernon, Indiana. Speaker 1: Where is that? Speaker 2: Mount Vernon, Indiana, is all the way south, the southern tip of Indiana. Speaker 1: Is that near Lexington [Kentucky]--no, Lexington-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Is it? Speaker 2: It's, it's not that far from-- Speaker 1: Lexington-- Speaker 2: --Kentucky. We're down in--right down there in that--in that--almost that little, the tip of Indiana, way south. Speaker 1: Plastics also. Lexan grew up to-- Speaker 2: That, that was the manufacturing plant. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That was where the plant is. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Still is. Speaker 1: Okay. And, now how did--was there something significant about that experience? 'Cause next, you go to China and I'm just wondering-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --how you-- Speaker 2: That was--that was--yeah, that was a big experience because that was the, the--that was a big move. That was the largest and most profitable product line and still is to this day within [GE] Plastics. And so that job--I mean, you, you--you know, to get that job was a big deal. It was very global because we had manufacturing--we had two big facilities in the U.S. One is that one in Mount Vernon, Indiana. The other one is in Burkville, Alabama, which is a big site. Then, we had a facility in Europe. Then, we had a small facility in Japan. So, it, it was truly global. You know, that was a big deal. That was a big point in my career. Speaker 1: And, now I was--I, I had heard that you had talked--you talk--you mentor a lot of people, and you said that one of your companies almost shut down because of one of your mistakes, was that any of this-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, well, one of my personal mistakes in my career was--happened later after I-- Speaker 1: Oh, this is-- Speaker 2: --left China. Speaker 1: Oh, well let's, let's--okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: We'll, we'll get there. Okay, so in China, now China, who--one--let me ask you this. Are you clearly--at what-- Speaker 2: Can, can I--can I--can I tell you one other thing-- Speaker 1: Okay, sure, sure. Speaker 2: --about the Lexan one. Burkville, Alabama, okay? Burkville, Alabama, is in Lowndes County, Alabama, and what I--what I didn't know when I took the job was that Lowndes County at that time, and, and still is, is predominantly African American. At that point, it was 92 percent African American. We had built a plant there. We had--it had--it, it had several hundred people there working. I took the job running Lexan and what I realized when I--when I started to understand the history of Lowndes County, Alabama, is that it had been a county that back during slavery days had, had had one of the biggest reputations for the--being one of the most cruel places for slaves to be. And this is a place in this county where, where slave owners would send, you know, their, their toughest slaves, the ones they couldn't sort of, you know, break, they'd send 'em to this, to, to this county within Alabama. And they, they were known for, you know, just breaking slaves. That's what--that's what the history says. We also had built this plant on a former plantation and there was a house there, is still there. It was deemed a historic site and it was--it was a plantation house, still sits on the--on the site. It's a huge piece of land. And, and we had bought this and built the plant and we thought this was good and, and it was good for the community, except we didn't realize that, that when you looked at the demographics of the plant--in other words, I'm, I'm in a county with 92 percent African Americans, I didn't have ten percent African Americans in the plant, okay? So you realize--you know, and this is--this is--I'm running this business. And in my first year there, I go down for a visit to this plant and I'm--I, I didn't understand the history of the county and the history of this location, the plant had a lot of issues in terms of the--of the people getting along. We had a lot of issues between African Americans and white workers on the site. We also had an issue that we--you know, when I realized the history and started talking to the community, I realized we had issues with the community, you know, saying they didn't view us--it wasn't, wasn't a hostile view but it wasn't a friendly view. Story_ID: 261624 Speaker 1: I learned a lot running that business and we, we did a--we spent a lot of time on that plant [GE Plastics, Burkville, Alabama] getting people to understand that I and we, the company and I wanted them to not like or love each other, but respect each other while they were there and work together. We spent a lot of time with the community there and, and one of the things that I--that I decided to do was--you know, outside of this, this building, this plantation house, there's a huge tree, and, and the local lore is that was the hanging tree. And, you know, one of things that I remember in that job was, no one ever stayed in this because it was out in the middle of, you know, acreage. It's on the plant site but it's--the plant's a mile away. You're out in this big area, there's nothing around you. And I, I decided one night that I, I should stay in that house, that--and I--and I stayed in that house and I, I--it's something I'll never forget that the feeling I had. One, it was--it was--it was a little scary to be out in the middle of this--nowhere within this house, but for me, it was a--it was a little bit of, of a feeling of, of paying back to all the people who had come through that plantation who sacrificed and went through so much to give somebody who looked like them an opportunity. And I just kinda wanted, you know, them to maybe feel like, hey, something was getting better. And I, I remember that night. I'll never forget that night. It was hard to sleep, but it, it was--it--'cause I was just thinking about the history of, we'd gone from, from that tree and this house to an African American was there in the house and, and, so I just wanted to give you that. Speaker 2: And did you--were you able to take care of some of the, the issues within the community and-- Speaker 1: We started doing--well, I, I, I--I'll tell you what we did and you can--you can decide. I mean, we, we started community outreach. We started doing community events in the community, inside Lowndes County [Alabama], so GE [General Electric] has a number of volunteer activities. We built a playground; we did some things for the school; we did some things with the library; we started tutoring program with the elementary school. We started a program--we realized that the literacy rate--one of the reasons we hadn't hired when I dug into it, the literacy rate was so low in the county that, you know, now that we're saying we need to hire people, you--we say, oh my goodness. So we, we actually had a, a program starting with the kids. We had two-pronged approach, one to start mentoring, coaching, helping the kids, one to get mentors and coaches to help them, but also to help the school, and the other was to--some vocational training for young adults. I'm happy to say now that, the, the demographics of the plant are different, the community relationship is different, and, and, and the, the issues in that plant have gone away. Now, I'm not saying they don't have any problems, but people work much better together. That wasn't just me, but, but I--but that was--you know, we played a role. Speaker 2: Now, how do you spell the county? Is it-- Speaker 1: Lowndes, L-O-W-N-D-E-S, I think. Story_ID: 261625 Speaker 1: Who wanted you in China then? Speaker 2: I--you know, that was a decision by, by--Jack Welch was still here and--but I was working for Jeff Immelt [Jeffrey R. Immelt], so they, they--the two of them had to agree on that, I'm sure. Jeff was the one who came and told me about the assignment [president, GE Plastics Greater China] and I talked to Jack as well about it. So, yeah, it was--it was the two of them. Speaker 1: Now, at this point, is Lloyd [G. Trotter]--has he-- Speaker 2: And Gary [L.] Rogers was around as well. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So it was--it was those three. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: I'm sorry to leave Gary out. Speaker 1: Okay. Was Lloyd--he--had he become president at the [GE Electrical Distribution & Control]-- Speaker 2: Lloyd was now--yeah, Lloyd was now running a, a business. He was now, you know, running his own business. Speaker 1: And that had start--that had happened in what year? Speaker 2: Oh, I'm gonna have to check. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But he, he was--it was-- Speaker 1: He was-- Speaker 2: It was, was right in that-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --it was right in that time period. Speaker 1: Okay. And his, his, his being promoted to that-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --showed possibilities then for you. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: Okay. And you had your eyes-- Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: But did you think that there could be two? Speaker 2: I-- Speaker 1: I mean at that point? 'Cause, you know-- Speaker 2: I--you know, I never--I'll tell you how I've thought about it. I've been asked that question a lot. I just wanted to know that there could be one. And my view was always if there can be one, there can be 100. And so--but, but I always worry about can there be one? So once I saw one, I decided there can be--there will be 100. The question is, will I be one of the 100? I don't know when there'll be 100, but I knew there would be 100. So that, that was--that's always sorta been my view is if--just show me there can be one and then I'll, I'll try to be number two. Story_ID: 261626 Speaker 1: The thing that strikes me there [GE Plastics, Burkville, Alabama] is that you did get involved in the community. Had you gotten that involved in the community in sort of leading efforts before that? Speaker 2: Before that, you know, my-- Speaker 1: It didn't seem-- Speaker 2: Yeah--well, when, when we were in Mount Vernon, Indiana, was where I really--my wife [Linda Harper] and I--by now, I'm married. Speaker 1: What year did you get married? Speaker 2: In 1982. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so now my, my wife and I both have believed--we have a strong belief that it is not enough to be great. We, we think being great is all about what you do for yourself. We think being good is about what you do for others. So we think it's not good enough to just--to be great, that you have to give back and be good. It's when I finally understood what my mother [Eleanor Graham Harper] was telling me about when she said, Artie [HistoryMaker Arthur H. Harper], when you grow up, do good. I, I for a long time thought--and I--by the way, I use this when I talk to people sometimes. I tell the story. I thought that my mother because she wasn't a, a high school graduate or anything, it was just a grammar or, or, or a mistake when she said do, do good. I think my mother knew exactly what she was saying and I finally realized that. It didn't matter--what was important was not, you know, how much money I made or what house I had or whatever. That's all great stuff, that's great for, for me, that's great for my family, but doing good is what is really important beyond that. And I think--I think we both believe that. So when we got to Mount Vernon, Indiana, we, we finally--we're moving a lot so it's hard to--it's hard to get involved. But when we get to Indiana, we really--by now, the African American Forum [AAF] is doing well. I'm, I'm a leader there. We are trying to do some things for the community in, in, in Evansville [Indiana]. We were living in Evansville, which is right up the road there. And, and, and that was when I could--I started to see, I can start to make--I'm--I've reached the level here that I can start to make some difference in a Burkville [Alabama] or in an Evansville, in my part of the business. Story_ID: 261627 Speaker 1: I was sent to China. I mean, I, I was working for Jeff Immelt [Jeffrey R. Immelt] and he asked me to go, but it really was a joint decision between Jeff, Gary [L.] Rogers who, who ran all of [GE] Plastics, and, and Jack Welch. And, you know, I was the--I believe, I was the first African American to go to China to run a business. We had others who'd gone to, to run functions or pieces, but I was the first one to go run it. And, and I remember having some discussion around that because, you know, there was--there was concern by, by the people above me, was that gonna work? You know, how would the Chinese react and how would I react and would it--would it work? Speaker 2: And, and what were--what were the--what made you decide to do it? Let's just ask that. Speaker 1: I, I--it was easy for me. One, I--my screen is always--was always the same. Will it allow me to pick up some new set of--a new set of skills that I need to move forward? So the answer there was yes. So, then it became was it gonna be interesting to me? And that was huge. It--you know, it was a big yes there. So, you know, it was a--it was just a matter of convincing my wife [Linda Harper] to go and she quickly said yes as well. So it really came down to, it allowed me to pick up some new skills and it happened to be this very interesting opportunity. It also had this, this really appealing piece to me, and that was, here was a chance to move the bar forward for African Americans, that I got a chance to do something first that hadn't been done. That carried with it a sense of--a great sense of responsibility, but a--but a bit of fear, too. Because--not so much from, from my own self failing, but I felt like I was gonna carry the weight of everybody, so if I did fail, you know, I thought--there's not--they're not gonna send another African American over here to China for twenty years or--you know, that was my thinking or for a long time. So I wanted to succeed more than, than I did in the other roles, not so much for me, but I knew what it represented. Story_ID: 261628 Speaker 1: Describe what you went to take over there, you know what-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --what, what was--what--you know, what GE's [General Electric] presence was and what were you taking over and what was your-- Speaker 2: --Well, GE, GE had been in China in--for quite a while at that--even at that point, but I went over to take over the plastics business, it was a--it was--it was about a 250 million dollar business there. It was growing at a strong double digit growth per year, which is really good. And our issue--all of our problems were we were growing too fast to keep up. So we had a manufacturing plant that was just being built, a small plant, about the same type plant I had run earlier in my career when I was a plant manager. It had a sales team all over China and Hong Kong and Taiwan, so I'd, I'd done that before in my career. It, it had now marketing; I'd done that before in my career. And, and so all the experiences were sort of coming together and you had--I had to put together a bunch of new systems and processes. It really was--it--the, the problem was this. We're growing so fast that we can't keep up. Go in, fix that, put the processes in, systems in, right people in, and don't slow down the growth while you do it. So it's a little bit like trying to change your tire on the freeway without stopping the car. And, and that was really the problem there. It was go do that. Speaker 1: And GE had been there long enough that it was accepted culturally? Speaker 2: Yeah, GE has been in China for quite a long while, so-- Speaker 1: How long? Speaker 2: Whoa, you know, we've been in China for over twenty years, probably twenty-five, thirty years in China. If--you, you gotta remember GE's history, right? If you go--and I'm talking about--when I say twenty-five, thirty years, I'm just talking about the GE we think of today. Go back to, to the early--to the '20s [1920s] and, and you'll find that GE was there in China. So it's been there for a very, very long time. Speaker 1: Okay. Now you were based out of, you said I thought Hong-- Speaker 2: I was living in Hong Kong [China] and I had at that time I think when I arrived six offices spread all over the People's Republic of China plus a manufacturing facility there in the People's Republic of China, and then we had two offices in Taiwan as well. So the headquarters was in Hong Kong, but the--but, but most of the people and the--and the customers and the manufacturing was in the People's Republic, and then we had a different set of customers in Taiwan. Story_ID: 261629 Speaker 1: Now in this particular case where you say, you know, you always focus on people. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So how was it there when you're dealing with a different culture and not-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --an American culture and-- Speaker 2: Yeah. It was--it--you know, it was one of the reasons I loved taking that job [president, GE Plastics Greater China] because one of the things I--one of the skill sets I knew I needed, I knew that I was good at this in the U.S. in, in several different types of jobs, but the question for me was when I saw bigger leaders, they had that--they were able to do that globally, and I had to prove I could do it globally. So that was the big question for me was, will my style be as effective in China as it was in the U.S. in all these different roles? I learned a lot by that. I found out that my, my style was, was effective. I also learned I had to adjust certain things about how I operated with people, one of them being communications. I learned in China--you know, one of--one of the early experiences for me is we'd have meetings and I get everybody together and we have a meeting and we'd agree on something and I'd say, does everybody get it? Do we agree? Everybody would say yes. We'd leave. And two weeks later, I, I, I do my--remember, I--rhythm and rigor, right? So two weeks later, we check, nothing got done, and I'd say, well, we, we agreed we were gonna do this, what, what happened? And I realized then that I--they didn't understand what I wanted. I hadn't communicated--I hadn't communicated on their channel, okay? Part of it was in some cases the, the language, right? English was their second language. The--you know, especially the, the Chinese in the PRC [People's Republic of China], it was their second language. They didn't really understand and they had a culture and have a culture of, of, of saving face. And so when I said does everybody understand, no one wanted to lose face and say I don't understand, so everyone said we understand even if no one understood. So I had to learn. That was my fault; it wasn't their fault. So I had to learn how to communicate more clearly, more, more effectively to make sure there was an understanding. I had to adjust what I call my channels. I think that with people--and I--and I--I've learned that around the world now that, that people share the same emotions, but we do have different cultures and we do have different styles, but at the--at the core, we're more alike than different. And so--and so that, that part, understanding people, touch is, is global. Touch--there is no difference in touch, but the communications and, and cultures were different. So I, I learned a lot from that. I had to adjust my style. I had to adjust how I communicated, adjust how I, you know, asked for things. Story_ID: 261630 Speaker 1: I'll give you an example of the U.S., China or Asia, and Europe; I've worked in all three. In the U.S., our culture is we, we like--we debate something but once we arrive at a--at a decision, we, we sort of what I call our cowboy legacy, you know, we agree, okay we're gonna do it, everybody goes and does it. That's it. In Asia, if you say to someone, do you understand, do you get it? If someone doesn't understand it in the U.S., they're gonna say I don't get it, tell me about the--they'll challenge you. They--because we like to debate. In Asia, they wanna save face. It's honor. No one will maybe tell you if they understand, so everyone says we get it when maybe no one gets it. And they go off and they're trying to do what you want, okay, they're really gonna try and do what you want, but they didn't know what you asked for. It's your--it's, it's my fault, so nothing will happen, okay? So you really gotta work a little harder to, to--all--how do you get--how do you ask someone if you know that, that if I say do you get it and you have to tell me you don't get it and you lose face, I gotta find a way to test your understanding without causing you to risk losing face. I had to learn how to do that. I had to say, okay, here's what--does everybody get it and I, I had to learn to go from that to, okay this is how we ought to--we want this done, okay, and let's think about it this way and let's talk about these options. And then because I didn't ask the direction question, I'd get questions, well why does it work that way? And then I realize, okay, I didn't explain this well enough. So that was one example. In Europe, what I learned was, in Europe, they love to debate but they love the intellectual part of the debate. And so in Europe, I had to learn it--we'd have the same meeting, we'd all agree on something, I go off, I come back in two weeks, what did we get done? Well, we didn't do anything because we came up with a better idea, okay? And that was a different culture I had to learn to deal with was, wait a minute, we agreed two weeks ago. So three different, you know--it's, it's--what I've learned is there are different channels of communication around the world, but at its core, what I learned is touch works universally. We all laugh and cry for the same reasons, we all feel the same emotions for the same reasons, so that works. Story_ID: 261631 Speaker 1: Did you travel a lot when you were in China and get to know the Asian-- Speaker 2: Yes, a lot, an awful lot. I, I spent two or three weeks a month for several months during the year, not every month, but, but at least probably four months a year traveling around [as president, GE Plastics Greater China]. It was part of--it was just part of, of building the team and you're growing like crazy, hiring people, building new facilities, building--opening new offices, seeing customers, yeah, and it was great. I, learned an awful lot about the culture talking to customers and my team at dinners, you know, breaking bread with them. And they were as curious about the U.S. culture and African American culture in the U.S. as I was about Chinese culture and Asian culture. Speaker 1: Okay. And, and you--when did you know that and when did the, you know, Jack Welch and Jeff Immelt [Jeffrey R. Immelt] and Connors [ph.], Roberts [ph.]-- Speaker 2: Gary [L.] Rogers? Speaker 1: Gary Rogers. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: When did they know that it was okay that you were black, that there was not going to be, you know--I mean, like did they get calls when they got over there, you know, saying who is this guy you sent here? Speaker 2: No, I, I--well, I don't know that, that they did or not. I don't think they did. But what I think they saw is when they came over, you know, because all of them--all of them have traveled in, in China. And so when Gary and, and Jack in particular came over, what they were looking for is how did my team relate to me? 'Cause they, they would see me with my team. Was my team with me or not with me? And they would look at how customers would interact with me. And I think--I think that was the--was the real evidence that this is working. It was--the team was relating to me. The team was with me and, you know, they, they didn't sense there was some division. Story_ID: 261632 Speaker 1: Are you being mentored at this point by--are you past mentorship or are you being mentored by Jeff Immelt [Jeffrey R. Immelt]? Are you being--or--I'm just--or-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --who's advising, like-- Speaker 2: I, I--yeah. Speaker 1: I mean, you know presidential candidates have advisors, you know? Speaker 2: Oh yeah. No, I, I think that--the simple answer is yes. I have a number of people who mentor me. I have some people who still sponsor me. I, I think there's two types of, of mentoring I've seen in corporate America, though. One is this formal type that most companies including GE [General Electric] have, have installed. I, I, I think that's good but, but they're usually not natural acts. It's like an arranged marriage in a lot of cases. And so some of--while some of those work well, a lot of them don't work well at all. For me, what's work is, is, is the natural network. My network--when I talk about building my network, my network is, is filled with people who mentor me, coach me, advise me, some sponsor me. None of--none of it's been sort of arranged. None of it was will you be my mentor. I, I always think when you--the, the moment you ask someone to be your mentor, you, you really don't understand how it works. So, yeah, I've got a lot of mentors. Story_ID: 261633 Speaker 1: Then how did the Netherlands come about, then? That's what I-- Speaker 2: That was my next assignment. That was--that was-- Speaker 1: Well, and what was the need? What--so-- Speaker 2: The need there was I went there to be the global vice president [of GE Plastics]. Now--this was my first vice president's job. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So this was big. I become an officer in the company. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, and now-- Speaker 1: So now there are two--no. Speaker 2: At this point--at that point--at that point-- Speaker 1: Nineteen ninety-eight [1998]. Speaker 2: At that point actually--at that point actually, there were already--probably I think there were four-- Speaker 1: Four, okay. Speaker 2: --African Americans and I get asked to go now to, to Europe, to the Netherlands, and I was asked to be the vice president of global manufacturing. So I go--now I go back to manufacturing. My engineering experience is coming back in again. And there, what, what the issue--I had two big things. I remember talking to Jack Welch and, and I always believe in trying to understand not just what your boss expects of you in a job, but I, I want to get their priorities. So I always ask what I call the clarifying question which is, what couple of things if, if I don't do you'll fire me over? Because, to me, those are the clarifying questions around what they--what their priorities are. And his answer was two things. It was get us through Y2K [Year 2000], okay? We got all these-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --we, we at that point had over forty plants around the world, okay, and, and if we had had a mishap in one of those, it would've been a, a major environmental and safety disaster. Get us through that, do not let us have that problem, and, oh by the way, there's this--there's this plant in Cartagena, Spain, very--about a billion dollar project, first plant, new technology. These plants take three years to build. It had been under construction for about two and a half years and it--a--two--a little over two years and it was finish the construction and start it up, okay? Those are my two things. Story_ID: 261634 Speaker 1: One of my big failures, which you were asking earlier happened in this job, in this job. Speaker 2: What--can you describe what happened? Speaker 1: This was--this was around that plant [for GE Plastics], around the Cartagena [Spain] plant. And we finished the construction, no problem, on time, on schedule, on, on budget, started it up, and I knew we had a problem immediately because we started running this facility and it started literally dissolving, okay, is the--is the--is the easiest way I can describe this problem. This was a very complex chemical process, very corrosive, and so you got a lot--imagine a refinery. It, it looked like a refinery, okay? It was a--it was a plastics--it was a Lexan plant but it looked like the size of a big refinery with very specialized equipment, okay, very expensive, very specialty, one of a kind types of equipment, and you start running this process. And you start realizing that the chemicals in this process are dissolving the equipment, and that was the problem. And, and no one understood why. We didn't understand why, the person we bought the technology from, the company, didn't understand why. We, we had a problem. So we started the plant up, we started running, literally it ran a few days and we had to shut it down. We, we would go in and spend, you know, two weeks trying to fix that, start back up, run it for a few days, it would--we'd have to shut it back down. And so we, we miss our startup date. It's, it's happening at a time when, remember, this is the most profitable, largest business in GE [General Electric]. It was happening at a time when demand was going through the roof, we can sell everything we can get, and we can't produce, and that's why we built this plant, okay, to be ready for this. So we're--we miss our deadline to start it up. We're spending money like crazy trying to fix it and--you know, and I knew right then--I, I knew within the first couple days we started up, we have a major problem. We--we're gonna be in trouble. The short version of this story is it, it cost the business, it cost the company $100 million, okay? But we figured out what was wrong with it. It cost $100 million to figure it out, fix it, and get it online, but we were about eight months late getting it up and running and, and getting the--getting it out there. I learned an awful lot in that eight month--seven, eight month period about myself, about the business, about leadership in that eight months. But at the end of the day, we got it up, we got it running. It, it, it--it's, it's now today a--you know, one of the best plants we have but it cost $100 million. Speaker 2: So what was the problem? Speaker 1: The problem actually was that that in these facilities--this was a new technology and so we, we bought this-- Speaker 2: And--using what kind of technology? Speaker 1: Well, it was a new--the simple version is it was a new chemistry process, okay, or chemical process and it had never been done on this scale anywhere in the world. And the person we bought it--the company we bought it from did not understand that technology enough to know that there was a reaction that occurred at a certain part of that plant that changed all of the--of the chemistry within the plant and caused it to self-dissolve. And so we built it exactly the way they gave it to us and explained it to us, and it didn't work, and we had to--they couldn't figure out the problem. We had to marshal of the GE resources from several different parts of GE to help fix this and, and we figured out that the chemistry was different than they thought and we had to re-modify part of the plant. Speaker 2: So you--you're saying you bought technology from someone else? Speaker 1: Yeah, it was very, very, very typical in this industry. Speaker 2: Okay. And then--but--and then they sold you the technology-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --you then implement on a grand scale. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: You--it didn't multiply that--it wasn't easy to multiply. Speaker 1: No. Well--right. And what they didn't realize was when you re--when you scaled it to the level we were at, there was another step in the process you had to put in and they didn't know that and obviously we didn't know that. And so to, to do that, you know--imagine you build this--picture this refinery now. It's, it's what a big plant like that looks like and you realize, oh by the way over here in the middle, I need another set of these big units. Now, to do that is very tough. But that's what we--we had to first figure out the problem and then--and then go in and do it. Story_ID: 261635 Speaker 1: How are you focusing on much of the rest of your global empire if you--if you--have eight--you know-- Speaker 2: That's where--that's where, quite frankly, the clarify--that's why I was so happy I'd asked the clarifying question early on. Because when we got into this problem, I realized that, that--I always ask that clarifying question because I know if it don't do those things that my boss is telling me they'll fire me over, then, then I missed the point. I missed his or her priority. So as soon as we had this problem, a lot of my background experience helped me get through this. First, I learned a long while ago that when you're in corporate or any--probably anywhere, but in corporate America, if you are doing well in your career, at some point, you're gonna get in trouble. Something is going to go wrong. You're gonna inherit a problem, create a problem, you know, have a problem thrown to you and you're gonna get in trouble, and it's going to be one of those problems like my problem in Cartagena [Spain] that you can't solve on your own. Now, what I'd also learned is that--is that I'd seen so many people get in a problem like that and they don't yell for help early. They either don't yell at all or they don't yell loud enough or they yell too late. They try to fix the problem on their own and it, it, it just escalates. So I yelled immediately. I yelled early and said there was a problem, we have a big issue. I, I remember going up to a meeting with Jack Welch and--which wasn't very pleasant and saying we have this big problem, here's what we're gonna do about it, here's how we're gonna attack it, but I want you to know, we got a problem and I need help. My team needs help. Second thing that helped me was that's when I knew I had to work my network. That's when I knew I need all the help from everybody in my network, so I called everyone in my network who I knew had experience in building plants, running plants, engineering, chemistry. I called, I said what, what are--what can you tell me, what can you--what advice can you give me? Not--to my surprise, not only did people, mostly in GE [General Electric], not only did they give me advice, they gave me--they, they loaned me people, here's my expert on this, I'll make them available, here's my person on that, I'll make them available. So my network--that was one of those times when I, I had--I learned yell early, yell loud and, and get help. And, and, and I got all kinds of help. And that was the good news early on. So I, I raised the flag, there's a problem, everybody knew it, I got all this help, but there was a period in there, probably three months in where I thought I, I couldn't overcome it. I thought it was over. It was--it was one of those low moments in my career where I'd had--I'd done everything I could do. My team had done everything they could do. We had all this help. Nobody understood the problem. We couldn't--I, I remember sitting in a room with about forty Ph.D. chemists and chemical engineers, all much smarter than me on this topic, and no--and nobody had a clue. And I walked out of there thinking, that's it (laughter). We're--you know, they--that's it. We gotta figure--we gotta bring somebody else in to do this. And I'd been in Spain, the plants in Spain. I'd been in Spain for probably three weeks without coming home to the--to, to Belgium. And I finally came home for a weekend and, and I got a call from Jack Welch. He called me on a--on a Saturday, right at the moment when I was really probably feeling at the lowest. And he said, "How's it going?" I said, "Jack, it's tough. We--you know, we're, we're, we're workin' it. We don't know--we still don't have the answer." And at that moment, he said--he said, "Look, you didn't create the problem, but you gotta fix it. We're all behind you, I'm behind you, you're gonna get it fixed. And I, I know it's costing all this money, but we've invested all this in you to fix it. Just get it fixed." And that--I, I--to this day, I don't know how he knew exactly that was the right moment to call, but he did, and that really--you know, that, that re-energized me, that allowed me to go back and within about five weeks after that, we figured out the problem. And then the rest of it was spending all the money to get it done, which wasn't very easy, but just knowing that--knowing what the problem was was the biggest hurdle. So I learned a lot. You know, I learned a lot about my character, the character of the team, how you get a team through a crisis, how the leader above dealt with that, you know. I've since had Jack tell me the story about he did something--he blew up a plant once years ago and he writes about that in his book. So it was--it, it--I learned a lot. Speaker 1: So he, he said--it wasn't like he was letting you off the hook. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: He was giving you the resources. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 261636 Speaker 1: Did you feel at that point you got off the phone that you could solve the problem in your-- Speaker 2: I never--I never felt that the problem wasn't solvable, I just didn't know how long it would take to solve it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I, I think I've always--may--maybe it's just a--you know, how I view things. I think, you know, all problems can be solved but not all in the time you wanna solve 'em. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, you know, my view was I was just gonna run out of time. Speaker 1: And, and so what did you learn about how to--how to navigate people or motivate them or manage them during time of crisis? Speaker 2: You know what I learn--what I--one of the things I learned was that, you know, big goal--one of the roles for a leader is to be what I call a dampener, okay, and let me explain what I mean by that. I've learned--I--I've learned that a lot--people will look at the leader, whoever the leader is, he or she, and they will read things about you that you don't even think about. They will see you when you come in and say, she's not happy today. She's, she's mad today. She's down today. But it'll also say she's happy today. So--and what they do is they feed on that, okay? And so what I've learned is that when a team is down, they're down because it's not going their way, it's not working, and I as a leader or you as a leader come in and, and you look down, they go even further down. You've just amplified that, that feeling. I also learned that when a team is up, excited, and I get too excited, I amplify that. So my view is that my job is to make sure that the highs, to--when, when everybody thinks that we are so good that we can do anything, we walk--you know, we, we are the best, we can do anything. My job is to say, guys, we're not that good. We still have to get better. And when everybody's down and says we're all gonna be fired, it's over, my job is to say, guys, it's not that bad. We're gonna live through it and, and, and I believe in you and let's get it done. I learned that my job is to dampen the highs and dampen the lows, and try to keep people--you know, try not to have--try to keep my team at a steady level, and that's what Jack [Welch] did for me and at that time, I was way down, and he got me back to--he didn't let me off the hook, but he got me back to get off the bottom. He also was very good at--when, when, when we thought we were the cockiest group in the business at times, of reminding us that we had to improve and get better. We weren't that--as good as we could be or as good as we thought. That's, that's what I learned about leadership in crisis, is people need someone to step up and say we're going to get through it. It's not that bad. Here's what we're gonna do. Let's move forward. Story_ID: 261637 Speaker 1: It was emotional. You have to understand something else. Here we are, we're building this plant [for GE Plastics] in Spain. We'd never built a plant in Spain, so my team is a Spanish--predominantly a Spanish team, okay? They are proud. This is the first Spanish plant of its kind in, in Spain, in Cartagena [Spain], it's GE [General Electric], and they had a lot of pride. They did not want to be seen as the only group across GE and the first group in Spain that couldn't build and run a plant. And they, they had a lot of--they had a lot of pride about this. And so, you know, beating them up was not gonna help, and I, I view that my role was every day to try to keep them--you know, let's not let anybody get too far down. Let's keep marching forward. Let's celebrate small wins. That was my role. Speaker 2: Okay. Now when that crisis abated-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Then-- Speaker 1: I was very happy. Speaker 2: Right (laughter). Okay, you went on vacation (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter). Actually, I did take some days. Speaker 2: You did (laughter). Okay (laughter). Okay. But then you had to focus on the rest of the operation. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I mean, that was the new plant. So-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --what did you--you know--and you're based out of the Netherlands. Speaker 1: Well, I was in the Netherlands but, you know, it wasn't too long after we got that plant up and running, you know. The other plants--the good news is the other plants were all running well and we had pulled in a lot of the people from the other plants to help us solve the problem, so we had people literally in Spain from Mount Vernon, Indiana, Burkville, Alabama. You know, we had people either flying in or calling in or on the ground helping to solve this problem. So they'd been very much involved so everybody was happy when it was fixed. And then what I did is we--when--obviously when the problem was solved, we undid the rhythm and rigor around that problem and we started looking at, one, what lessons could we learn from it? Why did this happen, postmortem? Story_ID: 261638 Speaker 1: I started focusing on just trying to get all of the manufacturing facilities to share the best practices and ideas and, you know, approaches. So that was the--that was what I went to afterwards. But it wasn't very long after that problem that I switched jobs again. I didn't leave Europe. I stayed in Europe but I went from being the [global] manufacturing VP [vice president] to running the business. Speaker 2: And--you mean running the, the whole business? Speaker 1: Running [GE] Plastics Europe, yeah. Speaker 2: Okay, right, throughout Europe. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And that was in 2000, right? Speaker 1: That was in-- Speaker 2: No, president and senior man-- Speaker 1: No, no, no, that was-- Speaker 2: Nineteen ninety-eight [1998]? Speaker 1: I came here--yeah, I came here--'98 [1998] I became the vice president of manufacturing. Speaker 2: And then-- Speaker 1: This was around 2000, right. Speaker 2: Two thousand, [2000] president-- Speaker 1: Two thousand [2000], I start-- Speaker 2: Okay, president and-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --senior manager for GE [General Electric] pla- right. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: You're--okay. And, now, this--explain this because you--it's not just Europe, it's-- Speaker 1: Right. It was Europe--it was Europe--most of the business was in Europe, but we also had operations, a few--it was Europe, Middle East, Africa, and, and India, and we had--we had some small operations in South Africa, joint--small joint venture we put in. We had a--we had some business in India that we, we got going there, and, and the bulk of the business was across Europe. Speaker 2: Okay. Did you find that any of the work with the European Union [EU], did that affect you and your work at all? 'Cause wasn't that around this time that we--you know, that the euro was coming out and the union was-- Speaker 1: Yeah, they were already talking about, you know, going to EU and going to the euro and all the things that, that have happened since then. It, it impacted us just from the point of view of getting approvals on things. People--as we got closer to that moment, people were a little more hesitant to, to approve because they wanted to wait until they got through it. It didn't impact the business on a day-to-day basis. It, it impacted us in a small way. Story_ID: 261639 Speaker 1: But Y2K [Year 2000] then came around. I mean-- Speaker 2: Y2K came, yeah. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: Y2K. Speaker 1: And there was this huge fever, fever pitch leading up to it. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. I, I mean--you know, we all--a lot, lot of us all thought, you know, the--we were all worried about the worst things happening. Everyone was geared around, you know, everything's gonna stop. And I think what we had done is we had put so much effort into this and so much work to make sure that nothing bad happened and, you know, it was a tremendous amount of work and effort and everything, and it was almost like--when, when the, the moment came and passed, we all were waiting to hear, okay, something bad happened somewhere in the world and we, we all know, hardly anything happened anywhere in the world. So, yeah, getting through 2000, you know, it, it was a huge relief. I'd gotten through the two things, the two things that I knew I had to do. I, I--Cartagena [Spain] and, and Y2K. Speaker 1: Now, was there a promise that if you did these that there would be, you know, a reward at the end? Did you know that? You know, I mean, or-- Speaker 2: No, you know, I think--within GE [General Electric], I think the culture here is this. There's, there's, there's not a promise, but there is sort of a contract, kind of a--an unwritten contract, and the contract is this. If you do well and deliver and do it in, in the--in the culture and value system that we have in the company, you're gonna--you're gonna move on. You're gonna get--you're gonna get the next challenge which is--which is a promotion or another role. That is always kinda the contract within GE. So, no, no one ever said to me if you do this you're gonna get the next job, but I knew just how the company worked that if I could pull this off, not have a Y2K problem, fix--you know, get this plant [for GE Plastics] up and started and I could do it in the right way, that I ought to have a shot at the next opportunity. So, so when that opportunity came up, you know, I was happy to get it. Story_ID: 261640 Speaker 1: Are you coming back and forth to the [United] States very often? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I'm coming--I'm coming back now every--at least once a quarter for meetings, you know, between first Hong Kong [China] and U.S. and now Europe and the U.S., so I'm traveling around the geography within my, my business, and then I'm flying back to the U.S. once a quarter for meetings, some, some, some quarters more than once a quarter so, yeah, I'm, I'm doing a lot of travel. Speaker 1: Now are you--when you're in these places, are you--were you sort of--did you maintain contact with the United States? I mean, are you aware or are you just sort of dropping in and then dropping out and-- Speaker 2: No, I--one of the things I, I have learned and, and I, I started learning it, believe it or not, from Bob Means [ph.], that job--that very first job. Because Bob--what Bob taught me was, Bob, Bob was on--in California, headquarters [for Continental Oil Company (Conoco); ConocoPhillips] was in Houston [Texas] at that time, and Bob said, you know, Art [HistoryMaker Arthur H. Harper], when you don't see people often or you don't hear from them often, you always assume the worst. That's human nature. And so he said, you know, if you don't contact Houston and you don't stay in contact with Houston, they're gonna think you're out here in California out on the beach. So you gotta make sure you stay in touch with them. And so Bob had a thing where he, he would love to--he'd get up at 5:30 in the morning or so and at six or 6:05, he loved to call Houston from home. And he said, you know, when you do that, they are gonna have a huge impression of you 'cause they're gonna say, geez, it's only six in the morning out there, what are you--so they get a different view. So Bob was the one that taught me, you have to stay in touch. It's on you when you're away. I did that in Hong Kong. I did that in, in Europe. I stayed very much in touch, email, phone calls, when I had to come over, trying to connect with people. I worked hard at that. That was part of my networking. Speaker 1: And, so now what happens then with--you--with--okay, so you--when people go abroad, abroad like you do, do, do they stay longer at those? I mean, are they-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: --'cause you did a five-year stint. Speaker 2: I was--I was told--I was actually out of the country by, by the time I came back almost seven years. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I was told when I went to Hong Kong it was two years and back, and that was usually the case, two years and back. And so coming back a little bit later than that, you know, it was--it was a little bit of a running joke with my wife [Linda Harper] and I, but we enjoyed it. Speaker 1: Okay. And you enjoyed--did you travel a lot? Did you-- Speaker 2: Well, you know, I-- Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: I was doing so much in my job-- Speaker 1: I understand. Speaker 2: --that-- Speaker 1: You wanted to-- Speaker 2: We did see--I mean, together, we made a lot of trips just, you know, to look around, but I was traveling so much in my job (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I understand. Story_ID: 261641 Speaker 1: Jack Welch leaves in 2001, right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Isn't--and that's the year you became executive vice president? Speaker 2: Well, he was--he's, he's, he's leaving and that--you know, he's on his way out there and Jeff [Jeffrey R. Immelt] is, is already--announces the next chairman, and I came to--I came home in the fourth quarter of 2001. Speaker 1: Okay. But that's after 9/11 [September 11, 2001], right? Speaker 2: Yeah, I got back-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: I came back here in, actually like in December of that year. Speaker 1: And Jeff got appointed just before 9/11. Speaker 2: Just before 9/11, so he--Jeff's already--by the time I land here, Jeff is--Jeff is the--he's the chairman. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He's the chairman. Speaker 1: So then do you become his sort of heir appointed or part of his, his inner circle because-- Speaker 2: No (laughter). Speaker 1: I'm just-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I'm just, just asking. Speaker 2: No I--I've never been his heir appointed. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: At that point, I-- Speaker 1: Or part of his, his-- Speaker 2: Well, at that point, you as an officer--as a vice president within GE [General Electric], if you become an officer, there are about 170-some officers. And at that time, it was maybe a few less, but somewhere around that 160 number. So those are the--those are the most senior people in, in the company, and I was in that group. I came in to, to be in the GE Capital business. Jeff had what he calls--still has a corporate executive council which are, you know, sort, sort of the top forty people that meet once a quarter. I joined--I was in that circle, so I was now in the CEC, the Corporate Executive Council, and every quarter we, we, we would meet, we still meet, and we would talk about all parts of GE. Speaker 1: Okay. And, and then how did that lead to the opportunity to then be, you know, become CEO of, of--I mean-- Speaker 2: Well at that-- Speaker 1: 'Cause it's-- Speaker 2: Well at that time, the way GE Capital was structured, it was twenty-six businesses, ind- independent businesses, sort of run, what a lot of people thought was sort of like a holding company. So you had these twenty-six businesses, all sort of running independently, and at the top of that, you had what was called the office of the CEO, and there were four people in that office of the CEO. You had a CEO for GE Capital for all these twenty businesses together, you had a, a COO, you had a CFO, and you had an executive vice president; that was my role. So I was--I was one of the four in this office of the CEO, and the--those four members were all in the corporate executive--the GE Corporate Executive Council. So when we reorganized about, you know, eight, ten months later into saying we need to take these twenty-six businesses and break them into four new businesses; we're gonna put groups together and have four different businesses, at that point I was assigned to be the president and CEO of equipment. What was then equipment management is now equipment services. Speaker 1: Okay. So why was that done? Speaker 2: That was done for a couple of reasons. One, I think you, you really needed--you, you had--this, this organization had grown so big, it was hard--it was hard to run twenty six total, you know, the entity that big, twenty-six individual businesses together, it's just hard, so that was the first one. It's just simpler for Jeff and everyone to see what's happening in four businesses than one business with twenty-six parts. The second thing is, there were synergies between several of the businesses and we needed to get them grouped together to get the synergies, to get lower cost or get better service with customers or get, you know, quicker service to the employees. So we, we tried to create businesses that were similar. Story_ID: 261642 Speaker 1: Can you talk about what is the GE [General Electric] conglomerate? Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: You know, because--you know, I think, you know, av- average everyday people, they don't understand-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --you know, I mean--you know, if you say GE, you think electricity. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You know, I mean you don't even think plastic so much. Speaker 2: Yeah. I-- Speaker 1: And you don't think media. Speaker 2: Yeah. I, I think--I think that--you know, I personally don't like the, the term conglomerate-- Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: --be--because--no, that's okay because I think it has a, a connotation around it or an assumption that people--as soon as you hear the word, it's--people think of a bunch of individual different businesses that really don't do much together but they're all under one umbrella. Here's why GE is a little bit confusing sometimes. We are a, a, a lot of different businesses. We make aircraft engines, we make, you know, appliances, we make lighting, we, we have--we make healthcare equipment. We, we provide railcars, a bunch of leasing products for, for cargo transport. We do financing of a lot of different things. We deliver power systems, make big generators for power plants. So you got all these different kinds of businesses together, but the one big difference I think that is, is within GE that you don't see in these other "conglomerates" is, there's very little commonality usually when you see that kind of diversity of, of businesses. One you usually or rarely see one culture across all the businesses. Two, you, you rarely see that there's been a lot of people movement of the leadership level across the businesses. And, three, they usually don't speak a common language across the businesses and don't have common processes. That to me is part of the secret of GE and the magic of GE is that it--there's one common language no matter which business you're in, there's one common set of processes, one set of values which are important, and GE's approach in strategy is let's develop great leaders who can work in any of these businesses, and you see a lot of movement; that's the difference. So that's why I don't like conglomerate for GE because, yeah, it looks like a conglomerate, but it doesn't behave, act or, or smell like a conglomerate when you're really inside of it. Story_ID: 261643 Speaker 1: My business because we're financial services, I'll give you three numbers. We do--we do about seven billion in revenues, we do--of, of the--of the 140 billion or so. We are nineteen billion of net earning assets which is--tells you the, the asset base which a lot of financial services folks look at, and, and we, we have about four thousand people in the business. Speaker 2: So you--but this is non-manufacturing too, right? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: It's not. Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: It's not. Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: And so--and this, this, this-- Speaker 1: My, my businesses are a collection of businesses--we do leasing, full service equipment leasing, and its equipment that, that is, is focused on cargo transport. So we've got a joint venture that's the largest sea container leasing company out there. We've got Penske Truck Leasing and, and rental. We've got railcar leasing that we do. We do trailer leasing. We have modular space products that we do. And then we got a business that is a services business that just provides technology for all of these so that you can track the assets and see what's happening inside the asset or to the cargo in the asset called asset intelligence. So that's my group of businesses. Speaker 2: So how, how is that--I mean, you've been in manufacturing [GE Equipment Management; GE Equipment Services] so long so how do you-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: This is totally sort of different. Speaker 1: It's very different. Speaker 2: But-- Speaker 1: Financial services is completely different. I, I think it is a testament to, to how GE [General Electric], though, thinks about developing leaders. I mean, they really focus on if I develop great talent--I want to develop great talent that has this ability to, to work in different types of businesses. And so if you look across GE, you'll see a lot of senior leaders who they've worked in, you know, NBC and [GE] Plastics, you know? Bob Wright who runs NBC today used to work in plastics. You'll see people like myself who are now in financial services who spent a lot of time in manufacturing and sales on the operational side; you'll see a lot of that. Story_ID: 261644 Speaker 1: I wanna ask you what your challenges are that are facing you right now and what--you know, what plans you have and is this another two-year stint, too? I mean-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: --you, you know, you may say things are changing, but your career is in two-year stints. Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, you know, I, I--I'm, I'm running out of runway here so it's, it's, it's gonna be longer than two years. Look, biggest challenge here for, for me and I think for a lot of businesses today is growth, is how--where do you get the next growth platform? You know, I--I'm a big believer that you can never shrink a business to greatness. You have to grow it to greatness. So it's always about growth at the end of the day and where, where are the new growth ideas? How do you create--we're, we're living in a world now where you got Asia--China's growing like crazy. The U.S. is, is right now, you know, doing fairly well, although we got some immediate challenges with high cost of fuel and, you know, there's a lot of signs that things aren't going to stay this well for too much longer. Europe is struggling in, in, in Central and Western Europe. Eastern Europe is doing very well. So you add it all up, what you get is you get a world that gets sort of moderate growth, okay? It's, it's, it's gonna be a difficult place to grow, and I think the companies that are gonna win are the ones that can create growth, who can find new markets, create new markets, find new niches, bring new services to customers, that's the challenge is, is, is where is the next growth platform? What's the next growth idea? Speaker 1: And what do you think it is? Speaker 2: It's different by business. I, I think every, every business has to--has to wrestle with that or every service has to wrestle with that. But it--but I--one thing I do know, it all centers around the customer. It's back to that thing I learned early on, it's about who understands the customer's needs better and then delivers the solution to those customers better than anybody else and faster than anybody else? Those are gonna be the winners. It--it's all gonna be about making that customer happy. Story_ID: 261645 Speaker 1: You're operating--right now, you--GE [General Electric] equipment, it's GE Equipment Management. Speaker 2: GE Equipment Services. Speaker 1: Services. You operate in nineteen countries, right? Speaker 2: We're, we're actually, right now--that--that's a little bit dated. We're now in twenty-seven countries. Speaker 1: Oh, so--okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, so-- Speaker 2: It's part of our growth. We're going--we're expanding. We're going into new, new geographies. Speaker 1: Okay. And are--is the-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Is that growth--has that been in Asia and in-- Speaker 2: It's been in--it's been in Eastern Europe, it's been in China where we're just going as one of the new countries, and it's been in Mexico where we--Mexico was already in the nineteen, but we're penetrating Mexico. And we'll, we'll very, very quickly be able to add Brazil. In fact, we, we, we have added Brazil to that number twenty-seven. Speaker 1: And what are you wanting to do in putting your mark here? I mean, what have you done to put your mark here in this, this particular-- Speaker 2: In this particular business? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: I, I think that a couple of things that we've been trying to do over the last three years. One was to, to set a, a different strategy for this business. I think we were--you know, when we were a part of the bigger GE Capital business, we, we sorta were under the umbrella of some of the other businesses. We didn't have a very well-defined strategy for what, what were we trying to do? Today, we do. We have a strategy for what we're trying to do. We also weren't growing, okay? Today, we are growing. And we also did not have world class execution in my opinion. Today I--I'm--I think we're--you know, I--we can always get better, but I think we got pretty good execution in, in what we wanna do. So it--the challenge is how do we extend and expand that growth and accelerate that growth? We got a, a very well laid out plan to do that. We're operating that plan and I feel pretty good. Story_ID: 261646 Speaker 1: You've told a couple Jack Welch stories, but I'd like you to tell a couple others. So, can you tell me something that would be sort of, you know, typical Jack Welch, you know, that he was sort of legendary for first? Then I've got another question, first. Speaker 2: Oh, first. Speaker 1: Okay, yeah. Speaker 2: What was he legendary for? Speaker 1: Or your interactions, just some anecdotal-- Speaker 2: You know, Jack, Jack, to me--maybe it's not a story but it'll give you how I think about Jack. I owe Jack an awful lot. I learned an awful lot from him. He was--he was this unique leader who had the perfect set of management skills and leadership skills. He had high touch. He had the ability to manage budgets, you know, projects, whatever, and still lead people. He could inspire you and he could challenge you. Whenever you went to see Jack, I always felt like this. You know, you get summonsed by Jack and Jack was one of those leaders--I think when I look at leaders, I think of--there are some leaders who are loved but not feared. There are other leaders who are feared but not loved. Jack was both, okay? And I--that's very rare to me. So whenever Jack would, would say, Art [HistoryMaker Arthur H. Harper], come up here, I need to talk to you about whatever. I always--I never felt--I never knew whether I was going in to get poked in the eye or get a cookie, okay? I just (laughter) couldn't tell. And even when he said come up here because you did something good and we wanna do this, you knew somewhere in that interaction, he always had this ability to, to challenge you and, and then--but make you feel good about it. And so I, I can tell you this. I had had--I've had a few times with him where I just got chewed up, you know? And I deserved that. But he never let you leave feeling bad about it. He, he--so he was able to sort of, you know, poke you in the eye, but before you left make you feel good about the experience. You know, he would say things like--you know, after he'd finish chewing you out, you're too good to do this. Don't do this again. We're--I, I believe in you. You gotta get this done, go get it done. Kinda like what he told me on the phone about the Cartagena [Spain]. So you knew you'd just taken a beating, but you always left saying, I gotta do more for this person. And, and that was--that was kinda--that was Jack. He was always challenging, but he was a great teacher, so he's always giving you ideas, thoughts, think about this, do that. But he was equally loved and feared and he, he--you never knew which one you were gonna get. Story_ID: 261647 Speaker 1: What about Jeff Immelt [Jeffrey R. Immelt]-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: What is--because what I find curious is that usually when one leader's out, you're out too, you know, or you're track ends, but you were mentored by both really. Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I--you--what you have to realize is, I came up, I was part of Jeff's team, so you, you know, I mean I was--I was on Jeff's team several times before he became the chairman, so that helped. You know, it's not--in a lot of cases, it is true if, if, if your--if your mentor leaves or your champion leaves, sometimes there's a regime change, and there was some of that in GE [General Electric] when, when Jack [Welch] left and Jeff took over, but not, not very much. You know, most people just stayed because it's a great company. Story_ID: 261648 Speaker 1: You're pleased with the career you've had I take it. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: And surprised. Speaker 1: And surp- okay. And what are your feelings about blacks in corporate America and the--and the potential for growth. I mean, the book that I was-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --you know, [HistoryMaker] David [A.] Thomas. You know, there had been this whole thing about, you know, these glass ceilings or black people getting things when it's--the company is like, you know, broken down, you know, they get, get the positions or-- Speaker 2: I, I think that, look, there's been progress made, but I--I'm disappointed when I think about corporate America, across corporate America, that more hasn't yet been done, and I think that there's a lot of work to be done. You know, we, we can point to individuals who've done well, and I--I'm very fortunate; I happen to be one of those individuals and there's several others who've done much better than me. But it's still a handful. It's still--it's still too much of a special event when an African American woman gets a certain job or an African American man gets a certain job. You know, you, you happen to be one of the, you know, African American whatever. I, I, I am--sitting here in 2005, it, it just--I'm disappointed in corporate America, okay, that we haven't done better than that. So I think that one of the responsibilities that, that I have and that, that those who have been fortunate enough to, to do--to reach certain levels, part of our responsibility is in my opinion and part of our debt in my opinion is to reach back and try to pull some other people up. I think--I think we--I think corporate America has to do some things differently, but I think the people who have made it have to do some things differently and I, I think that is--you know, that's the challenge. And, and there's a debt there in my view. You cannot get--I don't care how smart you are or who you are, you cannot get to the heights of a career in corporate America or corporate anywhere, okay, without a lot of people who've helped you, but there's an awful lot in our case as African Americans, there's a lot of people who, who sacrificed an awful lot, an awful lot to allow us to even have the opportunity. So I'm very grateful to the people who, who were mentoring me and still mentor me and sponsored me and I, I owe them, but I owe a greater debt to the people who sacrificed their life just so I could go to a school to prepare me, to be able to read, be--you know, just to have the opportunity. So I--it, it--corporate America has a piece of this, but I think we as African Americans, those of us who have been so fortunate, we, we have a responsibility and a debt; that's what I think. Story_ID: 261649 Speaker 1: I ask this in the context of, you know, your I think very interesting history and, you know, the fact that it began--your life, your early life was one--you know, and your parents [Eleanor Graham Harper] of a segregated, you know, life, self-imposed, not segregated, by law. And, and I look and say, you know, look at this--you know, you have morphed literally, transformed or grown or whatever into this sort of global view of the world and, and an active participant and much--you know, and a greater way than most people, you know, who live in the United States. So I'm just wondering, your view of African Americans role in the global world. Speaker 2: Okay. I, I think that--you know, I saw a model when I was in China that really got my interest, and it was I couldn't believe--when I got to Hong Kong [China] after I'd been there a few months, I realized that a huge amount of the investment dollars in the--in Hong Kong which is--which was known as a sort of great capitalist, you know, little island--had come from the People's Republic of China, this communist state. And then when I got into China, the People's Republic and I really could see what was going on there, you know, I was amazed that, you know, Shanghai [China] looked a lot like San Francisco [California] to me and Beijing [China] and other places were growing, and that's when I saw a model that said, you know, I've--I, I realized there were a lot of Chinese Americans and Chinese who had gone to, to Europe. They'd grown up in the U.S., they'd grown up in, in Europe, other parts of the world, but they still were Chinese. And they always talked about the motherland, and they when they were successful were always trying to find ways to change China, improve China, invest in China; I saw that model and I, I, I was amazed by that, by how, how much money had come in from Chinese who had left China, some cases two generations before, but they always identified with, with China and they were still trying to do things to improve China. That model stayed with me. So you ask, what is the role--what, what do I think the role of, of African Americans is in the global context. I think that when you look in the--if you step back now and say if I look around the world at, at black communities and countries around the world, it is very difficult to find a country or group, black group, that is--that has more intellectual capital, has more access to capital, has more experience in, in, in the capitalist societies than African Americans. And so while we are still wrestling with a lot of our problems here and, and we need to--we need to, to do that, we need to solve them, I think there is a synergistic effect that will occur when we figure out how to take some of the talents we have here and leverage them to make Africa better, leverage them to make some of the other parts of, of the world, Haiti and some of the other, you know, predominantly black countries better. I think by doing that, we're gonna find that we're gonna be able to, to create more wealth for the individuals there, but also I think create wealth for African Americans here. And I think that's--you know, we're wrestling right now with how to get access to capital. I think that's a big challenge for African Americans, but I think when you--when you--when you look at comparing that to these other countries in other regions, we're--this is the best prepared group of, of black people I see in the world, as I travel around the world, African Americans. How do we leverage that to change--make changes there and also use that to make change here? I think that's--it's, it's, it's the Chinese models, the model I saw there that I, you know, think about quite often. Story_ID: 261650 Speaker 1: There's a connection that the Chinese came from--I mean, they, they honor the fact that they came from there. Speaker 2: Right. Right. I think--I think, look, they have some advantages. They, they still have the language, they still can tell you the--you know, the province, the town where they came from, and a lot of African Americans, we can't. And that makes it--that makes it difficult. But I do think that there is a strong sense of, of Africa still as, as our motherland and, and a--and a connection with black people, you know, in other parts of the world. I, I--you know, I remember when I first went to Europe years ago, you know, twenty years ago, and the first time I realized that, you know, there are other black people, you know, in other parts of the world, I remember being in Paris [France] and seeing some, some black people and speaking to 'em and they spoke French and I had to realize, you know, at that age, okay, there are black people everywhere. So I, I do think there's a connection, though, and this--you look within the African American community at the experience we have, the capabilities we have, the connections we have, I, I don't see a better prepared group of black people globally than here, and how do we leverage that? Story_ID: 261651 Speaker 1: So you have great hopes for the black community I take it? Speaker 2: You know, I--I'm always an optimist, okay? I--you're right. I--I've morphed over time. I've grown over time and I'm still growing. I'm not--I'm still trying to grow up in a lot of ways. But I, I am in a--I'm an optimist. You know, I think we are people who have come through so much, so many difficult challenges and we've not only survived them, we have--we have found ways to create from that experience. We've--we--you know, we've, we've created. I'm, I'm a big jazz fan. I think, you know, much of what we do is, is this innovation from pain and from, from our experiences. So we--we've not just survived it, we've, we've grown, we've gotten better, we've innovated, we've created and, yeah, I think--I think, look, it's a matter of time, but I go back to can we solve the problem? Yeah, I think we can. It's gonna take a lot of people's efforts and a lot of focus, but, yeah, I'm, I'm very optimistic. Speaker 1: What are you concerns about the black community though even with your optimism? Speaker 2: I, you know, I think one of my big concerns is that we don't--we're, we're not--one of my frustrations--we, we are not facing reality enough from my perspective. We still have this, this residue of a victim mentality. And I know that's not a popular thing, but, you know, always finding a reason why it's not--why we can't deal with it is, is not gonna help us solve the problem. It's like--we talked about that problem I had in Cartagena [Spain], we didn't create this problem. We didn't--we didn't bring this in, but for those of us who are here now, we have to take some ownership to, to fix it. And I think other people do have some of the responsibility and, and should take some accountability, but we can't shirk our piece of it and, and I just think we, we gotta take a harder look in the mirror and say, are we doing what we can do to make a difference? Story_ID: 261652 Speaker 1: For young African Americans wanting to enter corporate America, what advice would you have with--you know, for them? Would it be the advice based on your experience or would it be--I mean, what would you tell them? Would you tell them that that's what they should do or go and be an entrepreneur? Speaker 2: I, I, I think that you gotta have--to be the best at anything, you've gotta have passion about what you're doing. And so I'd first say to them, what do you have passion about? Because if--look, if you have no passion about working for a big company, getting up every day, coming in, doing all the things you have to do in a big company, if that doesn't light your fire in the morning, don't do it. If your passion is to be an entrepreneur, then you should go be an entrepreneur because it's too hard, okay. The one thing I tell people is if you really wanna be the best, I always ask them, are you willing to pay the price? Are you willing to pay the price to, to work as hard as it's gonna take and make the sacrifices it's gonna take to be the best you can be at? And if you're not, go find something else that you are willing to do that in because it's too hard to, to fake it and, and--okay? Your career's a long thing. It's, it's--you know, if you're lucky, it's maybe just twenty years. For most people, it's thirty-five, forty years. That's--it can be a prison sentence if you're not doing what you're passionate about, so that's the first thing I tell 'em. The second thing I say is, okay, when you found that, then you really have to make a commitment. You have to become what I call a student of the game. You gotta really study all the people who do it. You gotta continuously learn, try to improve. It's about continuous improvement, continuously learning, trying to, to get better and better at what you do. You gotta benchmark yourself against the best to do it and then be as good as them, and then when you're as good as them, get better. And, and, and, you know, you're gonna need a network to help you, so work on your network. Make that a part of what you do every, every month, every year, you know, because you're gonna need people to help you. You can't do it alone. Story_ID: 261653 Speaker 1: You are still pretty young. I mean-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: I mean you're gonna be fifty, right? Speaker 2: I'll be fifty in December. Speaker 1: In December. I mean, that's-- Speaker 2: Thank you, but I feel--it's about the miles. I got a lot of miles. Speaker 1: Okay, it's the miles. Okay. All right, we'll talk about that. But the reason I say that because our oldest inter- you know, HistoryMaker is 104. Speaker 2: Wow. Speaker 1: And our average age-- Speaker 2: Compared to him I'm very young. Speaker 1: --is in seventy. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So, so I'm wondering what, what has Art Harper [HistoryMaker Arthur H. Harper] not done yet that he would still like to do? Speaker 2: I think Art Harper would like to do more in the communities, make a bigger impact externally. It's all about the, the giving back part. It's, it's--look, I--I've, I've lived almost every dream I've had for me and I--I'm, I'm, I'm so grateful for that, but I think that's not the legacy I want. The legacy I want is to, to give back more than I took and try to repay some of my debt to all the people before me, so I, I said earlier, I'm still growing, I'm still evolving. I'm still trying to figure some of that out. I do a number of things in the community now, my wife [Linda Harper] does a number of things, but I'm still looking for what--where can I make an even bigger impact? It--it's gonna be in that area. It's not gonna be around what next big job did I get or how much money. It's gonna be what, what can I do? Story_ID: 261654 Speaker 1: You say your father's [Joseph Harper]--he's alive. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: What--when he looks, what does he say about you-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: --and your career, I mean your growth. And your mother [Eleanor Graham Harper] passed away-- Speaker 2: Yeah, my mother--my mother-- Speaker 1: Never--she didn't-- Speaker 2: It's one of the few regrets I have in life. She didn't--you know, it, it was--that was, you know, a long time ago. She never got to see me do this. So my father, look, he--he's, he's, he's very proud, but what I like is he still challenges me. You know, he still wants to make sure, two things. Are you happy? He's always challenging me. He tells me now at eighty-seven, he said if you're lucky enough to reach this age, he said you'll look back on your life and it is nothing you ever did that you'll regret. It's the things you didn't do that you'll regret, so make sure you do those things, so I--that sticks with me. And the other is just, are you happy? You know, be happy because it goes quickly. So, yeah, I--I'm, I'm trying to--you know, he's still challenging me. I'm still trying to listen now. He was--he's a lot smarter now, you know, than he was when I was sixteen. Speaker 1: Did he--did he change and grow? I mean, did he-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Have they still remained the, you know-- Speaker 2: My father--my father is, is--has changed and grown. He's, he's, he's still a Muslim. That's his--that's his religious choice, but he's very different now. He is--he then was--it was all about, you know, self-determination for black people alone. Today, he's very much--you'd, you'd--if you met him, you'd think he's sort of middle, middle stream America. He's very much inclusive, you know. It's gotta be different. It's--so, yeah, he has evolved too. He's grown a lot. We're much closer at this point in our lives than probably we've ever been. Speaker 1: Okay. And your mother would say you did good I bet. Speaker 2: She would-- Speaker 1: I would think--I've-- Speaker 2: I, I would hope she would say that. Speaker 1: I would say-- Speaker 2: I would hope she would say that. Story_ID: 261655 Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be? Speaker 2: I, I would like my legacy to be, one, that, that said I tried to be the best at what I could do, but at the end of my life, I'd like people to really remember that I gave back more than I took. I, I, I really would like to be known not so much for, for what I accomplished as a--you know, in, in, in my career, but for what I did with that, all of that. What did I do? What did I give back? Did I make any, any part of the world better? Did I give back specifically to African Americans? Did I try to make it better for other African Americans coming after me so it will be easier? That's what I, I--I'd really like people to focus on that. Hopefully, they have a while for that, though. Story_ID: 261656 Speaker 1: This is a picture of myself with my beautiful wife of twenty-three years, Linda Harper, and this was taken in New York City [New York, New York] at a holiday party in 2004. It was taken at the Rainbow Room and this was a shot that they were doing of each couple coming in. I have to tell you that I couldn't have done any of what I accomplished without my wife. She was one of two women that I've ever known who've always believed in me. The first was my mother [Eleanor Graham Harper] and the second one is Linda. And I like to say I've only made one perfect decision in my life and that was marrying her. So, this was us at the holiday party...