 Story_ID: 643057 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matth- is, I'm sorry, Scott Stearns. Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My name is Clarence Linwood Irving; that's C-L-A-R-E-N-C-E, and middle name is Linwood, L-I-N-W-O-O-D, as I understand it. The I is--for whatever reason my family decided to put it in; usually they use a E, but mine happened to be L-I-N, Linwood; Irving, I-R-V-I-N-G, Sr. [HistoryMaker Clarence Irving, Sr.]. Speaker 1: Okay. And sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Eight, twenty-one, nineteen twenty-four [August 21, 1924]. My place of birth is Prince George County, Virginia. Speaker 1: Okay. And sir, what is your occupation--or former occupation and title? Speaker 2: My former occupation was--I was a safety monitor. My--prior to that I, I was a trained machinist going back to 1944. I graduated from the Navy Yard Apprentice School at nineteen because of the fact that the movement is so slow in that profession. In 1957 or '58 [1958], I think it was, I went to electrical school, so I learned--I was taught basic electricity and industrial electricity; that's how I was qualified for a position of safety monitor. Speaker 1: Okay, and that's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was Con Edison [Consolidated Edison, Inc.]. Speaker 1: Con Edison. Speaker 2: Now, I worked for the Navy Yard [Washington Navy Yard, Washington, D.C.] from--actually, I worked for the government from 1942--June of 1942 until 1952, and what kind of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I'm, I'm gonna ask you about your career later. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: I just wanna know where you retired. I was trying to get a sense of-- Speaker 2: Well, I retired--I retired from Con Edison. I retired from Con Edison. Speaker 1: Yes. But further, you've had a, a career as a, as a community volunteer, a historian and, and a preserver of history, and that sort of thing. I just wanna make that clear, too. And, and then--true? That's right. Speaker 2: Yes, that was all--I, I never consider it a, a--an occupation or a vocation because it was all volunteer. Speaker 1: Well, sir, that's why we're interviewing you-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --it's because of that volunteer life. Speaker 2: Yes, right (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Story_ID: 643058 Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions that we always ask as kind of a warm up-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and they only require a short, a short answer. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: Oh, in fact there are seven this time, because I didn't ask you what date it was. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: What is today's date? Speaker 2: What is today's date? Speaker 1: Yes, sir. Speaker 2: Today's date is the 11th? Speaker 1: I think it's the-- Speaker 2: It's the 12th? I'm sorry (laughter). I don't do too good a job of keeping the dates straight anymore (laughter). Speaker 1: July 12th (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's July 12th, 19--2013. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Twenty thirteen [2013], yes. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We are in Middle Island, New York--two words, Middle Island, New York-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --in my private home. Speaker 1: All right--about forty miles from New York City [New York, New York], I guess; that's all right. Speaker 2: From New York City more--give or take, all right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Now, these are the five lightweight questions we ask as kind of a warm up, which we--we don't need a warm up, but we're gonna ask 'em anyway. Now, sir, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue, yes. Speaker 1: A favorite food? Speaker 2: Favorite food. You wouldn't believe this, but my favorite food is beets. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Location, or time a year? What are we talk- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, location. Speaker 2: Not really, except to say that I love all of the United States, and I haven't had the time, and I won't have the time because I've always wanted to travel to the mountainous areas of the West, and I've never had the time to be able to take off and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, so, do you think that that would be your favorite if you had a chance to, to go? Speaker 2: Well, I have seen some of it; yes, it would, it would--it very definitely would because it's, it's so interesting. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Favorite time of the year. I think--well, I guess it would be spring and summer, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Off the top of my--off the top of my head I, I can't--if you'll ask me that in a couple a minutes it'll probably come to me, or I'll get the--because I don't know if this would fit, but I've always--and this is something I got from my parents [Elizabeth Claiborne Irving and Paul Irving]. I've always wanted to leave something on this earth the way something was left for me, so that no matter who comes along at some point, they'll be able to say that Clarence Irving [HistoryMaker Clarence Irving, Sr.] did that--the same as they would--might say Thomas Edison did. Story_ID: 643059 Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your family history. Speaker 2: Of course. Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: --but we're gonna ask about 'em separately so we don't get 'em mixed up, and then we'll put them together. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: So, can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My mother's full name is Elizabeth Clair; she was known as Liza. Books have named her because everything in the country is usually shortened; like Liza Jane was really Elizabeth Jane. Now her name was Elizabeth Clair, her maiden name was Claiborne, C-L-A-I-B-O-R-N-E [Elizabeth Claiborne Irving], and she married my father, who was an Irving [Paul Irving]. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is your mother's date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: I don't know if I can--I, I, I, I can--I can get it for you 'cause I do have it and the exact date, but her place of birth, her place of birth was Prince George [Prince George County], Hopewell [Virginia] area. Speaker 1: Okay. And what do you--would you suspect she was born around the turn of the century--1900 or so? Speaker 2: She--no, she was born around 1879 or '74 [1874]. Speaker 1: Okay, so she had you late in life, when she was in her forties? Speaker 2: Yeah. I was--as a matter of fact, not to be too talkative, I was--it's a family joke--I was a substitute because I had a brother who was a stillborn, and he died, and after that she--I have exactly three sisters [Lillian Irving Williams, Fannye Irving Gibbs and Pearl Irving Pryor] and two brothers [Paul Irving, Jr. and Benjamin Irving], and by my being born after my brother died, that leveled the family off again (laughter), that's why I'm known as a substitute. Story_ID: 643060 Speaker 1: What can you tell us about your ancestors on your mother's [Elizabeth Claiborne Irving] side? How far back can you trace them? And, and you had a good story for us, I know, at one point, but I don't know if you can go back any further. But how far back can you trace them, and what were they doing? Speaker 2: Well, I, I--my mother's side is a very interesting story. As a matter of fact, it may be too--too long to tell, because my relatives of my family--my mother's great-great-great-great-grandfather was an African who married a Powhatan Indian [Native American]. It is--it's been told that my (unclear) to some degree to substantiate it as much as you could, that my family--my great-grandfa- there was twenty--I think the Dutch brought twenty Africans over, and one of them was a, a young boy among the group, and that young boy in the group was my great-grandfather. Now, nobody has ever been able to--there's not a lot of authenticity to it, but nobody has ever been able to contradict it, so it's been accepted as that's a claim. Speaker 1: So this is a--yeah, this is the ship, the White Lion, that came over (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think it was, yeah. Speaker 1: The name of it--yeah, the name of it--I, I learned that a couple of years ago, the White Lion, and--to Jamestown [Virginia]. Speaker 2: Yes, right. Speaker 1: Yeah. And so--you know, President Obama's [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] descended from that same group of Africans that came over--on his mother's side--on his white mother's [Ann Dunham] side (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I--yes, yes, yes. Speaker 1: --which is very strange. Speaker 2: Right, yes. Speaker 1: But--okay, so--and you told a story about how this African boy got involved with a surveyor Claiborne [William Claiborne], right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Tell that story for us. Speaker 2: Well, actually, the Queen of England had commissioned Claiborne--the original Claiborne--there's still quite a few of them in Virginia; there's--as a matter of fact, they have a society, but the, the story goes that he wasn't successful because--in his survey because, as you know, there were a lot of Indians who didn't particularly like the potential new settlers, and they got lost, and they would find 'em the next morning floating upside down, and all kind of little things were happening. So then they said, "Well, why don't we get some white people? They would understand, and we could make it." Well, their fate got to be a little worse. Now he was at wit's end--he says, "What am I gonna do? I, I, I just can't get anywhere." And this--they take him to a dismal swamp and they leave him and whatever stuff. So anyway, the guy says, "Why don't you try that little boy that's in the group?" So the guy said, "Well, what is he gonna do?" So then the guy said, "Well, he's jungle smart; he know--he, he, he came outta the jungle." He was about eighteen or nineteen or whatever he was at the time. This was my, my relative. So he took him out, and they were very, very successful. After about--somewhere between five and seven years of working together and getting all the work done, this kid--I never really bought it this way; I think it was the other way around, but it is told is that, that this kid asked him, "Can I have your name?" And so he said, "What do you want my name for?" So, that was a way of looking up and also being subservient, so he says, "Yeah, you could have it." And that's how he became a, a Claiborne. He would have been Ooga Mooga [ph.], or whatever African name that they had penned on him. Story_ID: 643061 Speaker 1: Now, he married a Powhatan, and that's how my mother's family--that's where they came from. And you asked me what did I know about them; I know--I have photographs of 'em, I know--I, I have spoken with them on the phone a lot, but I just never had time. There were a couple a times I was supposed to go there, a couple other times that I went there. One time I went there, the roads were so bad until we decided not to go there and we went somewhere else and spent the night, and then we continued our trip. And then there was another time (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) These, these are the Claibornes in the-- Speaker 1: These, were the--these are the Claibornes of Virginia. I'm say--what I'm telling you is that I never--there was some of them that I knew, but most of them, physically, I never met them; there was always--it seems like always something came up. I have photograph of my--my sister was there, near about five years ago with her daughter, and they made pictures. I know these people, I've spoken with them, but I wasn't there; I never made it, depending on whatever happened. Something caused us not to be able to be at our destination which was their homes; so that's why I, I never was with them actually (simultaneous). Story_ID: 643062 Speaker 1: So, are there any other stories? I mean did your mother [Elizabeth Claiborne Irving] grow up there--in that part of the (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. What happened was my, my mother, at the age of fourteen--there was a, a group of people from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] who used to make it a habit of taking the little black girls and hiring them, and they--normally they would stay with them, sometimes five to six years, and they would work in a boarding school, and this way they learned to cook, they learned to sew--the whole nine yards. And these were rich kids, and they got to do a lot of things that they normally would not have done had it not been for these rich kids. For an instance, let's say this rich white girl went out and she had a stain on her dress. She would give the black girl a quarter to clean that dress so that, that the matron wouldn't see, and wouldn't--, "And where did you, where did you get that grass stain?" Because a grass stain is (pronunciation) indicative or indicative of other things. And in the meantime, there was a lot of--what's the word--camarad- [camaraderie]? Friendship--it was a lot of, a lot of friendship, and these girls were taught--for an instance, my--that's where my mother learned to play; she didn't play the organs that we see today, she played the old ones that you pumped up, and the peddle type organs, but she did learn to play. And my mother could read music, as a matter of fact, but it was taught to her by the--these girls from Philadelphia. Speaker 1: Do you know what school it was? Speaker 2: Nah, because there were several schools. Marian Anderson's family had relatives who did the same thing. See, Marian Anderson's family came from another part of Virginia--and for that matter, Adam Clayton Powell [Adam Clayton Powell, Sr.] also. But I, I was--remember now, I was on the tail end; the stories that I tell you are stories that were told that I had heard older people tell. Those people--I used to have to sit and listen to my father [Paul Irving] or my uncle. My father couldn't read or write; my mother taught him how to read and write, and--but he would make you read the newspaper to him and then you would hear the conversations that went on. So that, that, that's what I'm telling you, and not something that I actually witnessed, but. Story_ID: 643063 Speaker 1: Now did your mother [Elizabeth Claiborne Irving] have a chance to finish school or, or to go to school herself? Speaker 2: Well, my mother didn't--now remember, in that time, African American people, a lot of them were educated without getting a formal education. Now, if you--what I'm trying to say is there was the case of Duke Ellington. Duke Ellington never went to a conservatory, but he learned it from two guys. Two gentlemen, I guess I should say, taught him more than he would have learned in the conservatory because they cared that much for him and they gave him a--the bell never rang--the bell never--three o'clock bell never rang. In other words, if they were working on a song, they might have a sandwich, or eat some dinner--soup, or whatever, and say, and say, "Hey, let's go--let's, let's give that song another shot." So, that was--one of the advantages--I, I hope I'm not being too talkative, but one of the, one of the advantages of--my brother [Paul Irving] went to Virginia State College [sic. Virginia Normal and Industrial Institute; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia], and one of the advantages of going to these smaller schools was the fact that you developed a, a friendship with your professors that developed into the kind of a relationship that you, you felt like was a part a you--it was just--was, was your, your, your, your school, or whatever you did--the things that was done with, with pride. W.C. Handy came out of a small school like that, and Wilberforce [Wilberforce University, Wilberforce, Ohio]--if you--not to take you too far, and I hope I'm not saying too much--but those, those people who learned, and the reason that they learned is they knew how difficult it was for them to get in, and they would just grab you, and if you didn't straighten up--the same thing with--what's his name? Woodson-- Speaker 1: Carter G. Woodson? Speaker 2: Carter G. Woodson. He, he knew us as little kids, and you would go down there and you would say--and he would say to you, "Did you do your--did you do your homework?" And you'd say, "Yes, sir." And he said--he would say, "Well, let me see it." He wouldn't always do it, but he did it enough for--to keep you on your toes; you wouldn't dare lie to him 'cause you were afraid (laughter) that me may say, "Well, okay." And--'cause he would do it, though. I've seen him times he'd say, "Well, I want you to--." I'm just gone throw something very elementary out. "I want you to learn your three times tables." That's the way we learned 'em in those days. And he says, "Do you know your tables?" And you would say, "Yes, sir." He'd say, "Okay, good, well, say 'em." And he might let you slide, but the point was he always had you in the position where you were afraid not to do your work because--I don't know what he would do to you, but he, he would--it was that respect; I won't call it fear. Speaker 1: Okay. I, I understand. Story_ID: 643064 Speaker 1: Back to your mother [Elizabeth Claiborne Irving] now. So she never really was able to--she, she worked at a school? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: She worked at a school [in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --doing chores for the girls that were going to school--the rich girls that were going to school-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and in that way, she learned-- Speaker 2: Yes, to read and write. Speaker 1: Right, okay, all right. Now, this would have been back in the--it's in 1880s-- Speaker 2: Yes, yes, that's exactly. Speaker 1: --and the '90s [1890s]. Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: And so, so she--now--so did your mother go back to Virginia, or did she-- Speaker 2: Yeah, well, my mother met my father [Paul Irving] at (laughter)--my mother met my father at a, a revival meeting. Do you know what a revival is? Speaker 1: Yeah--in Virginia, or-- Speaker 2: In Virginia, yeah. It was--as a matter of fact, it was Hopewell, it was Hopewell, yeah, Virginia--Hopewell, Virginia it happened. Story_ID: 643065 Speaker 1: Well we'll get back to that story another time. Then we'll--we'll finish with the Hopewell [Virginia] revival; that's where your parents met, right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, right. What happened, it was, it was at--it was an old custom that--my father [Paul Irving] was working in the shipyard--the, the navy yard [Newport News Shipbuilding and Dry Dock Company] in Newport News, Virginia, and how he got up to Hopewell I'll never know, but anyway, he went to Hopewell and that's where he met my mother [Elizabeth Claiborne Irving], and then after he met her (laughter), he couldn't correspond with her because he couldn't read or write--she could write and read. So, he was living with my cousin, Fannie Belcher [ph.], and Cousin Fannie said, "Well, you--if you, if you wanna communicate with her, you're gonna have to learn how to read and write." So he [sic.] taught her how--or taught him how to read and write, and that was the way he was--and I think that the romance went on, I think, maybe six years because what they--they were unusual people in that if they wanted something, they were patient enough to save up to get it, and I think my father learned a--you see, it was--he saw a lot of sailors and a lot of people and a lot of things, so he was around a certain intellectually or intellects--intellects, and he--what's the word I'm looking for? Speaker 1: Well, kind of a-- Speaker 2: And then, and then--yeah. Speaker 1: --I think (unclear) looking for is a--like a more cosmopolitan kind of scene. He saw more-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --more of the world because of these sailors coming in from other places-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and--is that what you're-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And my mother, by being with these young girls [in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], they were doing a lot of things that they had no business doing, and they would tell each other, and you keep your mouth shut and you learn a lot, you know? Now what you would do is they, they (unclear) and saying, "You know, I just bought a car last week." "How did you get a car?" They say, "Well, I don't keep it here; my aunt's got it down the road, but that's my car." Well, you just let her tell all the stories she want. If you run in there and said, "You got a car," you blow your whole game because then you would bring the attention to them listening to you. They don't realize that you're listening to what they saying or what they're doing. I, I think--and I'll be very brief with this--when I mentioned to you about Virginia State [Virginia Normal and Industrial Institute; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia] and the Virginia Union [Virginia Union University, Richmond, Virginia], and places like that, those places were donated to by very, very generous people of our, of our community. I was in a program a few years ago; unfortunately, the gentleman died. We were in a speaking engagement down in Virginia, and he was the music professor at Virginia Union and we, for whatever reason, got hooked up together and we had a lot of conversation, and he verified a lot of things that I had heard but I didn't know, but he had actually lived 'em 'cause he was a very old man then, you know, and I tried to keep up with him. I went to see him. He was, was hobbling with a cane, and the next time I went to see him he didn't know who I was-- Story_ID: 643066 Speaker 1: And I had the same experience with Quarles--Professor Quar- Dr. Quarles (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Benjamin Quarles [Benjamin A. Quarles]. Speaker 1: Benjamin Quarles. I saw him--the last time I saw him was in Baltimore [Maryland]. I was speaking--that was the time I did the speech about the women (laughter) and I, I was just--I wasn't kidding, but I had no idea that I would get to see him, and I told this young lady--she said--she knew him, so she says, "I told him about you and he says bring you over." And when I went over to see him, he was--I think it was in July and he had a blanket over him; well, right after that I don't know--maybe less than a year after that, he passed--he passed on. Speaker 2: But the, but the, the first person you were talking about, he told you something about the school system--I mean the schools down there (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But--and--now, now, what he told, what he told me, what he told me, which is so irrelevant--he, he's always--I always kept it in my mind that he'd said--you know, maybe I shouldn't even be getting in this if (unclear), and you take it out. But anyway, he was upset over the fact that we are very selfish; we don't help each other and we didn't get that--where we are because of our selfishness. We got where we are was because if you needed a pound of sugar, he would see to it that you had the pound a sugar. I had the stove, so now we can make a cake, but if he doesn't get--he--if, if, if, if, if, if you've got the flour, he's got the sugar. But he's saying, "If they want some sugar, let 'em buy it." We're not gonna have a cake. And that's, that's a lot, and he, he was always trying to drum that in my head every time I had a conversation. All--the, the two of these, actually--Carter G. Woodson also--was the fact that if we wanna--devel- develop our ideas and get the things done that we--we're gonna have to be much more considerate of each other. Story_ID: 643067 Speaker 1: I know you were saying that when your--your parents waited six years before they got married; they were communicating via letter--writing letters to each other (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes. Speaker 1: And they had enough patience to wait until the time was right? Speaker 2: Yes. You see, that was a--I, I left a part of it off. The fact of the matter was this. My father [Paul Irving]--I don't know--I'll tell you about this later, but I don't know if my father would have tolerated it or not, but I know that my father--my sister--there was a guy who came down--a producer came down for (unclear); they were doing a play [sic.], 'Flying Down to Rio,' and he wanted her to join the, the--he wanted her to be a dancer. Speaker 1: And this is your, your, your (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My oldest sister, Lil [Lillian Irving Williams]. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: And my father said, "No." So, she a young girl, and she got upset, so she flew off and married this guy, and when she married this guy--they're still in the family Bible; it's no secret. She married this guy and, and my father told 'em, "What do you think you're doing?" He says, "You can't pay for a bed, you can't even pay for a pillow case, and you gone marry my daughter? You got absolutely nothing to offer her or yourself." He said, "No." And he used to always say--he used this on us, "I'm going to give you the same thing my father [Lymbrick Irving] gave me." And I said, "But I thought you told me that your father died when--?" That I never knew--no, that's what--I said, because I never knew my grandfather. I said, "I thought you told me I didn't know my grandfather?" He said, "That's it, yes. That's exactly what you're gonna get; you're gonna pretend you don't know me either. You see I got my bed, I got my house; you gone do the same thing." And there was a point that he was trying to--was, was, was, was, was driving home, and he was always that way, and--but if, if you had a tree, he would loan you a axe or give you a axe to cut it, but you better have a tree. Do you follow where I'm going? Speaker 1: Sort of, yeah. Speaker 2: And this is--and, and see this is, this is our thing today. Far too many of us want too much, or want somebody to give us something; see, that was the thing that Quarles--Dr. Quarles [Benjamin A. Quarles] told me the same thing, 'cause he had heard the speech that I made, and he said--you know, he had his sources, and they had told him, and he said, "That, that's a brilliant speech; don't ever give it up because we need to realize the fact that we have gone through more than anybody," and--because, as you know, we had. Our people bought that land 'cause they didn't know what to do with them--with the Africans, so they says, "All right, we'll let you go for seven years. So, for seven years--and they work the land so, let's give it to them." And then they were given a tag, and they worked on the road, and the guys come and cut the tags off their neck and say, "Get back there and then dig--and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and cut some more tobacco," you see? So, what's worse--nobody has ever suffered more than we do. And people will say, "Why you guys so lazy? You don't do this or you don't do that." But very few of us will tell people "None of you--you never had to pay--. How would you like to pay twice for that pair a glasses?" "You don't know what these people have gone through, or what they have had to deal with. Think about it before you start up calling 'em lazy." Say, same think like with Turner--everybody think Turner went nuts. Turner didn't go nuts; what happened was the man was a-- Speaker 1: Nat Turner, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, Nat Turner. Nat Turner was a minister, and a bunch of ministers lied to him, and that's--he just couldn't just--certain things that certain people just can't take, and he had his day. Story_ID: 643068 Speaker 1: We don't want to get too far afield (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, right. Okay, sure. Speaker 1: --but let me go back. Now, you're a junior, so your father has the exact same name as you, right? Clarence-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: No? Speaker 2: I, I thought I said senior. Speaker 1: You're a senior, that's right; I'm sorry, I'm sorry (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, my--my son had--yeah, sure. Speaker 1: --your, your son's a junior [Clarence Irving, Jr.]. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So, what's your father's name full name? Can you spell it for us? Speaker 2: Paul-- Speaker 1: Paul. Speaker 2: --Rufus, R-U-F-U-S-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Paul Rufus Irving [Paul Irving]. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: I, I, I--if you remind me, I'll give it to you. I have it; it's in the (unclear). Speaker 1: Is he older than your mother [Elizabeth Claiborne Irving]? Speaker 2: Oh, sure. I'm (unclear); he was, I think, two, three years older. We'll get the book (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, it has to be like circa 1870s? We're not gonna stop now, but I just thought mid-1870s. Speaker 2: Yeah, right--no, but before you go, you remind me, just say, "You, you promised me some numbers, and they're in the car," or something, and I'll get 'em. Speaker 1: Okay, yeah. Sure. And he was born--was he, was he born--where? Speaker 2: I have to be honest with you. We don't know, and we have tried, and I'm looking--I had--one genealogist is looking this up for me. We don't know where he--we don't know where the (unclear) that--he, he was--we know--we're trying to find out where that Irving strain came from. We--some of us thought that that was a, a theatrical group. And then there's another strain of Irvings, but they don't match up-- Speaker 1: Um-hm, okay. Speaker 2: --so, we, we don't know where, where, where they came from. Speaker 1: Was he raised in Virginia? Speaker 2: As far as we know, he was raised in Virginia, and he, he, he--but see, what hap- as I told you, he just all of a sudden showed up at this revival meeting [in Hopewell, Virginia], and he had been working in the, the shipyard [Newport News Shipbuilding and Dry Dock Company]. Speaker 1: Is this in Newport News [Virginia]? Speaker 2: In Newport News. That was through the Spanish American War, but we knew very little about him otherwise. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We knew his brothers-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --but we never- never saw his parents [Margaret Irving and Lymbrick Irving]. Speaker 1: Okay. So, so I take it that your father, since he didn't know how to read, he didn't go to school himself. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No. He went to school two days; that's the story he used to tell. Speaker 1: But he learned how to read and write from your aunt? Speaker 2: He learned how to read and write from my aunt and from my mother, yes. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Story_ID: 643069 Speaker 1: So, did your dad [Paul Irving] like work the balance of his life on the, on the-- Speaker 2: No-- Speaker 1: --naval yard [Newport News Shipbuilding and Dry Dock Company]? Speaker 2: --he, he--no. He bought a piece a land I have the deed to--piece said 1922, but--he was a farmer, he was a farmer. He used to--he hated--he, he hated tobacco because he hated tobacco. Those bites were like--it was something that he couldn't stand. But he, he raised a lot of corn, he raised a lot of string beans, and wheat; there's a, a couple of other things. That--see, there were times of the year that you could go down there and would see--the fields was just absolutely clean--nothing. And you know another time, you go through there and, and as they say, "The corn was high as the elephant's eye," you know--you couldn't see. It was, it was so beautiful. But that--that's how--and aside from that, he also had--he owned his own threshing machine. A threshing machine is a machine that you use to thresh the, the wheat from the, the stalk, and also the same thing with corn, so it saved a lot of manpower. Story_ID: 643070 Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask you more about growing up, but when you think about your parents' personalities, their dispositions, their sense of humor, how they walk, how they talk, what they look like, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: Well, my father [Paul Irving] died and I was nine years old. Well, you see, he was a, he was a great believer and so was my mother [Elizabeth Claiborne Irving]. We never, we never heard them argue about anything in our presence. Now, I'm not saying they didn't do it, but they didn't do it in our presence, and not only that, and if I want to say, "Ma, I would like to have a piano," or, or I would say, "Ma, I got the money for a piano," and she'd say, "Well, did you talk to your father about it?" And I would say, "No, I didn't." "Well, why didn't you talk to him about it? Why do you come to me? You go and talk to him, and tell him exactly what you told me, and then we'll make a decision as to whether or not you should have the piano." Now--see, but they were like this--they hated music. She loved to play church music, but they couldn't stand what is known in those times as ragtime, and stuff that was, you know, completely prohibited in our house. But if my mother didn't agree with something, I never knew that my father--all I knew that was what, what does (unclear). She says, "I talked to your father about this, and you're not gonna do it." That was it--case closed (laughter). And, and that, that's how, that's how I grew up. And he, he was a powerful man. I don't--I, I wish I could have been the man that he was because he, he taught us, he taught us to help each other. See, when my father died, that left my brother [Paul Irving] as the senior male in the family, and my brother had graduated Virginia State [Virginia Normal and Industrial Institute; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia], and he was a schoolteacher and-- Story_ID: 643071 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Let me kind of just do this, just for clarity. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: Can you name your brothers and sisters for us, and like-- Speaker 2: Oh, sure. Speaker 1: --their order of birth and, and, you know, what their occupations are. Speaker 2: Ah, that's nice. I know brother's name was Paul Ralph--not Rufus, but Paul Ralph [Paul Irving], and my sister's name was Lillian Espie [Lillian Irving Williams], E-S-P-I-E, and she'd kill you if I told--she knew I was telling you this 'cause she hated that name. You know why they did it? She was named after her horse. Speaker 1: Her horse? Speaker 2: She--yeah (laughter). Yeah, my brother--when, when she was going to school, my brother wouldn't let him ride--wouldn't let her ride in his car to go to school, but she could have her horse and buggy. So my father [Paul Irving] got sick of them battling back and forth, so he bought her a horse and this--let's see, my mother [Elizabeth Claiborne Irving] had a horse and a buggy, but my sister drove her horse faster than, than my (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So did she actually ride the horse--your sister? Speaker 2: Not--she didn't ride it that way then; she could ride side saddle, but that was--no, they had a buggy. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: They had a buggy. Speaker 1: She had a one horse buggy (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, right--(unclear) buggy, yeah. Speaker 1: And your mother had one, and your brother had a car. Speaker 2: And brother had a--my--the family had a car-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and, and my brother used to--being the man, he used to have the car all the time, and when he graduated in 1929, my father gave him a 1929 Town Sedan Ford [Ford Model A Town Sedan], right on the campus of Virginia State [Virginia Normal and Industrial Institute; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia]. And see, I didn't (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you were raised close to Petersburg [Virginia] then, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, well, it's all right there near the--near each other, sure. Speaker 1: Okay, the county--Prince George County [Virginia], okay. Speaker 2: As a matter of fact, that's what I was telling you, that the farmers around there they gave the potatoes, the string beans, the this, the that--they gave to the college, they gave to the schools; that's how they fed the--the, the kids were fed because you have string beans--you may have a little speckle on it or something, and all you had to do was cut it out; there's nothing wrong with the string bean but you couldn't sell it, you know, unless you sell it as what they used to call (unclear). But my father had--you know what he called a truck farm? You know what a truck farm is? Speaker 1: (Inaudible response). Speaker 2: A truck farm is every Saturday--yes, every Friday morn- or Saturday morning he would go to the city with a ham, watermelons--whatever, whatever was out at that time--the sausage--'cause we had a smokehouse, and whatever my brother had left over, he would drop it off at Virginia State before he would come home. Story_ID: 643072 Speaker 1: Oh, that's great, that's great. So, so, your oldest brother is Paul Ralph Irving [Paul Irving]-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and he went to Virginia State [Virginia Normal and Industrial Institute; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia]. Speaker 2: He went to Virginia State. Speaker 1: And then your next sister was Lillian Espie [Lillian Irving Williams]-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and her horse was named Espie [ph.]? Speaker 2: That, that, that--yes, that's how she got the name. Don't ask me where Espie came from; I have never--have no idea. Speaker 1: Okay. And then--now, there's another--okay (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, Fannye [Fannye Irving Gibbs]. Speaker 1: Fannye? Speaker 2: See, Fannye was, was going to Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton Virginia]. Fannye went to Hampton because my brother--my, my father [Paul Irving] was so fond of--what, what did I say her name was? Fannie Belcher [ph.]--Cousin Fannie Belcher, and, and, and she was an old maid sort of person; she really wasn't an old maid, she was just not a married lady. She owned her own beauty parlor, and she taught Fannye how to do hair, and Fannye lived with her 'til my father died in '33 [1933], and that was the last year that Fannye went to Hampton, and she finally got her diploma in 1977, or '76 [1976], from New Mexico (laughter), yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, who comes, who comes next after Fannye? Speaker 2: After Fannye, we--I--my brother Benjamin [Benjamin Irving]. He, he was a--very artistic, great singer, and he played the trumpet. But he caught pneumonia, and that was before penicillin, and he died. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He died in his early thirties. Speaker 1: Who comes after Benjamin? Speaker 2: Wait a minute. Did I say Fannye? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I said Fannye. Speaker 1: You said Ralph, Lillian, Fannye, Benjamin (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, now you got Pearl [Pearl Irving Pryor]. Speaker 1: Pearl, okay. And what did Pearl do? Speaker 2: Pearl worked for the--she, she worked for the Bureau of Engraving [U.S. Bureau of Engraving and Printing] in Washington, D.C. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That was during the time when they used to hand inspect the money; they inspected the money by hand. As a matter of fact, they used to accept and reject the money, and one guy was--he had stole so much money, and he put it away, and the idiot, he had--he had gotten away with it and nobody never even knew--never paid any attention because they would say, "Clarence [ph.], take this to Bethesda [Maryland]." Well, you know Clarence was taking it to Bethesda. So they never bothered, and then one day the guy in Bethesda happened to be talking to the--his boss in Washington, and he--and some kind of way it come up, and he says, "We don't have a record of--did he bring that money?" And then they traced back and found that he did--had been doing this for a long time, but never would of caught him if he would of just not been so greedy. Speaker 1: Okay. So Pearl worked for the Bureau of Engraving-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and, and you're the last one, right? Speaker 2: I'm the last one. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Story_ID: 643073 Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: Earlier childhood-- Speaker 1: Yeah, earliest--very first thing you remember. Speaker 2: The very first thing I remember? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: The very first thing that I remember was when I was in the country, my father [Paul Irving] had a, a neighbor across the street who was white, and he had a little son. I don't know if the kids--he--this boy stayed with him, and I know that whenever we would go the store and get what they call a bottle a pop--you didn't call it soda at that time--got a bottle a pop. Because of the fact that we--because of southern customs, you couldn't drink the soda in the store. He would always walk out with his grandson, and I always--and I also know--I didn't realize at the time, but he would always come over to the house--not always; he didn't do it every day--maybe two times a week, three times a week, and he would--and, and he used to call my mother, Sister Liza [Elizabeth Claiborne Irving]. And he'd sit down and he, he and the boy would sit there and eat. And I said to myself--I go figure it out because my sister used to carry eggs to the store, and I was told to never walk beside her, always walk behind her, and this way, if anything happens to her, your job is to run as fast as you can to your, your--back home, and tell somebody. Well, see, it was like a straight road--maybe three miles, and it was--my job was to tell 'em if anything had happened to Pearl [Pearl Irving Pryor]. Pearl was my sister; well, thank god nothing ever happened to her. But that--that's, that's the way that went. Story_ID: 643074 Speaker 1: Let me ask you about--now you--well, you all were on a farm--you were raised on a farm then, right? Right outside of Petersburg [Virginia], or near Petersburg? Speaker 2: No, only nine years of my life. Speaker 1: Okay--well, nine years--first nine years. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So, we'll talk about that part first. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So, where did you start school in those nine years? Speaker 2: I started school in Prince George's--Prince George County, Virginia. Speaker 1: Okay. What was the name of your school? Speaker 2: Brandon School No. 7 [ph.], I think it was. Speaker 1: Now, who was Brandon? Speaker 2: I don't know who Brandon was; what I do know is that there's a lot of things that's around there that were named after Brandon; now, who, who, who it was I, I don't know. Speaker 1: Did you have a sense if he was black or white? Speaker 2: Oh, he was very--I'm sure he was white, I'm sure he was white. It's just like you got the Armstrong school and those schools-- Speaker 1: But you know, you do have some schools that are named after black people, too, you know, during this period of time, that founded these schools, so-- Speaker 2: Yeah, it, it--you're, you're right. I, I don't really know; you're gonna have to--we'll have to look it up (unclear). Speaker 1: Okay, but it was named after somebody who was famous in that area there. Speaker 2: Apparently, yeah, because--well, they--'cause they all--so, the town seat was--which I understand now it burned down; it was named after Brandon also. Speaker 1: Oh, he's probably white then; I'm sure he was. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's what I said--I thought it was, yeah. Speaker 1: So--and I always ask 'cause sometimes it's a story connected to the person (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --that could be told, so that's why I always ask that question. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: But--So Brandon School No. 7, in Prince George's County, Virginia. And what, what, what size school was it? Speaker 2: It was a one room school. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, did, did all the children your age go to school? Speaker 2: Around my district, yes. See, my, my father [Paul Irving]--my father gave them the land, and he also gave them the lumber--the Royal lumber, to build the--to build the school. Speaker 1: Um, that's something. So, your, your father was a benefactor of the school. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: At some point it should've been named after him (laughter), I think. Speaker 2: Yeah, right. Speaker 1: But that's pretty good--that's, that's great. So, so--now this would be in 1930 or so--started in (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, he-- Speaker 1: Did you start school at age six? Speaker 2: No, it--I started school--yeah, I started school at age six, but I was thinking about my brother; he went to that school also. See, my, my, my father--the teacher, they didn't--that county didn't have money for the teacher, so the teachers used to stay at our house the whole week, and the minister stayed at our house on Sunday; so we, we were pretty well occupied. Story_ID: 643075 Speaker 1: Now, was the-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --minister a circuit rider? Is that what he was? He would, he would come to different churches or-- Speaker 2: No. What happened, what happened was I, I think he was a step above a jackleg preacher. What they mean by that is he would--I think he did something four or five days a week and, and then on the weekend he came up there to, to preach-- Speaker 1: But he came from someplace else. Speaker 2: --and get his self a ham, yeah. And then they would wind up with a ham, a chicken--a big load a stuff. And--but they were treated very, very good, 'cause they would take 'em back home and that, that kind of thing. And they always had enough eggs, and vegetables and stuff to last; they, they bought almost no food. Speaker 1: Okay. So, the preacher--they took care of him very--pretty well? Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, the teach- yeah, and, and, and, and, and when the weather was bad, you had a--we had a problem because my sister and I had to sleep on the floor, and the teacher--or the minister stayed in our room, and the teacher kept her--being a woman, she kept her, her room, and that was the only time I saw my mother [Elizabeth Claiborne Irving] put her foot down was 1932. She--we got this male teacher, and he's from Dinwiddie County [Virginia], and she told my father [Paul Irving], "No." And "No," we mean "No." She says, "I'm not gonna wash his clothes, wash your clothes." And remember now, these boys--see, those days we used to wear the long underwear and, and, like--she had maybe six to eight pair of underwear to wash and ring by hand; there was no such thing as a--and then she, she told my father, "No." She says that, "If you wanna have a male teacher, you better think of somewhere else to put him." So he stayed with my grandmother. Speaker 1: So, were the implications of that that the female teachers would help her? Speaker 2: They were--they wasn't that, that--no, they didn't do nothing--that's the problem. But it's a whole lot easier to iron a blouse than it is to iron a man's shirt. And don't forget, they didn't have (unclear); they, they used those flat irons, and you had to worry about burning 'em and making sure that the heat was always just right, and she was getting older. My father was sick, just like I told you; one day he was like a balloon, the next day he's back to normal, and said, she'd tell him, "No, I'm not--," and that's the first time; I think it was 1933--1933, the teacher--the first time the teacher didn't--must have been '32 [1932] because '33 [1933], I didn't go to school then--thirty-- Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 643076 Speaker 1: Oh, wait a minute. Did I go to school there in '33 [1933]? He died in '33 [1933], so--okay, it must of been '33 [1933], 'cause '34 [1934] I don't think I went to a--I don't think I went to school. I'm not sure. Speaker 2: So-- Speaker 1: But it's close enough for the years (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) so you would have been about eight years old when your father [Paul Irving] passed away? Speaker 1: I--yeah, I was eight, yeah, I was eight. I was nine that, that August 'cause I was born in August and he died in July. Speaker 2: Okay. Well, that--just back to school for a minute, did you like school? Speaker 1: Yeah, but you, you, you, you, you, you didn't have much, much choice, see, because--first of all, most of the conversations around my house were of, of, of--conversations of a certain amount of intellect. For an instance, somebody would show up with a National Geographic; it could've been from 1929, but as far as we were concerned, it was a good piece of material. And we used to have to play games--take a story out of it, and tell your story, but you had to have a story and you told it at the dinner table or after dinner. Like on Sunday afternoon, you had no radio, or whatever, and you wasn't gonna hear no jazz, so what you did was you told old stories. And somebody would tell a story about maybe Lindbergh [Charles Lindbergh] or Steinmetz [Charles Proteus Steinmetz], or somebody like that, and that's how it was. And that in itself was encouraging to a--all of us. Speaker 2: Okay. So a lot of learning took place at home, too. Speaker 1: Yeah--well, a majority of it because my father--my mother [Elizabeth Claiborne Irving] knew enough to knew how important it was, and my father he was interested (laughter) enough to keep you--he, he didn't let you sag; you just--you, you, you--and you had to have something on your mind 'cause that was the one thing he used to question. Not only him, but that was a--I remember--see, I remember--because this is moving ahead. I remember in--when I was living in Washington, D.C., and I did something that a little boy shouldn't do, and I looked up and I looked right in my teacher's eyes (laughter), you know. And you need--and, and they're holier than thou. You don't think of them in that--in that way. And I remember--I--we didn't realize it at the time, and this is not--it shouldn't even be in your story, but there was a teacher there name Miss Huley [ph.]--cute as she could be, and somebody did something; I think that somebody looked under Miss Huley's desk (laughter), and I'm not sure that fellow is straight yet (laughter). And that taught us to respect women, you know, and that's the way it was. Story_ID: 643077 Speaker 1: Anyway, back to the school. Now, who were--do, do you remember--now you're all in one room [at Brandon School No. 7 (ph.)]. About what, about forty students? Speaker 2: No, no, no, no. Speaker 1: How many did you have? Speaker 2: Maybe--not even twenty. Speaker 1: Okay. And one teacher? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. And the teacher came home with you all at night, right? Speaker 2: And she came home with us at night, yeah. Speaker 1: So, you're surrounded by the teacher and-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --did you have a favorite subject in school? Speaker 2: (Laughter) I was always interested in how do they make that, you know--like this thing that I would say, "What do you need it for?" And then you'd say, "Well, we need it." "Well," I'd say, "well, how did that--what is that? What's that black stuff?" And that was my curiosity. That's what led me--see, my parents [Elizabeth Claiborne Irving and Paul Irving] wanted me--my father wanted me to be a--and he'd a lived, he may have gotten away with it. He wanted me to be a lawyer, and I wanted to build things--to make things, and he told me about how difficult it was and how cold it was, and how hot it was, and all the, the mean bosses and all the other stuff. But the more he told me, the more I wanted to be that. And then later on, we--I was called by the navy yard [Newport News Shipbuilding and Dry Dock Company, Newport News, Virginia], and I knew I was home; I knew I was doing something that I wanted to do, and I showed an aptitude, and I didn't realize it at the time, and they put me in this very special group in the yard-- Speaker 1: I don't wanna get you that far--get you to the navy yard [Newport News Shipbuilding and Dry Dock Company, Newport News, Virginia] yet (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure, okay; I'm sorry. Speaker 1: --but we're, we're--just growing up. Speaker 2: All right, all right. Yeah, well, just stop me, just stop me. Speaker 1: All right, okay. That's why I jumped in there. Story_ID: 643078 Speaker 1: Yeah, right (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But--we always ask this question about growing up, you know. When you consider where you lived, and the atmosphere around there, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 1: Well, you see, from 1933 to 1936, I guess you might say, my life was very unsettled, and it was unsettled because we had different things happening in, in, in, in my life and things were evolving so fast around me. Speaker 2: That's after your par- your, your dad [Paul Irving] passed, right? Speaker 1: Yeah--oh, yeah, that's what, that's what caused it. If my father had lived, I would have had a more--a, a more balanced life. See, that was one a the things that I used to--as a little boy, I used to get--excuse me for saying this, but I used to get pretty mad with God. I said, "Why did you do this to me?" They, they all had a father, they had a mother. Why did I just--why don't I? And I look at these kids, they all got mother, they got father. But I had--as I said, my father had taught my brothers and sisters to take care of each other, and my sister [Lillian Irving Williams] now had married another person, Barnes Brown [ph.], wonderful man. They didn't have any children. And I became like his little son--everywhere he went, I went, and he, he took me--and then--and see, that was during the time when--when the war [World War II, WWII] started, there were a lot of things that they had tried to do that they didn't do in peace time. For instance, you had CCC corps, which was a, a Civilian Conservation Corps. Those guys prior to that was just standing on a corner, but when they got the Civilian Corps, they sent 'em out cutting trees, and cleaning the road--cutting down roads and, and various other things. And then they, they--all of them that they didn't use for that, they drafted 'em. So, there was much more intellect because the people had something to talk about, and if a, if a person came to your house, he could really tell you, say, "Where were you?" He say, "Oh, I'm over at Sullivan County [Tennessee]." "What are you doing in Sullivan County?" "We're building a dam up there." Well, see--but prior to that, you, you, you didn't get that kind of conversation, so (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, it wasn't that kind of stimulation down on the farm, it was just kind of static, would you say (unclear)? Speaker 1: Yeah, you're right. Because, you see, you hear me say my father owned three hundred acres of land [in Virginia], and there's another thing that, that happened that they don't--that they don't talk about too much. What they did--when they had the Depression [Great Depression], the rich people, or the people who were wealthy--the people who used to go for entertainment and stuff like that, they didn't have that extra buck to do that anymore, so that whole nightclub scene went outta business; there was nothing for them to do. You might recall many years ago they wrote that song, "I get no kicks from champagne, flying high in the sky is nothing for me to do; I just get a kick out of you" ['I Get a Kick Out of You']. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And that song came from that era. And then after that--they closed the banks in 1929, and then after--as soon as they closed the banks in '29 [1929], people suffered. Story_ID: 643079 Speaker 1: So, it was during the Depression [Great Depression] your father [Paul Irving] passed, I know. But did you--I think I'm missing something that--your mother remarried-- Speaker 2: No, no, no, no (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) after your father passed away. Speaker 2: My mother wouldn't even date anybody. Speaker 1: No, not immediately, I'm saying, but she did eventually (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. Speaker 1: She didn't? Speaker 2: No. She never did. Speaker 1: I thought you said she married a Mr. Brown [Barnes Brown (ph.)] that you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, I said you--my sister, Espie [Lillian Irving Williams]. Speaker 1: Oh, your sister! Oh, I'm sorry, okay. Your sister married (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, that was, that was my sister. See, but my sister-- Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: My sister and my father fell out because she wanted to be a dancer (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And she was-- Speaker 2: --and, and he said, "No," so she said, "I'll show you." And she went and married this guy. His name was Oaton [ph.]--I, I can't think of it. Anyway--so then she took off and went to Norfolk [Virginia], and when she got to Norfolk, she met this guy name Brown, so he said, "A fine little thing," so he (laughter), he decided he would marry her, and he married her the year before my father died-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and then when he died, I was in the room, and my sister wasn't on too good of terms with my father. But, as she told my mother, "I'm taking him with me because--," and my mother told her how my father died, and the whole (unclear). "He, he's had enough trauma in his life; he don't need this." Speaker 1: And just referring to you. Speaker 2: Referring to me-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --you see, because I, I was (laughter)--my, my, my--see, my mother almost killed me one day because of what my sister did (laughter). I asked--see, I--when I was a little boy I didn't know no different, and she--any, anytime I would do something I had no business doing, like I was caught riding a horse with no saddle, no nothing, and the horse--all the horse had to do was, was throw me and he would break my back and I'd become paralyzed and whatever. See, I didn't know at the time that my sister--that had happened to her, and she couldn't have any children; that's the same sister that's in Norfolk. But young woman, look good, so who cares, right? Anyway, the point was this. When we got to Norfolk--no, no, my grandmother--my father--this is my father's--my father's mother [Margaret Irving]; she was the one who, who ratted me out and, and said, "Liza [Elizabeth Claiborne Irving], that boy's on that horse again." He was a beauti- he was beautiful. It was little--it was a little horse; it was a beautiful horse. And all I had to do is go up there around that horse trough and get on his back, and he'd take you to (laughter) Europe and back. He was a gentle, beautiful horse, but there was always a case that if he looked down and see a snake, it might spook him, or whatever, see, so--and they knew this and I didn't know this. And I don't (unclear) on me, but the horse, you know--but anyway, what happened was now we are in, in, in, in, in Norfolk. We, we--now, my sister felt that I--after my father died, that I had enough trauma in my life, so she just wanted to, to take care of me, and it worked out fine because in the fifth grade--that, that, that happened in Norfolk. In the fifth grade I made the honor roll--a country--little country bumpkin coming into the city and becoming an honor student; I have the certificate for--for all that. So--what was the other part of the question? Story_ID: 643080 Speaker 1: No, I'm just trying to catch up on the life story to get you where we oughta be, and, and you got us there, and that's pretty good. So, now we're (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Simultaneous) What was the end of the story about your sister and you riding a horse? What happened? Speaker 1: Now, what happened was, my sister-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: My sister--my father [Paul Irving] had given my si- he, he was doing pretty well financially, and he gave my sister--they made her bred this horse, I'm not sure, but she was my horse--my sister's horse, and being my sister's horse, I was on the horse's back, and my grandmother [Margaret Irving] was down the road. Just like you're down the road here, she looks up and then she sees me on that horse, and she goes up there and she says to my mother, "Liza [Elizabeth Claiborne Irving], you're gonna have to beat that boy again; he's on that horse again." So my mother, she said, "Beat him now, Liza; you ain't gone hit him anyway." She say, "I'll wait 'til his father come home." And then my mother--she don't say nothing but she's a little upset (laughter). "How you gone tell me when to whip my chile," you know (laughter). So, my mother don't go for that. And in the meantime my, my father he comes home, and he say, "You sass my mother." Oh, Lord, no fate worse than death (laughter). So, anyway, when he said that--and I was crying. Lil [Lillian Irving Williams] grabbed me up--this is a sister--that's Lil's horse--the one that owned the horse. She grabs me up and she takes me around the other side a the back a the house like--you know, you say for an instance, if Lil do something to Brandon [ph.] right now, and I say "Don't cry," and I take him around the back a the house and I pet him and hold him, then (unclear)--be like Jack [ph.]; Jack was a old mule--most stubborn mule you ever wanna see in your life. I said, "You gotta be like Jack; you don't cry." So, I said to my mother--this is the part you were looking for. I said to my mother one day, "Ma, is Lil my mother?" (Makes sound) Man, I--she nearly killed me. She hit me so hard, I think she still got a dent in the wall. And she said, "Boy, if there's any one my six children that the whole world know that you're mine, is you. I laid up here in this hot sun for five hours waiting for them to get the," the other thing 'cause my--that was the other thing, my grandmother didn't like me because my grandmother was the midwife for all the children; she delivered all the children. Well, I was a breached birth, and the more my grandmother tried to get me outta--the more problems she had, so all of a sudden they find that I had crossed in my mother, so they said, "Go get Dr. Brown, he's in Petersburg [Virginia]." So they go and they get Dr. Brown, and Dr. Brown comes out. So Dr. Brown came out and he delivered me. And when I said that to my mother, there was little my mother--she said, "The whole world--if there's any one child I ever had, the whole world knows--no! Lil is not your mother, I am your mother." And I--that's the first time I had a problem with my mother, but (laughter) that's what you--I think that's what you were asking me about. Story_ID: 643081 Speaker 1: And you said--but the horse was just an example of the trouble you were getting into and, and your sister [Lillian Irving Williams] decided to take you to (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Simultaneous). Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah. See, see, the problem with the horse was, the horse would do--it's like having a big dog; that horse would do anything you asked him to do, and she would--didn't bother nobody, and that horse almost got me killed one Sunday, too (laughter). My mother [Elizabeth Claiborne Irving] had got all dressed up and, and had got me all dressed up in my little white suit, and told me to go outside and wait for her 'cause she gotta put on all this bustle and hustle and stuff, you know, that women wore at that time. In the meantime, this idiot goes--you know what a horse trough is, don't you? Speaker 2: (Inaudible response). Speaker 1: Anyway, I go to the horse trough, and I'm out there looking down the well. Well, my mother don't know whether to go crazy or scream, because she could see this boy looking--see this boy, he's about what--two or three years old, looking in the well. If she spooks him, he might fall in the well, so the only thing she could do is just hope and pray. So, when she goes over and get me at the horse trough--comes up on me in the back of the horse trough, Billy [ph.] grabbed me by my clothes, and he took me off of the trough, and put me on the ground. My mother (laughter) was ready to kill him. She said, "Why didn't you do that five minutes ago after I go through all this trouble? And all of a sudden you go to show me what a hero you gonna be" (laughter). So, that's the story of--don't ask me what happened to Billy (unclear); I don't know if Billy died or what. Speaker 2: Any rate, but that--but--so--and, and when you're nine, you like move to Norfolk [Virginia] with your sister-- Speaker 1: Yes. And so I moved (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) and her husband [Barnes Brown (ph.)]. Speaker 1: --I moved to Norfolk with the sister and her husband, and I started serving newspapers and just becoming a normal boy, and they had me going to church and going to--that's when I became a Cub Scout because in the, in the South, things of that nature were important to us. It would be--become a part of what--whether it's American Legion or--even though it was a discriminated American Legion, you still wanted to do it and be a part of it. Speaker 2: Okay, so you got involved in activities (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, sure. Speaker 2: --that you wouldn't have possibly been able to do out on a farm, I guess, right? Speaker 1: Yeah, right. Story_ID: 643082 Speaker 1: We were only in Norfolk [Virginia] for two years. Speaker 2: Okay. That's the question I was gonna ask you--how long you were there. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Two years. And--so by this time you're in, what, sixth grade or something? Fifth or sixth grade? Speaker 1: Yeah, fifth or sixth grade. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I was in the fifth grade when I got the honor roll-- Speaker 2: Okay, and made the honor roll, that's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and the year before that I lived in a little suburb called Oakwood [Oakwood Terrace]-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --which is a, a, a part of Norfolk. Speaker 2: Right. I think [HistoryMaker] Tim Reid, that we interviewed, lived there at one time. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: So, so you made the honor roll. Now, what, what happened? Was it the atmosphere that just made you more comfortable at school? Speaker 1: Yeah, but you see--don't forget I, I had a leg up on those kids because most of the kids were--most, most, most of--most of the kids were just ordinary kids who came out of the community, and I had spent my whole life holding conversations with teachers and writing and if you remember--or maybe it's before your time; we used to do--the way we learned to write was the old Locker system [Locker Easy Method Writing] that you had to make a bunch of Os and Ls and all kind of--and then you would take the alphabets and put 'em together, and writing was like a, a, a skill; I mean, you know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, they taught handwrit- you know, they're stopping that now in the public schools (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, well, that's what I'm saying and see--well, see, they--during those days--the other thing was this. You would learn--we would get--I remember ev- every week you had a spelling bee, and Ipana toothpaste? Used to give us a little tube a toothpaste. Well, you wanted to win that tube, and you really went to work to win, to win that, that tube a toothpaste, and that's how--there were a lot of incentives; there were a lot more incentives. Oh, I guess you--you'd have to say that it was kind of like a, a better--I hate to say the word, but a better class of people. See, you remember in Norfolk you got a lot of sailors around there at that time. If you were a black sailor and you were a, a steward--is that what they call 'em? They were stewards and--but they were like--lived there permanently; they had a, a family--they were there permanently, and that was the people who you went to church with, and the people whose kids you played with while the father was maybe away at sea, and whatever. So, that's--and then, two years later, my brother-in-law [Barnes Brown (ph.)]--this is my sister's husband--he got the job in Washington, D.C. as a, a mechanic's helper--you couldn't be a mechanic--and he worked for the department of motor vehicle bureau [District of Columbia Department of Motor Vehicles]. And not the state but the, the city department of motor--and I don't know if you've seen years ago that the police department used to have a lot of motorcycles-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and when my mother [Elizabeth Claiborne Irving] died, they had six motorcycles and, and, and then they had the floral cars, and then the hearse, and then I think two or four more motorcycles on the end of it. That was a kind of an entourage, or celebratory activities that, that, that went on. It was a lot of show; and it was serious, but a lot of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, honorific. Yeah. Story_ID: 643083 Speaker 1: Now, in the meantime, my brother--this is the one that's teaching school--he never liked to teach school in the first place, and as I said, the war [World War II, WWII] was just starting, so they had called him to become a welder; that's 1940, and that's 1940. So he went to work in New York--they, they sent him--sent for him for the New York navy yard [Brooklyn Navy Yard, New York, New York] here, and he came here and worked with--oh, who is that? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Okay now, tell us about--before we get too far advanced here--1937 you graduated from Thaddeus Stevens Elementary School and, from what I understand, you had a interesting time at Thaddeus Stevens, named for the great Senator Thaddeus Stevens of Pennsylvania. This is in D.C. [Washington, D.C.], right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Thaddeus Stevens. And the story I heard is that you did not have a library at Thaddeus Stevens school-- Speaker 2: That's correct. Speaker 1: And so-- Speaker 2: We didn't have--we, we, we, we didn't have an auditorium either. We had activities--our greatest activity at Thaddeus Stevens was, was May Day, which is a maypole. I don't know why they selected May 1, but May 1 was a day that they danced and they sang, and whatever talent the schools had, and I think it was at--not I think, I know for a fact that it was at Thaddeus Stevens that we were taught the importance of exhibiting your wares. In other words, if you can dance, then be a dancer; if you can sing, then be a singer. You might recall--I don't know how to do this verbatim, or say it exactly the way he said it, but it was in one a Martin Luther King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] speeches in which he says that: if you are nothing but the scrub by the side of the wall--by the side of the--yeah, by, by the side of the hill, be the best little scrub on the hill; that's what you should strive to do. And that was what we were taught, basically, at Thaddeus Stevens Elementary School. You, you didn't attend Thaddeus Stevens and, let's say, take an apple from the fruit dealer's stand, although they had them out there, but there weren't too many things that were worse than that type of behavior if you were a Thaddeus Stevens student. One of the reasons why it is--I wouldn't say one of the reasons why; it's the main reason why is because Stevens was a school that was a very connected school. Now, what I mean by that--see, Duke Ellington went to school about twenty blocks away, the nearest school to it, but you had people like Mrs. Clinksdale [ph.], and people like that, who--, "Okay, so your son did it? We'll take care of it." Thaddeus Stevens, you don't do it (laughter), so ain't nobody gonna take care of it, and you understood that because they believed that an ounce of prevention was worth a pound of cure. In other words, if you don't get yourself in the situation in the beginning, then you're not gonna have a problem down the road. Now, we have had people--one of the people that we often forget, who also graduated from that school, was a Hooks, and you may remember him from that TV show, 'Car 54, Where Are You?' [sic. 'N.Y.P.D.']. I think it's [HistoryMaker] Robert Hooks; I forget his name now. Speaker 1: Oh, Robert Hooks, the actor. Speaker 2: Yeah, right. I met him. Story_ID: 643084 Speaker 1: Well, if you notice--I won't call any other names of the Hollywood people, but there is also a person who came along at his time. Well, it was funny when he said it and I know he was serious 'cause he, he always lived up to it. But he always told the guys, "I don't die. In other words, don't even offer me a script that you expect me--I'm not dying; I'll do anything else, but I don't die." But [HistoryMaker] Robert Hooks was a little more--sophisticated is not the word; he was, was a person that was a little more careful, and still is--'cause I think he has a son, and I think he has a successful movie business right now. Speaker 2: Yeah, Kevin Hooks, right. Speaker 1: Yes. But all of that came from Carter G. Woodson's--now, remember, Carter G. Woodson taught the teachers. All of the teachers--every teacher that I had, and it must of been ten or twelve, I ran into at Stevens [Thaddeus Stevens Elementary School, Washington, D.C.] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now wait a minute. You're talking about Carter G. Woodson, the father of-- Speaker 1: I'm talking--yes, I--that's who I'm talking about. Speaker 2: The Carter G. Woodson. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: The Carter G. Woodson. Remember, Carter G. Woodson had a peculiar type career. He was a teacher, a principal, a teacher, and then a president, and somewhere in there he went to a--he went to a--the Philippines. Speaker 2: Right, he does his first teaching post, I think. Speaker 1: Right, and, and, and he came back. And what I'm saying is that--and he was the kind of a person that when he looked at you, he looked you straight in the eye, and--but his principles were beyond all comprehension because--I think it was Sloan--the Sloan Company [ph.] that gave him a large donation, and what he did was he took the donation and the guy offered him--as he was taking it--he, he wrote, wrote it in a lower key--a, a low case key, and Carter G. Woodson got so mad he handed him the check back, and the guy says, "Don't you want the check?" He says, "Yes, but if you can't give me the check with respect, then I don't want it." And from that--and it was a ten thousand dollar check--and from that, some of the old feelings grew, but that was all because he was--Carter G. Woodson was the kind of a person that demanded respect. Story_ID: 643085 Speaker 1: Woodson, Woodson's--was it his home, or the, the headquarters for the association [Association for the Study of Negro Life and History; Association for the Study of African American Life and History] that was near Thaddeus Stevens school [Thaddeus Stevens Elementary School, Washington, D.C.]? Speaker 2: That was his home; it's where he lived-- Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: --but I--now I, I, I won't swear to this because I don't know, but I do know this; I do remember--I should know. Carter G. Woodson, he didn't have a home; that associative-- was associated--whatever it is, that was his home. He was interest- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So he actually lived there on the site? Speaker 2: Yeah. He was interested in his--he was more interested in his people and in their history than he was the luxury of a palatial type dwelling--whatever you wanna call it. But as a, as a person, he was a--one of the things that he did--I remember the first year that I went to Thaddeus Stevens. I had seen him because, you know, everybody was together, everybody went to--either they went to church, or you run into 'em in some kind of way, and he used to be in this YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association]. I don't remember was a YMCA or a YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association], but I do know he had this table near the back, and that's where he always ate--from that table. And he, he, he was sitting back in the corner, and when you went in there, there was no loud talking, no screaming, and in, in those days you had to have a necktie. As I recall, there were people that we had a lot of respect for, but they had patches in their pants but they had a suit on. And that was the thing that he sold us on--neatness, and also politeness--you must be polite, you must treat people with respect. Story_ID: 643086 Speaker 1: Do you remember the first time you met him? Speaker 2: Yes, I do (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you actually talk to him? Speaker 2: Yes, I, I, I--the first time I met him--see, I'm going back to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] now. My mother [Elizabeth Claiborne Irving] knew--had worked with this lady--I have a photograph of this, also. She worked with this lady on--who had a place on V Street. Now, remember, they didn't have hotels at that time. For black people, they had a lot of-- Speaker 1: Boarding houses? Speaker 2: --boarding houses. And the boarding house had big tables. Now, what happened, I used to love to play baseball, but I had to go by and see my mother. Although she didn't have a full-time job with this lady, she was supposed to have been helping this lady out, but Washington [D.C.] was expanding so big at that time, was--it began to grow in the '40s [1940s], 'cause then you had Mary McLeod Bethune and this person and that person, this--Dr. Mays [Benjamin Mays], and all these people were coming in, and I used to have to go by and peel potatoes, or whatever they wanted done for the, for the day. And the first time that I remember seeing him, he came by and he rubbed me on the head, and he said, "Do I know you?" And, and, and, you know, and naturally I say, "Well, I, I don't know, sir, but I certainly do know you." So he said, "Well, who am I?" I said, "You're Dr. Woodson [Carter G. Woodson]." And he said, "Well, tell me what you know about Dr. Woodson." And that was, that was the kind of person that he was. And we talked, I guess, maybe for three, five minutes--whatever it was. Then that fall when we went to--when school opened--he had a habit--I don't know if he did it or if Mrs. Malone [Lillian S. Malone] did it who was the principal. But they had a habit that you had to take him to every room in the school. He knew that school [Thaddeus Stevens Elementary School, Washington, D.C.] like the back of his hand. But first of all, he just wanted to make sure that you were polite, he wanted to make sure that, that you had respect for that school because he had a lot of respect for Thaddeus Stevens, as you know. I don't know how much you know about Thaddeus Stevens, but Thaddeus Stevens was really a fine man, and there was some question about his housekeeper, and he once told somebody off and told 'em, he said, "When you start paying--like when you start paying my rent, then you'll start dictating to me who live in my house." Because, see, he was--and the lady was good for him because he was always on the go; he was like almost never there. Speaker 1: This a white senator who was a abolitionist leader in the Senate [sic. U.S. House of Representatives], and the woman they were talking about is a black woman that was his housekeeper, right? Speaker 2: That was a black woman, right, right and-- Speaker 1: And there were rumors about their relationship. Story_ID: 643087 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, right, that's basically what I didn't wanna--but anyway that's--well, that, that--that's what was about. And, and Dr. Woodson [Carter G. Woodson]--you see, how Dr. Woodson got involved and, and had the kids involved in this is I--you could look 'em up. He met this Filipino--or they think it was a Filipino, but anyway, he developed something like a jaundice, and he was not able to return to the Philippines to teach, so he had a housekeeper at his home the same as Stevens [Thaddeus Stevens] had a housekeeper at his home. But these people would never walk--you never saw them walking down the street hand by hand; they were never disrespectful to anybody, and if they--you see 'em at church, they would just come into the church and sit and worship, and go up and, and, and, and, and leave, and that was the, the, the way it was. So, I was-- Speaker 2: So--but, but I think you didn't tell us that you used the library in Woodson's home, right? Speaker 1: Yes. Well, we used the library in Woodson's home because he was a--he was a great believer in reading, and he wanted to instill upon us that we had to--you see, reading is something that--either you know it or you don't know it, or either you're--like he said, "Did you read that book?" I said, "Yeah." Well, you have no way, except for asking me questions to find out whether or not I'm telling the truth. And I could also scan the pages to pick up certain things. But if you were sharp and you've read the--you really read the book, you'll--sooner or later, you're gonna trick me or trap me, and then I'm gonna say, "Well, I," if you're an honest person you'll say, "I didn't--really didn't read it; what I did do is I scanned some of the pages, and on page such and such I read so and so," and, and that, that, that, that kind of thing. I would say that he gave us, and taught us a lot of integrity, as I said before. The teachers that I had at Thaddeus Stevens [Thaddeus Stevens Elementary School, Washington, D.C.] were all former students of his, and he was a person who (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, what are some of the names of the, the, the, the teachers that you had at Thaddeus Stevens that were mentors to you then, that you learned-- Speaker 1: Miss Geraldine Tate [ph.], Mrs. Josephine Petty [ph.], and Mrs. Malone [Lillian S. Malone]. Mrs. Malone was a principal, and Mrs. Malone was a very unusual person because Mrs. Malone was not only a teacher, she was also a lawyer; she had her law degree but yet she came back to Thaddeus Stevens to be its president. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And, and I, I kept up a very close friendship with 'em until she passed away. As a matter of fact, I would say two years ago, Jarvis [ph.] and--see, Mrs. Malone's daughter, Crystal [Crystal Malone Brown], was married to Walter Brown [sic. Wesley A. Brown]. Walter Brown is--was the first African American to graduate from the Naval Academy [United States Naval Academy, Annapolis, Maryland]. Now, I didn't say attend, I said graduate. He was in President Carter's class. As a matter of fact, President Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.], when he decided he was gonna run for president, he wanted him on his team; and he told him he wasn't interested in politics. But he's an architect, really. Story_ID: 643088 Speaker 1: So you graduated from Stevens [Thaddeus Stevens Elementary School, Washington, D.C.], now y- something happens and you don't go on to high school. What happened? Speaker 2: What happened--what, what happened was I, I--what happened was this. I, I didn't graduate from Stevens. If you recall me telling you that I had a brother [Paul Irving] that went to Virginia State [Virginia Normal and Industrial Institute; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia], well Virginia State went to--my, my brother went to Virginia State and he had a classmate whose name was Walker--Mr. Walker [ph.]. And Mr. Walker almost drove me up a tree, and I couldn't understand it to save my life. I, I, I used to have to go around the other hall to avoid him, and when you go down--let's say you're supposed to use--you know, in school you're supposed to use hall A, and I will take hall B. Well, they would look at your ticket there that you had, and they say, "What are you doing over here? You're in the wrong place." I say, "Oh, god, I can't win." But I go back and I say--I see Mr. Walker. "Hi, Mr. Walker." And he would speak to you. You get halfway down the hall, and he would say, "Come here." So you stop, and he'd come. He says, "I want you to come in the room and empty your pockets." And I, I wanted to say to him, "What? You gotta be kidding." But he would make you do it. So you empty your pockets, he find nothing in your pockets. And this goes on and on for about three months, or six months, or whatever it was. And then he said to me, "Yeah, and by the way, what are you gonna do with yourself?" What am I, twelve years old? What do I gotta do? What have I gotta worry with so much? "I don't know what I'm gonna do" (unclear). "You don't have any--?" He say, "You--are you telling me you don't know?" And I say, "Yes, sir." So then he said, "You mean to tell me with this big world, and you've never thought of what you wanna do or what you wanna be?" So, they took us to the Navy Yard [Washington Navy Yard]. The Navy Yard in Washington [D.C.] has a gun factory where they made--they, they made guns. So we go to this gun factory, and the next time I see Mr. Walker, he says to me, he says, "Clarence Irving [HistoryMaker Clarence Irving, Sr.]." I said, "Hi, Mr. Walker." He says, "Hi, my foot; come over here, I wanna talk to you." So he said, "Did you make up your mind yet what you wanna do?" And I said, "Oh, yeah, I made up my mind what I wanna do." He say, "Oh, hallelujah. What are you gonna do?" So I said, "I wanna be a machinist." I didn't know a daggone thing about no machine shop; I was fixing to get him off my back (laughter). So he said, "Where did you get that from?" So I told him that they took us to the Navy Yard and I saw Duke Ellington's father [James Edward Ellington]. No, it's where Duke Ellington's father worked, I think, 'cause Duke--his father--I said, "I, I saw the Duke--. I saw the desk that Duke Ellington's father worked at," because Duke Ellington's father used to work in the blueprint room, and that was a big deal for a black person at that time, even though he had did all the work, and everything that went with it. So, he said, "That sounds good." Story_ID: 643089 Speaker 1: So, he sees me about a month or so later, and we get into this machine shop thing again, and he said, "You're serious, aren't you?" I said, "Yes, sir, I'm serious--I'm very serious." He say, "Oh," he says, "oh, yeah, by the way, where is your brother [Paul Irving]?" Huh? What do he know about my--I, I'm not even gone dare ask him. What do he know about my brother? So he said--he put his arm around me and he said, "Let me tell you something, son." He said, "I know you think I'm the meanest man in the world, and I wanted to be the meanest man in the world. I went to school with your brother. I was there when he graduated." He say, "I knew when your mother [Elizabeth Claiborne Irving] was pregnant with you." And he ran the whole, the whole fam- told me about the whole family. And he said, "I just don't wanna see you waste your time." Well, in the meantime, I'm this aspiring young baseball player. So, he says to me, "Where, where is your brother?" I said, "He's in New York [New York]." So he says, "Your brother's in New York?" He says, "Well, I'm gone tell you something right now; you're not gonna get what you want here. They don't have any equipment here in the black schools," he said, "but what you can do is, if you go to New York and stay with your brother, you could do--." So I go, and I talk to my brother. I went up there with my two little pair a pants, so--and a shirt, and I said to him that I wanted to stay with him and I wanted to go to school. And so my brother told me, he says, "I'm gonna tell you something right now. You'll stay here as long as you behave yourself. The first time that I hear anything about you, you're gonna break the world's record of (unclear) how to get back to Washington [D.C.]. You understand that?" So I said, "Yes." Anyway, I had a heck of a summer that summer--that year, and the Newark Eagles were gonna give me a tryout; they--'cause they have a way every year. They take two rookies and they try them out, and if they show some promise, they let them travel with the big team. Well, Larry Doby was on the--on that same (unclear). I would of been on the same team with Larry Doby. Well, what happened was--I had a good summer, and when the summer was over, I came down with appendicitis. At the time that, that this appendicitis, my colon ruptured, so now I got a problem. It's either a machine shop, or nothing. So--but I didn't know at the time that I was gonna wind up in the machine shop but--this is 1940; in 1942, I get this letter. First of all, after I got sick, I was disgusted, and I gave up everything and I went back to Washington. And they say, "Well, what are you gonna do now?" Well, I could sing a little bit, so I used to--you see, I used to sing on Pearl Bailey's night off at the Crystal Caverns [Washington, D.C.]. Story_ID: 643090 Speaker 1: Well, you know, Pearl [Pearl Bailey] could dance, she could tell jokes, she could do the whole nine yards. Speaker 2: Okay, wait a minute now. Let's--let me try to recap here--where we are 'cause (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Sure. Speaker 2: --this is 1941 (unclear) all? 1940, '41 [1941]? And you're a, you're a (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In 19--this is--this must be 1940 'cause I'm in Washington [D.C.]. Speaker 2: Yeah, 1940; you're sixteen years old. Speaker 1: Yeah, I was--yeah, I was very young--I was very young. Speaker 2: Sixteen years old. And you're, you're playing basketball [sic.]-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --you're living in New York [New York] with your brother [Paul Irving]-- Speaker 1: Yeah, that year. Speaker 2: --playing baseball. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: You got an offer from the-- Speaker 1: The Newark Eagles. Speaker 2: --Newark Eagles, which included Larry Doby at the time to play (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, well-- Speaker 2: --for a trial; it was a trial, right. Speaker 1: It was a trial and, and, and Larry happened to make the same team that I made; I would have made that same team. Speaker 2: Did, did you make the team or, or-- Speaker 1: I made the team. Speaker 2: --but then you had appendicitis? Speaker 1: I had appendicitis and I made the team in September, and then in November I came down with appendicitis, so I nixed--I couldn't throw (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now, tell us--for our baseball fans, say--what position did you play? Speaker 1: I caught. Speaker 2: You were a catcher, okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: All right. So, so you kept--did you go to a lot of the Negro League games when you were growing up? Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, and as a matter of fact I, I, I caught a lot of the young ones on the way up and the old ones on the way down. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: And, and see, what I mean by that is, we had a guy--I forgot his name; we used to call him Blue, and he had--he used to put--you know the cigarette papers that used to be silver? Speaker 2: (Inaudible response). Speaker 1: Well, Blue (laughter), Blue would put the cigarette paper on his teeth, see, and depending where the sun is coming from, and he put that cigarette paper on his teeth; just as he's gonna release the ball, he would give you a glint, and you didn't know what was happening, so all of a sudden you, you get startled, and ain't no way in the world you won't hit him, you know, and so I (laughter), like a dummy, I told him, I said, "Blue," I said, "now, why don't you stop this because I gotta, I gotta catch this ball," you know; because you, you know they never'll come too low, they don't come too high. See, the reason why you could--it was easier to make it as a catcher, if you were willing to catch anybody and, and your knuckles look--been felt like--man, my hand ached so much I have 'em in a bucket a cold water all night, when we'll go from town to town. So, anyway, to make a long story short, Blue had this thing on his teeth, and he was eating people alive, and they couldn't figure him out because he--he didn't do it on every pitch, but every once in a while if he got, got stuck, he would throw the--he'd throw the glint on you, and he'd throw the glint on you; if you get startled, he got you (laughter)--you'd swing and miss. So, anyway, this went on. But I--can I just tell you another little story from that? Story_ID: 643091 Speaker 1: Oh, sure, go ahead (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. What happened was--I'm a rookie now, and we were playing--the, the year was--I went with the Brooklyn Black Sox [sic. Baltimore Black Sox]; that was before I made the Newark Eagles. So we had to go Bangor, Maine and come back, so what happened was we had this old broken down bus, and you would travel--your, your mode of travel was to travel at night and play all day at, at these rich resorts, and they didn't charge admission; what they would do is they would--they just throw quarters and, and, and dollars, and whatever, up there to people (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, on the field. Speaker 2: On the field to the players, yeah. And the, and the guys (laughter)--then there was another guy, he walked around with a straw hat and he, he (laughter) took up, he took up the money. So that particular day we were playing a, a double header. They didn't make the rookies play a double header that much, unless they were angry at him. So anyway, I was--I played the first game, and this little girl she was sitting up in the stands, and I saw--and she had invited me to dinner at her house. Well, there was a guy name--we used to call him Jaybird, the third baseman. And I--you know, people tell you to keep your mouth shut and I didn't have sense enough to do that, so I went over and told him say, I said, "Hey, Jaybird," He said, "What?" I said, "That lady is--they're having me for dinner." So, Jaybird (laughter)--I must've been playing that second game, but anyhow, Jaybird went over and told them that, "He's a nice boy, and I'm so glad that y'all are taking care of him 'cause that's what we try to do, but he had a night--he have a night sickness," and he said (laugher), he said, "You don't want him to come to your house and get sick because he's a good boy, and we really care a lot for him, but he, he just might get sick. So I'll tell you what," he says, "I got a couple of other friends and myself, and we'll come over and have dinner." Well, I went over (laughter)--the game was over, and in order for you to take a shower, you get a bucket a water and you let the water get you wet and then you wash, and then a couple a more buckets a water, and you felt so good. So, there I was all ready to go to this house, and I find--and, and the lady, she closed the door on me, they don't wanna--nobody wanna talk to me, nobody don't wanna let me in. So, in the meantime there's an old--there's a guy that's on the team, well, he's laughing a big horse laugh and I'm wondering, "What are you laughing about? What's so funny about this?" So, he said, "One of these days you'll learn how to keep your mouth shut," he said. "When you're on the road, you don't tell nobody nothing, so now you're talking yourself right out of a meal; they over there eating, and look at you--you can't even get a hot dog." So (laughter) that's what I was laughing about when I thought about it--the kind of tricks and things that, that, that, that, that, that they did when, you know, the left hand monkey wrenching and the, "Get me a bucket of steam," and all that stuff. And you learn (laughter) to go along. Story_ID: 643092 Speaker 1: So you--so thi- so you--okay, let me, let me just get the chronology straight here 'cause you start--you, you had a trial with the Newark Eagles, made the team, but they had--so, so (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I traveled with the Newark--I, I traveled, I traveled with the Brooklyn Black Sox [sic. Baltimore Black Sox], which was a subsidiary of the, the Brooklyn Eagles [sic.]. Speaker 1: Newark Eagles. Speaker 2: Ah, Newark Eagles, yeah. Speaker 1: That was like a farm team of the (unclear). Speaker 2: They were a farm--yeah, right. Speaker 1: Yeah, of, of the Newark Eagles. Okay, I got you. All right, so--but you--was this before your appendix problem, or afterwards? Speaker 2: Yeah, well, see, what happened--the year--I came up here, and I played the year--the whole year of 1940? Yeah, played the whole year of 1940, and then in November, just before Thanksgiving, I was feeling real bad. Speaker 1: Now, were you playing with the Brooklyn team then? Speaker 2: I was playing with the Brooklyn team. Speaker 1: Okay, right. Speaker 2: I--see, I, I knew I had a spot on the, the Brooklyn Eagles--I meant on the, on the--yeah, on the Brooklyn Eagles I had a spot; I didn't have that to worry about. But I was gonna move up; there was a good chance that I would move up to the Eagles-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: and--because I think this guy Cash [Bill Cash]--I think Cash was catcher for the Eagles at the time, and he was planning to move over to the Philadelphia Stars--I think it was like that. But in anyway, I pretty much--I'm not bragging on myself, but my job was more assured than Larry Doby's was at that time because, don't forget, they needed catchers. Doby was just good (laughter), I mean, but the catchers--they, they needed, but anybody that was dumb enough to go back there and get their fingers broke up and-- Speaker 1: Larry Doby went on to be the first African American to play in the American League, right? Speaker 2: That's correct, right, yes. Speaker 1: With the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, no, no, it was the Cleveland Indians-- Speaker 1: --Cleveland Indians, right (unclear), right. Speaker 2: --because--yes. He, he was a--he just died a couple a years ago. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 643093 Speaker 1: So you were touring and now you're, you're--you say you were singing, too? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Singing? Now how, how did the singing come about? How did you get involved with singing? Speaker 2: Well, you see, during the war [World War II, WWII], if you had a dog that could bark, they were glad to have--because you see, what happened, when they had the soldiers come to Washington [D.C.], as they were coming to--you had Fort--Camp--Fort Belvoir [Virginia] or Fort Meade [Fort George G. Meade, Maryland]-- where is the one they bury all the--they bury all the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Arlington-- Speaker 2: Arlington cemetery [Arlington National Cemetery, Arlington, Virginia]. You gotta--they got Aberdeen proving grounds [Aberdeen Proving Ground, Aberdeen, Maryland]. You got about six or seven different (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Eustis [Fort Eustis; Joint Base Langley-Eustis, Virginia], Monroe [Fort Monroe, Virginia]-- Speaker 2: Yeah, around there. And as these--they--and they're graduating and these--I mean and these people are doing their basic service, and now they're entitled to go out for a night of fun. But there was no place, no place for fun, and the guys are out nights, off days, nights, and--oh, Washington was a little town that used to shut down at night. Well, what happened was I had been--and when I was in junior high school I had a decent voice, and so what happened was somebody told 'em about me and I went down there (makes sounds). "Okay, yeah, you got it." And they needed somebody to fill in, in Pearl Bailey's night off 'cause she was working seven days a week, and even if she wanted to, you couldn't 'cause your voice can't hold up that long. So, anyhow, I filled her spot, and that's how I got to sing. But the, the thing that I wanted to do when I found out that I wasn't gone play baseball anymore was--my ambition was to buy a, a, a rooming house, let that buy me another rooming house, and then sing for weddings, funerals, and whatever. And you'd be surprised; you, you could--you could make a good living see, because a lotta people--people make the mistake of thinking that they don't know; they, they will--you will hear people say, "Duke Ellington's father [James Edward Ellington] was a caterer." True. "Duke Ellington's father worked in the Navy Yard [Washington Navy Yard, Washington, D.C.]." True. Now, when you put those two together, it don't seem like they add up, but what happened was this. Duke used to--Duke's father used to cater on the weekend, and he worked in the Navy Yard five days a week. So--well, well, that was--what it was during those days was a lotta services going on, see, and if you are--you, you would have to have worked, or been around southerners to understand 'em, because a lotta times when--let's say Mr. Scott would die, Mr. Scott would leave so much for his wife, so much for his mother, so much for the cousins, so much for the dog. "Oh, yeah, and leave the boy--give that--leave that boy four or five hundred dollars," 'cause he, he, he liked you. And, and that is what happened. There was--there were cases that I know where women--it's just like a--what do you call it? This thing with Thaddeus Stevens, and the stuff that's going on now; there's a lot of that stuff that went on for years and, and nobody ever told about it, and they gave the maid his property. And so it's, it's, it's, it's, it's not really new, it's just that--and nobody has bothered--somebody probably'll write about it now, if they haven't written about it already. But, like I said to you when I first started this conversation, the problem that I see is that we are not forcing people to understand that there is a certain amount of our history that must be told as it is; that's the thing that created so much--I won't get into that. I was gonna tell you about the Malcolm X (unclear). Speaker 1: We'll talk about that later (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, that's what I said, yes, that's what I said (unclear)-- Speaker 1: --but I hear what you're saying, that, that a lot of things that we don't-- Speaker 2: Loose ends (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah, that we don't put together-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and they're obviously there (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right, absolutely, yes. Speaker 1: (Unclear) take a, a look at it at all. Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 643094 Speaker 1: So now we're, we're in the, in the '40s [1940s] and, and you're in your teen years as you, as you start--as the war [World War II, WWII] starts. Now you weren't drafted. Now, is there a story why you weren't drafted? Speaker 2: Yes. I was drafted-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --but what happened was there was a fellow name Rudolph [ph.]--a young German fellow--engineer--architect, and he was given the job--he had told the government that their apprentice program was antiquated. They said, "What are you talking about?" Well, remember now, this was the war, and nobody had modified anything because they were dealing with peacetime things. So he said, "This apprentice program that you have that you--is taking these kids six years to graduate, I can graduate 'em in four, and they'll know more than they know now." And the guy say, "Oh, yeah?" So, he said, "Just give 'em to me." Now, I, I don't know how I got lucky, but when they, when they ran the--when, when they screened the people, I happened to be one of 'em that was screened, and then--well, of course, I was the only black one that made it. And when they screened the men and I got the position, I took my papers to my supervisor and he didn't say nothing to me, but two, three days later, he says to me, "Come on, I gotta take you up topside." "Huh?" You see, I, I had almost just got in trouble before--I'll tell you about that later. But I had almost got in trouble before, and here I am. I took this papers and I go upstairs, but I was so upset until I didn't even bother to read, and realize it was the same--it was my papers from the [U.S.] Army that, that, that I had been drafted. So he says--he reads it, say--he picks it up and he throws it down, and he said, "It ain't gonna happen." And so I said, "Did I do something, sir?" He says, "No, you didn't do nothing but that's what's wrong with these knuckleheads; they don't realize the fact that they can't pay you twenty-one dollars once a month when you are a well trained student of mine. I'll take care of it." And that was the--that was the end of that (laughter). So he (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He got you an exemption? Speaker 2: He got me an exemption, right (laughter). Speaker 1: So, so, what year is this? Speaker 2: This was ninet- that was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Forty-two [1942], '43 [1943]? Speaker 2: No, it had to be '44 [1944], or something. Speaker 1: Forty-four [1944], okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, it was somewhere around there. Yeah, yeah, because I was more than all--more than finish with my--almost finished with my class, and he had told somebody that, that, that was their mistake--that they weren't really--see, 'cause he had a, a big sign on his wall: "If the Students Haven't Learned, the Teacher Hasn't Taught." And he meant it; he, he, he, he, he, he, he really (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He was serious. Speaker 2: --he meant it. He said, "Yeah," he'll tell you in a minute, "you ain't gone make--you're not gone make a dummy outta me." I, I'm even--I'm dressing that up (laughter), but--yeah. And, and he told me, he told me, he said, "No," he said, "you work for me. You're gonna come out here and you're gonna know what you're doing and they're gonna respect that." Speaker 1: Okay. So, so when you got finished with the program, you were a qualified-- Speaker 2: A qualified machinist. Speaker 1: --machinist, okay. Speaker 2: Journeyman. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: But they threw me out. Speaker 1: So what happened? How did that happen? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Because I was on the program and I couldn't stay in the yard [Brooklyn Navy Yard, New York, New York] if I was on a program, so I went to work for (unclear). I owed them time; if they wanted me, they could have me back. So what they did was--in 1950, I think it was, they took me back and gave me an advanced course, which I got a--I graduated and got a certificate for that. And I stayed with them until 1956 or '58 [1958], whatever it was. And that's when I went to work for Con Edison [Consolidated Edison, Inc.]. Story_ID: 643095 Speaker 1: Well we go back a little bit more and-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: --there's a--I know you got involved with forming a, a baseball team in '46 [1946]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Nineteen forty-six [1946]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. And--now this is while you were working at the navy yard [Brooklyn Navy Yard, New York, New York], right? Or, or were you still at the navy yard? Speaker 2: Yes, I was--no, I wasn't. When I first started, I wasn't working in the Navy Yard. Speaker 1: Okay. Is that, is that during the period where they had thrown you out? Speaker 2: No. What happened was I was working--well, I was working as a silversmith--a metal spinner--that's what I was doing; I was working as a metal spinner, and I happened to just see them--the cops--these kids were playing stickball and the cops came down the street and was like--they, they did these things, it was like--I, I don't know if, if you've ever--I, I have to put this--if you've ever lived in a black neighborhood or not. Speaker 1: Yeah, all the time. I do now. Speaker 2: Well, then you know and you've got--you've got some guys psychologically just should not be cops if we--because in other words--the kids was out there playing stickball. Now, instead of them taking the sticks and say, "Listen, fellas, I'm gonna take your sticks this time, and don't you ever do--just don't get caught doing this." Speaker 1: So, was it against the law to play stickball in the street? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: Was it against the law? Speaker 2: Well, no. It was against the landlord's law because what they would do, they broke out a lot of windows. The kids didn't even have money for a hot dog; how they gone pay--so they would break out windows and--or things like that. So, what happened was they wanted them to, to not play stickball in the street. Well, that's fine but, you know, what is that old saying that, "When you take from a man that what is dear to his heart, you must replace it with something of value." And it's the same thing with a kid and stickball. And I know when you say to a kid, "I'm gone take your stickball," and then he take it (unclear) little iron fences in those days, and they would take the iron fence and break the stick over it, so there was nothing but--and, and, and what was hurt so bad was it's hard to get them broomsticks, see, 'cause they used to play with broomsticks, you know. You don't get too many a them. And the guy take your stick and he just break it up, and instead of saying, "Listen, I told you before, don't let me catch you," or something like that, no. Because there were more guys like Shepherd [ph.] and them who would do that. But then you had these cops who were wise guys, and the kids had absolutely nothing but contempt for them. And, and I, I happened to be standing there at the window and--looking out the window, and I said to (unclear), I said--well, I was about what--twenty-one years old, or whatever it was. I said, "You know, that--that's a--that's a damn shame." I said, "Why do they do those kids like that?" And I said--and it kind of bothered me and I get--ordered another cup a coffee and I--, "You know, something should be done about that." So, the guy say, "Yeah, you're right; you should do something about that." So now, he's called me out, so I said, "I will." And that's when I got a bunch--a bunch of kids, and my brother was--had a--at that time they were taking out--changing over from oil burners to, you know, coal--coal fuel oil but coal fuel--furnaces--changing 'em over to oil burners. And my brother as- was doing so well by being a burner and knowing how to do it, he was hiring guys, and he kept 'em really, really busy. So I had told him, "I need your truck." He say, "Are you outta your mind? What do you need my truck for? You don't even have a driver's license." I said, "I need a truck because I wanna take some kids--." "Take some kids! Where you gonna take these kids?" And I--he said, "Yeah, and what happens if one a them happen to me?" "I got an insurance (unclear)." So I talked him into it, and he took these kids out in back of East New York Vocational School [East New York Vocational High School], New York Transit [Transit Tech Career and Technical Education High School, Brooklyn, New York], and we went out to East New York Vocational School; it's a vacant lot out there, and the weeds were like two, two, two and a half feet high. The first week, all we could do is cut 'em down, and now if we cut 'em down, we had to load all the grass on the truck because the people they don't want this grass in the neighborhood, so we kept doing this until we finally got it to a place where we could make a field out of it and--but that's how it started with these kids--the original team. There were a lot of different ages, but at least they were outta the--off the block and away from what was going on. Story_ID: 643096 Speaker 1: Was there a minimal age? Speaker 2: No. There was--these were just kids; they--we had kids, we had girls, we had everything because the girls used to come on and go and get the water for the boys, and the boys were all different ages, and little boys was rooting for the big boys, and--in other words, they--but they--don't forget, these kids had nowhere to play. It wasn't like they had a playground, or somewhere that they could go to play because there are no playgrounds downtown; you only had 35--P.S. 35 school, and you wasn't gonna get that because that was loaded with guys like Manford Chandler, Tommy Davis, and guys like that who, who, who, who really could play. I mean, you know--and, and, and they wanted to play, too, but you gotta find something there for them to play. Speaker 1: Hm. Okay. So did you, did you all join a league, or something, or did you just, just practice? Speaker 2: Well, what happened, what happened was I had known a guy who knew me; his name was Duncan [ph.], and he said to me, "Why don't you bring your team into the league next year?" And I said, "I, I don't know; these, these kids aren't, aren't ready for that." So he said, "Well, you get 'em ready." So, I got 'em together and I told 'em what we faced. So he--we formed a league--or they formed a league and we formed a team called the Betsy Head League, and we played in that league and we won the championship. Speaker 1: Now, how long did it take to win it? Was that the first year? Speaker 2: No, it wasn't that easy. What happened was--as a matter of fact, I left out something. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: What I--I'll tell you what I, I left out. What happened was this. I had this group a kids, and I had just got married, and I said, "That's it, I'm finished," you know; "I, I've had a enough of this. This is all I ever did all my life was play ball, and this and that, and I got a new wife and the whole nine." And then there was a--Jackie was there and I was involved with him. So anyhow, what happened was-- Speaker 1: This is Jackie Robinson. Speaker 2: Jackie Robinson. Story_ID: 643097 Speaker 1: Nineteen forty-six [1946] you got a Jackie Robinson story. Now this is the year that Jackie Robinson broke into baseball [Major League Baseball], right? Speaker 2: This is the year that he broke into baseball (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Unclear). Yeah. Speaker 2: When Jackie Robinson broke into baseball, he had nowhere to live, and this is why you hear me say very often about people's disregard for other people. For an instance, you would have thought that with all of the organizations and people who we have, they would have offered them something, give him a nice layout. Instead, he stayed in a, a, a furnished room with his wife and child--boy Stevens [Ed Stevens]--I think he's dead now. But anyway, when Jackie came, he played his first game in Ebbets Field [New York, New York]. The guy who had the Orange Blossom Inn [Brooklyn, New York], which was a restaurant, name was Willie Moore, and the guy wrote--he wrote--he had southern cuisine; the, the food was good. Well, anyway, Jackie and his wife [Rachel Isum Robinson] and his mother-in-law [Zelle Isum]--must've been his mother-in-law; I'm not sure who that lady was. Anyway, they couldn't--they, they couldn't get outta the restaurant. So Willie Moore said--the next day, he says, "I know what I'll do; I'll close the store down for dinner--I'll, and Jackie, I promise you you'll be able to eat comfortably." Well, nobody was thinking about other thing, and they did. So they closed the store. Jackie came down Ralph Avenue, went in the restaurant, sat down and ate, and he enjoyed his dinner (laughter), but the proprietor made no money; all he made was serving Jackie, and he may have given him, given him that meal--I'm, I'm not sure about that. But anyway, the next day, he said to me, he says, "I can't afford this." He said, "I'll send this stuff around and I'll send Jackie's food around there to him." So when Jackie left Ralph Avenue going to the ballpark--going to Ebbets Field, he told him, he says, "Jackie, I'll get your food to you tonight. We'll serve you at--bring your food to the house." Now, you got all a Brooklyn [New York] with all the restaurants and everything else. Some of them was discriminatory--discriminated, some of 'em didn't, but he certainly could have gone to other places. But anyway, he'd much rather be at home; he said this way he could eat and relax and no problem. So Willie Moore asked me and my friend Ernie Butler, when they saw Jackie go home, he said, "Will you take Jackie his food?" And they only had brown paper bags at that time, and he used his best of china, the brown paper bag, and I took it around there to him and Ernie took his stuff around there, and every, everything was fine. But the point of it was that you would have thought that people would have been much more--what's, what's, what's the word? That, that, that people would have shown more love for who he--who and what he was. You have all these things that you read about and write about and whatever, but when it comes down to the nitty gritty, it's just not there, and that's the story of Jackie Robinson at the Orange Blossom. Now (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So everybody kind of loved him symbolically, but not-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --in their--on the ground. Story_ID: 643098 Speaker 1: Right. Now, the other thing is this. Jackie Robinson started a fad. See, if I say--I may have told you that--but those guys, in those days, they were getting out of the [U.S. military] service, and they would be coming, coming into neighborhoods getting married, and moving into the neighborhood and whatever, whatever. But Jackie decided that he wanted to move up to Long Island [New York], which I was fortunate enough to live near him later, after he left and had gone up to Connecticut [Stamford, Connecticut]. But the point that I'm bringing out is that every young man that you saw, it became a style that you see a young man--you saw a young man with him and his baby. Guys didn't have cars, but some guys had twins, but they had those baby carriages out there in the street showing 'em off. So, I find it hard for people to tell me that we can't do a better job of taking care of our children than we do. That was what I wanted to tell you, that because of Jackie's--Jackie and Rachel [Robinson's wife, Rachel Isum Robinson], a lot of people became very, very family conscious, and there were a lot of good families was started out of that--from that time. Speaker 2: Okay, so you're--so you're saying he was a good role model for (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Absolutely; he was an excellent role model for 'em, yes, yes--and everybody wanted to be like him. Story_ID: 643099 Speaker 1: Now when did you--the--in terms of baseball, I guess the next big thing is when you formed a team called the Bisons, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. What happened--I, I had formed a team in '49 [1949], won my little championship, and I was finished. Speaker 1: Now, now what, what level did the Bisons play on (unclear)? Speaker 2: They were fifteen to--fifteen to eighteen. Speaker 1: Okay. So it's like a pony league team during the summer (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, they had a different classifi- a different name, but it was--the age group was--or age grouping was about the same. Speaker 1: Fifteen to eighteen, all right. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So these, these--so they were in a league sponsored by the Kiwanis club [Kiwanis International]--Kiwanis league? Speaker 2: Yeah, the Kiwanis--what happened was the Kiwanis sponsored the league--had sponsored the league like the Protestant had sponsored the league or, or--let's say that CYO [Catholic Youth Organization]--they would throw in maybe five hundred dollars and use their name and their banner, and that gave it prestige. Well, it was the same thing, except in the Betsy Head League, these were extremely poor kids--came from lower class neighborhoods, and a, a, a friend of mine name Artis--Arthur Ryzell [ph.]--he was a young man, he had been accepted at--he'd, he'd, he'd been accepted at UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles School of Medicine; David Geffen School of Medicine, Los Angeles, California] or USC [University of Southern California School of Medicine; Keck School of Medicine of University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California], but anyway, anyway, I know he was accepted at a medical school in California. So, he came around, he came around the house and he said to me that he had to go, and would I take over his team. I said, "No, you could forget it; it ain't gonna happen." "I've had enough of this." And I says, "Do you realize how hard this is on a young wife, man?" And I say, "You realize how hard it is on her [Irving's first wife]? I don't wanna go through this every night, the same thing. And, and, and she sit there for two hours waiting for you to come home and game go into extra innings, and the food get cold, the baby's been driving her crazy all day, and you out there on the ball field." So I said, "No, no, forget it, forget it," so he backed off. And I ran into a guy name Pop Lewis [ph.], who I knew Pop Lewis; he was an old man--older guy. Well, see, during my day, we listened to the older guys; we were always ready to hear their stories, whatever they wanna tell us. And, and Pop Lewis says to me, "I was talking to Dominic Tinderelli [ph.]." No, he didn't say Tinderelli, he said, "I was talking to Dominic, and Dominic told me that he asked you to start a baseball team and you told him, no." And I said, "Why can't I tell him no?" He said, "How can you tell him no? We helped you," he say, "we helped you, remember?" Says, "You gotta pass it on." So, to make a long story short, I won't go into the long version of this. Story_ID: 643100 Speaker 1: I said, "Okay, but if I manage this team, it's gonna have to be the way I want it. It's gonna do the--the things it's gonna do will have to be a reflection of me." So he [Pop Lewis (ph.)] said, "Who said that, that you couldn't have that?" So, I said, "All right, we're gonna start." First of all, there was a bar that used to--it's called the Red Top Village [ph.], and they used to--but they, they bought uniforms for the kids, but I didn't feel that a bar should advertise kids on its back, so that was the first thing that went, and we played the summer that whole year and, and you'll see it on the, the team uniform. We played in tee-shirts. Okay, we won--we, we, we, we won the--we won the championship [of the Betsy Head League], and the next year we sold and saved tin cans, rags--anything you could get your hand on. And I have--he's not an uncle, but I think he's a cousin; he owned the building, and I had the building loaded with newspaper and all other kind of junk, and somebody complained, and when she complained, she complained to Assemblyman Acquavella [A. Lawrence Acquavella], or Councilman Acquavella (unclear). Councilman Acquavella called me and said to me, that, "You're gonna have to get that stuff outta that, that place. You should get a ticket now, but I'll waive the ticket, but you're gonna have to sell that stuff and get it outta there." So, we sold it, got it out, and they came Christmastime. We sold Christmas trees; all this is saving money to-- build up money to operate our team [Bisons] because I didn't want a sponsor. See, a lot of people wanted to sponsor the team, and I didn't want 'em to sponsor the team because if a guy gave you ten dollars and he says, "I want my son to play," you gotta play him. But if I don't owe him nothing, he don't owe me nothing, then I'm not gonna do nothing and, and that was what happened. And that's how I got the reputation of being arrogant and--I did what I wanted to do, and on top of that, I--you know, you--winning makes a lot of changes. You can do a lot of things if you're winning. And I'll tell you what had happened to me in 1953. Story_ID: 643101 Speaker 1: Paul Robeson got ran out of Peekskill [New York] in 1949. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Nobody forgot that. So we went up there to play them, a playoff game. They could have had the game here instead of making us go up there, that's why I never had too much respect for the Kiwanis league [Kiwanis International] as a group. The individuals were good, but the whole, I wouldn't give you a box a buttons for. But anyhow, we went ahead on, and we were fortunate enough to win the championship. When we got to Peekskill, I told the guys--well, it was like night and day because usually, we go into a town, we go in there early enough, maybe to, to buy a soda or something, and then you change your clothes and you play, you, you shower, and put your street clothes back on. When we went into Peekskill, the kids--I let--I didn't let 'em outta the bus, and they wanted to know, "Well, what did I do now?" You know, 'cause some of these kids are really nice kids. And kids like Ray Epstein [ph.] is nice a kid as you ever wanna meet. Walter Edge [ph.]--I mean these are guys who'll climb a mountain for you, but they wanna know what--in other words, what did they do? So I wouldn't tell 'em anything. Then when--after game was over and we came home--we got home, the next meeting I told 'em how proud I was of 'em, and how they conducted themself. But that's what it took and--and see, it wasn't that I thought that I was, you know, that good as a baseball manager, but I did think that--and I still believe that I can help a youngster face some of the battles that he's gonna have to face on his way up that mountain, and sometimes you have to say things, you have to do things you don't wanna do, and you don't ask any questions. And they didn't ask the questions, and we did quite well. Speaker 2: Okay. So, the team [Bisons] won the state championship in 1955, right? Speaker 1: Yes. Well, in 1955, what happened--we had a--see, in 1954, we believe that we were robbed, and the guys played with a chip on their shoulder the whole sum- the whole year. And the thing about it was half of my team was stripped--I lost 'em because of their ages. Now, the Giants had signed John Malone [ph.]--four guys of my guys were signed to Minor League contracts, so that meant that they weren't there, and there were others--there was one guy, he didn't wanna play baseball so he said, "Forget about it." But I have to start with a whole--he--see, in, in order to be a champion, most times in baseball, not only in--do you have to be good, you also got to have the desire, no matter how tough it gets, how rough it gets that you gonna hang in there, and somebody gonna know you played 'em. Well, in 1954, they went out to--they split the league. Half of us could go to--the first place team could go to Astoria [New York] with Bill Penney [William Penney], and the other half could go to Cooperstown [New York]. Well, I wanted Cooperstown that bad, and we played the game against the Astoria Cubs was his name, a guy named Bill Penney was the manager of the team. We lost by one run. It was--I, I believe that they could've done a little better in umpiring than they did, but that's the way it went. So, 1955, we go up to Cooperstown, and I said, "Any of those little smart alecks come up here from the city--never again; they, they ain't taking nothing out of here." Well, see, what I didn't know, Ray Robinson [Sugar Ray Robinson] was really the cause of this whole thing. Story_ID: 643102 Speaker 1: Is it Sugar Ray Robinson? Speaker 2: Sugar Ray Robinson. Speaker 1: The Sugar Ray Robinson. Speaker 2: The Sugar Ray Robinson. See, Sugar Ray Robinson was fighting for the Salem Methodist Church [Salem United Methodist Church, New York, New York]. They had a boys club down there, and they had--that's where Ray started out as a boxer. And there was a guy name George Gainford who was running the boxing program down there. Anyway, there was a fellow's name Walker Smith. No--Ray Robinson's name is really Walker Smith [Walker Smith, Jr.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And they got right up to the--two or three days before the, the fight, and George Gainford wrote--George Gainford wrote this guy's name as Johnny [ph.]--I forget him now, but Johnny was a sports maharaja of, of, of, of Johnny--of, of--you see, when you play upstate, you--it's worse than playing--there's no place in Georgia as bad-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and the reason why is because it's, it's never what you think it is. And the reason why I'm saying that is because you know that you can't expect anything in Georgia, but--and in New York it's a deceptive kind of thing, and you let your guard down and there they--you--all of a sudden you say, "Where is that blood coming from?" And they say, "It's coming from you." "What me?" They say, "Yeah, that's your throat; somebody just cut it" (laughter). So, that's--but you don't, you don't realize this when you go 'cause you think you--"Oh, I'm upstate; everything is fine." So, anyhow (laughter), what happened was Walker Smith--no, George Gainford says, that he wrote him a letter--he wrote this guy Johnny a letter, and he told Johnny that he had this kid, and he said, "He's a, he's a good dancer, but he can't punch, and he--he's really not a fighter; he'll dance for you all night long, but that's all you're gonna get out of him." Well, Johnny had been burned (laughter)--Johnny had been burned before, and he, he couldn't stand--he was rooming downtown--downstate, and he knew that he was playing us [Bisons], and we were from downstate. So we go up there and, make a long story short, we win the championship. And we win the championship and we think we got the trophy--I don't know 'cause he told me, he says, "Oh, well, your trophy is gonna be put in a baseball hall of fame." Well, there's no such thing is gone happen. Baseball hall of fame is only for professionals, a top professional. So, I believed him. Story_ID: 643103 Speaker 1: And then--this thing stayed in there for twenty-five years, and somebody decided they wanted to go and get it out because we wanted to have our reunion--that's how it happened. So we went, and that's when they started--now, Bill White, at the time, was the president [of the National League], and I called Bill White everything but the mother of God. See, we are very close friends, and Bill had this--he got a good--Bill threatened to fire the guy--told him, "If you don't find this thing in a week, I'll fire you." So, one of the old timers that--you know how the old men and--sit up there and whittle on a, on a piece a wood, and he was whittling on a piece a wood, and he said, "I don't wanna get in ya business, but you ain't gonna ever find that thing, and you ain't ever gone get that championship. You can take--you can forget it, and you go (makes sound) if you want to," you know. So (laughter), anyway. Who could believe that such a thing would happen? Now, we go up there and playing baseball. Remember, Johnny [ph.] is in charge of all the sports--amateur sports, and we go right into his den. We had no--tell you the truth, I didn't even know about the whole--this whole thing. So, as time comes for Ray Robinson [Sugar Ray Robinson] to fight, Ray Robinson went out there and in 'bout two and a half minutes, he knocked this kid out that he fought, and George Gainford says, "You see, you can't trust them S.O.B.'s, and he tell me the guy can't fight. The guy hit like a damn bull; what do he think this is?" So, anyhow (laughter) (unclear) kick like a (unclear). So, anyway, we go and we beat 'em in the all-star game, and he says, "If he think he'll ever see this trophy, he better think all over again 'cause he'll never see this trophy." I say, "Well, what did we do to him?" And so he say, "It's not what you did, it's the way you did it." He says, "All you slickers coming up here [Cooperstown, New York] from downstate and think you know all the answers. You know that boy could fight, and he almost killed my kid, and my, and my kid--." I said, "I didn't know; I never seen him fight that well in my life." So, George Gainford went over to apologize, and he pulled his hand back and said, "Don't you ever speak to me as long as you live." Because he thought that George Gainford had set him up, and it really wasn't that he set him up; it was just that that was the night that Sugar Ray had established himself and made himself a reputation. In the meantime, I got this championship with no trophies to, to, to prove it. Speaker 2: Did you ever get it? Speaker 1: No, we're still trying to get it. As a matter of fact, there's an article in the paper; I'll give you a copy of it. Speaker 2: Sir, did you ever see it? Speaker 1: Yeah, when we saw (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It did exist, huh? Speaker 1: It did exist. And see, the way he did it was the thing that got us. They--oh, they had the big ceremony, the mayor and everybody--oh, there's a whole lot of other stuff, but I'm not gone go through that with you. But anyway, this mayor, he is standing there--the mayor's wife, that's what it was--the mayor's wife is standing there holding the trophy, and Johnny got his hands on the other half; you can hardly see that I'm in the picture. But--so what happened was--when it comes out in the newspaper, they comes under the newspaper as if we had cheated 'em, so--nobody didn't say nothing, but in the meantime, that was the end of George Gainford as--friendship and mine. Story_ID: 643104 Speaker 1: Now you retired from softball management in '56 [1956]? Is that true? Speaker 2: That was--yeah, but that wasn't softball, it's baseball. Speaker 1: Baseball--oh okay, that's right, that's right; this is baseball, right. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: I don't know what I'm--my mind is at. But that--that's a--yeah--but you formed a--now, is there a significant by--a, a significance behind the name Bisons? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: What is--what is that? Speaker 2: My mother [Elizabeth Claiborne Irving] wanted me to go to Howard University [Washington, D.C.], and Howard University are the Bisons, and--no, my father [Paul Irving] wanted me--no, it was--it, it, it was my mother who said my father wanted me to go to law school. I didn't wanna go to law school, but I didn't' wanna tell 'em I wanted to do something else, and I had--floundering around all over the place, and finally I decided this is what I wanna do is help youngsters, and I decided to name 'em the Bisons, and that's how they got the name the Bisons. Story_ID: 643105 Speaker 1: Well, tell us about the Bison Athletic Club [Bisons Athletic Club]--just, you know, just what kind of things did the club do, and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They, they, they, they ran a tutorial program called Operation Elevation, they provided scholarships, and they also gave financial assistance. See, remember, we, we had some boys--Fred Roepon [ph.] was on--is a member of the Bisons, too, you know? You know, those guys had money; they could afford to, to do that; they were like--if I was to tell them that a kid was going away to school, and they, they got a tough time, and I don't want them to go up to the school and they don't have a, a car, I took--tell you what happened--Freddie Roepon had one of his teammates, who had a son, a daughter--whichever--I don't know which one it is--I forget. But that, that particular individual that I'm talking about had--was a quad- quadriplegic--whatever it is, and they--I told--I did--wasn't--we weren't trying to get the money to buy a van, we were trying to get the money to get his van fixed. And Fred told him, or called him up about a week or later, or something like that, and told him, "Look out your window." And he looked out the window, and Phil Pepe's father--not Phil Pepe's father--what's that boy name? Seve Pepe [ph.], Seve Pepe--his wife looked out the window, and she saw this big ol' van with a, with a big red--what do you call it--and she yelled and called me, and she says, "Clarence [HistoryMaker Clarence Irving, Sr.], oh, my god!" And I said, "Well (unclear), what the hell you talking about?" So she says, "Oh," she says, "Freddie Roepon just gave," whoever her name was--Darlene, or whoever; I don't know what, "just gave 'em a van." And she say, "Can you imagine that?" So, I said, "I can imagine a whole lot of things," (laughter), "when it comes to these guys." Because the guys who made money, they, they was a very closely knit organization. Today, to tell you the truth--see, they wanna do a story on me but I don't know if I can be able to live that long to get that amount a dictation. But it's, it's an unbelievable--it's an American story that you wouldn't believe. Story_ID: 643106 Speaker 1: You were telling us off camera that Tommy Davis, who's one of the great baseball hitters of the '60s [1960s] was a, a part of the group, right? Well, he was part (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, well, Tommy, Tommy played for me for five years. He played for me through all of--from the juniors to the, to the seniors. As a matter of fact, Tommy Davis was--is this kind of a person. Tommy should have been brought up in 1954; he should have been brought up to the senior division, but I had an outfield that--it would've been very hard for him to crack that outfield, although they didn't go any--they didn't--they couldn't--but they didn't go any--'cause they didn't wanna go anywhere. You had a, a, a, a--Jim Moseley [ph.], but Jim Moseley had a bad knee--hell of a hitter, great arm, and Tommy would play--they had Walter Edge [ph.] on that same team. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Now, Walter Edge's mother--he had--Walter Edge had promised his mother that he would be a schoolteacher because we--when he graduated from high school and he was sitting on the bench with the robe on, she said, "Oh, Mr. Irving [HistoryMaker Clarence Irving, Sr.], I wanna talk to you," and I--, "What do you wanna talk to me about?" (Laughter) So I go over there and I--and she says to me, she says, "You gotta do me a favor." I said, "What kind of favor can I do for you?" She says, "Don't let Walter sign; I don't want Walter to sign a professional contract." So, I said, "Midge [ph.], Walter can't sign nothing. He can sign all he wanna; they won't even use it for wallpaper. You have to sign--he's still a young boy." And she grabbed me and hollered, "Oh, Mr. Irving I'm so (unclear)." And everybody know she's a single lady, and they know me, and everybody--and this woman--and she sitting up there in the stadium just squeezing me and won't let me go, you know, 'cause she didn't wanna--he just--he was here three weeks ago. He was here three weeks ago, yeah. And, and now--he went on to be a principal and she--anyway, she's dead now, but she was--she'll tell you that story in a minute. And the same thing with Tommy Davis; I asked him to stay down. I said, "Tommy, will you stay down until '55 [1955]? And I promise you I'll bring you up." Well, I didn't know that the team [Bisons] was gone be riddled in '55 [1955], but--and I mean by riddled was--the day that we had to blend the championship game, this guy had a broken thumb, the other guy had this, the other guy had that, but--and nevertheless, that was when told you that these guys they had a--an unbelievable built in motivation. They wanted that championship. I've never seen anybody want anything as bad as they wanted that, and the Dodgers [Brooklyn Dodgers] had a hard time catching 'em that day. And I know you're gonna say, "What are you talking about?" But then--well, don't forget, you had Gil Bassetti; Gil Bassetti hurt his arm up in Orleans, New York, and he got (unclear) so he became a scout. You had Paul Burrello [ph.]. Paul Burrello was one of the best junk men you ever seen; he didn't throw hard, but he had about nine different curves--he'd drive you crazy 'cause he in--if he ain't in the dirt, he's up around your ears, and he went on to become a policeman. And then you had Philip Taylor. Philip Taylor went to become a doc- a very prominent doctor. And he, he couldn't even play because at the time that he was supposed to play, he and Don McNeely [ph.], both had to report to football practice. So, I said, "God, is there anything else that you got up there that you can do to me?" But there--wasn't nobody gone beat--gonna, gonna, gonna beat them. And, and see--and like I told you about this guy from New Salem [New York] (laughter). See, he knew me because he was paying more attention than I was. He, he had a lot of money, 'cause he owned a big fruit building. I think he--I don't think you could bring an orange into Cooperstown [New York] area without it coming by him. And me, I--what do I know? I'm just trying to win a little ballgame here and there. But some of these people take it very seriously, and some a them lot of their money is invested in it. Story_ID: 643107 Speaker 1: Yeah (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But-- Speaker 1: --Tommy Davis won-- Speaker 2: --he won-- Speaker 1: the batting crown in the National League. Speaker 2: --Yeah, he won, he won two in a year--in a row, and (simultaneous)- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In '60 [1960], '61 [1961] [sic. 1962] Speaker 2: --but see, there's another thing. There's another piece a history that, that, that, that, that gets me--my goat. When Tommy won, do you know who's record he, he--do, do you know whose record he broke? Speaker 1: (Inaudible response). Speaker 2: Clemente [Roberto Clemente], Clemente, all right? Now, here is the thing. Clemente turns around and--what's his name? Dick Young. Dick Young wouldn't even wear black shoes; that--that's the kind of guy Dick Young was. And he accused Dick Young of taking care of the Americano--was talking about taking care a Tommy because Tommy beat him out by a, a tenth of a point, or a decimal point, or something like that. And it was all--it was in the papers; I got it now, 'cause I been saving it. He--what he--what, what he did was, he had about ten different mathematicians and they all came out, and Clemente went to his grave saying that Dick Young jobbed him out of his title. And the thing about it was Tommy played every game--Dick Young didn't play every game. And see, everybody knew--all them guys, Ramirez [Manny Ramirez] and all them guys that they're catching like now, they were using that stuff for years. You never heard of McCauley [ph.], Henry Aaron [HistoryMaker Hank Aaron], Tommy Davis, Bill White--none of those--Willie Davis. None a those guys ever--were ever caught to be on anything 'cause they didn't use anything. But that stuff came outta the Caribbean. And, and while you putting fans in the seat, nobody was gonna--nobody was gonna argue. Who was the guy that hit the five hundred home runs? He played for Chicago [Chicago Cubs]. Speaker 1: Sammy Sosa. Speaker 2: Yeah! When they said that--when they said they were gonna investigate, Sosa retired. Then they had that other guy, a really quiet guy from California; he did the same thing. They said they gonna (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Mark McGwire--McGwire--but his teammate, though-- Speaker 2: Not McGwire, it was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) but his teammate-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. The guy I'm talking 'bout was a Hispanic. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: Yeah, but not, not, not--but not all of them did it now, because Perez wasn't in that. Well, Perez was a--Perez is a--Perez is a Puerto Rican [sic.] anyway. Speaker 1: Tony Perez? Speaker 2: Yeah, Tony Perez. He wasn't--he wasn't in that stuff. Do you know, do you know Roedon? Speaker 1: Bill Roedon [ph.]? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I don't know him, no, I don't know him. I know of him, but I don't know him (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Story_ID: 643108 Speaker 1: Because--somebody was trying to tell me that--whether--to get in touch with Roedon [Bill Roedon (ph.)]--that, that Roedon could, could do a hell of a story on the Bisons, but that's--see, the last five years I, I just haven't felt up to it, you know? I, I did this--and, and I'm saying this--and I don't want you to misunderstand me. As I told you, I'm doing this more or less for my good friend and, and, and she says that--she feels, she feels that I deserve it, and she want me to do it, and I said, I said, "If they want me they'll come to me." She said, "No, Clarence [HistoryMaker Clarence Irving, Sr.], I want you to join; you gotta be in (unclear)." So I said, "What's the advantage, and what, what am I gonna do? What am I gonna do with it?" You know. Speaker 2: You, you're talking about Glennette Turner [HistoryMaker Glennette Tilley Turner] (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I'm talking 'bout Glennette, see, because Glennette is--Glennette--what Glennette wants is Glennette wants this to be in the--not the hall of fame; what do you call it? Speaker 2: Archive. Speaker 1: Archives. Yeah, but--no, but what's the name of the place? Speaker 2: The HistoryMakers archive, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, but the--what's a--it's a government thing. Speaker 2: National Archives [National Archives and Records Administration, Washington, D.C.], or Library of Congress [Washington, D.C.], or (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, National Archives, yeah. And she thinks it, it should be--and I, I, I don't argue with her-- Story_ID: 643109 Speaker 1: Let's go back to-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: --let's catch up a little bit here-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: --because you went to--you went on to Brooklyn Technical Evening School [Brooklyn Technical Evening High School; Brooklyn Technical High School, Brooklyn, New York] and studied electrical--elec- you studied to be an, an electrician, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, see, what happened--what happened there was when I became a machinist, I didn't know that machinists live a--most of 'em live a long time, and it was almost no chance of me ever becoming a journeyman. And they had offered me a supervisor's job and I wouldn't take it because I, I didn't wanna be nobody's supervisor (laughter); I'm more or less a man's man, you know. So, I felt that my best way out was to just do what I had to do and, and mind my own business, but I know what I'm trying to say. I went back to night school, but when I went back to night school, it was because my, my family was growing and I, I look around, and I'm not sa- I don't have any money saved up for them to go to college. I wasted all this time fooling around doing things that I shouldn't do, so I went back to night school so that I could learn to be an electrician-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and, and go up--I just went up a different ladder, that's all. Speaker 1: Okay, so that--after you got that certification, you went on to work for Con Edison [Consolidated Edison, Inc.]. Speaker 2: I was working for Con Ed. See, I found--see, Con Ed being a utility, and I found out that Con--Con Ed has a lot of nepotism--not only Con Ed; all of them have a lot of nepotism. And if, if you are gonna--if, if, if, if, if, if you're going to make it in those big companies--it's a little different now, but if you're gonna make it in those big companies, you better be good--you better be very good. And that's why when I see--and I, I, I shouldn't put this in there but I'll throw it in there anyhow--that's why when I see these people and then I say to 'em, "Well, what did you give the Negro fund [United Negro College Fund] last year?" Or "What did you give to the Urban League [National Urban League]?" And they turn around and say, "What they do for me?" See, I'm ready to kill him, see? And then that's when I tell 'em, I say, "Do you realize what I did? Now, you didn't have to do it for me because I had mine, but I was trying to get you in the gate, and now you stand in my face and tell me what did you do--what did they do for you? You wouldn't be here without them." I don't need to preach that sermon, but-- Speaker 1: That's true, though, I mean (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Of course it's true but--I mean I get this every day, and that--that's why-- Story_ID: 643110 Speaker 1: In '64 [1964] so, Con Edison [Consolidated Edison, Inc.], to--from what I've seen in this outline, they are--they've been very cooperative in, at least on the outline, in, in helping you do some of the things that you wanted to do. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, oh yeah. As a matter of fact, Con Ed, Con Ed wanted me to, to, to, to be--to join their public affairs department, but the reason I didn't join their public affairs department was because--there's a funny thing about, about us. For an instance, you have the--a group of people called the--I, I think you call 'em the black engineers, or the black whatever they are. Speaker 1: National Society of Black Engineers? Speaker 2: Yeah, right. Now, they--you can tell me 'cause you, you probably know more about this than I do. Do they have, do they have any set asides? Do they have anybody that you know that will say, "Well, this is Carter, man; this is Carter G. Woodson; he got us started." He (unclear) me not. You see, 'cause what--we have a way of doing--we'll, we'll, we'll knock each other down and step on each other, and show absolutely no respect for--like I did something for a guy one time--he had made a mistake. He was--had just got here, and we have the biggest feed pumps in the country--I mean in the world--'cause they were made, they were made for Big Allis. Big Allis is that big machine. You may have one in Chicago [Illinois] now, but it was, it was that big generating station that they call Ravenswood [Ravenswood No. 3] that they put in, in, in, in Queens [New York]. And what happened was this guy had a--he said to a bunch of guys one day, "Oh, yeah, we got that at home." I didn't say nothing. And he did that about six times, and I said, "Look, do you realize you're making a fool outta yourself?" They, they don't--nobody else ever had one a these things. It's just like with the boring mill. See, the boring mill was--it's nothing but a lathe laying upside down--I mean standing vertical. You look it and it's half--it takes up a, a half a block, and when you stand it the other way, it takes--it, it, it takes three and a half floors. Now, there are very few people who know how--who, who, who know the theory of the boring mill, and what I--the way I was brought up right, you pass something on to me, but I don't slap you in the face with it. I, I mean what these guys would do is they would get a brick and get something, and then they walk by; they see me eating my lunch, and I may have a peanut butter and jelly sandwich. "Yeah, you still eating peanut butter and jelly sandwich, man? You gotta go out." Huh? You didn't tell Steinmetz [Charles Proteus Steinmetz] that! That's what he wondered! (Unclear) to leave the man alone; let him be what he wanna be. You know what I mean? They gone--, "And Steinmetz was a hunchback; he was an idiot;" he, he--if what's his name was along--was two steps past an idiot. What's his name? The mathematician. Speaker 1: Einstein [Albert Einstein]. Speaker 2: But they always respected him and treated him with a certain respect. You have yet--now you--maybe you know and I don't know 'em, but you tell me, a one black safety monitor that--what you call 'em, the black engineers? That they endorsed. Speaker 1: I don't know; I don't (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I mean that didn't go to college. Story_ID: 643111 Speaker 1: You understand what I'm saying? See, because you--I'm not again--don't get me wrong, I'm not against college; I never did--never tried to say that I was against college. What I'm saying is this. Let's look at it in a truthful way. I remember years ago, see, 'cause I'm pretty close to Duke [ph.] all my life. And they wanted Duke to do something--I know they wanted to do something, and that--was the four--three of us is sitting here, and he decide so he said, "Man," said, "a, a, a, a clown should dance." And, and he say, "Yeah, but clowns can't dance, man." I say, "If you wanna bring him out there and let him shake everybody's hand, fine. But don't bring him out there and expect him to, to dance with Debbie Reynolds because he's only gone make her look bad." Or--then they'll turn--they'll turn around and have a person--for an instance, like with--Sidney Poitier is a typical case. Sidney Poitier lived in that same (unclear) neighborhood that we lived in. We laughed at him many days (unclear) 'cause Sidney used to come over and wanna buy coffee and cake, and start a conversation, and the guys said, "I'll be damned if I'm a teach you English. If you don't know it, you're in trouble." And he would say (unclear) guys, you know, and he kept working at it, and working at it, and he finally got it. Well, Sidney just happened to be one of the nice guys that everybody liked. And you take the same thing with Belafonte [HistoryMaker Harry Belafonte]. But Belafonte was, was friendly with everybody. Now you take these same guys today; they want their own world. I mean--and anytime--what is it, a house divided shall not stand? Am I right? So, why do we--am I, am I, am I making my point? Am I making a point? 'Cause I'm trying to say to you that when are we gonna wake up? And simply because of the fact that you may be an engineer, or you may be whatever you are, there are always the tricks that old man know that--you know--now, there was a guy who saved a machine. He was a--he had a habit--he would walk by, he would walk by a, a generator, and he could take his flashlight in his ear, and he could pick up a ping inside a generator, and if he tell you, "You better shut that generator down, you better shut it down." But say "He don't know, he don't know." Can you imagine that fool every time I see him he on the--they ain't gonna do nothing for him, but yet the company knew that he saved millions and millions a dollars for them because to take one down and then have to re- rebore it, and it and go through the whole nine yards, it's a big operation. But I have yet--and, and, and I guess I--this chip is on my shoulder because I know that it hadn't a been for--the other guys are dead now; they can't speak for themselves. But I could tell you one thing, if we hadn't a made it, they would not have made it because they don't understand how hard it is. You could ask Jackie Robinson, and see, there--there's a whole--there's a whole lot of Jackie Robinsons out here; they just don't say nothing, but there's a lot of us out here (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, in different fields-- Speaker 1: --in different fields. Speaker 2: Yes, sir. Speaker 1: And people don't make sure--I, I try my best to make sure that he understands and see what goes on. I took him the other day; we went to the, the sportswriters dinner. He's a piano player; what's he got business at the sportswriters dinner? But he's gotta know people. I want him to be able to go in any kind of a crowd and treat 'em nice. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 643112 Speaker 1: So Con Edison [Consolidated Edison, Inc.] would let you have the summers off to work with the Bison Athletic Club [Bisons Athletic Club], right? Speaker 2: What happened (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Over the summertime? Speaker 2: --what happened was- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --the mayor, John Lindsay--I don't--don't ask me the exact year; I think it was 1969--you can find it someplace (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Unclear). Speaker 2: But anyway, what happened was Lindsay sent for me and a couple of other guys who--say, we grew up in the streets. I don't mean that we were mugging and that kind of thing but, you know, I, I know my way around, you know, in the community. And what happened was you had the kids that nobody ever really bothered to talk to them. See, like one of the things that I learned as a youngster from the Depression [Great Depression] was if you get in a--you get into a problem, they will magnify that problem--make it even bigger than it should be. For an instance, they'll tell a kid this. "Okay, if you just tell me where John Henry lives, we'll let you go home." Well, the kid don't know no better, so they'll write out this thing say, "John Henry--I saw John Henry stealing them (unclear) apples, and John Henry's mother is strung out on drugs, and John Henry's father come from a family of bootleggers." And the kid don't know so he--he's--he, he, he signs so he can get out. So what happens? Two things happen. He has ratted the family out, and on top of that, he's established himself now as a criminal; that's how he got out. So, what I learned a lot in the streets, like you hear me, you hear me say people like Pop Lewis [ph.] and them--Mr. Walker [ph.] and those guys--they would say, "Don't do it the first time, then you don't have to worry about straightening out the second time." And one day I led a protest against the police. What happened was, I told the kids when the cops come, that they had a certain time you'd see 'em, like you could see all the way down the block. "When you see them come, you just sit on--make sure you sit on your stoop. Don't do nothing. Don't have no stickball sticks or anything. But make sure that you're not involving yourself in anything." Speaker 1: Now, you're living in Brooklyn [New York] during this time? Speaker 2: I'm living in Brooklyn, yes. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: See, I came up in Brownsville [Brooklyn, New York]. See, when Brownsville--when I first came to New York [New York] in 1940, this guy you hear me talking 'bout, Willie Gatson [ph.], Willie Gatson was really a number banker, and he would take his--he, he, had a ice truck, coal truck, and you could buy an ice house, and his ice business was a legitimate business. He never allowed us to, to have anything (unclear), and us being the kids, he never allowed us to have anything to do with the numbers game, or anything of that nature. And what happened was he--the police arrest went down. You mean to tell me you got Brownsville and you didn't arrest nobody tonight? What happens if you arrest a child? You arrest a boy--and see, people don't know this. And you have to try, and we were getting it across to them very good until 1965, and I'll tell you what I'm talking about. We told kids, "You don't get in trouble, that way you don't get a record because when you get a record, you involve the police, you also involve the corrections officer, you also involve several social workers. In the meantime, you put yourself in a position where you can never have a government job." Story_ID: 643113 Speaker 1: Now, you were finishing--finish up what you were saying before, if it's relevant to this, and then we'll go on. Speaker 2: Was it the Lindsay [John Lindsay] part? Speaker 1: You were talking about the arrest in '69 [1969] in Ocean-Hill Brownsville [Brooklyn, New York]. Speaker 2: Oh, no, this was--oh, no, this was way beyond--before Ocean-Hill Brownsville. Ocean-Hill Brownsville was another thing. No, what I was saying to you was--and maybe I shouldn't a--should've cleared it up. Remember I, I, I told you that I--or maybe I didn't say it, but I took every exam that I could take, whether it was shining shoes, or whether--as long as the government--it was a government job--because it gave us a certain amount of security. Even though we didn't have the unions to back us up, they, they did have rules, and they, they wouldn't break the rules. In, in other words, nobody went out and picked on you and say, "You're black, so you're not gonna have this." They may have found other devious ways to do these things. But my experiences with Lindsay was because Lindsay was interested in the problems that he had in the projects. "What do we do with these kids at night?" Well, I go back to--you remember me talking about the PWA [Public Works Administration] and the WPA [Works Progress Administration; Work Projects Administration]? Speaker 1: (Inaudible response). Speaker 2: What did they do? They had people who were artists, they had people who could sing, they had people who could dance--they, they did a little bit of everything. So it gave them entertainment. Now, in the '40s [1940s], they started building projects; they was tearing down the old houses like around Williamsburg [Brooklyn, New York] and stuff, and they started building new houses. So the idea that came into my head was why don't we have entertainment for these families right there within their communities because you, you would be surprised. Like you may have a grandchild; you've never seen 'em dance or whatever they do. I remember the--I remember a group called, The Voices of East Harlem, and they had a song called something about the dutchy, 'Three Times around the Dutchy' [ph.], or whatever it was; it became a tremendous hit. That was Little Anthony [Little Anthony and the Imperials]--that whole bunch--Little An- not Little--I'm sorry Lord, forgive me. I meant to say--what was the guy's name--the leader of--Frankie Lymon. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Had Frankie Lymon--had he been advised--and one a the things that has hurt us a lot is the fact that we don't understand money; we don't have the--we don't know how to work with money, and a lot of times we get lied to when you're dealing with money, and so you wind up with a--with, with, with, with a problem. Now--so, you could develop talent right there in the, in the projects; there isn't a project in the city that don't have some kind of talent that lives in there or come out of there. So I said, "Why don't we run a baseball camp in the summertime--in, in the day time, and we'll have entertainment at night?" Well, Lindsay thought it was a great idea and we did it, but it put me in trouble with the politicians because now the politicians don't have anybody that they can put their hands on. See, if you take a look at what's happening now, the boys of Harlem [Boys Choir of Harlem]--the boys of Harlem was as corrupt as anything you have ever seen, and the reason why it was corrupt was because it stuck from the head. If that man had told his--you see, they thought that Alvin Ailey was a nut, but remember, Alvin Ailey took this little girl that you probably wouldn't even let her scrub your floors, but she could dance. And he brought her up by his hands and he taught her the whole business. So when he died, she was able to take over, and this is the kind of thing-- Speaker 1: (Unclear) [HistoryMaker] Judith Jamison. Speaker 2: Judith Jamison. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 643114 Speaker 1: He could use her [HistoryMaker Judith Jamison] as an example of what you can do. Now, what's the other one's name--the other dancer? He went broke; he (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) [HistoryMaker] Arthur Mitchell? Speaker 1: Yeah. Well, see, Arthur's problem was Arthur had his certain clientele that he did his--whatever he did with, but by the same token, they had things going on that shouldn't have been--shouldn't have been going on, and if you take the boys of these--take, take the boys of Harlem (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Boys Choir of-- Speaker 1: Boys Choir [Boys Choir of Harlem] that should have been broken up a long time ago because they knew it was happening. And it's the same thing you've got right now, as I talk. You've got a baseball league right there in Queens [New York] where the manager was in control of some thirty, thirty-five kids, but that manager--but these kids are all under arrest, and this guy was in jail--he may be out by now, because he uses the funds. The politician gives him the funds that he should be using on children's programs; he's taking that money to support his political ambitions, and this is, this is the, the kind of thing that happens. Well, I had seen all of this and I grew up with it, and I knew it. And when I formed the baseball league [Betsy Head League], I--when I--and I got kids that wanted to, to play, and I got guys that I knew. And I said, "Listen, I'm gonna tell you something right now. If I catch anybody, anybody playing with anybody's daughter--playing with anybody's son, I will personally kill 'em; I promise you that." But we was--maybe--you know--we, we, we--we're down--we're not going--and they didn't. And we did that program for two years, and we had not one scandal. There were--that first dinner that you saw that we had, the guy says to me, he says, "You gotta be out of your mind." He say, "You know the (unclear) sit there that has a big balcony up in the back," and we had Ralph Kiner--oh, I don't know who the, the--Tom Seaver was there--a whole bunch of people were there. And they were doing what adults do, and we had the kids with sodas, and I said, "Anybody cross that line they're gonna have to deal with me." And during the evening I kept going back and forth, and I said, "Hey, John [ph.], having a good time? How's everything? Everybody treating you okay?" 'Cause a lot of 'em were saying, "They don't like us (unclear)." And I said, "I promise you they will show you all the respect in the world." Well, that evening I spent the whole evening having them come to me and me go to them, and it worked out fine. Story_ID: 643115 Speaker 1: Then fast forward. Let's look at 1976. Speaker 2: Okay, but before that--before we get to '76 [1976]-- Speaker 1: Sure. Speaker 2: --I just wanted to ask you about the stamp--postage stamp-- Speaker 1: Well, that was on (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) Black Heritage stamp series [Black Heritage Series]. Now, this starts in what, '72 [1972], or so, when you start (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, it actually started--what happened was this. My, my first child was a girl [Carole Irving], and I didn't want her to be a Babe Zaheedricks [sic. Babe Didrikson Zaharias]. If you remember, they blamed Babe for a whole lot of things; I never caught--saw her doing nothing, but (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, Babe Hendrickson [sic.]--yeah, the, the golfer? Speaker 1: Yeah, right. So, any--anyway, my wife [Irving's first wife] and I discussed it, but in the meantime I wanted to spend some time with her. But I, I, I, I, I say, "What do you do?" I don't play chess; I don't know if I would--had the time to learn to play chess, I wasn't interested in no crossword puzzles, so the only thing that I thought that I could do that would also be educational and would help her to think and write, and whatever it takes, because she liked--I had a relationship with a librarian, and so that's when we started the stamp collection; that's 19--that was--1950 she was born, and my sister had started me collecting stamps when Booker T. Washington's--see, Booker T. Washington's stamp came out, my sister bought me ten stamps, and I was sixteen--I was sixteen years old, or whatever it was. But anyway (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nineteen forty-one [sic. 1940], yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, my sister bought me these stamps and told me, "You don't let 'em get wet, and you don't spend 'em." "What? What you giving me this crap for?" So, I held onto it until--and every year--and my sisters would--you can ask her; they--I never grew up. She'd pick on me, said, "How many stamps you got?" (Unclear)--look at--, "I don't like that necktie," even until the day they died (laughter). And that was the way it was. Now, getting back to the stamp thing. I had saved this idea; I wasn't planning to use it, but when I made the proposal and I asked them about the trail--there's a person on that committee named Flora Jones [ph.], and Flora Jones said, "By tomorrow, they aren't even gonna know what you asked them." See, first of all, she gave me an extremely difficult chance. Now these people--this is our money; we're tax payers. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Rather than for her to come to me and say, "Well, what do you know about service organizations and things like that?" She--her first words out of her mouth was that, "You gotta have a certificate." "Huh?" "I know that's a certificate--I got a certificate." "Where'd you get it from?" I said, "I told you I, I had a certificate, right?" "You have that certificate down here for me by tomorrow morning at nine o'clock, and if it's not here, you will not be a part of this program." "Huh?" Speaker 2: A certificate of--what was she talking about? Speaker 1: Yeah. See (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And what program are you talking about, too (laughter)? Speaker 1: Yeah, no-- Speaker 2: You can't jump ahead too fast (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, okay, okay, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, so slow down a little bit. Speaker 1: So--but, in order to belong--in order to belong to the, the-- Speaker 2: Was this the bicentennial committee? Speaker 1: Yeah, the bicentennial com- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Queens Bicentennial Committee. Speaker 1: Yeah. In order for you to belong to it, you had to have a certificate. Nobody tells you this. The schoolteachers should tell kids this so that they would know; they don't tell 'em in the poor neighborhoods. You never--they never--anybody ever tell you about the 4-H club at the school you went to? Speaker 2: I didn't think so. Well, how--so, how come when you go out here to Bayport [New York], they got a 4-H club; we don't have a 4-H club. I have a letter from a girl right now. I pay the same taxes that you pay. In my high school they don't teach earth science--in their high school they do. So what happens was the reason we started--and I'm getting ahead of myself. The reason we started the Operation Elevation, and I have a letter to that affect, was because we wanted these kids to be--have a privilege of enjoying, or being able to use the things that were out there--the materials that were out-- Story_ID: 643116 Speaker 1: Now, you--so what happened--getting back to where we was-- Speaker 2: The bicentennial committee [Queens Bicentennial Committee]. Speaker 1: Yeah, bicentennial committee-- Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy-five [1975]. Speaker 1: Yeah. This is how she talks to me. There's another one, and this is on tape and not some, uh. This lady sits there and says, "Well, if the blacks are so interested in the bicentennial, why don't they have their own bicentennial like they had the DAR [Daughters of the American Revolution]?" "Huh? Don't you know, or do, do you care that we been fighting for how many years to break up the DAR? Here you are in Brooklyn, New York and telling me that we don't belong in the bicentennial?" And so, the next morning I was there, and when I got there she hung me out to dry. She made me sit there for an--over an hour. She's a really--she's in the real estate business but she's a political hack. She say--oh, I said to her, I said, "I'm gonna tell you something. You don't know who you playing with, and the reason why you don't know who you playing with is because I promise you I will jack you up as high as the moon, for what you've just done. You have no right to do what you've done. First of all, you're not supposed to do bicentennial business away from the bicentennial facilities. You got a office downtown; what do you make me come to you over here for?" So, anyway, make a long story short, I go back and I was talking to--what's her name? Flora Jones [ph.]--and, and, and we had a--we used to go to--we used to eat in White Towers on St. Johns [Place]--St. Johns, yeah. Anyhow, she said, "Well, what do you think?" I said, "Not very much." She said, "You know, I got a bad feeling about her, too." So, I said, "Flora, I got one thing that I could submit, but it, it will set 'em on fire." She said "What?" I said, "If I put in this stamp." See, it was only for two black women; it wasn't a series. What happened was Joe Addabbo [Joseph P. Addabbo], the congressman--when he got a hold of it and realized what I had, he and the borough president--the borough president, his [sic.] name is Claire Shulman-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and they said (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Let's make sure we go through this one step at a time, and don't jump over the connections (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Okay, well-- Speaker 2: --'cause we won't know what you're talking about. Story_ID: 643117 Speaker 1: Where do you want me now? Speaker 2: So, so, you're talking about--you had an idea for two stamps-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --for two black women, right? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Who? Speaker 1: My, my, my choice was--I'm glad you brought that point up. My choice was Mary McLeod Bethune, and when I said, Mary McLeod Bethune--now, I'm not sure (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And who was the other one? Speaker 1: The other one, it came up to be Harriet Tubman. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And--but I thought that we'd get Mary McLeod Bethune we're doing something, that--that would've been the end a that. But after they made the big stink over Mary McLeod Bethune, we decided (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, what was the--what were their--they, they rejected the idea of having a--having her on a U.S. postage stamp? Speaker 1: Not so much that as it is the idea that--and I have to be honest with you. There are certain things that certain people don't like for other people to be able to say that, "I did it." If they can say it, or if they could say, "This boy and I," or "We," or "This is a good ol' boy here. We put it together, but don't have any ideas of your own." And that's--and that's what it was because (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's where the friction came? So it's (unclear)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, that's--this is, this is where it--because it came from outta the sky. "What would make him think about a United States stamp?" This is outta the ballpark. You talking 'bout the whole country--you're talking 'bout fifty states. So, anyhow, Joe Addabbo [Joseph P. Addabbo], a very nice person, he realized what he had, and also it's his--he was a congressman, and Joe jumped right on it. Now, when he mentioned it to the guy--he went to the guy from--I can't remember him to save my life now. Strom Thurmond! Strom Thurmond! Speaker 2: Strom--okay. Speaker 1: I think he went to Strom Thurmond, and Strom Thurmond said that he wasn't gone have no NBs--he wasn't--no, he wasn't gonna endorse no NBs. And the guy behind him, I'm not sure, is from Maryland; I should of paid more attention to it. But it was a guy from--a congressman from Maryland. So Joe said--you see, they have a courtesy. He said, "I'll--." He said, "I'll go with you." So, he said, "What?" And so Joe calls me out to work, and Joe is being a cong- is a congressman, and he said to me, "Would you like to--?" I--he, he, he, he, he said, "We got a--you got a choice." I said, "What?" He--, "You've got Harriet Tubman or--," what's the girl's name out of Upstate New York? Speaker 2: Sojourner Truth. Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: No? Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah, Sojourner Truth; that's her, you got it--Sojourner Truth. So, he said, "But I know who you wanna choose." So, I said, "Joe, after all, I could throw a--." See, where I was born, I could--I, I, I can't throw the (unclear) have a machine gun to do it, but I could throw a rock in Harriet Tubman's window. But don't forget, Sojourner Truth was born in New York. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Joe Addabbo was born in New York. But since it was my idea, he was willing to go along with me the way that I went. So, I told him that I wanted Harriet Tubman. Story_ID: 643118 Speaker 1: So, he said, "Okay," and they got it through. Now, if you look at it--and say, "I'm not looking at anything right now," but if you look at it, you'll notice that Harriet Tubman, Sojourner Truth, and--what's the other? There are three of them--there're, there're one, two, three. Speaker 2: Mary McLeod Bethune? Speaker 1: Mary McLeod Bethune, see, were all on this ticket. So, that's how it started. In the meantime, Joe [Joseph P. Addabbo] was beginning to get a lot of, a lot of smoke. "What are you taking care of them for?" So, when he saw this--see, your, your boy was the one who, who picked it up--who brought it up. Stokes. Speaker 2: Oh, [HistoryMaker] Louis Stokes from Ohio? Yeah. Speaker 1: Stokes, right. See, because Stokes, Stokes (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Congressman Stokes. Speaker 1: --Stokes is listening and keeping his ear to the ground but he ain't saying nothing because he got his horse in the stable, too, you know. He had a--what's your boy's name? You just named him--in Dayton [Ohio]. Speaker 2: C.J. McLin. Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: Dunbar, Dunbar. Speaker 1: Dunbar--Paul Laurence Dunbar. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, he's in the game and, and, and he's eating this stuff up because he likes it. In the meantime, Joe Addabbo said, "I promise you one thing; those three girls'll be on there; we'll get them through. You're on there and I promise you this, too, that we're gonna start--we'll start a series." I said, "Joe, I don't believe--." He says, "Watch me." See, he was dying of cancer anyhow, and that was number one. Number two is he didn't care because he, he, he didn't have no love for them, them guys. You see, people don't realize the fact that--the things that, that, that--a lot of those civil rights things that happened was because Emanuel Celler and those guys--Joe didn't really depend on them for, for, for his, for his support. And then aside from that, I had been involved with St. John's University [Queens, New York, New York], which was his alumni, so that's how we got the four that started on there. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. So this is--and the, the series [Black Heritage Series] was founded in--I guess in 1976 and, and has been (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It, it was founded in--it was, it was proposed in '76 [1976], and the first stamp came out in '78 [1978]. Speaker 2: Seventy-eight [1978], okay, all right, okay. And there've been like--over thirty stamps, I guess, now. Speaker 1: Yeah, way over thirty stamps now. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 643119 Speaker 1: Tell us about--now, in--you were on the bicentennial committee [Queens Bicentennial Committee] and formed something called the Bisons Bicentennial Committee, too, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Seventy-four [1974]. Speaker 2: I was on a bicentennial committee but, you see, they didn't let us in on the reindeer games. You see, I'm still not sure--culturally speaking, I'm still not sure if a lot of this is because we have people who're elected--who just don't care, or people who're elected who don't wanna show their ignorance, and so they pretend, you know, with--it's the fox and the grapes thing, you know. The guy says (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Is your congressman--was it Addabbo [Joseph P. Addabbo]? Speaker 2: To my--Congressman Addabbo then, yes. Speaker 1: And, and I know Shirley Chisolm was in another district in Brooklyn [New York] then, right? She was-- Speaker 2: Yes, but, you see, Shirley Chisolm had nothing to do with that. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay, right. Speaker 2: And, as, as, as a matter of fact, you shouldn't of even mentioned Shirley Chisolm because Shirley Chisholm was a disgrace. My daughter won Miss Gardenia [ph.] in 1970--'69 [1969], or something like that, and we had--over half of the Mets [New York Mets] were there, and Shirley Chisholm didn't even send a postcard. Not that you expect money, but you--usually they have a repre- if they can't do it themselves, they send a representative to, to speak on their behalf, but she never did do it. Well, see, Shirley, Shirley got into trouble because we had asked Shirley to join the agricultural committee, and she said, "I ain't no damn farmer; I don't know nothing about farming." And you see what's happened with the-- Speaker 1: The black farmers [Pigford v. Glickman], yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: They finally got their money. Speaker 2: Did they get the money? Did they get it? I know they (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Unclear) were made, beginning in 2009, I believe. Speaker 2: Yeah, but did you see the check? Speaker 1: I didn't personally get one, so I didn't see one. Speaker 2: Yeah, see, because they (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But that's what I, I read, that they (unclear)-- Speaker 2: You see, we--the reason I say that is because we had the same kind of thing. Now, here's a case right here where Tip O'Neill and--I forget who the other person was now. But anyway, they set up a--it was Tip O- was--Tip O'Neill and Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] set up that--a notch of people my (unclear) from twenty--who was born 1926 and--oh, I forget the other years, but anyway, I fit into that bracket. They took this money out of social security and said we would get it back. If you've seen it, I've seen it. But yet they show us no mercy when it comes to taking away our income taxes. And the other thing is this. Joe Lou- Joe Louis gave $250,000 to the naval relief fund tax [Navy Relief Society; Navy-Marine Corps Relief Society]. Duke Ellington did fifty-five shows--tax. How you like that? This is not something I made up; these are things that actually happened. And if you tell this to--the only people that know anything about it, is, is Stokes [HistoryMaker Louis Stokes]. Stokes knew, and who else? Stokes knew and the, the guy outta Pennsa- out of, out of-- Speaker 1: Gray? Out of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]--William Gray [HistoryMaker William H. Gray, III]? Speaker 2: No, no. He's a Republican, to tell you the truth. You know the guy, out of Massachusetts. Speaker 1: Oh, Ed Brooke [HistoryMaker Edward Brooke]. Speaker 2: Ed Brooke. But these things we got down there now, I--the guy said, "I wouldn't give you a cold bucket of spit for 'em 'cause--." Trust me. So we really get the shaft. Story_ID: 643120 Speaker 1: I wanted you to talk about the Black American Heritage Foundation that you formed in 1984, right-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and the music archive [York College-Black American Heritage Foundation Music History Archive]. Speaker 2: Yes. I formed a foundation because there were a lot of things that happened, particularly in the mu--in the world of music, and people don't know--for an instance, Nat Cole [Nat King Cole] had a very sad experience in Alabama when he went home, and I remember the time when Roy Eldridge, trumpet player--heck of a trumpet player--he was playing with Artie Shaw. Now, Artie Shaw had--he had a song called, 'Let Me Off Uptown,' and in the song--Anita O'Day is a wonderful person, which wouldn't hurt a fly on your head, and Anita O'Day comes on in the song as Roy--near the end of his so--I'm trying to see how they did it. But anyhow, she sings--she comes right in; she sings, and near the end she says--Roy does his thing and he says, "Anita, Anita," and then she said--it was something about, "I feel like I wanna blow." And when she says--and she says, "Whoa, blow Roy, blow!" Well, see, Roy--and she--when she did it, she pulled--she touched him; she didn't put her arm around him, but she touched him, and when she touched him, the theater almost went crazy. And he say, "Can you believe this? Here I am, world renown- at home, and for them to treat me like this." And he, he, he, he never really got over it, and there every musician--see, I--one time I owned a record store, and how I got in the record business was because (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) About what time period are we talking about? Speaker 2: Oh, what time are we talking about? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I owned a record store in 1945. What happened was I bought the--I, I bought--I gave Ernie Butler five hundred dollars, and he put his five hundred dollars; he opened a store. And you know the guy, Robinson [ph.], up on 8th Avenue [Frederick Douglass Boulevard]? Speaker 1: (Inaudible response). Speaker 2: Well, there's a guy up there, he's 'bout ninety years old, and got long white hair now. But anyhow, he used to own--at that time he, he used to own a blue--he started out with a shoeshine parlor and a record store, and records started hitting that Apollo [Apollo Theater, New York, New York], so he got his record business expanded. But you didn't have any such thing as that in Brooklyn [New York], and a lot of guys didn't like to live in Manhattan [New York]. Anyway, I--my friend, he came from Pennsylvania also--Wilks-Barre he came from. As a matter of fact, he fought a guy name Costalonus [ph.], and he beat Costalonus, but the members of the Scranton family was there at the fight, and they saw him get robbed, and a guy came in the dressing room and told him, he said, "Don't worry, son, I'll take you--we'll take care of you." If you take-you'll take care of me? Now what did I do, you know? (Unclear) white people (laughter). So, anyway. Story_ID: 643121 Speaker 1: He came to New York [New York] and he visited me and he told him that he had a, had a job for him. In the meantime, Ernie had opened this record store. See, he was the guy who discovered--Ernie was the guy who discovered Larry Holmes, and Larry Holmes will tell you that Ernie taught him to save his first ten dollars, and Larry--Ernie Butler told him to save his first ten dollars that he ever put in the bank in his life; he never had a bank account until Ernie Butler taught him. Now, in the meantime, I'm stuck with the store, and he says, "You can either buy it or, or lose it; it's up to you." I ain't gone lose no five hundred dollars. So I took over the store. I don't know nothing about no record business--I don't wanna be in the record wor- I didn't know about the record business. But it was a store--I don't know if you had this kind of stores in New York--or I, I mean in, in Dayton [Ohio] or not. The front a the store was, was a selling area. In other words, you had--whatever you--your product was sold at that end. In the back a the store, you had a, a bedroom, a, a, a, a--a living quarters back there. So, in the meantime, I'm stuck with this, and I got to meet--by hanging out with George Gainford and those guys, I got to meet fighters. What is the guy name? Roy--a guy name Troy [ph.], another guy name--what do they call--well, anyway, names aren't important, but what is important is these guys, they would come up here and they had to borrow money from week--from fight to fight. The musicians did the same thing--they had to borrow money from, from one period of time to another, so this guy was getting five for six, at a dollar a week interest. In other words, you would--for every five dollars you borrowed from him, you had to give him a dollar interest. So, I said, "This guy, he's eating--he's eating you alive." He say, "Well, what can I do?" Speaker 2: That's 20 percent. Speaker 1: Yeah. So, I said, "I can," I said, "I can see to it that you do better than that." Well, see, I knew the street, but I never played the game. And there was a guy, we used to call him Charlie Cheeks [ph.]; he only had one eye. And he was (laughter)--I, I can tell you now, 'cause he's dead. He used to work for Consolidated Laundries [Consolidated Laundries Corporation] and--but he had privilege to get into the laundry--to the sheets--before they got--before they put the, the stamp on 'em, and he was selling 'em and renting them to women who had--who--women who had rooming houses, and he was selling 'em and renting 'em to these guys, and they were also renting rooms to these guys. Now, all day these guys had nothing to do, so I would let them--you didn't cone in the store to go in, in, in, into this place. You came in the building, and then you walked down a hall, and it was a side door. As long as you stayed at the back and didn't yell all over the place, they didn't even know you was back there--nobody was--but as a matter of fact, the guy that lady used to see--the girl--it's a girl who used to work for me forty hours a week--forty--yeah, forty hours a week, and she was--I was paying her a dollar an hour, and she had a baby, and they thought it was mine--thought that, thought that she was--it was my baby (laughter). It wasn't my baby; it was that--it was a good break for her. She a brand new baby, she didn't have to take the blue--'cause what just--what used to trouble me and still trouble me--I hate to see a woman in the morning with her baby, and she--you see the baby so sleepy, so tired, and you gotta take the baby to somebody else's house. Let that chile sleep. So I said, "Would you, would you take--you can have the place in the back." So she took the place in the back and I said, "But there only one thing--I gotta have privileges. If I have a meeting with somebody with--," and she kept that place as neat as possible. You could--it couldn't have been any neater or cleaner. And for a long time, they thought that she was, she was my wife. And one day, my wife came in this way with my baby, and there this girl was (laughter) at this--at the counter (laughter) with, with the other baby. So I said, "Now, these are the--these two babies that you've seen; this is my baby, this lady works for me." But it was a great help to her. Story_ID: 643122 Speaker 1: I decided that I wanted to talk to these guys who were in the business because they were guys that were saying, "I'll get you a job tonight." Like--let's say they get him a job at the, the Rose Club [ph.] to sing tonight. But what they would do is--and not only would they--if the job paid ten dollars, they gone take five off the top, or something--or two or three--not five, but two or three. They always rake off--there was always--and I said, "You don't have to--you don't have to--nobody treat you like that." So--like people tell you that you can do anything you wanna do, I got news for it--you try it. We had a friend who had--who was in the Signal Corps [U.S. Army Signal Corps], and he knew--you know jukeboxes, right? Speaker 2: (Inaudible response). Speaker 1: Well, he knew jukeboxes backwards. There was--he, he could put 'em together, do anything he wanted to do with 'em. And I went--we went down to Wurlitzers [Rudolph Wurlitzer Company] and we gave Wurlitzers one thousand dollars, that was twenty-five dollars each, for these jukeboxes. So, we went down there and the guy (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Fifty dollars apiece, right? Yeah (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah, whatever it is, yeah; I can't count. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Anyway, what happened was, when we got down there, there's a guy sitting there, and he says, "Listen, I'm gonna give you your money back, but I want you to forget about ever getting in this business. This is not for you." So--and that's why we never got into the jukebox business, because at that time, you had the soda pop--ice cream stores, you know, when you go in there, they made more money in ice--made more money with the jukebox than they did with the ice cream. But all of these were experiences and things that we saw, and I--we saw guys could sing, could dance, could do almost anything, but they had no control--they had no idea of what to do with their money, or how to control themselves. Speaker 2: Okay, so--now, remember, we're talking about the music archive [York College-Black American Heritage Foundation Music History Archive]-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --music history archive. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: So this involvement in music over years' involvement. You said you knew Duke Ellington, and all these musicians. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: So, so this involvement, is that what leads to the development of the archive? Speaker 1: Yes, absolutely. It, it, it, it looks--I knew, I knew Duke Ellington because I went to school with Duke Ellington's niece. I'm sorry--I went to school with Arnold Hardwick-- Otto Hardwick's niece--he was a saxophone player in Duke's band; he was one a Duke's original musicians. But the thing of it--the thing of it was that most musicians were extremely unhappy. They were unhappy because they were always on the road. You gotta go when you don't wanna go, and you find people--I don't condone drugs--never used 'em, and was always--to, to tell you the truth, I was always too afraid to use 'em because I saw too many guys that I know that they took one hit and they could never pull themselves back. Story_ID: 643123 Speaker 1: But in talking about musicians, there was--for, for, for an instance, the guys who made the big money were the guys that were taken advantage of most. And I tried--all my life I had tried to teach people, like youngsters, to, to--I said, "Take a look at Louis Armstrong. What has he done for us? Where is that apartment building that he built for us?" See, they don't know--and because of the fact now that they can live in metropolitan buildings--and I won't--can't think of the name of the buildings, Stuyvesant Town [New York, New York], Parkchester [Bronx, New York]. All of those places were built by companies like Metropolitan Life Insurance Company, but you couldn't buy an apartment in the--I remember a friend of mine, he had a beautiful body--it actually was my partner. He had a beautiful body, and he had this sculpture; every--that saw him as she went to the gym, and she saw him and she liked his physique, so she asked him would he pose for her. Well, he, he did, and (laughter) what happened was this. Every morning, she said, "For you--when you--I'm gonna give you the key, and you--if I'm sleep, it's okay; you can wake me up, and you come down here and, and, and when you get all ready to pose, just let me know, and I'll be ready to work." So, anyway, he had the key. He goes into her apartment, takes off his shirt--it was the summertime. He takes off his shirt, and when he takes off his shirt, there's a guy over in the apartment building up there, and he's seeing what he's doing, and it looks like to him that he was going in there raping this white woman (laughter), and don't you know, that the cops came and knocked the door down! I don't mean--they didn't tap on it, they knocked the door down! And there they were, ready to put him in jail, and the girl--and, and, and, and the girl said, "Oh, well, he--he's working with me, he's working with me." So, the guy says, "Just tell 'em that he forced his way in here, and you don't have to pay him." And she says, "Oh, I can't do that." See, you know, you meet a lot of women in New York [New York] from a lot of different place, and they're really honest and, and down to earth, and fair minded people. But they--she--he wanted her--this guy so bad until that's what he was willing to do, to tell a lie. Can you imagine the trouble that that would of put him in? And there were many situations like that. Now, getting back to John [ph.], John--huh? Story_ID: 643124 Speaker 1: Well, I just wanna get back to the--why, why you founded the black--the music history archive [York College-Black American Heritage Foundation Music History Archive], and what is it the black music history archive (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I formed, I formed the music history archive because there were so--there were so many cases where the new--the writers wrote what they wanted to write, and the guys had tears coming outta their eyes because they knew it was a lie. And you'd be surprised at the--except for the Amsterdam [New York Amsterdam News] and a couple of other papers. You couldn't, you couldn't get the truth, and, and so when you--if, if a guy had a story and he wanted to write up--wanted you to write about his home--his home state--maybe Dallas, Texas, or wherever it was--they didn't want that. If it didn't have some smut in it, they didn't wanna deal with it. So that was the reason why. And I listened to these fellows tell their stories, and I preserved as much as I could, and I had it in my mind. See, remember, that isn't--Harlem [New York, New York] is not a community that was owned by the musicians; they were just there living in a room, or whatever they could. The ones in Queens [New York] that owned that property now--and these are typical of the people who wanted to be--musicians who wanted to create and, and do various things, and this way, they could tell their story the way they wanted to tell it, without having to have somebody edit it and say what they want it to say, you see, because--and with Louis Armstrong, if you didn't have him giggling, you had--you, you, you had nothing. But they never told you about--how many people will tell you about W.C. Handy? And almost nobody will tell you about William Grant Still. And, and being serious was something that they didn't want; they wanted you to be like an idiot. For--it's the same thing like--what's the saxophone player that lived in--he, he, he, he lived--he, he had the same address as Rose Murphy. He used to keep his clothes at Rose Murphy--he was always on the road, but he kept his clothes with Rose Murphy-- Speaker 1: In Baltimore [Maryland]? Speaker 2: No. Right there, right there in Queens. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: You remember Rose Murphy. I'm trying to think of the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I don't (unclear). I'm not from here (laughter). Speaker 2: Yeah, well I was trying to think of the name of the saxophone player. But, but what I'm saying is this. There are many people, particularly in the theater and in the arts, who can't express themselves, who can't say what they wanna say, or do what they wanna do. Now, I'm not talking about what we saw--what's his name? Richard Pryor. I'm not talking--I'm not talking necessarily about them, and I've seen guys who had their, their material stolen from 'em. What do you call it used to say--what was his name? The (unclear) used to say he never saw a joke yet, that he didn't wanna steal. Milton Berle. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Now, how do you think that sounds to a guy that--he sits up and writes his joke and fine tune, get it all squared away, and after he get it all squared away, the guy take it downtown and, and, and he's working downtown and he's making hundreds of thousands a dollars a year, and the guy who's telling the joke is making less than nothing. Story_ID: 643125 Speaker 1: From what I understand, the music history archive [York College-Black American Heritage Foundation Music History Archive] is housed in a college here in--? Speaker 2: How it got to be--it originally was to be housed in a park department property. Again, getting back to what I told you, we do not have people who are interested in culture; they didn't understand culture. And their problem was--don't come to them with a proposition, and if you knew what you were talking about, it's almost guaranteed that they're not gone do it. Speaker 1: Okay. So--all right. So, where is the archive at the present time? Speaker 2: It's at York College [Jamaica, New York]. And the reason it's at York--the reason that it is at York College is because I was able to work out a situation with a--rather, to work out a, a, a proposition with the president [Milton Bassin]. Now, there is something I wanna tell you about that particular college. There was a lady who does public affairs, and she wrote a story about that nobody was intro- thinking about- nobody was thinking about the culture or history, until this guy Carlisle Towery came along. Now, I know the man. But that's not true. Speaker 1: Carlisle-- Speaker 2: Carlisle Towery-- Speaker 1: --Towery. Speaker 2: --until he came along (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Can you spell his last name? Speaker 2: T-O-W-E-R-Y. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In other words he, he--we needed him to do our thinking. And that--and that's a lie; that's not what really happened. What really happened was that these people are so stubborn, they refuse to correct a mistake. It was--I did a piece the other day--a volunteer piece for the museum and, and then--they had omitted the fact that Duke Ellington had been a fundraiser for the treasury department [U.S. Department of the Treasury] in 1942. They completely omitted it. I wrote them--I had somebody send them an email and I sent 'em a letter. She wrote me back a letter and apologized that she was so sorry, that she was not aware of the error that she had made. This is the way people get along. You don't say, "You don't tell me what to do." I mean we all make mistakes, but this is, is, is, is what happened. Now, you've got a bunch of--one of our main--greatest problems right now is the lack of a, a cooperation among our people themselves. Story_ID: 643126 Speaker 1: That--that's--this--almost like no other way I could put it. Speaker 2: Okay. Now, now, this is a--well, tell us about the--now, now, the Black American Heritage Foundation--is that, is that housed anywhere in--around here? Speaker 1: The Black American--it is not housed as it was intended to be housed, and the reason why it's not housed is because--again, in order for you to do--in order for us to do the kind of things that we would like to do, it means that we have to listen to what other people say, and I'm not interested in listening to what other people--I'm interested in the, the truth about the, the matter. What is the truth? So that, you know, we can pass this on to, to our children, and they will have something to talk about, write about, or whatever it is. Story_ID: 643127 Speaker 1: Looking back on everything you've done to this point--and you've received like hundreds of awards, it seems. I mean I have read the list and list of awards from everybody around this area. What would you consider to be your, your, your legacy as a community activist? Speaker 2: Well, the one thing that strikes me more than anything, and means a lot to me, and I'm not necessarily of his persuasion, but when the president of the United States said that I do things in an American way, I think that's the thing that I'm quoting, or at least it's close enough. But to have the president of the United States willing to sign his name to the things that you've done as a citizen through the years, I don't think it could get any better than that. And that, that could be George Wallace; I, I couldn't care who--if it's Haley Bower [ph.]. But to have the president of the United States recognize you--and particularly me. Maybe I'm just being selfish, but I look at it this way. When I think of all the things that I've had to go through, I think of the things that my family has gone through, and I think of the things that I've earned the right to be called an asset to America, it's pretty good stuff--for me. Story_ID: 643128 Speaker 1: And your family, I mean this is a--as we walked in here today, the place is--there are lots of files, lots of boxes, lots of awards, lots of (laughter)--it, it looks like a place where there's a lot of volunteering and activism going on. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So, I mean, just--when you look back again at everything you've done to this point, is there anything different that you would do, if you could change something? Speaker 2: When you real--when, when you realize where you came from and what you had to do--remember, there were times when I couldn't vote, there were times when, when I started in working for the government. They say, "Pass my test, and I'll think about what you would like to do, but you will have to first pass my test." And I feel that, to be given the opportunity--and then not only do that, but also accomplish. For an instance, the greatest fear, I guess, among those, is when you have--even the mayor of today--and I'm not politically active, and he says, "Go ask Clarence Irving [HistoryMaker Clarence Irving, Sr.] how did he make it; he's been here eighty-nine years, he must know something." That's a, that's a, that's a pretty heavy appraisal (laughter). And you think of anybody, and they think enough of you to say that good, "Ask Tom Scott over there; Tom was around." That meaning somebody has some respect for you because you certainly don't send a person to a person that nobody has respect for. Story_ID: 643129 Speaker 1: You worked with youth for a great portion of your life. What advice would you give to youth watching this interview today? Speaker 2: (Laughter) I, I, I would say this. Get it right the first time, and don't--and above all, don't say that-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: I believe that--the, the one thing that our youth has to understand--simply because you have an eraser on a pencil, don't mean that you need to use it; if you do, then you do, but I have never yet seen a--an erasure--a, a respect that on the same level as a document that doesn't have an erasure. So, trying to do it the right way the first time and, and al- al- always remember that if you're gonna wait for life to be fair, you may be waiting a long time. I, I, I think you give it your best shot the first time. Story_ID: 643130 Speaker 1: Tell us something about your family. I know you've been married twice. Your, your, your current wife [Lillie B. Crowder] is an activist, too, involved in a lot of-- Speaker 2: Yeah, she's a person that was involved in the move- the movement, if you will. I think she's a very courageous woman, in that when you think about the fact that your par- (laughter), your parents--you (unclear). Your parents send you to school, and while you're at school you get involved in the movement and, and those girls, they had maybe two dresses as a mini- as a maximum, and for them to have to--and your parents are hardly making ends meet, and yet they had the courage to say, "I'm not gonna throw rocks at you, and I'm not gonna throw bricks at you; I'm gonna hit you in the places where the most vulnerable would hurt more. If--you are the people who are our board of education, but you sell the food to our school, and if you're not selling any food, that's gone be a whole lot more potent than for me to throw a brick in a window. Because if, if I don't eat--you can't lock me up for not eating. You can only lock me up for a thing that I physically do, but if I'm not eating, I just tell you I don't have an appetite." If you take a look at--no, this is a good take to take a look at a state like Alabama, and what they--and what the people who came from these states--how did they make it? What did they do? Because that's--this is what got us where we are. Speaker 1: Yeah, I know you--I know your wife was involved in South Carolina, right? (Unclear). Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, right. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. But, but, but it, but it, but it was all a part of the overall picture. Story_ID: 643131 Speaker 1: What about your children? Speaker 2: I would say my children did a lot of good things and, unfortunately, my oldest child [sic.] was involved in things that--he [Clarence Irving, Jr.]--he's not a poli- he's not a politician, and he has certain standards that, that, that he li- that he lives by. I should be ashamed of the fact that I'm not a, a person who is computer astute--he is; he has done a lot of writing. He's a graduate of Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California], and I think that he has, and still does. I don't see him that often because--one of the things, when your children work on the inside--working in the government; it's somewhere you don't wanna be. If I don't know it, I can't tell it. You'd be surprised how many strange vehicles have shown up here through the years, but they realize the fact that I'm not involved in anything, so why bother me? But if they saw him frequently here, then it would be a different kind of a story (unclear). Speaker 1: So, you have two children, or, or-- Speaker 2: I, I, I--actually three. Speaker 1: Three, okay, all right. Do you wanna name 'em for us, and tell us what they're doing? Speaker 2: Sure. The oldest one is a girl [Carole Irving]. She was married--she was--she's married to a fellow that's in the [U.S.] Army for over twenty-five years, and what she does--he was stationed overseas for about twenty-two years, I think it was. But his job primarily is to watch our soldiers and--at least tap 'em on the shoulder--, "You don't win 'em all." But you, you tap 'em on the shoulder and say, "We don't smoke Camel cigarettes, and if you, if you find yourself smoking 'em, I just want you to know you're outta line," and you can do what--you do what you want. My daughter is involved in the situation--in a sense the Army took in- into the--since the Army integrated. You've got a lot of problems that they didn't have before because you got women and men integrated. The third one, he [Anton Regales] works as a detective for a, a hotel chain, like the Hampton House. He, he, he basically will go there. I never dreamed of this job. He'll go to the hotel, and the guy at the front desk doesn't know who he is. Speaker 1: Okay, so he's something like a-- Speaker 2: He's secret service. Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 643132 Speaker 1: Now, is there anything I haven't asked you about that we need to discuss before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: Trying to think. Well, I did ask you--there was something that I, that, I wanted to ask you. You don't have to answer it if you don't feel that you should (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Unclear). Speaker 2: I wrote a piece, and I'll give you a copy of it, or I'll send it to you. The piece that I wrote is--I'm deeply troubled with our situation now, particularly in this country. I was, I was under the impression that we were trying to be Americans--we were all trying to be good Americans--reach that point. After 1965, we brought in a group of new people and, and, and, and they, they, they don't--appears to me that what they're doing is, is, is making another slice out of the pie. I didn't know that that was what we were trying to do. I thought we were just trying to enrich the fire that we have. It troubles me when I see a person--for an instance, we have a--people who've been here for many years--like I mentioned to you somewhere down the road, we got where we are because we discussed and asked each other, and all of a sudden, it appears that the African American is being pushed outta the game by the very same people that you, you, you were trying to help. I don't see any need to be Italian--you're an Italian American. Now, if you're gonna do nothing but eat pizza pies and pasta fazool, you, you, you're breaking off a spur that sooner or later is gonna grow so big it's gonna drop off and break itself off. Story_ID: 643133 Speaker 1: Now, as I recall this, when I came here to New York, we had people who came here from Europe, or where--various places, and all it--I, I, I understood it to be you give me a chance, and I'll prove to you what I can do. And when I got the chance, I did that. Now, we have a group of people who are saying, "Look at me." "Huh?" Is that what we really wanna be? Because if that's what we're gonna be, we're only gone destroy ourselves. Now, I'm part Powhatan; I'm not gone walk around--yet, anyway (laughter)--I'm not gone walk around trying to prove to anybody who I am. I'm an American. You asked me if these were the requirements. In order for me to do what I did, I did them. And now that I've done them and been respected for 'em, why can't we move on? Why can't we all? We sat here this afternoon, and we could do this in the next twenty years, and never have a cross word. Why? Because we wanna be Americans. Now, I don't know anything about what somebody did to hurt somebody's feelings, or whatever they did, but I'm saying this. If we're gonna be Americans, we better get started in doing what we have to do, that people will respect us because we go back, like I told you about the thing with Carlisle [Carlisle Towery]. How this lady gonna sit there and write that nobody knew anything until he came along? He won't--he don't even (unclear) that--won't even tell you that. Does it, does it make sense? You take the World War II [WWII]--I'm sorry; not World War II, the other thing. Speaker 2: Vietnam [Vietnam War], or-- Speaker 1: No. The, the, the-- Speaker 2: The Civil War (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, no, no--no, no. I wasn't--I, I wasn't--I'm talking about--you take right now, and you go out here to the World's Fair [Flushing Meadows, Queens, New York]. You've got a beautiful story out there, but nobody cares to talk about it. You got Jackie Robinson, you've got Arthur Ashe, and Ralph Bunche. Three fatherless black men who all made a big difference in this country, yet we have--how many kids know who they are, or what they've done? And so you see I, I, I, I don't wanna get any deeper because we could talk all day. Now--and if they're so wrong, why is it the mayor still can say, "Well, call Clarence Irving [HistoryMaker Clarence Irving, Sr.] up and see if he, if he is--still remembers, 'cause I wanna ask him how did he make it in 1969? How did he make it through the last depression? How did he get his kids in the best schools that this country has to offer?" But that's my question, and I'll leave it there. Am I off base? Story_ID: 643134 Speaker 1: The last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different. Sir, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: As a person who tried to leave something here that my friends and my family (unclear) could be, could be proud of. I knew this guy; this is what he was trying to do. I talked with him, I walked with him, I ate with him, and all he ever wanted to do was just be a, a good American in a quiet atmosphere, is it? That, that, that's it. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, thank you very much. Speaker 2: Thank you. My pleasure, my pleasure...