 Story_ID: 360114 Speaker 1: My name is Evelyn Pounds, and Adrian Jackson is the videographer. I am the interviewer. Please state and spell your full name. Speaker 2: Edith, E-D-I-T-H, Jacqueline, J-A-C-Q-U-E-L-I-N-E, Ingram, I-N-G-R-A-M [HistoryMaker Edith Ingram]. Speaker 1: Okay. And today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is January 25th, 2006. Speaker 1: All right. The location of this interview? Speaker 2: This is 32 Whaley Street, Sparta, Georgia. Story_ID: 360115 Speaker 1: I'm going to ask you a few questions, and they bey- they may be a little People magazine-ish. What is your favorite food? Speaker 2: My favorite food is chicken. Speaker 1: Time of year? Speaker 2: Spring. Speaker 1: Color? Speaker 2: Purple. Speaker 1: Vacation destination? Speaker 2: Anywhere I can fish. Speaker 1: A favorite phrase or saying, if you have one? Speaker 2: One that my grandmother used to say all the time: the bottom rail is going to come to the top. Story_ID: 360116 Speaker 1: Please tell us something about your mother, her name, when she was born. Speaker 2: My mother's name was Katherine Hunt Ingram. She was born May 6, 1919 here in Hancock County [Georgia]. She was one of eleven children, and she was a mother who spent most of her time with her family. She loved to cook, she was the best cook that I've ever met. And of course, I try to model myself after her, but I never quite get it right; almost but not quite. During the time of the movement time, my mother was the person who was always home. All of the calls came into her house. Speaker 1: And this was during the Civil Rights Movement? Speaker 2: This was during the Civil Rights Movement in the earl- late '60s [1960s] and early '70s [1970s]. And she would proceed to get the message to whoever it needed to get to. She was a person who had a bit of a temper when people--when my brothers [Jerold Ingram and Robert Ingram] got in jail, she would be the first one to go down there and demand that they be released and stuff like that. But she kept the notes and made all the telephone calls. And she was a great encourager. She did a lot of work at the church and in the community. She used to deliver babies at the clinic. And I don't care how many babies she delivered, she made six dollars. And of course, instead of giving her the six dollars, they put it on her bill. But-- Speaker 1: Now this was during the time that you were growing up? Speaker 2: When I was growing up, um-hm. That was the only time that she worked out of the house. At night she would go the doctor's office and deliver babies when the time came. Speaker 1: So, she was a midwife? Speaker 2: Not really. Speaker 1: She would just assist the doctor? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Like a nurse with the delivery? Speaker 2: She was supposed to assist the doctor like a nurse, but by the time the doctor got there, the baby was already born. Speaker 1: Oh, so she did the full delivery. Speaker 2: She did the full delivery. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then when those babies came home, she made sure--the first two weeks of their lives she'd bathe them every day and feed them every day. So, anytime you wanted to know anybody's birthday, all you had to do was call my mother. Speaker 1: Well, she would go to the homes of the people who had the baby? Speaker 2: Uh-huh, yes. Speaker 1: Yeah, and that was during the day when babies kept their open, I mean kept their eyes closed-- Speaker 2: Closed for a while. Speaker 1: --for like two weeks, or a week or two weeks. Speaker 2: And the mother stayed in the house for six or seven weeks. Speaker 1: And those were also the days when the mother was bound after she had the baby. Speaker 2: I guess so. Speaker 1: Did they, did they wrap them then? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay, the mother, all right. Did she have any favorite stories that she told you about when she was a girl or when she was growing up? Speaker 2: Yeah, she used to tell us how they had a big farm when she was growing up. And they used to give food to all the people in the community, and how all the other farmers were sharecroppers, but my grandfather [Wilkins Hunt] rented his farm, so he didn't sharecrop. He always made a lot of stuff. And one time somebody came to the house and said they were hungry, and she gave them all of the vegetables out in the garden and the meat to cook it with, and chicken and eggs and butter and milk. And then some white person came along and was admiring my grandfather's cows, and she sold them a cow. I forgot how much it was for, but it was much less than the cow was worth. So, she sold them the cow. And another time she gave away a whole hog. They had killed hogs and put them in the meat box, the cure house, and she gave the whole thing away to somebody who didn't have any food. So, she used to tell us all those kinds of stories, and of course, the stories about the little devilish things that she and her sisters and brothers used to do. And she was always afraid of kittens. So anytime my grandmother [Katie Neal Hunt] left home, she and my grandfather, everybody had chores to do. And everybody would mess around and not do their chores, but she'd do hers. Then they'd get a kitten and make her do that chore. So, she used to always tell us about that. Speaker 1: Okay. Now the farm, where was the farm located? Speaker 2: It was out in the Hunts Chapel area. Speaker 1: And what part of what city? Speaker 2: That's in Sparta [Georgia]. Speaker 1: That's in Sparta? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The church's name is Hunts Chapel [Hunts Chapel African Methodist Episcopal Church, Sparta, Georgia] because the land was donated by her family, and they lived out there before they moved into Sparta. It's out on the outskirts of Sparta, but they lived there before they moved into Sparta. And one of our high school teachers used to tell us all the time that my grandfather had so much stuff back there in those days that people used to, they took their wagons out there to help him move. And it took him a whole week to move all his cows and horses and pigs and all that kind of stuff to his new location; he had so much stuff. Speaker 1: So, he moved after your mother grew up, or-- Speaker 2: While she was still growing up. Speaker 1: Okay. Did they move to another part of Georgia or did they ju-(simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, another part of Sparta. Story_ID: 360117 Speaker 1: Did you know her [Ingram's mother, Katherine Hunt Ingram] parents or her--? Speaker 2: Yes. Her father was Wilkins Hunt, and her mother was Katie Neal Hunt. When I was a little girl I started calling my grandfather Pa Daddy. And everybody picked it up, and we all, everybody called him Pa Daddy. And I started calling my grandmother Ma Kate. So-- Speaker 1: Would you spell Ma Kate? Speaker 2: M-A, Ma, Kate, K-A-T-E. Speaker 1: Okay, Ma Kate, all right (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Ma Kate, uh-huh. So, everybody called them Pa Daddy and Ma Kate. I remember my grandmother was a very lively person. She used to shoot the rifle and do all sorts of things. And she used to tell us stories about my grandfather. And once she told us that when my Uncle Charlie [Charles Hunt] was born, they were walking up the road to somebody's house. And she asked my grandfather--she called Pop. She said, "Pop, tote Charlie for a while." And my grandfather didn't want to carry him, so she laid him down on the ground and she told him, "Well, there he is. I carried him nine months, and you can't take him up the hill to somebody's house." (Laughter) She'd do stuff like that. And she told us, she said once she went to a meeting in Albany, Georgia and W.E. Du Bois [sic. W.E.B. Du Bois] was there. And she said she was on her way out of the door, and everybody else was going back to shake his hand. She didn't know the significance of shaking his hand, but she went back and shook it too, since everybody else was shaking it. She said it was just an old man. So, she shook his hand, too. And we were saying, "You met him?" Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: It was nothing to her. And she used to always tell us, "I haven't ever thought about dying. I'm going to live until I die." And when she died she was 106 years old, still taking care of herself, still in her right mind. She could exercise, reach up and touch her shoulders all the way down to the floor without bending her knees. She used to ride a motorcycle with my brothers [Jerold Ingram and Robert Ingram]. She was just a lively lady. Speaker 1: Okay. And how many sisters and brothers did you say your mother had? Speaker 2: There were eleven of them. Story_ID: 360118 Speaker 1: Tell us something about your father, his name, when he was born, where he was born. Speaker 2: My father was Robert Toombs Ingram [Robert Ingram]. He was born here in Sparta [Georgia] in 1918, January 10th. His mother [Lillian Ingram] was blind. They called her Blind White. But she played the piano for the church. And she could hear something on the radio and get right up and go to the piano and play it. Speaker 1: So she could play by ear, that's what they called it? Speaker 2: Um-hm, that's what they called it, playing by ear. She would go right to the piano and play it. And she lived across the street by herself. Well, she lived with our great--her great aunt Marcenia [ph.], who was a Cherokee Indian [Native American] woman, until Marcenia died. Then she lived there by herself, across the street from where we lived. Speaker 1: Well, spell your father's middle name for us. Speaker 2: Toombs, T-O-O-M-B-S. Speaker 1: Okay. And is there any significance with that middle name, where it came from? Speaker 2: The only thing I know about it is that he had an uncle named Toombs Butts. Speaker 1: Toombs-- Speaker 2: Butts. Speaker 1: B-U-T-T-S? Speaker 2: B-U-T-T-S. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I don't know where they got it from. Speaker 1: All right. And you said that his mother was blind, and they called her Blind White? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: What was the significance of Blind White? Do you know where that name came from? Speaker 2: Her nickname was White, and she was blind, so they just called her Blind White. Speaker 1: Okay. Was White a maiden name? Speaker 2: No, just a nickname. I don't know how she got that nickname. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We called her Ma White. Story_ID: 360119 Speaker 1: What kind of person was your father [Robert Ingram]? Speaker 2: My daddy was, in my early days, was a man of few words, he was very quiet. He worked, he liked to hunt, and he liked to fish. And I remember when I was still in high school [L.S. Ingraham High School, Sparta, Georgia], I went to Washington, D.C. to live with my aunt, to work during the summer. And my aunt called him and told him that I had gone to a party with my cousin and stayed out a little late. He wrote me a letter, "Dear, Jack [HistoryMaker Edith Ingram], the fast life leads to destruction. Love, your dad, Robert T. Ingram," period. We used to always laugh because he'd always put a period at the end of his name. And that was the only thing that letter said. And then another time of his few words--my brother, my baby brother, Robert [Robert Ingram], went to the courthouse and took down the signs from the water coolers that said white and colored. And the sheriff called him and said, "Robert, what's wrong with your boy? He up here taking the signs down and tearing them up." So Daddy said, "There was nothing wrong with him when he left home, and I don't expect anything to be wrong with him when he comes back," and he hung up. And, somehow-- Speaker 1: Now what was year was this? This was during the '70s [1970s] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was in the early '70s [1970s]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Somewhere along the line somebody spoke to him and told him to start talking, and then he got so you couldn't shut him up because he talked a lot then. Speaker 1: As he got older? Speaker 2: After he got older. And he ran for the board of education in 1966. He was the first black person to ever run for any office, he and another guy named James Smith [ph.]. And he ran for county commissioner, and he was elected to the board of education where he served for some twenty-some years. And he worked at the Quality Cleaners here in town, he was a presser. And the man at the cleaners had told him that he would go with him to the bank to borrow money for me to go to college when I graduated from high school. Of course when that time came, he reneged on his promise, and I had to get an educational fund to go to school. But then Daddy stopped working at the cleaners for that reason, and he went to work at Central State Hospital in Milledgeville [Georgia], which is a mental institution; he was something like an orderly. And when the white community found out that he was on the board of education, they fired him. So then he started working for J.P. Stevens [J.P. Stevens and Company, Inc.], which is a manufacturing company. And they found out, and they fired him. And the black community told him that they would take care of his family, but they did not want him to resign. And later on in the early '70s [1970s] we organized something called East Central Committee for Opportunity which worked with poor people, and we organized several projects under that umbrella. And he started working for them, which was run by blacks. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, where is, would you spell where he worked first? You said that's before he worked for the manufacturing company in Sparta, Georgia. Speaker 2: He worked at Quality Cleaners here in Sparta. Speaker 1: Okay, and after Quality Cleaners? Speaker 2: He worked in Milledgeville, Georgia at Central State Hospital. Speaker 1: Okay, would you spell that part of Georgia for us? Speaker 2: M-I-L-L-E-D-G-E-V-I-L-L-E, Milledgeville. Speaker 1: Okay. How far is that from Sparta? Speaker 2: Twenty-four miles. Speaker 1: Okay. So he had to commute? Speaker 2: He had to commute. Speaker 1: All right. And when he got fired from there because he wouldn't give up his seat on the board, is that when he took the manufacturing job (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And that was also in Milledgeville. Story_ID: 360120 Speaker 1: Did he [Ingram's father, Robert Ingram] have any stories that he shared with you about when he was growing up, or when he was a child? Speaker 2: Well, Daddy didn't talk too much about when he was a child. He just said that for Christmas they didn't get anything but socks and a little fruit in a box, and that he grew up with a lady we call our aunt. Because they grew up together and they were raised by sisters and brothers. Edith, her name was Edith. That's where I got Edith from. And they grew up together as sisters and brothers. Speaker 1: Okay. And you say he grew up right here in Sparta [Georgia]? Speaker 2: Right here in Sparta. Speaker 1: All right. Did he tell you, well, anything about what Sparta was like when he was growing up? Had it changed a lot when you all came along? Speaker 2: Well, there were, a lot of stores were open, and a lot of people used to come to Sparta. It had a lot of black schools. He used to do a little teaching at some of the schools. There were a lot of academies, you know, black academies in different communities. You know, they had community schools then, church schools-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --in just about every community. And-- Speaker 1: Can you think of any one or two of those? Speaker 2: Well, there was Bethlehem School [Hancock County, Georgia]. There was a school out at Union [Union County, Georgia], and they still have Union Baptist Church [Blairsville, Georgia] today. There was Galilee School [Sparta, Georgia], and Galilee Church [St. Galilee Baptist Church, Sparta, Georgia] is still there in operation today. There was Hunts Chapel School [Sparta, Georgia]. Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. And these were the one-room schoolhouses? Speaker 2: One-room schoolhouses, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Have they preserved any of those schools? Speaker 2: Some of the buildings are still standing, but they have not been preserved. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And this would have been when he was how old do you think? Would it have been in the '20s [1920s] or-- Speaker 2: Probably in the late '20s [1920s]. Speaker 1: Late '20s [1920s]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: And he was a great basketball player, and he was a good dancer. Story_ID: 360121 Speaker 1: Did he [Ingram's father, Robert Ingram] share any stories about how he and your mother [Katherine Hunt Ingram] met? Speaker 2: They went to the same school, that's how they knew each other. And he said that Mama was trying to be a little stuck-up. She didn't want to be, she was acting like she didn't want to be bothered, but she really did, he says. (Laughter) And he used to try to walk her home, and her other sisters and brothers didn't want him to walk her home, but he started going to her house anyway. And he got so he was just like another one of the children because he was there so often. So, so, that's how they met. Speaker 1: Okay. And this is when she was living on the farm [on the outskirts of Sparta, Georgia]? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Story_ID: 360122 Speaker 1: Did he [Ingram's father, Robert Ingram] serve in any wars, or (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No wars. Speaker 1: --did any of his relatives-- Speaker 2: He was not in the [U.S. military] service. Speaker 1: Okay. Did his, did he tell you any stories about like any of his grandparents that might have served in the war? Speaker 2: No. I knew his father, Joe B. Ingram [Joe Ingram], he lived in Atlanta [Georgia]. And to my knowledge, he was not in the service either. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, this was when he was older that he lived in Atlanta, the grandfather, your grandfather on your father's side? Speaker 2: Uh-huh, when I was a child he lived in Atlanta. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He, he died in Atlanta. Speaker 1: All right. Do you know how old he was when he died approximately (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't. Speaker 1: It was when you were young, right? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: All right. Okay. Story_ID: 360123 Speaker 1: Let's talk about your grandparents on your mother's [Katherine Hunt Ingram] side. Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 1: You said your mother was born around 1918? Speaker 2: Mama was born in 1919 (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Nineteen nineteen [1919]? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: And your father [Robert Ingram] was born in 1918. And you said that her mother [Katie Neal Hunt] lived to be one hundred and-- Speaker 2: Six. Speaker 1: A hundred and six years old. Now, did she get a chance to tell you any stories about when she was a child or when she was growing up? Because she was born in like 18-- Speaker 2: Eighteen ninety-one [1891]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Well, when she was growing up--she didn't tell me too many stories about when she was a child. She talks a lot about after she married my grandfather [Wilkins Hunt]. She told us about, you know, she would always have all the babies, and they raised each other--my grandfather raised them. Because when she had them, she said she had done her part, she said. And-- Speaker 1: So, she turned them over to him-- Speaker 2: She turned them over to him. Speaker 1: --to raise? Speaker 2: She turned them over to him. It would have been the bigger children, to raise. Speaker 1: And there were eleven children? Speaker 2: Uh-huh, eleven children. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And she used to sew a lot and make her children's clothing and stuff. She told me that there used to be a time around here when the cotton was in bloom and ready to picked. They used to close the black schools-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --so that the black children could go to the field and pick cotton. Then as soon as they finished picking all the cotton, they would bring in the circus or the fair, they called it the fair, and got the money right back from the black community. And my grandfather and my grandmother never sent their children to the field to pick cotton during that time. And some white people came to see them about that situation and told them, "Why are your children at home, when all the other colored children are picking cotton?" And she told that person, "You got one child," and she named that child. And she said, "Now these children are me and Pop's, and we decide when they going to pick cotton, whether or not they're going to pick cotton." Speaker 1: She was outspoken. Speaker 2: She was very outspoken. And they had a huge farm [on the outskirts of Sparta, Georgia], as I said before, but they always hired people to come in and work their farm. They didn't have their children to do all the work like some of the other children did. They always had hired help to come in and do the work. Speaker 1: And you said on that farm they had vegetables and... Speaker 2: Animals. Speaker 1: Animals and hay. Speaker 2: Yes, everything. Speaker 1: Okay. So did they take them to market after they finished farming? Speaker 2: They gave it away. They took their cotton to the gin, but all of the vegetables and stuff they had, they gave it away. I remember my grandmother said that one time my grandfather got a load of vegetables to take to market. And by time--they lived way out in the woods. By the time he got to town the wagon was empty, where he had given it away, along the road on the way to the market. So he came back home empty-handed. Speaker 1: So, that's where your mother got the giving spirit from? Speaker 2: Uh-huh, that's where she got it from. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, your grandfather, her husband? How long did he--do you remember when he passed? Or did you say he (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He passed in 1954 I think. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Did he get a chance to pass any stories down? Did you hear any stories from him? Did they talk about-- Speaker 2: No, I didn't hear any stories from him. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: He worked downtown at the hardware store. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's my earliest memory of his working life. He was just around there on the farm. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, did they, any of them, share stories? Did your grandparents or your parents share stories about what life was like during the Depression [Great Depression]? Because they lived through those times, the '20s [1920s], '29 [1929] through '39 [1939]. Speaker 2: Yeah, they were, they were saying that stuff like coffee--I think they said sugar, I believe, was kind of hard to get. But because of this big farm that they had, they always had plenty of food and could always share with their neighbors, so they didn't have it so hard. But they used to wonder how my grandfather was able to furnish shoes and clothes for eleven children to go to school, you know. Speaker 1: Okay. But he did? Speaker 2: He did. Speaker 1: He did do that? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: And he was given the job of raising the children, right (laughter)? Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 360124 Speaker 1: How far back can you trace your ancestors? We've done you know, your mother's [Katherine Hunt Ingram] mother [Katie Neal Hunt] and father [Wilkins Hunt]? Did you hear any stories or did you hear anything about their parents, your grandparents' parents? Speaker 2: The only thing that I can recall is that there used to be a judge here, a white judge, Judge Sayer. Speaker 1: Would you spell that for us? Speaker 2: S-A-Y-E-R. Who had a huge house, and inside of this house was an apartment, like a room where he kept his black mistress. And her name was, her name was Hunt, Susan Hunt. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And Susan Hunt had children for Judge Sayer. One of the children's name was Henry A. Hunt, you know, naturally all of them took her name. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, this Henry A. Hunt turns out to be my grandfather's father. Judge Sayer had children by Susan Hunt, and as I said, they had one called Henry A. Hunt who was my grandfather's father. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And of course after him there came--looked like everybody named their child Henry A. Hunt. But, you know, after that, there were several Henry Hunts in the family. Right now there's a Henry Hunt in Fort Valley [Georgia], I think. I don't know if he's still living, but he was in Fort Valley, and had a funeral home down there who's part of that family. But that's where my grandfather came from. Speaker 1: Okay. So, would that be your grandfather's relatives, like sisters or brothers, you know, like that? Or would it be like after your grandfather's generation? Speaker 2: It was after my grandfather's generation. Speaker 1: They just started using the name, Henry Hunt-- Speaker 2: Henry A. Hunt-- Speaker 1: --in the family, in the Hunt family? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And has anyone done any family genealogy, like written a book or anything about that Hunt family or Judge Sayer? Has anyone in the family done anything like that, as you know of? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And on your father's [Robert Ingram] side, you talked about his mother [Lillian Ingram]. And she was, you know, she was blind. But his father [Joe Ingram], did-- Speaker 2: Well, I didn't know too much about my daddy's father. I knew that he lived in Atlanta [Georgia], and during the summer my grandmother--he was remarried to a lady named Sarah [ph.]. But my grandmother and I and my brothers [Jerold Ingram and Robert Ingram] would go to visit her and spend some time with him and his new wife during the summer in Atlanta. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But other than that, I didn't know too much about my grandfather. Story_ID: 360125 Speaker 1: What is your earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: My earliest childhood memory is when I was four years old and my Aunt Edith took me to New York [New York]. When I got to New York, I saw all of the lights. And my aunt had a store back here, so I told her to call up my mama [Katherine Hunt Ingram] and daddy [Robert Ingram] and tell them to get all the candy and come to New York because I liked all the lights. I was four years old on a train ride to New York. Speaker 1: So you rode the train from Sparta [Georgia] all the way to New York? Speaker 2: To New York. Speaker 1: Was that New York City? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: We had to catch the train out of Augusta [Georgia]. Story_ID: 360126 Speaker 1: Can you describe what your early family life was like here in Sparta [Georgia]? Tell us about your early days in Sparta, like where you all lived, you and your, your family? Speaker 2: Well, my family lived in a part of town we call the Gut, G-U-T, Gut. And it was just a community of close-knit people. And we all went to East End Elementary School [Sparta, Georgia], and we all went to Macedonia Baptist Church [Sparta, Georgia]. There was a lady in the community we called Sister Annie Washington [ph.], we called her Sister, who used to take all of us to Sunday school every Sunday morning. Speaker 1: Did she take you in a car, or did you walk? Speaker 2: No, we had to walk. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: A car didn't come about in my family until way up in the '70s [1970s]. Speaker 1: All right, okay. Why was the community called the Gut? Do you know where the name came from? Speaker 2: I don't know. It was the Gut when I knew about it. Speaker 1: Okay, is it like lower than the rest of Sparta? When I say that, I mean geographically? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: It's just that it was the black section of town? Speaker 2: They just called it the Gut; it was the black section of town. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: But there were several black sections of town because Hancock County [Georgia] has always been predominantly black. But they call one side Dixie, one side Hunts Chapel, Mayfield, and the Gut. Speaker 1: Okay. Did the streets have names during that time? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: When I, while I was still in elementary school, they got named. We lived on Burnett Street. Speaker 1: Okay. What did you all do for holidays and special occasions? Speaker 2: The same thing we do now. We just cooked a big dinner and everybody gathered at the house. And we ate and exchanged gifts and talked, and listened to my parents [Katherine Hunt Ingram and Robert Ingram] talk and told stories. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, this was like in the early '40s [1940s] that we're talking about now? Speaker 2: Um-hm. I was born in '42 [1942], so it was the late '40s [1940s] and '50s [1950s]. Story_ID: 360127 Speaker 1: What are some of the sights and sounds and smells that you remember when you were growing up that remind you of childhood [in Sparta, Georgia]? Speaker 2: Well I, when I was about seven or eight years old, I ran a store. My aunt had this store, and I had to stand on four or five Coca-Cola crates to reach the cash register. The smells that I remember is pig ears cooking. I sold pig ear sandwiches. The man down the street had a little barbecue joint, and people would be down there drinking whiskey. And by the time they got half lit, they'd come up there and get pig ear sandwiches and eat, and then they'd go back and start their drinking habits all over again. (Laughter) So that was the smell that I remember. I guess the earliest sights that I remember was watching TV at my aunt's house. She was the only person in the neighborhood who had a TV, and all the children would gather over there and watch television. Speaker 1: Now TV came out, the televisions came out around the late, what is it, the early '50s [1950s]? Because that's when they started entering into the black neighborhoods. Speaker 2: I guess it was, uh-huh. Speaker 1: Like the early '50s [1950s], somewhere around there. Speaker 2: But she had a television, and we'd gather there to watch television. And of course, I remember that we'd gather there to get watered down, we called it. She'd turn the water hose on all of us in the summertime; that was our swimming. She'd water us down with the water hose, all the children in the neighborhood. Speaker 1: Was this just water? Were you in the tub, or were you-- Speaker 2: No, we were just running around out in the yard, and she'd just skeet the water on us with the hose. And we used to, we used to have these huge tires. And we used to get inside of the side the tire and roll each other; that was what we played with. Speaker 1: These were car tires? Speaker 2: Uh-huh, that's what we played with. And we'd go in the tree and hang a rope down it, and put a piece of board in it and make ourselves a swing. Speaker 1: Out of the tire? Speaker 2: Out of a tire or out of a piece of board and a rope. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Those were the things that we played with. And of course we had bicycles and skates, things that we'd get for Christmas. Speaker 1: Were these roller skates? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. And-- Speaker 2: Of course, I never learned to roller skate; I had a bicycle. Story_ID: 360128 Speaker 1: So, we were talking about some of the sights and sounds of childhood [in Sparta, Georgia]. So, would you just tell us a little bit more about what your play consisted of as a, as a child? Speaker 2: Well, we played hopscotch, Little Sally Walker, and little games like that along with the tire rides, the bicycle rides and the skates. The roads were still dirt roads, so we had to go up to the main road to skate on the sidewalk. And that was about three or four blocks from where we lived. We had our outside toilets, and we had running water. But we had a faucet that came up and came through the wall in the kitchen, and we used to catch water in the dishpan and put it on the stove to get hot, to wash the dishes with. Then when you were finished you'd take it outside and throw the dishwater out, which reminds me of a story with my [paternal] grandmother [Lillian Ingram]. They were selling whiskey, and the police came. And he said, "I know it's in here because I smell it," the white policeman. Well, Marcenia [ph.] had taken the liquor and poured it into the dishwater, and the glasses and dishes they say were just sparkling. And she said, "Well, if you know it's in here, find it, dammit." But he never could find it because when she finished washing the dishes, she just let the window up. As they say, she heisted the window and threw the water out of the window. Speaker 1: And this was not just regular whiskey out of the store, was it? Speaker 2: No, this was liquor they had made in the liquor still. Speaker 1: Okay. So this was called, what is it? This is bootleg? Speaker 2: Bootleg rot gut liquor (laughter). Speaker 1: And I don't know how it got that name. Did it come from rot gut? Speaker 2: I don't know, I don't know how it got that name. Speaker 1: Was it--if I remember, it was something that, it would deteriorate your insides. Speaker 2: It should have. The way it smelled, it smelled like it would deteriorate your insides. Speaker 1: And then another name for it was, was it corn cob liquor? Speaker 2: Corn cob liquor, um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And this is--I guess 'The Dukes of Hazzard' is where most people would remember (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Would remember it from. Speaker 1: --moonshine and-- Speaker 2: But people still make it, people still make it (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In this day and age they still--? Speaker 2: In this day and age they still make it. Speaker 1: And it still has that odor attached to it? Speaker 2: It does, it does (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That strong smell? Story_ID: 360129 Speaker 1: Well, I know you said your [maternal] grandfather [Wilkins Hunt] had a farm [on the outskirts of Sparta, Georgia]. Did he milk cows, and is that where he got the milk from (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He milked cows, yes, uh-huh. Speaker 1: You got it, from your, from the farm? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. So then your family was also provided with food from the farm. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Did it come from there too? Speaker 2: Right, uh-huh. Speaker 1: All right. Because a lot of times people think that you just go to the grocery store and everything was there. But in these days, families had their own individual plots of land. Speaker 2: Uh-huh, and when I was a little girl, my father [Robert Ingram] had a garden. We grew our vegetables and we raised hogs, too. We didn't have cows and horses and all that, but we still had hogs and raised our vegetables in the garden. Speaker 1: Okay. So, what did you all raise? Was the garden in the backyard or to the side of the house? Speaker 2: The garden was in back of my grandmother's [Lillian Ingram] house who lived right across the street from us. Speaker 1: And this is your father's mother? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We raised butterbeans and cabbage and collards and corn, potatoes, okra, tomatoes. Speaker 1: Okay. And did you do any sweet potatoes, or was it not-- Speaker 2: Yeah, sweet potatoes and white potatoes. And then, see, you'd have to shell all that stuff and can it for the winter in mason jars. You'd put it up for the winter because nobody had any freezers. Then we used to deal with ice boxes, and the iceman would come. And when we were children we'd be so glad to see the iceman coming because as soon as he took the block of ice in the house to put it in the icebox, we used to get on the truck and call ourselves stealing the chips of ice. Speaker 1: Yes (laughter). Speaker 2: And when I was grown, I told him one day, I said, "Iceman," we called him Iceman--I said, "Iceman, I used to steal ice off your truck all the time." He said, "Yeah, I used to chip it and leave it for y'all to get it because I knew you all were getting it." (Laughter) But we had the old icebox, and they used to have that hoop cheese that was in a round wooden container. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And it would sit on top of the icebox. Speaker 1: So, he brought, the iceman brought cheese? Speaker 2: He didn't bring the cheese, but it would sit on the top of the icebox in the wooden container. That's where we kept the hoop cheese, they called it. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: But he would just bring the ice. Speaker 1: And then--okay. So, what kind of icebox did you all have? I know this is before, this is the forerunner of the refrigerator. Speaker 2: I don't know what it was called. But it was, it was made something like a refrigerator. It had a top and a bottom to it. It was white, and up in the top was just a little square opening where you slid the ice in. And then the bottom of it was where you put this other stuff. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And-- Speaker 2: But you know, when my--I used to hear my grandmother say when they were coming up they used to put stuff in a hole and cover it with sawdust to preserve it. Speaker 1: Oh, that was the refrigerator, the coolness of the ground? Speaker 2: Uh-huh, the coolness of the ground. Speaker 1: Now that's interesting. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: They would just dig a hole and put a box in it to protect it from the dirt? Speaker 2: And cover it with sawdust. Speaker 1: And then put a top on it? Would they put the top on it first and then put sawdust on top of it? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Did you all bake sweet potatoes, as they say? Speaker 2: We used to bake sweet potatoes in the oven. But then sometimes when we were just sitting around talking, we used to also make them in the fireplace. You know, you'd part the ashes and put the sweet potatoes in there and cover them up and let them cook. Speaker 1: Okay. You might remember the story too about the hoe cake. Speaker 2: Ash cake, they called it. Speaker 1: Okay, right. Speaker 2: I never had ash cake, but I've heard them talk about it. Speaker 1: All right. That was an African--the way that--they were in the field when they were working. But did you bake sweet potatoes? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Like in the wintertime? Speaker 2: We called it hill. Speaker 1: H-I-L-L? Speaker 2: Yeah, like a sweet potato hill. Speaker 1: Okay. And how did, do you remember how they made that? Speaker 2: I don't know how they made it. I know that they put the potatoes in there, and it was kind of up like pyramid or something, like a cone, really. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then they would dig into the side of it and get the potatoes out. There used to be a man named Johnnie Palmer [ph.] who was a distant relative of ours who lived out there. And he used to always have this huge potato hill. And then there was a guy who lived next door to him who would always take his potatoes. So, he was sitting out on the porch one day and he said, "I'm raising rattlesnakes. And when I go off, I put my rattlesnakes in my potato hill." And this man that was taking the potatoes said, "Mr. John Palmer sho' is a mean man. He got rattlesnakes in his potato hill." But after that, he never missed another potato because this guy thought rattlesnakes were in the potato hill. (Laughter) And he didn't take any more of Mr. Palmer's sweet potatoes. Speaker 1: All right. And I remember one way to bake sweet potatoes--this is because of the winter. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: So they would keep them--they would dig a hole, and I think you lined it with either a croker sack or with straw (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Straw. Speaker 1: And then that's when we would put the potatoes in and then put the straw on top of it. And then that's how the hill probably mounted because-- Speaker 2: Probably it kept the dirt up there. Speaker 1: Yeah, it kept the dirt up, and it also kept the straws--to keep the potatoes from freezing in the wintertime. And you'd just go out-- Speaker 2: Yeah, and get them. Speaker 1: --and get them from the bank (laughter). Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So, you had potatoes all year long. This was preserving them, like what you did like with the veggies and the fruits and the--okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The vegetables, uh-huh. Story_ID: 360130 Speaker 1: What elementary school did you attend? Speaker 2: East End Elementary School [Sparta, Georgia]. It was a community school that was located in the Gut [Sparta, Georgia]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It went from first to third grade. Then after I got to fourth grade, I had to go to L.S. Ingraham High School [Sparta, Georgia], no relation to me. But this was a school that was founded by Lenton Stevenson Ingraham [ph.], a black man, and it went from first grade to the twelfth grade. It was about two and a half to three miles from where I lived. And when I was a child, my mother [Katherine Hunt Ingram] was always sick, she had rheumatic fever. And so, I had to get up in the morning and heat, make a fire. My daddy [Robert Ingram] made a fire in the stove, but then I had to heat the water and take it across the street for my grandmother [Lillian Ingram] to wash up, and take her breakfast and feed my mother before I left for school. And Mama used to always tell me, "If the bus leaves you, don't come back home." So one day the bus did leave me, and it was raining. So, I walked all the way to L.S. Ingraham School. The trees were, the limbs were falling out of the trees and everything. And when I got to school I was wringing wet and had twisted my ankle, so I had a sprung ankle. And the teacher brought me back to the cleaners [Quality Cleaners, Sparta, Georgia] where my daddy was, and he took me to the doctor to see about this ankle. And my mother wanted to know, "Well, why didn't you come back home?" I said, "Because Mama, you told me if I got left, don't come back home." So, I walked all the way to school in that bad weather. Speaker 1: And you say that was two and a half miles? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: You were being obedient. Speaker 2: I was in the fourth grade. Speaker 1: In the fourth grade? Speaker 2: Fourth grade. Speaker 1: Okay. Did, so the first elementary school that you went to, did you have a favorite teacher? Speaker 2: Yes, I did. My favorite teacher was Miss Beulah Harris, she was the third grade teacher. Speaker 1: And what was it about Miss Harris that you admired? Speaker 2: Well, Miss Harris used to always bring us little things to school. And she used to always let us go up the street to this lady's house, Miss Nettie May's [ph.] house and get flowers. She was just a good teacher. She made learning so interesting. Speaker 1: Okay. And what kind of student were you-- Speaker 2: I was always-- Speaker 1: --at an early age? Speaker 2: I was always a good student. Speaker 1: Okay. So, you liked school? Speaker 2: I liked school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Now when you left the first elementary school, then you went to L.S. Ingraham? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Now tell us about your early years at L.S. Ingraham. Because that should have been like third, fourth, and-- Speaker 2: Fourth. I went there from fourth to twelfth grade at L.S. Ingraham. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I used to catch the bus. Speaker 1: Now did they have it divided up at all for elementary, junior high, and senior high? Or did-- Speaker 2: They just had elementary and high. Speaker 1: Okay. So-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, your early years, let's say the fourth through the-- Speaker 2: Seventh grade. Speaker 1: --seventh grade, okay. Did you have any favorite teachers? Speaker 2: Miss Amy Harper [ph.], my seventh grade teacher. Speaker 1: And what's her last name? Speaker 2: Harper. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Miss Harper was a teacher who demanded that you do your work. She would have us learn seven or eight poems, 'The Gettysburg Address,' [President Abraham Lincoln] and 'Abou Ben Adhem,' [Leigh Hunt] all these poems. And when test time came, you had to stand up and say every one of them, one behind the other. And if you missed one word, she'd have you sit down, and that means you failed. And she taught us how to diagram sentences. I'll never forget when I went to Fort Valley State College [Fort Valley State University, Fort Valley, Georgia], my freshman year they put me in remedial English. And in this remedial English class they had these sentences on the chalkboard. And I was the only person in the whole class, the whole freshmen class, who could diagram a sentence. And they took me out of remedial English and put me in English 101, right back to Amy Harper. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I'll always remember Miss Harper. I learned more from her than I did from any teacher I had. Story_ID: 360131 Speaker 1: What was it like in school? I know you had to learn--but what were some of the other things that you remember from those days (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I remember when we got in school we had to make a fire in the potbelly stove. The room was cold, and there was no heat. They had these huge potbelly stoves, and you had to go outside and take the scuttle with you and get some coal. And then you had to bring kindling and newspaper from home and make the fire in the stove. Then you had to have your classes in the cold room until the room got warm, which was around eleven or twelve o'clock before it really got warm in there; keep your coats on. There was no lunchroom, you had to bring your lunch to school. And our school, at L.S. Ingraham [L.S. Ingraham High School, Sparta, Georgia] when I was in elementary school we were confined to one--to the right side of the road. The school was on the right and left side of the road. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But most of the elementary--the first through third grade and the high school mostly was on the left side of the road. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And the fourth through the seventh grade was on the right side of the road. And the buildings were old [U.S.] Army barracks, you know, they looked like old Army barracks. We went to school there, and we would have little recess and big recess. We'd go out and play a little while about, I guess about ten o'clock. And then at twelve o'clock we had lunch. And at lunch we had to--those kids who did not bring their lunch from home--and most of them did--would go across the street to the library and buy peanut butter cookies and milk. Speaker 1: Someone over there was selling-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: One of the teachers? Speaker 2: Uh-huh, one of the teachers. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now you just talked about memory, how they--Miss--what is it, the fourth grade teacher, Miss Harper [Amy Harper (ph.)]? Speaker 2: The seventh grade teacher. Speaker 1: The seventh grade teacher. Speaker 2: And we had all secondhand books. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The books came from the white school, and some of them had the backs torn off of them and pages missing. They were just raggedy books. We never got a new book. All of them were secondhand books that the white children had discarded, and that's what we had. Speaker 1: Did you do a lot of penmanship, writing in school? Speaker 2: Yeah, we did letters, learned how to do letters and stories. Speaker 1: And you stayed in the same room the whole-- Speaker 2: The same room the whole time. Speaker 1: And what time did classes normally start? What did school start and what time did school let out? Speaker 2: School started about eight, and let out at three. Speaker 1: Okay. Did you all have, how did, what was the signal to let you know when school started? Speaker 2: They had a bell. Speaker 1: And was this bell a modern bell, or was it a--what kind of bell was it? Speaker 2: It was electric. They would ring it and you would hear it all over the campus. That was when we got in high school [L.S. Ingraham High School, Sparta, Georgia]. But when we were in elementary school [East End Elementary School, Sparta, Georgia], we just went by the teacher's watch, you know, when it was time for recess and time for lunch. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Of course when it was time to come back in, they had the manual bell. They'd come to the door, and ding, ding, ding, ding, ding. And you'd know it was time to go back in then. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And we started changing classes once we got to the eighth grade. Speaker 1: And how many times did you change classes? Once or twice, or more? Speaker 2: More. For every subject, you went to a different class. Speaker 1: Do you remember what some of the subjects were? Speaker 2: Well, we had math, English, biology, and political science, home economics. Story_ID: 360132 Speaker 1: How did you spend your time after school for the early grades, like from seventh grade to--from first to seventh grade? How did you spend your time during school, like the breaks? And then after school? Speaker 2: Well, during the breaks, I was eating my lunch or playing with my classmates. After school if my mother [Katherine Hunt Ingram] was sick, I had to come home and cook dinner and get my homework. And we had to bring in, my brothers [Jerold Ingram and Robert Ingram] had to bring in the wood for the fireplace for the night. And I had to bring in the pots because we had outside bathroom facilities, toilet facilities. And then we had a night pot we called it, and I had to bring them in. And we had (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now was it, what did this pot look like? Was it-- Speaker 2: It was just-- Speaker 1: An enamel pot? Speaker 2: An enamel pot. Speaker 1: Did it have a top to it? Speaker 2: It had a handle, it had a top and a handle to it. Speaker 1: Okay, like a bucket (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Uh-huh. Speaker 1: But it was actually shaped in the-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Did--they had different names for them. They called them chamber pots, and then they called them slop jars. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We just called ours the pot. Speaker 1: Okay. So you had one for each room, or was there just-- Speaker 2: No, we had one for the house. Speaker 1: Okay. Everybody-- Speaker 2: It stayed in my mother's room. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Yep. But we had to get all this done and had to be in the bed by eight o'clock. You'd get your bath and get in bed by eight. Speaker 1: And was, I know you had running water. But what were the bath facilities? Speaker 2: The bath facilities was a tin tub. Speaker 1: Number eight, number ten, galvanized? Speaker 2: Yeah, we had a galvanized tin tub. And on our cooking stove we had what we called the reservoir that held a lot of water. And we'd keep it full, and while we were cooking dinner the reservoir was heating the water for our bath. So, the kettle was heating water to wash the dishes in. And after we ate and washed the dishes and got our homework, then we got water from the reservoir and took a bath in the tin tub. And then we went to bed at eight o'clock. Speaker 1: Now what did the reservoir look like? Speaker 2: It was just a hole in the side of the stove. Speaker 1: How was it heated? Was it heated by gas or-- Speaker 2: No, the woodstove. Speaker 1: The woodstove? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Oh, this was the potbelly stove? Speaker 2: No, not the potbelly stove. It was a stove that you used for heating. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But the wood cooking stove was a stove that had a flat surface with eyes on it, you know, that you could put your pots and stuff on. And on the side was a deep opening about like that. Speaker 1: Like a pocket? Speaker 2: Uh-huh, that had the water, and they called it the reservoir. Speaker 1: Okay. And then, well, how could you get water out of the reservoir? Speaker 2: With a bottle. Speaker 1: Oh, you had to dip it out. Speaker 2: Dip it out. Speaker 1: All right, that's interesting. Okay, what kind of soap did y'all use? Speaker 2: Ivory soap, to be sure. The only soap we had was Ivory soap. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: And you know, of course they had the Oxydol soap and the lye soap that they used for washing. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And the soap they made in the wash pot. Speaker 1: And would you explain what the lye soap is? Could you tell us a little bit more about that? Speaker 2: The lye soap was a soap that they made out of lye and grease, cooking grease that they had used to cook. And they'd put it in the pot and cook it, stir it and cook it. And then they would pour it and cut it out when it got cold, cut into-- Speaker 1: Yeah, cut it into squares. Speaker 2: Into squares, uh-huh. And people used that for washing. Speaker 1: And you say it was made in the pot? Speaker 2: In the wash pot, a big black wash pot that had a fire under it. Speaker 1: And I remember that the lye soap was like a community thing when it was made, you know (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, they would share it. Speaker 1: When the soap was made, different people would--like the women would bring--come over and make it. It was made by the community so to speak-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And then after it was all made and solid, then different people in the community got pieces of it (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Got a piece of soap, right. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 360133 Speaker 1: So during those days, a lot of things was community. Speaker 2: Well, yeah. When they killed hogs, everybody met at the house where the hog was being killed, and dressed the hog and cut it out, then everybody got fresh meat. And it was the same thing when the gardens were in season. Speaker 1: Okay. Was hog killing time a festive affair? Or was it-- Speaker 2: It was a big time, it was a big time. Speaker 1: Could you describe that for us? Speaker 2: All the neighbors would come and they'd have these fires going around the wash pot. And then they'd have the hog hung up. But at first, they'd cut his neck. And then they'd take the hair off with the hot water out of the wash pot. Then they would spin him over and hang him up. Then they'd let him drain, and then they'd start, you know, cutting him up. And of course, the meat they didn't give away they had to put salt on it. And we had a place we called the smokehouse. It's where they kept the meat until they cured it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I can remember my [paternal] grandmother, the one we called Ma White [Lillian Ingram]. She used to send us out to the smokehouse, and the hams were hanging from the ceiling. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: She used to send us out to the smokehouse to cut her a piece of ham. She used to eat it raw. And we'd eat it raw too, but we'd go out there and cut her a piece of ham out of the meat that was hanging from the rafters. Speaker 1: One story that was kind of amazing was that the green mold part that would sometimes be on that meat that was in the smokehouse where these hams were being cured--they said that the older people would just cut the green off and just eat the rest of the ham and never got sick. I guess it was penicillin. (Laughter). Story_ID: 360134 Speaker 1: During this time were you thinking about what you wanted to be when you grew up? Speaker 2: Well, I thought I wanted to be a teacher. I had a teacher who, Miss Nelson [ph.], who was crippled. She used to walk on a crutch. And when I did get a chance to go outside and play in the afternoon, I'd get the broom and put a towel on it and walk on the crutch like Miss Nelson and teach school. So, I thought I wanted to be a teacher at an early age. And then when I grew up a little bit I thought I wanted to be a nurse, and ended up teaching. Story_ID: 360135 Speaker 1: What was high school [L.S. Ingraham High School, Sparta, Georgia] like? Speaker 2: High school was a very interesting time. As I said, when we got in eighth grade we started changing classes and we started--we had a library. Of course everything was in a separate little building. We had one large building which had the auditorium, which also served as a classroom, and it had partitions that separated the English class from that. We had to go outside to go to the other buildings to class, whether it was raining or whatever was going on. And one part of the school was on the right side of the main highway, and one was on the left side. So, when it was raining we had to cross all of that schoolyard and go to the other side of the road. Sometimes there would be convoys of soldiers coming through, and the class would--it would be time to change classes again by time we got to that class because we had to stand beside the road and wait until the convoy passed. Speaker 1: Do you know where they were going? Speaker 2: Probably to Augusta [sic.], to Fort Benning [Georgia]. Speaker 1: Okay. But it took them that long to pass? Speaker 2: There were a lot of them. Speaker 1: Okay. Now this was like the early, this was in the '50s [1950s], right? Speaker 2: Fifties [1950s], uh-huh. I graduated in '59 [1959]. Speaker 1: All right. I'm trying to think would a war have been going on then. Was there a war at that particular time, where the soldiers would have been transported? Speaker 2: I don't know if there was a war, but they would be trans- trans- coming from--toward Macon [Georgia] going down to Augusta Road [Old Augusta Highway]. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, let's back up a little. When you said that you had little recess and big recess, what was the difference between the two? Speaker 2: The length of time that you stayed outside. Speaker 1: Was it, did it have anything to do with the time of day also, like whether it was in the morning? Speaker 2: I guess when I was probably in the first or second or third grade, we'd go outside about ten o'clock for maybe ten or fifteen minutes. But then at twelve o'clock you had your big recess, and that's when you went out and had time to eat lunch and play. Speaker 1: Okay. So, that was a little recess and a big recess? Speaker 2: And the big recess. Speaker 1: Okay. The big recess was lunchtime? Speaker 2: Was lunchtime. Speaker 1: Okay. And then the other one was little recess. Now when you got into-- Speaker 2: When I got into high school, we just had a twelve o'clock lunch period. Speaker 1: And then the rest of the time was dedicated to? Speaker 2: To classwork. Speaker 1: To classwork, okay. Now, did you have any particular interests? You wanted to be a teacher and you pretended that you were like the teacher-- Speaker 2: Yeah, when I was in elementary school [East End Elementary School, Sparta, Georgia]. Speaker 1: Oh, that was in elementary school, okay. Speaker 2: When I got in high school, I enjoyed my home economics class a lot, learning to cook. I didn't do too well in sewing. But one quarter you took sewing, and the other quarter you took cooking. So I enjoyed the cooking class and I enjoyed my biology class a lot. I guess that's when I started thinking I wanted to be a nurse. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And of course, well, I enjoyed all of my classes. But my biology teacher in high school and my math teacher, who was also my homeroom teacher throughout the high school time, were my favorite teachers. Speaker 1: Now, what were the names of the two favorite ones that you had? The biology-- Speaker 2: My biology teacher was Mr. Hobbs [ph.], and my English teacher was Miss Relaford [ph.]. And my math teacher was Miss Charity Bonds [ph.]; that was the one who was our homeroom teacher. Story_ID: 360136 Speaker 1: During this time--this is still--what is this? Speaker 2: In the '50s [1950s] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Mid-'50s [1950s]? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Mid-'50s [1950s]. Do you--how was Sparta [Georgia] at this particular time outside of school for you? What do you remember about Sparta as a city? Speaker 2: Well, my life was mainly back in the Gut [Sparta, Georgia], in my community. The dirt roads were still there. I was, I had the little store where I used to work and sell the pig ear sandwiches. And Sister Seals [ph.] took me to Sunday school every Sunday morning, and I went to church with my mom [Katherine Hunt Ingram] and dad [Robert Ingram] afterwards. And my life was just centered around that little area right there in the Gut. Of course on Easter and for Christmas we would always go to Macon [Georgia] to shop for those occasions. Speaker 1: Okay, to shop for Chistm- Easter dresses? Speaker 2: Uh-huh, yeah. Speaker 1: And for the festivities for Easter. And far is Macon? Speaker 2: Fifty-two miles. Speaker 1: All right. So that was a long trip. Speaker 2: It was a good trip for us. Speaker 1: And that was by car by then? Speaker 2: By car. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My aunt had a car, and we'd eat lunch at the cafe. We really enjoyed that. Speaker 1: Now, was this a black cafe, or was it a white cafe? Speaker 2: It was a black cafe in Macon. Speaker 1: All right. What did that look like during those days? Were we still dealing with segregation? Speaker 2: There were stools around the counter and little tables with checkered tablecloths and chairs. Speaker 1: Okay. Was it noisy or quiet, or-- Speaker 2: It was pretty quiet. Speaker 1: But you could go and sit down-- Speaker 2: And eat. Speaker 1: --and eat. And was this in the black section of town, or was this-- Speaker 2: It wasn't exactly downtown, but it was close to downtown, as far as I can remember. Speaker 1: All right. Did you encounter any problems in the stores when you went? Speaker 2: No, no, none that I remember. Speaker 1: And these were white stores (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 1: --that you went into to shop for shoes and dresses and the like? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And you would come back home and-- Speaker 2: We'd always go to Macon to Joseph N. Neels store [Joseph N. Neel]. Speaker 1: Would you spell that? Speaker 2: Joseph N. Neels, N-E-E-L-S. We called it Joseph N. Neels. Speaker 1: And it was Joseph--spell it for us. Speaker 2: J-O-S-E-P-H, Joseph, N. Neels. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That was the name of the store. Speaker 1: Spell the Neels part. Speaker 2: N-E-E-L-S. Speaker 1: Okay. And was that, what kind of store was that? Speaker 2: It was a dry goods store. They sold clothing and shoes. Speaker 1: And who owned that? The name Joseph N. Neels, was it whites who owned it? Speaker 2: Whites. Speaker 1: Were they Jewish or-- Speaker 2: I don't know if they were Jewish or what, but they were white. Speaker 1: Okay. Joseph, that was pretty English like. Joseph N. Neels, okay. So after you came back from Macon and doing the shopping, and after eating, you know, at the little, the cafe, did you--what did you do? You know, what did your activities consist of once you made it back into Sparta? Speaker 2: Well, I remember one Christmas we went shopping and we came back. And my aunt would tell me at the store--she would send me to her house to get something. And she said, "Make sure you do not go in George's [ph.] room." And I started wondering, why didn't she want me to go in George's room? I'd been going in there. Speaker 1: That's your brother? Speaker 2: That was her stepson. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: And I went there anyway, because she kept telling me not to go in there. And there was all of our Christmas stuff that we had tried on at Joseph N. Neels. That's how I found out about Santa Claus. But she never knew that I went in there until much, much later. But that was why she was telling me not to go in there because all of the Christmas stuff was stored at her house until Christmas night, and they would, you know, bring it to our house. Speaker 1: So, what did you feel when you went in there and you saw this? Speaker 2: I said, "Oh, there's no Santa Claus. There's my coat I tried on." And I tried it on again to make sure it was the same coat that I tried on. Speaker 1: To make sure it was the same color, same coat (laughter) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The same coat. Speaker 1: Okay, but you didn't let anybody know. Speaker 2: I didn't let anybody know. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Story_ID: 360137 Speaker 1: Now, we were talking about high school [L.S. Ingraham High School, Sparta, Georgia] days, from eighth grade on up through to twelfth. Now, what was your favorite class? You said biology and-- Speaker 2: Home economics. Speaker 1: Home economics. And your teachers were-- Speaker 2: Well, my home economics teacher was Miss Edwards [Nancy Edwards]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She was the wife of Reverend Edwards [Lonzy Edwards], who also was on the board of education with my father [Robert Ingram] some years later. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And my biology teacher was Mr. Hobbs [ph.]. Speaker 1: All right. Now, we're around '53 [1953], '54 [1954] right now, with you being-- Speaker 2: It's around '55 [1955]. Speaker 1: Fifty-five [1955]? Speaker 2: Eighth grade, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now this is the time of, right after Brown v. the Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954], with the separate but equal court doctrines as it relates to black schools being termed not equal to white schools. So, how did this affect you in Sparta [Georgia]? Speaker 2: Well, as I told you, in Sparta we had a lot of community schools--East End [East End Elementary School] in the Gut [Sparta, Georgia], Hunts Chapel church school [Hunts Chapel School, Sparta, Georgia], Galilee church school [Galilee School, Sparta, Georgia], Union church school [Union School, Blairsville, Georgia]. And in 1955, all of those schools closed and everybody came to town to school. But we still had the black schools, the all-black schools, and the all-white schools. Now, to go back a bit further, in the late '40s [1940s] and the early '50s [1950s], my grandfather Pa Daddy [Wilkins Hunt], and my father got together with a man named Charles Harper, who was from Hancock County [Georgia], but was living in Atlanta [Georgia.] Charles Harper [Charles S. Harper] came here to show them how to put together a petition for a new school that had inside facilities, and books and labs and all this kind of stuff for the black community. And in the '50s [1950s], they presented it to the white board of education. And after a lot of meeting and arguing and meeting and arguing, they finally approved it. And when the school was built, it was named Hancock Central. Well, no, it was named Hancock County Training School [Sparta, Georgia]. I graduated from high school in 1959, and they went into the new school in 1960, September of 1960. And at that time it was the largest school in the State of Georgia for black people. And of course, it was-- Speaker 1: And it was like ten years or so in the making? Speaker 2: Yeah, it was still all-black though. Speaker 1: All right. So, Sparta was actually not affected. Brown didn't reach Sparta. That decision in Kansas didn't reach Sparta yet? Speaker 2: Right. Not right then. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And that's probably true of a lot of states. Speaker 2: Probably so. Speaker 1: Now, tell us some more about high school, and some of your activities that you participated in. Speaker 2: Well, in high school I was in the drama club. I was in the Tri-Hi-Y, and-- Speaker 1: The Tri-Hi-Y? Speaker 2: Yes, the Tri-Hi-Y. We used to have little religious programs, and we used to go to different kinds of schools and have little programs that we'd participate in, saying poems and singing in the choir. And I was the editor-in-chief of the yearbook my senior year. I was elected Miss Senior in my senior year in high school. And I never played--I was a cheerleader. I never played basketball. My daddy wanted me to play basketball because he was such a good player, but I was a cheerleader. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what are some of the other memories or some of the other activities that were going on when you were in high school? You were a cheerleader? Speaker 2: Yeah, I was a cheerleader. We, we, would have a lot of games at home, and then we'd have a few games in surrounding counties and we would go and cheer. And as I said, I was a member of the Tri-Hi-Y, and we used to go to other counties and do programs, singing and poems. I was in the choir, and we used to sing at different churches and at the school. And of course I was in the drama club, and we used to periodically present plays at the school. Story_ID: 360138 Speaker 1: Now, who were your other siblings? How many brothers and sisters did you have? Speaker 2: I had two brothers, Robert [Robert Ingram] and Jerald [Jerald Ingram]. Jerald was the oldest, and I'm the oldest of all; then Jerald and then Robert. And then I have a sister, Kathy [Katherine Ingram], that you met, who is about ten years younger than my baby brother. Speaker 1: Okay. Why don't you do this? Why don't you give me the names of the siblings and the year that they were born if you remember? Or-- Speaker 2: Jerald--I was born in '42 [1942]; Jerald was born in '44 [1944]; Robert was born in '46 [1946]; Kathy was born in '58 [1958]. Story_ID: 360139 Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit more about high school [L.S. Ingraham High School, Sparta, Georgia]. Were you thinking about going to college? If so, had you decided where you wanted to go to college? Speaker 2: No. I had not thought about going to college. As I said, after I got out of elementary school [East End Elementary School, Sparta, Georgia], I changed from wanting to be a teacher to wanting to be a nurse. So after graduation, I went to Washington, D.C., where I had been going during the summer to work. And I was trying to get in a medical school, so I went to Brooklyn, New York to be with my Aunt Mae [ph.], and she enrolled me at Manhattan[AB1][TW2] Medical School [ph.]. And I had to catch a train from Brooklyn to New York City [New York, New York]. And the first day that I learned how to catch this train by myself, the gang members were on the train, and they had a person who made another person undress at knifepoint. And of course that ended my career right there. (Laughter) I came back to Washington [D.C.]. And I had gone to a corner market, and they run into me and knocked all of the vegetables that I had gone to the market to buy out of my hand, these gang members. And I just kept walking because my aunt had told me don't say anything to them, just keep going. I kept walking, and I went home and I was scared to death. So I came back to D.C. and stayed there a few weeks and then I came back to Sparta [Georgia]. And this was around late November or early December, and I decided to go to Fort Valley College [Fort Valley State College; Fort Valley State University] in Fort Valley, Georgia. And when I got there I chose elementary education as a major. Story_ID: 360140 Speaker 1: Now, what was life like at Fort Valley [Fort Valley State College; Fort Valley State University, Fort Valley, Georgia]? Fort Valley is a historically black college [HBCU]. Speaker 2: Well, first of all, Fort Valley State College was founded by Henry A. Hunt, which is one of the Henry A. Hunts in my family. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: When I got to Fort Valley and I went to the business office to get registered, I didn't have enough money, and they said that I could not register. So I had to go meet with a person that they called the comptroller [L.R. Bywaters]. And he was trying to explain to me that I didn't have enough money. And I was trying to explain to him that I don't understand how you can be an institution of higher learning and you want to deny me an education just because I don't have enough money. Find me a job on campus and let me work. Because I told him I wasn't going back home. So they found me a job and let me stay. And then they introduced me, I got introduced to--I forget the name of it--some educational fund that I applied to and got money to complete my education. And of course during the summers I went back to D.C. [Washington, D.C.] and worked to buy my books and buy one or two pieces of clothing. But I enjoyed my stay at Fort Valley. I enrolled in Fort Valley in January of 1960, and I took extra hours so I could catch up with my class. And I graduated without having to go to summer school in 1963, June of 1963. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My freshman year was in Hunter Hall [ph.]. And that's where I got my first experience with being away from home and being on my own. And we had a good time there. I met a lot of girls, and we had a nice time there. And we were a little devilish; I learned to be a little devilish along with them there at Hunter Hall. And then we went to--no, the freshman hall was Jeanes Hall, and then we went to Hunter Hall the sophomore year, which was my favorite hall. And-- Speaker 1: And this was the dormitory (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Dormitory. Speaker 1: --where you all lived? Speaker 2: Yeah. We used to have, we had a dormitory matron. We used to call her the house mother. And she would come out and tell us it was time to quiet down; time to go to bed; lights out; time to go to the library for study. But as I said, I had a job, I worked at the rec center in the bookstore. And I'd go to the library and do my studies, and then I'd go to the rec center and work. And then in my junior and senior year I lived at Davison Hall [John W. Davison Hall], and that's when I got inducted into the Delta Sigma Theta Sorority. And I still had my job. Now back here, one of our neighbors had died who had six or seven children, and some of the neighbors were taking some of the children to raise them. So, my mama [Katherine Hunt Ingram] had taken in one of the daughters named Gwendolyn [ph.]. And when it was time for me to graduate from college, it was time for her to graduate from high school. And my parents could not afford to get her a cap and gown and her ring in high school and with me in college. So, I didn't march, and I didn't get a ring for college. I told them to let her have the experience because I had had it in high school [L.S. Ingraham High School, Sparta, Georgia]. So they got her a ring and cap and gown and let her march, and they mailed me my diploma. Because both of us--you know, couldn't afford to do it for both of us. And I graduated in June of 1963. Story_ID: 360141 Speaker 1: And while I was in college [Fort Valley State College; Fort Valley State University, Fort Valley, Georgia] I did my student teaching in Griffin, Georgia in the second grade under a lady named Ceola Head [ph.] who was very strict. And she had me doing many, many lesson plans every night because our classes were divided into so many group levels. And she had me doing a whole lot of work that I thought was unnecessary at the time. But I did the work, and I got an A for student teaching. And then the principal contacted me and asked me if I'd like to come back there and work, and I worked there for four years. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Teaching second grade. And then my brother Robert [Robert Ingram] was getting ready to go into the service, in the [U.S.] Army. My brother Jerald [Jerald Ingram] was already in the [U.S.] Air Force, and my mother [Katherine Hunt Ingram] was still kind of sick, so I came home to be with her and start working at Hancock Central [Hancock Central High School, Sparta, Georgia]. They had changed the name of the school [Hancock County Training School, Sparta, Georgia] to Hancock Central. I worked over there in the second grade for two years and then I ran for political office. Story_ID: 360142 Speaker 1: Let's go back to the comptroller when you first entered-- Speaker 2: Fort Valley [Fort Valley State College; Fort Valley State University, Fort Valley, Georgia] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Fort Valley. Would he, do you remember the name of the comptroller at that particular time? Speaker 2: I think his name was Mr. Bywaters [L.R. Bywaters]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Because one of the persons [HistoryMaker Anita J. Ponder] we interviewed, her father was a comptroller at Fort Valley State. Speaker 2: Oh, really? Speaker 1: So, I was wondering if he was there at that particular time. Speaker 2: Do you remember his name? Speaker 1: Mr. Ponder [Clifford Ponder]. Speaker 2: I remember Mr. Ponder. Speaker 1: Okay, but he came in later? Speaker 2: Later. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, he was comptroller during the time that you were there? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: But that was after? Speaker 2: After. Speaker 1: After that time, all right. And the dormitories, what were the dormitories like? Because at that particular time this was--the girls had dorms and-- Speaker 2: And the boys had dorms (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And the boys had dorms, okay. Speaker 2: The dormitory rooms were small. There were three of us in one room, and I-- Speaker 1: Now, did you have twin beds or-- Speaker 2: We had one twin bed, and then a bunk. Speaker 1: Okay. So, one girl slept on the bunk. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Everybody would basically get the bottom bed, nobody wanted to be on the top. But I roomed with a girl named Jackie Nichols [ph.] from Summerville [Georgia], I believe it was, and a girl named Sally Carson [ph.] from Eastman, Georgia. Speaker 1: All right. So do you know them now? I mean have you all stayed in contact over the years? Speaker 2: No. Jackie is back in her hometown. Sally passed away. I don't hear from many of my college classmates. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I know where one or two of them is. Speaker 1: Now, during those days there was a matron, or like you said, there was someone over the dorm? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And they told you what to do? Because now we have co-ed dorms. Speaker 2: Yeah, they told us what to do. Speaker 1: And they were on the job, were they not? Speaker 2: They were on the job, believe me, they were. Speaker 1: Their duties were to keep the girls in line? Speaker 2: In line. I remember my freshman year the dormitory matron was Miss Duncan [ph.]. And one night about one or two o'clock in the morning she came over the intercom, "All the girls will come to the lobby immediately. Put on your robes and come to the lobby." So when we got to the lobby she told us that the police had gotten one of the girls from behind the boys' dormitories, and she was going to make an example out of her so that the rest of us would never do that. So, we were sitting there waiting. They came in with her daughter, and she fainted. (Laughter) We got cold Coca-Cola bottles and put cold water on her, "You ain't fainted, you just cheap because this is your daughter. Get up." (Laughter) Yeah, but she was a very strict-- Speaker 1: (Laughter) But she never knew it was her daughter? Speaker 2: No, she didn't know until they brought her in. Speaker 1: Not her in wildest imagination would she have thought that it was her daughter. Speaker 2: No, she didn't know it until they brought her in. Speaker 1: Now, was her daughter in that particular dorm that she was over? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Now, were the boys' dorms on the same side of the campus as the girls? Speaker 2: They were on the same side of the campus, but it was down like in the bottom, Jeanes Hall. Yeah, all of the boys and some of the male professors lived in that dormitory. Speaker 1: Oh they, oh okay, they lived there and taught on campus (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Some of the professors lived on campus. Story_ID: 360143 Speaker 1: Now, when you were at Fort Valley [Fort Valley State College; Fort Valley State University, Fort Valley, Georgia], what were some of the classes that you had that were of grave interest to you, that you really liked? Speaker 2: I liked English. I didn't care too much for history. English was my favorite class. Speaker 1: Okay. And did, when you started teaching, were any of the classes that you really liked--did they play a role in helping you to become the teacher that you wanted to be (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes, yes. Speaker 1: Was English one of those classes? Speaker 2: English was one of those classes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And we had a class called economics, and biology still. Speaker 1: What about life at Fort Valley State? What did you do after hours or on weekends? I know you worked. Speaker 2: Well, after hours we went to the library. And of course I had to work. And whenever a game was on campus, if I was not working I would go to the basketball game. I didn't care too much for football, I never understood it. So, I didn't go to the football games, but sometimes I'd go to the basketball games. And of course on the weekends, on Saturdays we would just--after breakfast we would just go to the library for a while, and then we were just out on campus walking around or at the rec center. I was at work at the rec center. And of course on Sunday we had to go to vesper every Sunday, vesper service every Sunday. Speaker 1: And that was Sunday school, right? Or was that church service? Speaker 2: It was something like a church service, but we didn't go to a community church. But they'd have vesper like in the evenings, and they'd invite violinists and speakers and that kind of stuff. And I remember one time we had these people playing the violin, and we had gotten together and we didn't want to go to vesper. And it was required that you go your freshman, sophomore, and junior year; it was a requirement. But your senior year, you had a choice; you could go if you wanted to. Speaker 1: And did you get a grade for it, or was it just mandatory? Speaker 2: Just mandatory. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And these people were out there playing the violin. So we had decided that we were going to make them play until they dropped. And every time they came out to play, we would just applaud so much that they'd come back with another number. And we just never did let them rest, so they just had to tell us that they had to stop. But it was something that we had made up. And one time I tried not to go to vesper. I put on my high heel shoes and my hat, you had to wear a hat, and my coat. And I went out, I signed out downstairs in front of the dormitory matron. I went around to the side door and I came back in and went back upstairs and got in my bed. And what I didn't know was that the dormitory matron made a room check. So, she came up there and caught me and some others who had skipped vesper. So, we had to write these papers about why we skipped vesper, and why we should not skip vesper. And we had to go before some disciplinary person, I forgot who it was. But I never tried that again. And all of the years that I was required to go, I did not want to go. And in my senior year, I didn't miss a one. Speaker 1: Even when it wasn't required? Speaker 2: Uh-huh, it wasn't required (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You still went? Speaker 2: When it wasn't required I didn't miss a one, I wanted to go then. I never did understand that logic, but I didn't miss a one my senior year. Speaker 1: Yeah, vesper was an activity that is not required now. But then at that particular time it was a semi-religious ceremony. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Because it was non-denominational. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: All of the religions attended that. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And it was after-- Speaker 2: After church service (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) the regular church day. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. So, that was to make sure that they were there. And it normally was packed, wasn't it? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And you had to dress for the occasion? Speaker 2: Had to dress for the occasion. Speaker 1: Like you were going to church? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And during those days, that was the full church dress? Speaker 2: The full church dress. Speaker 1: Did you have to wear gloves? Speaker 2: Gloves and a hat. Speaker 1: And normally the bags that the girls wore matched the shoes? And-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: --your Sunday, your Sunday best. Story_ID: 360144 Speaker 1: And Lord I remember at Fort Valley [Fort Valley State College; Fort Valley State University, Fort Valley, Georgia] when we would go to the dining hall, the first time I went in there was for breakfast. And I was looking at the food, you know, the food on the tray. And they had hot dogs and grits. And I was saying to myself, "I have never seen anybody have hot dogs and grits for breakfast." And by that time, the lunchroom director came over and grabbed my legs like that. I was saying, "What's wrong with this lady, grabbing my legs?" They said, "Don't get alarmed." They said, "She's trying to see--." See, I had on seamless hose. She was trying to see if I had on stockings because you couldn't come in without stockings on. Speaker 2: To go to breakfast? Speaker 1: To go to anything in the dining hall. You had to have on stockings or socks. So-- Speaker 2: Well, how did you have to dress for class? Anyway that you wanted to? Speaker 1: Well, you had to dress in skirts and sweaters or blouses or pantsuits. You had to dress, you couldn't just go any kind of way. And one Sunday when I was a sophomore, we had one pair of Red Fox stockings, the whole little group of friends. So we started--we usually waited until the lunch hour was about over before we'd go to lunch. But we started going when it first opened so that all of us could wear the same pair of stockings to the lunchroom because we didn't have any stockings and didn't have any money to get them. And sometimes parents would send, would send you a box of food. It only lasted one day because everybody in the dorm had to get a little bit of it. They'd send us canned and potted meat, and sardines and crackers. Sometimes they'd bake a cake or a pie or something and send it. And everybody would share it. But that particular Sunday all of us wore the same pair of Red Fox stockings with a seam up the back. Speaker 2: One at a time. Speaker 1: One at a time to the lunchroom. Speaker 2: And Red Fox was a brand. Weren't those stockings in certain colors? Speaker 1: They were kind of reddish. Speaker 2: And were they silk? Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: Because they weren't pantyhose, they were stockings? Speaker 1: Stockings. Speaker 2: They stopped at the thigh, or right above the knee? Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: That was when girls wore garters. Speaker 1: Garters and girdles. Speaker 2: And girdles. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And waist cinchers with the stocking attachment to them. Did you all wear pants at all? Speaker 1: I don't remember wearing pants too much, especially to class. We mostly wore skirts or dresses. Story_ID: 360145 Speaker 1: Are there any other memories that you have of Fort Valley State [Fort Valley State College; Fort Valley State University, Fort Valley, Georgia]? Speaker 2: I remember when I was on line to join this sorority [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority]. There was a girl named Dolly [ph.], and Dolly liked to laugh a lot, and everything tickled Dolly. Well, whatever one person did on the line, everybody had to suffer the consequences. So, they told us that we had to go around to everybody's table and beg them to give us their cornbread. And once they saw that they was making us eat all that cornbread--nobody wanted the bread, they were just giving us piles and piles of cornbread. And they made us eat cornbread until it was coming out of our ears. And all of us had to sleep on the floor. There were about eight or ten of us, and all of us had to sleep on the floor on two mattresses for that week of probation while we were going over to the sorority. We had to walk around with an egg on a spoon. We had to go in the doors backwards. And-- Speaker 1: So, how long was the pledging period? Speaker 2: Two weeks. We had a week of silent pro and a week of open pro. And I had, one of my education professors, Dr. Berry [ph.], was my big sister. And we had to bow down and say "Hail, most noble Greek of the Delta Sigma Theta Sorority." And you had to stay there until they told you to get up. And once I met her, she said "Are you saying H-E-L-L, or H-A-I-L? I said, "H-A-I-L, most noble Greek." She left me down there, and she went into a building and stayed as long as she pleased. And she came back, I was still trembling and bending over there waiting for her to come and tell me to rise. Speaker 1: With hazing and everything going on on college campuses now-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --that is amazing that that would be--a lot of pledgees probably wished that that there was something that they had experienced. Speaker 2: All of the kids used to wait out in front of the dining hall to see the sororities and the fraternities do their steps before they went into the dining hall. Everybody would, each group would come up with a step show before going into the dining hall. Speaker 1: Okay. And was this all--each day that you were on line? Speaker 2: Each day that we were on probation, uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what did you have to do to qualify to actually become a pledgee of Delta Sigma Theta? Speaker 2: You had to have a B plus, or above average. Speaker 1: Okay. And did you go through an interview? Or did--how did you get-- Speaker 2: Yeah. I had an interview with the sorority members. And they ask you about your grades and your activities that you're interested in, and your activities back home, what did you do? Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then you had to write them a letter, something like an application letter, and say that you were interested. And then they would invite you to what they called a rush party if they were interested in you becoming a member. Now, they had a sorority, the AKA's [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority]. They had, most of their girls were pretty girls, light-skinned or long hair. And most of the Deltas were dark-skinned girls, but who had that average. And they were the only ones who were interested in me, and they were the only ones that I was interested in. So, I wrote them a letter and they invited me to the rush party. And when I found out that it was going to cost five hundred dollars, my heart sunk because I knew that my parents [Katherine Hunt Ingram and Robert Ingram] didn't have five hundred dollars. But Aunt Edith came to the rescue, and I got on line and was (unclear). Speaker 1: Now during the time that you were pledging, did all of the girls who submitted letters end up being accepted? Or were they-- Speaker 2: No, some of them were not accepted. Speaker 1: And after pledging, were there any pressures--well, let's just say during the--either during the time that you were pledging or even immediately after you made, you crossed over and you became a Delta Sigma Theta--were there any kind of social requirements that you had to adhere to? Speaker 2: Not that I can remember. I just remember during the time that we were on probation, the big sisters would pressure you to clean their rooms or go to the library and look up this and that for them, or wash their clothes or cook them something. You know, they just had you doing a lot of, a series of things. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, at Fort Valley were there--Fort Valley is located in Fort Valley [Georgia]? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Is that significant? Is there, was it named after a fort, or was there a fort located there? Speaker 2: I don't really know. I just know it's located at Fort Valley, and that was the name of the school, Fort Valley State College. Story_ID: 360146 Speaker 1: So you graduated from Fort Valley [Fort Valley State College; Fort Valley State University, Fort Valley, Georgia]. And now you're, well, you did your student teaching before you graduated (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right. Speaker 1: Now, the student teaching experience, explain what an average day was like? Or what did you have to do to qualify to become a student teacher? And then what were your days like as a student teacher? Speaker 2: Well, to qualify to be a student teacher you had to take all of the subjects, and pass all of the subjects that dealt specifically with your major. And then you have lab classes there at the college where you taught a class. Then, they would send you out for a quarter of student teaching. And the, you know, professor would find out what schools were participating and accepting student teachers, and they would send you to that place. And they sent me to Griffin, Georgia. And of course, I had to go up there beforehand and arrange for living quarters, and I stayed with Reverend and Mrs. Parren [ph.]. Another girl who was doing student teaching, Jeannette Porter [ph.], which was one of my sorority sisters too, we stayed with Miss Parren and her husband. And so we had to walk to the school [Moore Elementary School, Griffin, Georgia], we didn't have a car. So, we walked to school most days. And in the morning when the children came in, we had to see to them using the restroom and getting water and all that before class started. And then the classes started and we had to have all of these groups going on in the classroom. Miss Head [Ceola Head (ph.)] had to check my lesson plan. Speaker 1: Miss Head was the- Speaker 2: She was the supervising teacher. Speaker 1: Okay. She was not the teacher in the classroom? Speaker 2: She was the teacher in the classroom. Speaker 1: She was the teacher in the classroom? Speaker 2: Yes, but she was supervising my student teaching. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: So, she actually gave you an agenda of what you were to do-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --as a teacher? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Did she meet with you periodically, or quarterly? I mean not quarterly, but-- Speaker 2: Just about-- Speaker 1: Weekly? Speaker 2: --two or three times a week. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: After school she would meet with me and tell me what I needed to improve on, or what I needed to do the next day, or what I needed to improve on that I was already doing. Speaker 1: So, did she actually teach the classes and you observed as a student teacher? Or did she give you an assignment and then you taught the classes? Speaker 2: I taught the classes, and she observed. Speaker 1: And she rated you on your performance (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, that's right. Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Now, as a supervisor of a student teacher, did she have to meet any qualifications? Did she have certain qualifications that she had to have in order to be a supervisor? Or did just being a teacher qualify her to-- Speaker 2: I really don't know whether she did or not. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I don't know. Speaker 1: All right. Well, tell us how the whole quarter went. Because it wasn't a full semester, right? Was it like from January to May? Speaker 2: I think we were on the quarter system then. Speaker 1: And what months would that have been? Speaker 2: Oh, I think it was about three months. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And it was in the winter. As I said, I was living there with Reverend and Mrs. Parren, and we went to school every day. And of course, we had to go to the PTA [Parent Teacher Association] meetings and other meetings that the teachers had during that time. And on Sundays, we went with Reverend and Mrs. Parren to church, or with the Heads to church, or to some church in the community. And then once in a while I'd come home for the weekend. I met a fellow up there that I just fell head over heels in love with, and he used to bring me home to church. We were having church at my church here in Sparta [Georgia] only on the third Sundays at that time. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And he'd bring me home for the third Sunday for church. And we'd have dinner and then we'd go back. He was the first black policeman on the police force there in Griffin. And we would go to games, and other than that we'd just be around the house. We'd go shopping. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, did the student teaching assignments consume a lot of your evenings? Speaker 2: A lot of it, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. And did you have to do lessons (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Because see, we had to bring all those lesson plans. Speaker 1: Okay. And how detailed did the lesson plan have to be? Speaker 2: Well, you had to state what your objective was, and then the activities that you were going to have to meet those objectives, and how they would show your objectives--the activities--and how they would project your objectives. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then you had to have what you expected them to learn out of that situation. Speaker 1: All right. And that's so different from the way that everything is done today, because everything is kind of computerized. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And therefore, a lot of lessons and assignments that even the teachers have are still taking them away from the classroom. But in your days when you were doing your student teaching, there was a lot of hands-on with the children? Speaker 2: Hands-on with the children, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. And a lot of, a lot of time was given to lesson plans, but you still had a lot of time for actually teaching and working like individually and after-hours with the children? Is that correct (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 360147 Speaker 1: After student teaching [at Moore Elementary School, Griffin, Georgia], then what did you do? Speaker 2: Came back to Fort Valley [Fort Valley State College; Fort Valley State University, Fort Valley, Georgia] and waited for graduation. Speaker 1: All right. So, you forfeited your cap and gown and the graduation festivities for-- Speaker 2: For Gwendolyn [ph.] to do hers at the high school level, yes. Speaker 1: Now, what made you so free to give? Why did you feel that-- Speaker 2: Well, as I said, her mother had died. I don't remember exactly where her father was at that time. But the children were divided up in the community and among relatives. And it was time for her to graduate, and she wanted to march and she wanted a ring. And I just felt, I guess it was just bred in me because my mother [Katherine Hunt Ingram] and my grandparents [Katie Neal Hunt and Wilkins Hunt] had been so giving all along. And I just told my mother that I would not march and not get a ring, to let her get hers. Speaker 1: And that's amazing. Because in today's society those children would probably have been placed in social services or (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Foster care, yes. Speaker 1: --foster homes, yeah, or even an orphanage. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: But during those days, that's when the community was still functioning as a community. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And that proverb, "It takes a community to raise a child" (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) To raise a child, yes. Speaker 1: Yes. Now, has Sparta [Georgia] changed very much from the time that you were in elementary school [East End Elementary School, Sparta, Georgia] up to when you graduated from Fort Valley State? Speaker 2: Well, not that much insomuch as we still have a lot of relatives who raised children, and grandparents who raised children, and aunts who raised children. Because there has not been a whole lot of industry in Hancock County [Georgia]. And most people, when they get out of high school and have children, they have to leave Hancock County to get a job to support themselves. And they have left their children behind with relatives to raise. So in that respect, it's still going on. Story_ID: 360148 Speaker 1: Did your parents [Katherine Hunt Ingram and Robert Ingram] still live in the same place that they lived in when you were here? Were they still in the Gut [Sparta, Georgia] where they were raising (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They were still in the Gut until around 1965, I think-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --when I built a house for them, remember I told you. And then they moved from, they still lived in the Gut, but closer to town. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: On New Street, that's where the house is now, on New Street. Speaker 1: Okay. So when you graduated, you went back to Fort--I mean when you graduated from Fort Valley [Fort Valley State College; Fort Valley State University, Fort Valley, Georgia], what did you do after that, after student teaching and after graduation? Speaker 2: Well, after that I went back to Washington [D.C.] for the summer and worked. And as I said, the principal had contacted me from the school where I did my student teaching, and I had a job there [Moore Elementary School, Griffin, Georgia]. So in August, I came to that job and I worked there for four years. Speaker 1: Okay, in Griffin [Georgia]. Speaker 2: For four years. Speaker 1: For four years? Speaker 2: For four years. Speaker 1: All right. Now, did, this is where the young man was also? Speaker 2: Yes, uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. So, did you all continue to-- Speaker 2: No, we had a big breakup just before I moved back to Sparta [Georgia]. And he got married to someone else during the summer, and I came to Sparta. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And after I was elected, he came to Sparta to see me, of course, and wanted to know if he had the marriage annulled, could we still make it? So, I figured if he acted like that before marriage, I didn't want any part of trying to, you know, trying to see if he could act any different. So he is a minister now in Griffin, and has, I don't know how many children, seven children. And I came here to Sparta and worked two years at, well, a year and a half at the local school [Hancock Central High School, Sparta, Georgia] and then I ran for political office. Story_ID: 360149 Speaker 1: So you taught school, and what grades did you actually teach? Speaker 2: Second grade. Speaker 1: Second grade. And that was in Griffin [Georgia] and-- Speaker 2: And in Hancock. Speaker 1: And in Hancock. In Hancock County [Georgia]. Now as a teacher, you had fulfilled your obligation, or your earlier desire to be a teacher, from elementary school when you patterned after the teacher with a handicap. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: All right. And you had gone through that nursing career, or the desire to be a nurse. So, you became a teacher. Now, what was it like being a teacher in Hancock County where you had graduated? Speaker 2: Well, the first thing is most of the children knew me. So in the classroom they called me Miss Ingram [HistoryMaker Edith Ingram]. But when we were out for recess, they called me Jack, because everybody around here calls me Jack. My middle name is Jacqueline, and they call me Jack. But as soon as we went back in the classroom, they switched it right back to Miss Ingram. And I had a very good bunch of children. I could go out of the classroom and not have to worry about them acting up. And I had a lot of children. Back then they had a lunch program where they fed a lot of children who couldn't afford it. And some of them didn't get fed, but every day I would march mine through, and let the ones who had money go on through the line. And then the rest of them who didn't have the money, I would give them a plate from the assembly line. And I'd go right on to the principal's office, because I knew he was going to be looking for me, for giving away all that lunch. And-- Speaker 1: So, by now we have classrooms, I mean we have schools with lunchrooms attached to them now now (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) By now. In 1960, when they went into the new school [Hancock County Training School; Hancock County Central High School, Sparta, Georgia], they had a lunchroom. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, but when you were there--this is not the same school that you went to? Speaker 2: No, this one was closed. Speaker 1: This is one of the other schools that was in the-- Speaker 2: This is the new school that my father [Robert Ingram] and [maternal] grandfather [Wilkins Hunt] petitioned to build. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: This is the first brick and mortar school for blacks. Speaker 1: Okay. And this was first through twelfth grade? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: All right. So, did they close the school down, the L.S. Ingraham School [L.S. Ingraham High School, Sparta, Georgia]? Speaker 2: L.S. Ingraham, yes, they closed it down in '59 [1959]. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: June of '59 [1959]. Speaker 1: And when they closed that one down, they opened this school? And this-- Speaker 2: And everybody went to that school. Speaker 1: Everybody in Hancock County, all the black children in Hancock County went to this school? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And still no integration yet? Speaker 2: No integration yet. Speaker 1: All right. So you had some disciplined young children? Speaker 2: Very much. Speaker 1: Did you have a concentration in any particular subject that you taught? Speaker 2: No, we taught all subjects--reading, writing, arithmetic, spelling, geography, health. Speaker 1: Now did they still have the type of recesses, the little recess and the big recess that you all had? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: They still had those? Speaker 2: They still had them. Speaker 1: But they didn't have to bring their lunches? Speaker 2: They didn't have to bring lunch. Speaker 1: Had any other changes taken place since you were in school? Like were there, had the government become involved in any of the activities like lunch programs, or-- Speaker 2: Yeah, the government was involved in the lunch programs. They would pay for, well, they were supposed to pay for lunch for people who were not able to purchase lunch. But as I said, some of them were not being given lunch, so I gave them lunch. The books were a little better. Of course, they still were not enough, but they were a little better. We got some new books and we still had some old books for the classes. And in high school they had like chemistry labs and that kind of thing. Speaker 1: All right, okay. Now, are any of the students that you had then, do you, did you follow them? Or did they keep in contact with you? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: In adulthood? Speaker 2: Yes. One of my students, Awanna Leslie, is now the acting superintendent of schools. And several others work in neighboring counties. Some of them are in service. I've kept up with quite a few of them. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But most of them have meaningful employment, and they're doing well. Story_ID: 360150 Speaker 1: Now after teaching, now you decided to run for judge. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Now, how did that come about? Speaker 2: Well, in 1966 my father [Robert Ingram] ran, as I told you. And then my brother [Robert Ingram], in '67 [1967] was getting ready to go to the [U.S. military] service, and my mother [Katherine Hunt Ingram] was still sick. So I came home so that I would be home with her. And in 1966, when Daddy ran for office, the ordinary then, Ms. Miller [Helen Miller], a white woman, had told them they could have poll workers during the election process. And they had to go through the black community and muster up somebody to serve as poll workers. You know, back then they were afraid to serve as poll workers. And on the election morning when they got to the courthouse to serve, she screamed out and ran and told them, "Y'all can't come in and serve, because the white people told me don't let no niggers work in the election." So they promised her then that her politicking days were over. Speaker 1: This is your father? Speaker 2: My father and James Smith. And before that, at my church, my brother Robert and a guy named James Clayton, Jr. had worked with the voter registration drive, and they had registered a whole lot of people-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --who were going to go out and vote. And so they just wanted some representation during the election process. And I came home, and they had a club called the Democratic Club [Hancock County Citizens Democratic Club]. It didn't mean that it was Democratic as a party affiliation; they just named it the Democratic Club. And they were looking for somebody to run for ordinary, and they asked me about running. And I said initially that was not interested. But my daddy and others kept explaining to me the importance of it. And their main reason was because an ordinaries, one of her duties is to supervise the elections. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, one night in the middle of the night I decided that I would run, and I proceeded to call and tell people that I was going to run. And that's how it all got started, that was in 1968. And I was elected in November of 1968. Well, when I got elected I went to the courthouse one Saturday and asked Ms. Miller if she would show me around the office, because I was going to come in in January. And she went and opened the door and told me to get the hell out of there and come back when my time was. At that time, she gave the key to the ordinary's office to the clerk of the superior court, who was a white guy, and the ordinary's office would not open anymore until I came to open it. She just closed up, period. And when I got in there, I thanked God and a few other responsible people that she did not show me around. Because she had death certificates and birth certificates mixed in together. Her recordkeeping was just totally mixed up. And I said it was a blessing that she did not show me around, because I would have had to unlearn what she had taught me. But I went to, I believe it was Marietta [Georgia] and visited an office. But the operation was so much larger than this office's operation, and it didn't really relate. And I just had to wait until I got in there and hit the books. Speaker 1: Now, why do they call it ordinary? Speaker 2: I don't know. The ordinary court came from England a long time ago, as much as I know about it. And the duties of the ordinary were duties that the kings and queens did not attend to. And then next in line was the ordinary, the court of ordinary, that's where they got it from. And early on, they changed it to probate court, probate judge. Story_ID: 360151 Speaker 1: This was the polls, the poll keepers. This was the one that really upset your father [Robert Ingram] and the--? Speaker 2: Right. Because they were the ones--when people had come and get checked in to vote, they'd give them the ballot. And they were the ones who would count the ballots at the end of the election. And they didn't want any niggers as they say, to do that. Speaker 1: It had always been held by white people? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: And even-- Speaker 2: And here it was held at somebody's country store where the wife and husband and daughter and son ran the whole poll, a family. Speaker 1: So, they could just count them the way they wanted to count them (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Anything they wanted to do. Speaker 1: Because right after the Civil War, the voting was a great big--even running for offices. Because a lot of blacks did run for office, and there was a lot of problems with voting, because a lot of the whites who held those offices didn't want to give them up. So there were a lot of fights, especially in Louisiana. And they came up with some organization to keep blacks from voting. It wasn't the Knights [Knights of the White Camelia]. It was dealing with voting, but they would ride through neighborhoods or they would just do anything to keep them from voting--changing voting spots and everything. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, here we are again. That's the late 1800s, and here we are again in the 1950s, late '50s [1950s], early '60s [1960s], and even late '60s [1960s]-- Speaker 2: And the '70s [1970s], too. Because I remember in the '70s [1970s], the white community here got a group called the Night Riders, from Washington County [Georgia] to come through the black community and shoot up the black community. And when they came through to shoot up the black community, we had gotten word that they were coming, so we did the shooting up. We were ready; we did the shooting up. Speaker 1: So, the Night Riders consisted of who? Speaker 2: The Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK]. Speaker 1: The Klan themselves? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: They would come in at night and go through the black neighborhoods and-- Speaker 2: And shoot. Speaker 1: --shoot up those ones. So, you all had a shoot-out at the O.K. Corral [Tombstone, Arizona] (laughter)? Speaker 2: A shoot-out at the OK Corral (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The Sparta Corral (laughter). Story_ID: 360152 Speaker 1: And that reminds me. Speaking of the Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK], back when my mother [Katherine Hunt Ingram] was a child, she told us that some black guy had killed the white sheriff here in Hancock County [Georgia]. And they thought that he was hiding at my grandfather's [Wilkins Hunt] house way over in the woods where they had this big farm. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And the Klan came over there to search and see if he was over there. But my grandfather got word that they were coming, so he had all of his boys go out from where the Klan was, and they were behind them with their guns. So if they started shooting, they could attack from behind. And my grandmother [Katie Neal Hunt] was in the house, but she told them--they came to the door and asked her was he there? And she told them, "He went to church this morning." But that was all she said. She didn't say he wasn't there. She just said he went to church this morning. And they said that they were looking for this man, and she told them that he wasn't there. And by that time, some white person that they knew came up and asked her for my grandfather. She said, "He's in there hiding." They said, "Why did you say he went to church?" She said, "He did go to church this morning, but I didn't tell you he didn't come back. You asked me where was he, and I told you he went to church this morning." But the Klan left, because they had them surrounded. My uncles out in the field had them surrounded. Speaker 2: So your uncles surrounded the Klan? Speaker 1: Surrounded the Klan. Speaker 2: And then the Klan did leave? Speaker 1: They left. Speaker 2: Did they have on the hoods, or did she say? Speaker 1: She didn't say whether they had on the hoods. I'm sure they did. Speaker 2: And a lot of this is not making the history books, about the blacks who did fight back. Speaker 1: No, it's not. Speaker 2: It's not making it, and then the many riots that took place regarding voting and voting rights. And it just keeps repeating itself in history with blacks and voting rights, and the ability to control the polls or just be there, just be present (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It's a powerful po- it's a powerful position. Story_ID: 360153 Speaker 1: So at any rate, you're, you ran, you were successful, and Miller [Helen Miller] was ousted [as probate judge]. Did you have any other stories about Miller and, you know, when you became judge or--? Speaker 2: Well, when she was in the office, any time anybody went in there for some business--I told you another lawyer's office was over in the commissioner's office. And I think it was her brother-in-law or someone who was one of the lawyers. And she would always check with them before she signed any paperwork, to make sure she was doing what she was supposed to be doing. And when I came in the courthouse, they moved out. And-- Speaker 1: Even the brother-in-law? Speaker 2: Uh-huh, the whole law firm moved out of the commissioner's office. They had no business in there in the first place, having the county pay for their law office. Because they weren't paying any rent, they were just having that law practice out of the commissioner's office. Speaker 1: (Background noise) Do you know how long that went on? Speaker 2: I don't know, it was there when I came. Speaker 1: So that was just a tradition with-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh. When I came in, they moved out. Speaker 1: So, you came-- Speaker 2: Before we leave that, my mother's [Katherine Hunt Ingram] uncle was working for Ms. Miller. Her brother had a car dealership, and she was working at the car dealership in the afternoon. And she told my uncle, his name was James [ph.], "James, I want you to pass out some of my campaign cards." He said, "Miss, I'll do anything you ask me to do, and you know I will." He said, "But I can't pass out your campaign cards, because my nephew is running." (Laughter) He was talking about me. He said, "My nephew is running." Speaker 1: He called you his nephew (laughter)? Speaker 2: His nephew. He said, "I can't pass out none of your cards because my nephew is running." Speaker 1: So, why did he call you the nephew? Speaker 2: I don't know. He just got it mixed up, I guess (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I guess he did. (Laughter) So he didn't pass any out? Speaker 2: He didn't pass out any of her cards. Speaker 1: Because he knew who he was voting for. Speaker 2: That's it. Story_ID: 360154 Speaker 1: You ran, you, you won by a landslide. Speaker 2: I did. Speaker 1: Because what is the ratio, what was the ratio of blacks to whites in Hancock County [Georgia]? Speaker 2: Well, it's been better than 80 percent for a long time. Speaker 1: And it's still-- Speaker 2: It still is. Speaker 1: It's still like that. So when you entered as judge [probate judge], what was the makeup of the city government at that particular time? Speaker 2: It was all-white. All the county government was all-white and the city government was all-white. I was the only one. Speaker 1: And then you were the only female ordinary in the State of Georgia or throughout-- Speaker 2: There were a lot of female ordinaries in the State of Georgia. But when I was elected, I was the first black in the United States to be elected to that position. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And now, what were some of the qualifications? In some instances judges are appointed, and in other instances they ran. So, you ran for this office? Speaker 2: Yeah, I ran for the office. Speaker 1: And you were elected. Okay, what was it--other than your father [Robert Ingram] and his friend [James Smith] wanting you to run and oust Miller [Helen Miller], what were some of the qualifications that you had for actually running? You were a teacher. What were the qualifications for the-- Speaker 2: Well, the only qualifications that were set forth by the law were that you be at least, I think it was at least twenty-five years old, and be a registered voter and a citizen of the county or the state of the Georgia. Those were the only qualifications. Now, in larger cities like Atlanta [Georgia], it was required that you have law training, but not in small counties like Hancock County. Speaker 1: Okay. Now what were the duties of the ordinary? Speaker 2: Well, the ordinary's court dealt with wills and estates, administration, guardianships, birth, death and marriage records, performed marriage ceremonies, had traffic court, supervised elections, had lunacy hearings. Those were the main duties. Speaker 1: So you wore your black robe? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Like a judge. Well, you were a judge, you are a judge. And did you have to, did you receive any special training or additional training? Speaker 2: Well, during the year it was mandatory that each judge get at least twelve hours of training from the University of Georgia continuing education center [University of Georgia Center for Continuing Education, Athens, Georgia]. And you would go like probably three days, and you'd have training in two or three of those areas. The meetings were held two or three times a year to address different subjects. But you had to get those hours to maintain your position. Speaker 1: And in these courses, you became familiar with state law and-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --county laws, and-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --for the State of Georgia? Speaker 2: Right. Plus, you had to do a lot of reading on your own. And of course, you know, I would always--when I was not sure about something, I'd always call and ask someone. Now, there was a judge in Baldwin County, Milledgeville [Georgia], Judge Simpson [ph.]. From the very beginning, he was so much help to me. Speaker 1: He became your mentor? Speaker 2: He did. Speaker 1: And this was a white judge? Speaker 2: Yes. The first year I went to the meeting, the judge who was in charge was the president of the probate judges association [Council of Probate Court Judges of Georgia]. He got up when it was time for a refreshment break and said, "Well, it's time for a refreshment break. That's what the niggers in my part of the country call it." There I sat with 158 white ones. So we went on the break, and while we were on the break he came and told me, "I hope I didn't offend you." So he said, "When you go back in, I'm going to let you tell a joke about an old cracker preacher." So I just told him that I didn't know any jokes about an old cracker preachers, and I would appreciate it if he didn't refer to me as a nigger, and that he didn't use the word nigger in my presence. That was in the general session. We went to the city sessions where they were dealing with traffic court. And the state patrol was there, and he said, "I'm going to tell this joke to break the monotony, and then we'll get on into class. There was a white welfare lady who was working at the welfare office. And this black lady, this colored lady, came in with her white poodle and wanted to put it on welfare. And she, the welfare lady asked her, 'Makes you think--,' well, no, the poodle was black. 'What makes you think your poodle deserves welfare?' She said, 'He's black, unemployed, and don't know who his daddy is.'" And everybody laughed. So I said, "About a year ago, a black poodle came into Hancock County by the name of John McCown, who had an investigation and found that all of the white poodles had transferred their property into the names of their children and had retired leisurely on welfare, and there were no black poodles on welfare. Now, we have a role that outnumbers the white poodles with black poodles. Now we can get on to the traffic, that's what we're here for." Story_ID: 360155 Speaker 1: So, when you responded to the joke and proceeded to go on with the rest of the day with, you know, what was on the agenda, how did they respond? Speaker 2: They just looked at me. And when we went to lunch, there were five or six seats on either of me, and nobody would sit next to me in class or when we went to lunch. We had these round tables-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --and mostly I was at a table almost by myself, with one or two other people sitting there, and they'd leave four or five empty chairs on each side of me. They would not sit with me. They'd just look at you. And when it was time to go to class [at the University of Georgia Center for Continuing Education, Athens, Georgia], sometimes they'd say, "Here she comes," (laughter). Speaker 1: And they wouldn't wait talk to you? Speaker 2: No, only Judge Simpson [ph.]. Speaker 1: He was the only one? Speaker 2: He was the only one. Speaker 1: Well, how did that make you feel? Speaker 2: Well, I knew it was wrong, I didn't particularly like it. But then on the other hand, I didn't really give a damn whether they talked to me or not. Speaker 1: You had a job to do-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and that was what-- Speaker 2: And I was there to learn what I needed to do when I came back here to take care of the folks in Hancock County [Georgia], and to take care of all of the people in Hancock County. When I went into office [as probate judge], I think they thought that I was going to go in and treat them the way they had treated us for so long. But I had to let them see that I was there to serve the people of Hancock County. Because whether they voted for me or not, I was still their ordinary until somebody unseated me. So, the black--some black people thought they could do whatever they wanted to do--driving up and down the road speeding and under the influence, and if they could just make it to Jackie [HistoryMaker Edith Ingram], everything would be all right. But I had to show them that that was not the case. And I had to show the white people that I wasn't just going to throw the book at them because they were white, and because they had done it to us. So, after I got that established, you know, things started going better. Story_ID: 360156 Speaker 1: So, how was your dad [Robert Ingram]? Was he elated that you won (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yes, Lord. He was very proud. Speaker 1: He worked hard to help this come about. Speaker 2: Yes, to help, uh-huh. Speaker 1: But then your brothers and others in the family and friends also rallied to support you. Speaker 2: My brother was in Vietnam during that time, Robert [Robert Ingram] was. I don't know where Jerry [Jerald Ingram] was, somewhere in the [U.S.] Air Force. But my daddy worked very hard, you know. Now, when we were getting ready to run for public office, we organized. A guy came to town in '66 [1966], John McCown. We were already sort of organized, but not organized like he organized us. And we, we would go out to the community door to door. Speaker 1: Now this, who is the we? Is this for-- Speaker 2: This is the people who were running for office, and the precinct captain. We have seven voting precincts and we had seven precinct captains, and each of those captains had workers. And anybody who wanted to work in the campaign, we would meet and decide who was going where. And we'd go door to door, crisscrossing the community. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And when we went to the community, we went to find out who in the house was registered, who needed to register, who needed a ride to the polls, what time they wanted to be picked up, and if they had any reason for not going to the polls. Some of them said they had to go to the store, they had to wash, they had to keep the baby, they had to stay at home with Grandma. Well, when we wrote down what time we were going to pick them up, we also wrote down what they needed. And we took a person to wash, to keep Grandma, to keep the baby, to cook. Whatever they say they needed done that would keep them from coming to the polls, we supplied that person-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --while they were coming to vote. Now, the person who picked them up--they knew who was going to pick them up; they wouldn't come with anybody else, now. That person would pick them up, and all the way to the polls they would be telling them about, we called it the Democratic slate. And they had a copy of our slate, and they'd read it to them and let them see it. And when they got to the polling place, if they couldn't read and write, they already had somebody with them who could assist them to make sure that they didn't fall into the wrong hands. And then when they'd voted, we'd take them back home and pick up the person that was left there to take care of Grandma and go on to the next house. Speaker 1: Now, this is the strategy that McCown--would you spell his last name? Speaker 2: M-C-C-O-W-A-N [sic.], McCown. Speaker 1: McCown, this is the same-- Speaker 2: That was his strategy. Speaker 1: This is the strategy that he worked out? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: And he came from where? Speaker 2: He was from Loris, South Carolina. Speaker 1: Okay, but he was on loan? Speaker 2: On loan to us. Speaker 1: For a period of time? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then he moved here and made this his home. Speaker 1: Oh, he did? Okay. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: And he worked out the strategy, and you implemented it? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And that's how you were able to get-- Speaker 2: Every year we elected more and more blacks. Speaker 1: So, what's the ratio now? Is it, I mean have blacks-- Speaker 2: All of the, all of the county officials are black except one county commissioner. The mayor is black, and three councilmen are black. Speaker 1: And this was all-white at one time? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: And this was before you took office? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And after you took office, then-- Speaker 2: After I took office, then the white clerk of the superior court retired, resigned, and I appointed Leroy Wiley [Leroy S. Wiley], a black science professor, to take his position. Speaker 1: You appointed him? Speaker 2: I did. Speaker 1: That was your duty, to-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --appoint judges? Speaker 2: Appoint other officeholders when somebody resigned or something. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And now, he, is he still holding that position (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He's still the clerk. Story_ID: 360157 Speaker 1: So, now Macon's [Macon, Georgia]--because of your breakthrough--you're breaking through the color lines and putting some color on the county board, and obviously you have opened doors for many blacks to walk through-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and take over those positions like it is right now. Okay, what are some of your fondest memories of being judge [probate judge], when you were sitting on the bench? Speaker 2: Well, I think what I liked most was elections. And that was because everybody got a chance to express themselves through the secret ballot. I trained my poll workers. Blacks were volunteering to work on the polls, and they got the training, and they did an excellent job. And of course after each election, the white community, who tried to defeat us, took us to court saying we had too many absentee ballots. We would go around at night and get people to sign and vote absentee. And one of the reasons to vote absentee is you had to be, you were going to be out of your polling place all day. But if they said they needed to be out of their polling place all day, somebody took them to Milledgeville [Georgia] all day. So, they voted absentee. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And we'd have a lot of absentee ballots, and they would say we had too many. But then when we went to court, they were never able to prove any of it. One time we had to have an election over, for some reason I don't recall. But I won every suit. My first election was in 1970 [sic. 1968], and I won every one. I went to court after every election. And those are my fondest memories, those elections. Of course, I have one or two funny stories that were fond memories, too. Speaker 1: Okay, well, tell us about this one where you--after each election--since you said you won every election for the thirty-two years that you sat on the bench. Speaker 2: I sat on the bench thirty-six years. Speaker 1: Thirty-six years, all right. Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: You said after-- Speaker 2: After each election where I had supervised the election, they were alleging that I did something illegal while holding the election, and we had to go to court. Those are the cases that I won, every one of them. Because I told them that I taught my poll workers to document everything that happened, right down to who was involved, what time it was, what the situation was, and what the outcome was, and then put a code section down there to back what their actions were. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So when we went into court, we had all of this documentation, and they could not prove their case. So, we won all of the cases for election fraud that they were alleging. But they were not able to prove any fraud because there really wasn't any. Speaker 1: There wasn't any. And after each election, everybody was ready to kiss you goodbye? Speaker 2: Yeah. At the probate judges association [Council of Probate Court Judges of Georgia] in Athens [Georgia] at the University of Georgia, the first election and the first four years they were saying, "Well, it was nice having you among us. It's time for re-election. You probably won't get re-elected." And he was shaking my hand and telling me they had enjoyed knowing me. And by time it was time for us to come back again, another election had passed and I was re-elected. So, they had to see me again. And I told them, "Well, I plan to be here for a while, so you might as well get used to it because I really plan to be here for a while." And out of all the years that I ran for office, eight or nine times, I got opposition twice. And all the other times, I ran unopposed. Story_ID: 360158 Speaker 1: What would you attribute your persistence and your fight ability--to withstand all of the--I'll call it prejudices that you had to encounter? What do you attribute your stamina to? Speaker 2: My faith in God. Everything, I prayed about; everything, I prayed about. And then my mama [Katherine Hunt Ingram] and my daddy [Robert Ingram] had always taught me that if I did what was right, in the end--there might be some in-between ground--but in the end, right would prevail. My grandmother always told me that. My grandmother always told me that regardless who it was, don't care what position they were in, to never think myself less than any of them, and to go in there and do what was right by the book for the people. And she used to always say, "Now, you can bend it as far as you can bend it without breaking it, but make sure you're on the side of the law." Speaker 1: And that-- Speaker 2: That kept me. Speaker 1: That kept you going? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Because you met a lot of opposition. Speaker 2: Yes, I did. Speaker 1: And a lot of odds. And being the only black woman in the United States to be an ordinary [probate judge]-- Speaker 2: And then too, I didn't just have the duties of the ordinary. There were people who would come for me to make doctor's appointments for them, to take them to the doctor, to re-certify them for welfare. Because the lady down in the welfare office, a white woman, didn't want to fill out the paperwork for them, and they couldn't read and write. So, I had a lot of things to do that were not office related. I did them for both blacks and whites, and that kept me. Speaker 1: And you said that to show--in order for the voters, some of the voters to show their appreciation--what are some of the gifts that you received? Speaker 2: They'd bring me a jar of jelly that he had made during the summer from prunes or figs or peaches. They'd bring me, when they'd kill hogs, they'd bring some fresh meat, they called it. Or they'd bring me some potatoes out of the potato hill, or they'd bring me some vegetables. Sometimes I'd get home and I'd have tomatoes on the porch, or beans or peas on the porch. And when I was first elected, when I first went in, the first day I went in, someone called me at the house, a white man, and told me, "You'd better not go to the courthouse today. Because if you walk up those steps, we're going to shoot you in the back." Well, I knew I had to go. So, I drove on in the car and parked out in front. And when I got there, around the square in front of the courthouse were all of these trucks with white men in them, with their rifle racks full of guns. I said a quick prayer, and I got out of my car and put my head in the air, and I took the longest walk of my life up the stairs of that courthouse. Well, when I got to the steps, I could see that there were two black guys standing there waiting for me who I knew, and they went in with me. And when we got inside of the courthouse, there's a door on both sides, and there were two black guys at both of those doors. So they came and they sat right on the outside of my office until it was time for me to go to lunch. Then they would take me to lunch to my mama's house, and then they'd bring me back and they'd sit there until five o'clock, and then they'd take me home. And then they'd go on home, or to a meeting or wherever they needed to go. And they did this for a week or two, and then they just vanished. And-- Speaker 1: And the men sat out on the trucks with the-- Speaker 2: No, they weren't, they weren't there. Speaker 1: They did it one day? Speaker 2: Some of them, well, they did it the first day. Speaker 1: Okay. And then, but your guards-- Speaker 2: My guards-- Speaker 1: --protected you for like a week or two (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They protected me for like a week or two. And so, the old people would come in and say, "We never thought we'd see the day that we'd see a colored person in this office, and we just want to bring you something." And they'd bring me jelly and stuff. And then they'd say, "Now, bow your head and let's have a word of prayer." And you could hear them praying all over the courthouse. And they'd lay hands on me and pray. And that kept me. Those prayers kept me. Speaker 1: That is so traditional, for the older black people, especially the uneducated black people, as we say. So, that must be something that speaks to even the generosity (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, the Bible tells us, "The prayers of the righteous availeth much." Proved to be true. Story_ID: 360159 Speaker 1: Now, you have wined and dined with the governor of the State of Georgia and other dignitaries of all races. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Now, tell us about some of those affairs. Speaker 2: Well, I belong to an organization called the Georgia Coalition of Black Women, which is a women's advocacy organization. And we did things like prepare people to go on interviews--women to go on interviews--how they should dress, and how should act on an interview. We did an LPN class for nursing. We had a computer class for foster children. We'd do get out the vote seminars. We were non-partisan, but we'd do get out the vote seminars. And we had a women in government seminar once. And I met Rosa Parks, C. Delores Tucker, Lady Bird Johnson. And then Judge Robert Benham, who was the first black person to be head of the Georgia supreme court [Supreme Court of Georgia], we honored him. We had the Brotherhood Awards program, the coalition did, and we honored him. I got a chance to meet Governor Joe Frank Harris, Governor Zell Miller, and Governor Jimmy Carter [James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.]. And when Governor Carter was there, he appointed me to the State Democratic Executive Committee, and of course I got invited to the inaugural ball for him, and stuff like that. Then I went to the White House [Washington, D.C.] when the first Bush [President George Herbert Walker Bush] was in. And I met Millie the dog, and I met Barbara [Barbara Bush] and Bush. Speaker 1: Now this was in the '60s [1960s], right? Or was it-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: This was in the '70s [1970s]? Speaker 2: Seventies [1970s] or early '80s [1980s]. Speaker 1: Eighties [1980s], okay. Speaker 2: The first Bush was in office. Speaker 1: The first Bush? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: And that was like--yeah because then we have Bush, Jr. [President George Walker Bush] now. Speaker 2: Lord, help us. Speaker 1: And we had (laughter) Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] for two terms also. And he was, was he right before-- Speaker 2: I think he was. Speaker 1: Right before Clinton, okay. Speaker 2: I think. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: What are some other fond memories that you have of serving as judge [probate judge], the ordinary for Hancock County [Georgia]? Speaker 1: Well, I did a lot of speaking engagements. I got invited back to Fort Valley State College [Fort Valley State University, Fort Valley, Georgia], my alma mater, to speak to a group down there. And I got invited to Paine College [Augusta, College] to speak. I did a lot of public speaking, mostly at churches, but at a few colleges. And I got sent, my name got sent in for a Higher Education Award from my college; that was nice. And they recognized me in the International Association of Probate Judges, from Cambridge, England. They sent me a nice certificate, and of course, you know, all the 'Who's Who' books and stuff that they put you in to get you to buy a book (laughter). Speaker 2: You earned your spot (laughter). Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Story_ID: 360160 Speaker 1: And some more memories of the judgeship [as probate judge for Hancock County, Georgia]? Because you did wills, you did marriages, and-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: --you did the whole gamut. What about some of the marriages that you performed? Speaker 2: Did I tell you about the old couple that came in to get married? Speaker 1: Let's hear that one. Speaker 2: It was raining cats and dogs, and they came in. And they had on these old-fashioned galoshes that fastened over to the side, and they umbrellas hooked on their arms. They had on wool coats and hoods, and they were about eighty years old, and had no teeth. And they said, "Miss Edith [HistoryMaker Edith Ingram], we want to get married." So I said, "All right." So I had them stand there, and I couldn't get them to take off the coats and the umbrellas and all that. They just stood there. She had a snuff can in her hand. So I said to him, "Do you take this woman to be your lawful wedded wife, to live under God's ordinance?" He said, "Yes Ma'am, I'll take her if she cooks and cleans up and keep my clothes clean, and do the things a wife should and ought to do." And then he nudged her and said, "Are you going to do it?" She said, "Yeah, I'm going to do it." So he said, "Yes, Ma'am, I'll take her." Then I asked her if she would take him to be her lawful wedded husband. So she spit in her snuff can, and she said "Miss Edith, I tell you, he logs for his living." Speaker 1: And how do you spell that? Speaker 2: L-O-G-G-S [sic.]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: That means that he hauls wood, pulpwood trees. She said, "He can't log when it's raining." She said, "But if he logs when it ain't raining--in order to buy the vittles--," that's the food-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: "--and bring it in so I can cook it, and keep stuff there in the house for me to be a good wife, I'll do it." So, she said--he said, "Yeah, I'll take her." So I went on, "By the power invested in me I pronounce you man and wife." And I said, "You can now salute the bride." And he said, (salutes) and saluted the bride. (Laughter) So I said, "No, that means for you to kiss the bride." And I had to stop them from kissing. I said, "Save some of it until you get home," they were kissing so long. That was, that was my marriage. And then one time I had, a guy came by here and he said, "Judge, I need to talk to you a minute." He said, "I got caught IUD [sic. DUI]." I said, "You did?" He said, "Yes, Ma'am." He said, "I don't want to get you in court and let the state totally make a fool out of you, so I come over here to explain something to you." I said, "Okay." So he said, "When they take you down to the hospital to test you to see if you're IUD, and they're getting ready to stick that needle in your arm to get your blood--." He said, "What do they wipe it with?" I said, "A cotton ball." He said, "What's on the cotton ball, Judge?" I said, "Alcohol." He said, "Well, that's how that alcohol got in my body. I wasn't IUD." (Laughter) My brother told me that I should have dismissed his case for originality, if nothing else. Speaker 1: It's amazing what comes before the judge (laughter). Speaker 2: It's amazing. Speaker 1: It is actually amazing. Speaker 2: Then-- Story_ID: 360161 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Then I had this guy that was driving an eighteen-wheeler, he was a white guy. And he didn't have enough money to pay his fine; he was overweight. So, I asked him if he'd like to call his company to get them to send his money to Western Union [Western Union Company] so he could go on his job. So he said, "Yeah, I want to call them." So he got on the phone and told his boss, "Some nigger woman down here claims she a judge, and say I owe three hundred dollars. And I need you to send me some money so I can go." And it was a black guy there who had also called his boss. And his boss had sent his money--I mean didn't send his money. Neither one of them were there when I got ready to close at five o'clock. So, I called the black deputy. I told him to take this guy, the white guy, and put him in jail and bring me the key. And take this gentleman over to the hotel and tell Mr. Chubb [ph.] I said to put him up for the night and send me the bill. The next morning, his money had come. And I told them to let him out of jail so he could go to the Western Union and get his money. He came with a bacon and egg sandwich and a Coca-Cola. "Here, Judge, I brought you some breakfast, and I brought you the money." I said to myself, "Uh-huh, it's changed since then. You said I'm the nigger woman who thinks she's a judge, didn't you?" So, he got on his way. A lot of little stuff happened. I had one of the lawyers who came over, and he was going to probate a will. I had known him all of my life. And he was addressing the people there, Mr. this, and Ms. that, and he took the papers and threw them on the table. He said, "Sign them, Edith [HistoryMaker Edith Ingram]." So I said "In my court, you will address me as Miss Ingram or Judge Ingram." And he got mad and stormed out. Well, the probate was over except for the signing, so I went on and signed it. And he came back two or three days later and told me that he came in to apologize. I said, "Well, I accept your apology, Mr. Dickens [ph.]." So he was about to leave, and as he was going out the door he turned around and said to me, "I wouldn't have said that to you if you hadn't corrected me in front of those white people." So I said, "Well, my grandmother told me the first place to correct a child is where he makes his mistake." So he left out of there and slammed the door and went on out. And later on he came and probated, and said, "Judge," just like he should have. And then of course, you'd have people who would send people--there was a guy whose mind was not very good. And some of the white people used to always send him on errands. And one day a lady sent him to the courthouse to get a birth certificate. So he knocked on the door, and I said, "Come in." No one ever opened the door, so I went and opened the door, and there he was. And he handed me a note because he couldn't remember what he wanted. And I read the note, and he wanted a birth certificate. He said, "I'll stay out here." He didn't want to come in. So, I looked up the birth certificate and gave it to him, and he paid for it and he went on out. And I went to the window and watched, and he was skipping down the street just like a child. And I said to myself, "Now he doesn't even realize the condition of his mind, going down the road skipping like a child and trying not to come in here because I'm here and I'm black." Story_ID: 360162 Speaker 1: The arms of prejudice stretch very long. Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Very long. Speaker 1: But you endured for thirty-six years [as probate judge of Hancock County, Georgia]. Speaker 2: Thirty-six years. I retired in February of 2004. Speaker 1: You just decided not to run again? Speaker 2: Well, my mother [Katherine Hunt Ingram] had been sick for a very long time. Then my daddy [Robert Ingram] got sick, and I had to take care of both of them, plus all of the stuff that I had to do to keep abreast of what was going on in the court. I was just tired. And I had this clerk, Marva Rice, who had been with me for twenty-five years. And I felt that she was ready to assume the duties, so I retired in the middle of the term so that she could have the opportunity to get some experience as the appointed judge. Because I had the authority to appoint someone to serve in--my chief clerk, to serve in my place. And she served until it was time for an election, and then she ran and she was re-elect- she was elected, rather. Story_ID: 360163 Speaker 1: Now when did your mom [Katherine Hunt Ingram] and when did [Robert Ingram] your dad pass? Speaker 2: Mama died July 4, 2001, and Daddy died October 18, 2003. Speaker 1: They lived full lives. Speaker 2: They did. Speaker 1: They lived long and full lives. Speaker 2: Mama was eighty-two, and Daddy was eighty-five. Speaker 1: And your dad also worked, you said, in the cleaners [Quality Cleaners, Sparta, Georgia]. Speaker 2: In the beginning, yes. Speaker 1: In the beginning. And then he was elected in '66 [1966], which was two years before you were elected judge [probate judge]? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: To the school board? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Now, is there any experience that he shared with you that might have inspired you when he ran for the school board? Speaker 2: Well, he was just talking about--he didn't talk very much, but he was talking one time about how blacks were not given a fair chance at participating in the government and didn't have any representation. Because all of them were white who were representing their communities, so naturally they were not interested in what was happening in the black community, and we needed to have some people in there who would have us in mind when they made decisions and try to get things working in the black community as well as in the white community. And when the time came for somebody to, for him to run, they wouldn't let him have any poll officials. They knew that that position was a supervised election, so they knew that that person needed to get out of there, and somebody needed to get in who was going to allow black people to have a part of the election process. Speaker 1: Now, it wasn't easy for him, being the first black-- Speaker 2: No. He didn't tell us, but someone else told us of when they had the first graduation down at the all-white school. For the seniors, they had the graduation, and all of the board members were required to be there. And they had all of the board members sitting on the platform, and they had a chair for him over by the door. So, all of the white board members were sitting on the platform with the superintendent and the speaker. And they had a chair for him over by the door where he sat. And all of them filed by him and neither one of them recognized he was there, or made any attempt to speak to him or to introduce him as a board member or anything. And of course he--in the meetings being outnumbered four to one, he didn't have too much say-so, but he made sure that they knew his opinion and how he felt about things. He knew he couldn't get it passed because he was the only one, but they knew his feelings, and they knew the desires of the black community. Speaker 1: And he served for how long? Speaker 2: Oh, about twenty-three, twenty-four years. Speaker 1: So in the '80s [1980s] or so, he retired? Speaker 2: Uh-huh, he retired. Speaker 1: Okay. Now this was, what you experienced and what he experienced was representative of what was going on in Sparta [Georgia] as it related to the white control and the insulting experiences that you had to go through. Now, when you first took office, or sometime close to that in the '70s [1970s] there was, what was it, the submachine gun incident. Because black Sparta was and black Hancock County [Georgia] was talking back to the white community in many ways (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes-- Story_ID: 360164 Speaker 1: Now, we were talking about the submachine gun incident. Explain, tell us what happened. Speaker 2: Well, black people started hearing the firing of machine guns during the night in their communities. Speaker 1: And what year was this? Speaker 2: This was in 1971. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: And they came to the meetings. We used to meet every week in a church, every Thursday night. And we would go from community to community to community so that we would be able to address the problems of each community. And they started bringing this information to the meetings. John McCown was the county commissioner then. I was in office [as probate judge of Hancock County, Georgia], and Daddy [Robert Ingram] was in office [on the board of education]. And they ordered ten machine guns, submachine guns, the white community did, to use them, they said in the black community. And one of the druggists, who was one of the persons who helped pay for the machine guns, said they shouldn't have gotten machine guns, that they should have gotten bazookas. Well, we decided that if they were going to attack us with machine guns, we needed to have something to counteract their attack. So, my mama [Katherine Hunt Ingram] ordered thirty machine guns from a company in Miami [Florida] with the understanding that they would not deliver the guns until we said bring them on. We just put them on order. And we told the white community that we would cancel our order if they got rid of their guns. Well, it went back and forth and back and forth, and they wouldn't get rid of the guns. We could still hear them at night. So, the governor, Governor Carter [James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] was contacted. And of course the GBI [Georgia Bureau of Investigation] the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation], the justice department, everybody came. Governor Carter came down here in his little helicopter and landed somewhere and came. And they would meet with us, and then they'd go and meet with the white community because the white community didn't want to meet with no niggers. Speaker 1: Now, what was the name of your group? Speaker 2: We were just the Democratic Club [Hancock County Citizens Democratic Club]. Of course, in the meantime, Mr. Wiley [Leroy S. Wiley], who was the clerk of the court, and John McCown and myself had decided that we would organize a sporting rangers group. And of course, the sporting rangers were just supposed to be a group--because the only activities we had around here were fishing and hunting. So, this was just to promote fishing and hunting and marksmanship. It had nothing to do with the machine gun situation, but they thought it did. Speaker 1: Well, marksmanship, wouldn't you think-- Speaker 2: Well, it didn't have anything to do with us ordering machine guns. Speaker 1: Exactly. Speaker 2: We hadn't thought about machine guns until they got them. Speaker 1: All right, so-- Speaker 2: So, that was one of our things, too, that we would disband that group, since they thought that was for them, to get rid of their machine guns. But we had thirty on order, ready to be delivered to us anytime we said the word. Of course, we already had some pretty nice guns ourselves that we used when the Night Riders came through. And they came down and they--well, the FBI and all them would be walking through the courthouse looking in my office all day long, but never said anything to me. I lived out in the woods in a mobile home. And if you didn't know where it was, you didn't just readily see it from the road. About eleven or twelve o'clock at night they came down to my house. And I saw a car drive up in my driveway right at my bedroom window. But the only thing I could see was the silhouette of two men, one smoking a cigarette. Then they came and I asked them to show me their ID, and then I let them in. And there was a rifle sitting beside the front door, and they wanted to know why I had so many guns. And I said, "You know, to protect myself from people who choose to come to my house unannounced so late in the night." And then they asked me if Mr. Wiley had any machine guns. So I said, "You passed his house on the way to my house, so you'd better go back up there and ask him does he have any machine guns, I don't know." And they left. And then they did a lot of investigation, and they finally talked to us and talked to them, and finally got them to give up their machine guns. And they put them in the trunk of somebody's car. And to make sure they left, we had our black deputy to escort them out of town to the county line with the machine guns. But Governor Carter and all of them had been down here trying to smooth the situation over. And in the meantime, we told them that if they didn't get rid of the machine guns we were going to boycott the town. So, they didn't get rid of them, so we threw a boycott. And we bussed our people in our cars and vans and stuff to Milledgeville [Georgia] to do their shopping. And the grocery made about twenty-five dollars in a whole week. So after that, you know they got on the white community to get rid of those guns because it was affecting their livelihood. That's how they finally decided to get rid of them because the white merchants was on their case about it, so we could start shopping at the stores. But-- Speaker 1: Now, this was at-- Speaker 2: We actually never got-- Speaker 1: The machine guns? Speaker 2: Our machine guns. Speaker 1: Right. But they did get rid of theirs? Speaker 2: They got rid of theirs, and we canceled ours. Speaker 1: And this was right at the outset of your-- Speaker 2: This is 1971. Speaker 1: --election. And you were elected for four years at a time? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Story_ID: 360165 Speaker 1: One story that you probably wanted to share, or we would like to hear you share, is about the election, when you were elected [as probate judge of Hancock County, Georgia], and how some of the domestic workers-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: --participated and played a part in getting you elected. Speaker 2: We had our domestic workers, who worked in the kitchens for seven dollars a week. They did the washing, the ironing, the cleaning up and cooking and everything for seven dollars a week. Well, they didn't come to any of our meetings, and they didn't register and they didn't vote. And the white people that they were working for had them come over to the place where the election was to tell black people, "Don't go in there and vote. Niggers ain't got no business in the courthouse." That's what they'd be telling them. "Don't y'all go in there and vote. You know niggers don't know what to do in the courthouse. Y'all, don't go in there and vote." They said, "We ain't going to vote. Our white folks don't want us to vote." But the white people were communicating through mail, and we were communicating with our people through our weekly meetings. Well, when the white people came home for lunch, the maid would just iron or take care of the baby close to the table and hear them discussing what was in the letter. And when they went back to work, the maid would roll the baby around in the carriage outside and meet us on the street and hand us the letter. And we went and made a copy of it, and met them back down the street on the way back to the house, and she'd go and put it back. So, we knew all of the moves of the white community, and we knew that they were going to be out there saying, "You niggers don't go in there and vote." But they had already given us all of the strategy from those letters. So, you know, they didn't vote, but they played their part, the most important part because we knew what to expect. So you know, black people play whatever role they have to play to get the job done. Speaker 1: And that has gone back for centuries. Um-hm (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) For years and years, generations, yes. Story_ID: 360166 Speaker 1: How did the Civil Rights Movement come to Sparta [Georgia]? In what way did you all integrate the schools, and how did you go about doing it? Speaker 2: Well, it started in 1970. They- we had the all-black school [Hancock Central High School, Sparta, Georgia] and the all-white school. The white school had empty classrooms because there were not enough children to have them filled. At the black school, we had in the gymnasium--a math class was going on over here, and the English class was going on over here. The health class was going on over here and a history class--they just had four or five classes going on in the gym at the same time because there were so many black children that the school was overcrowded. And this was the new school, it was overcrowded. So we had back then what was called Freedom of Choice. Speaker 1: And what was that? Speaker 2: Freedom of Choice was a form that the parents would fill out for them to transfer to another school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I went around with some other people, John McCown, my father [Robert Ingram], and a lot of other people--Mr. Simmons [ph.], Mr. Jones. We went around at night to folks' house and got them to sign those forms--Mr. Irving Kelly [ph.]. And when they signed them, the next day when the children got off the bus at the black school, we had the forms. And we knew who the children were, and we said, "Come on over here where we are." We were standing across the street because they had an injunction against us going on school property. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I'd stand across the street and tell the kids, "Come on over where I am," those two that I had the forms for. And we marched them down to the white school and told them we were coming down there to enroll them in the white school. Well, the superintendent at that time, a white man, Red Andrews [W.M. Andrews] we called him, didn't want them to enroll, and was giving us a lot of problems about it. So we decided that we were going to walk out the school. The principals, the teachers, the janitors, the cooks, the bus drivers, the students, everybody walked out. There was nobody at the school at all for twenty-six days. We started at the courthouse, and we would march from the courthouse to the white school. Well, we'd march from the courthouse to the first red light, and we'd have prayer. Then we'd march from there to the white school and have prayer, and then to the black school and have prayer, and then back to the courthouse and have another prayer and some songs. And we didn't have any outsiders come in. SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] and a lot of different other organizations wanted to come in and help us with our march, but we did it on our own. The state patrol was here, but they stayed parked because I deputized twenty-five or thirty guys to keep our march peaceful and to keep anybody from getting hurt. My daddy was in charge of communications, and all of us had CB radios [citizens band radio] in our cars and things. But no one knew the code but the people who were in charge of security. So we, we were, he was able to tell the lead car where to watch out for trouble, knowing the code. And they didn't know what was being said. So we marched for twenty-six straight days without any incident, before we got school integration. Speaker 1: Now, did, you said that one famous person came through, and it might have been related to that. Speaker 2: Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture] showed up one day. We were down at the church doing some voter registration work, and he showed up. He knew John McCown, so I don't know exactly how he got here. But when we introduced himself, and we recognized him anyway. We were just, "Oh, Stokely Carmichael is in Sparta?" So we got a chance to talk to him briefly. Speaker 1: So, this was the official integration of the schools? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: So after that, what happened? Speaker 2: After that, they enrolled the kids in the school and they integrated. Speaker 1: And all those empty classrooms were filled? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Now, did you have white kids going to black schools, and black kids going to-- Speaker 2: Not right then. We just had blacks-- Speaker 1: Black kids going to black schools? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. And pretty soon they started sending some white teachers into the black schools. Speaker 1: But at first it was all black teachers? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: How did this affect integration in Sparta? How did this affect the black teachers who had their positions? Did you lose a lot of black teachers? Speaker 2: No, we didn't, they just changed schools. Some of them went to the white school, and some of the white teachers went to the black school. Speaker 1: Okay. So they didn't end up phasing them out-- Speaker 2: Uh-uh. Speaker 1: --with any type of tests (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. No. Speaker 1: --or anything of that nature? Story_ID: 360167 Speaker 1: For your length of time on the bench, you've seen people come and you've seen people, you've seen people go. Now, when you decided to step down [as probate judge of Hancock County, Georgia], did you feel like you would miss this regime that you had, or miss the activities that you had? Speaker 2: No. I knew I wouldn't miss them because I didn't plan to go anywhere. And I said this is home, everybody knows me. Everybody knows my number and where I live. They still call, "What should I do about this? What is the best way to handle this?" Or they, if they don't call they'll come by. Or they'll come to church, and if they've got a problem, "I need to talk to you about it." And I still see them, we still have our meetings. So-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Of course we're not as on we used to be. Speaker 1: Things have changed? Speaker 2: They have changed greatly. Speaker 1: And would you contribute that to the generation, or generations? Speaker 2: Yeah, somewhat. Speaker 1: But a lot of the people are still around, are they not? Speaker 2: Most of them are dead now. And the young kids don't seem interested in what happened back then. They can't believe that those things really took place in Sparta, Georgia, in Hancock County. So, we used to go over to the school, and we still do, during Black History Month, and talk to them about the struggle, as we call it and try to let them know that the struggle is still going on, we have not yet arrived. But they don't seem to grasp it, you know. And it makes it actually sad to see the way it is now, the loss of unity among the black community. And some of the community tried to help the whites put us back where we came from, and beyond. It really hurts, it really does. Speaker 1: But in your particular instance, you were able to pass the baton on to-- Speaker 2: Yeah, a girl, Marva Rice-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --was my clerk for twenty-five years, and during that time, I made her my chief clerk. And the law said that your chief clerk can be appointed if you, you know, resign in the middle of the term, and they can serve the unexpired term. And she served the unexpired term, and she was elected. She's serving her first term now, and she's doing a very good job. And she tells me all the time, "Well, I got it from you. I do it just like you do. And the first thing I think about is what would Jackie [HistoryMaker Edith Ingram] do?" That's what she calls me, "What would Jackie do." And sometimes she'll call me and say, "Now, Judge, what should I do about such and such a thing?" We talk to each other two or three times a day. Speaker 1: Now, that should make you proud. Speaker 2: That's the one that you met earlier. Speaker 1: Yes, that should make you proud. Speaker 2: Um-hm. And sometimes when she goes to her meetings at the University of Georgia [Athens, Georgia] or in Savannah [Georgia] or wherever they are, she'll take me with her and I'll get a chance to see the old judges. And it's been, it's still pretty nice. Now, I kind of miss being there a little bit because I don't get to see as many people as I used to see. But I'm still in contact with them. Speaker 1: Now, for the board of education, was there anyone black who replaced your father [Robert Ingram]? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. The whole board is black now. All of our elected officials are black except one person, and that's one of the county commissioners. Everybody else is black. Story_ID: 360168 Speaker 1: When you look back and you see where you have actually come from, and the contributions that you have made to Sparta [Georgia]--your home, you know, your place of birth and all--I want you to just look and see if there's anything that you have seen and I have omitted, or any question that I should have asked that I did not ask, or anything that you would like to say that you didn't get a chance to say? Speaker 2: Just that to be in public office you have to go there with a mindset that you're going to serve all of the people. And you have to go in with a mindset that you're going to serve them with courteous service and to the best of your ability. I didn't always know the answers, but I knew where to get the answers. And I can always appreciate that I was not too stout-hearted to ask someone if I didn't know, before I'd tell them something wrong. And I could always appreciate my upbringing in the church and my faith in God that really sustained me during all of those trying times, and still does. And I know that it was just by the grace of God that I stayed there thirty-six years [as probate judge of Hancock County, Georgia] and was able to get as much accomplished as I did. And at the end of my term, I had whites as well as blacks come by to ask me, "Please don't retire, we need you." You know, and of course, that just melted my heart, but I was just tired. And then I felt too that Marva [Marva Rice] deserved a chance to venture out and to serve because she was the best clerk. I never had to worry about what was going on in my office if I was not there because I knew she knew how to carry it on, and she would. So I just, I decided that she deserved a chance to, to fly. And being tired, I just decided to retire and put her in a position to go right in. And she's there and she's doing a marvelous job. Speaker 1: And even now, like you said, when she'll take you to meetings when she goes to, you know, to Atlanta [Georgia]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And you get a chance to meet-- Speaker 2: To see the old judges that I was in there with. Speaker 1: And the neighbors and people in Sparta are still paying their respects, too-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --for the job, the good job that you've done. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: And what was the Christmas gift that you received? Speaker 2: A lady came over and she bammed on the door. We were eating Christmas dinner. She said, "Jack [HistoryMaker Edith Ingram], I just came over here to bring your Christmas present." Her name is Pinkie [ph.]. I said, "All right, Miss Pinkie." And she came from behind her back and had a rooster, a live rooster. Speaker 1: And this was a live rooster? Speaker 2: And had his feet crossed like this, with a big red bow on the side. She said, "I just want you to enjoy your Christmas, and here's your Christmas present from me and my husband." I said, "Well, thank you so much." And I put it out there in the storage house until we could finish dinner, and then my daddy [Robert Ingram] put it somewhere until it was time, until he had time to kill it and clean it. And we ate it, it was really very delicious. But when I saw her standing out there with that rooster, I was about to just pop. But I couldn't laugh because she was so serious; she was just too serious. I had married she and her husband. Both of them were old. Speaker 1: That wasn't the couple that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was not the couple, though. Speaker 1: That wasn't that couple? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: But that was-- Speaker 2: But I had married them, and they were so old. He told me when I was marrying them, "Do you mind if I sit down and marry her?" I said, "No," and he sat on the sofa while she stood, and I married them. Speaker 1: Was that in the '70s [1970s], or the '80s [1980s], or-- Speaker 2: It was probably in the late '70s [1970s]. Speaker 1: Okay. Had they been together all those years, and just now getting married? Speaker 2: No, uh-uh. Speaker 1: Okay. Because black people have some traditions that they don't really break from. My mother always said that she had seen numerous black people who had lived together for-- Speaker 2: For years. Speaker 1: --years and they wouldn't marry until the man was about to die, or the woman was about to die. Speaker 2: Well, I had occasions like that. This couple had lived together for years, and they had children. And he had gotten sick, and somebody had told her that they needed to get married so that she could get his benefits. Speaker 1: Exactly. Speaker 2: But then she found out that he had not been properly divorced from his first wife. And when they did--she found that out after they got married. So then she came and told me about it, and said, "So that means that I'm not married, and we got these children?" Then I had to help him through his divorce process from the first wife, and then remarry them. But it happens a lot. Because they had no idea that they had to get a divorce. She went her way and he went his way. And both of them took up with other people, and had families. Speaker 1: So, it's good to have a judge who sits in the county seat to be a friend (laughter). Speaker 2: That's correct. Speaker 1: Then if the judge wasn't your friend, then he becomes, or she becomes your friend. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So that's, that's excellent. Story_ID: 360169 Speaker 1: Why did you want to tell your story? Speaker 2: I wanted to tell my story because traditionally, if black people don't write their own history, it doesn't get told. That's the main reason. And to encourage someone else to step out and run for public office and make a difference because we certainly have so far to go. We have not arrived by a long shot. If anything, we're, we're retrogressing, and we need to put a stop to that. And we need to save generations to come, by what we do today. So that was the main reason to get it out there, so someone else might be inspired to do the same. Story_ID: 360170 Speaker 1: Now, how do you feel about the way you have lived your life? And what is important to you? Speaker 2: Well, in my earlier days, I did some things that I had no business doing. And it wasn't exactly that I didn't know any better, but I think it was I didn't relate to the consequences of that; of my actions, I'd say. But I have since made amends with those folks that I, that were involved, and I have changed my ways and I try to live a Christian life. And I think that I can look back and see that I'm not where I need to be, but I'm not where I used to be, and I can kind of like who I am and appreciate the things that I have been able to do, and to appreciate the people who allowed me to do it and who helped me do it. Because I know I didn't do it on my own. There were many people whose shoulders I stood on, and many people who encouraged me and prayed for me. And like I said, by their prayers and the grace of God, I weathered the storm. Story_ID: 360171 Speaker 1: Now, what advice would you offer to those who are going into your field, first as an educator and/or as a judge? Speaker 2: Well, for those who are going into the field of education, I think that one of the main things that they have to do is love children, and to know that they are there to teach all children, and to know that they are there to make provisions where provisions are not made by others for those children as it relates to materials and supplies and stuff. You don't always have all that stuff given to you through the system. You have to make sacrifices. In anything, there's got to be a sacrifice. And then you have to have a vision for your children and for the people that you're going to serve. You have to have a vision; you have to some objectives and some goals and then some means of meeting those objectives and those goals. And you have to just remember that right will always prevail, and God is still sitting on the throne. And if you keep your hand in his hand and do what you're supposed to do, he will never leave you alone. He will keep you as long as you keep your mind stayed on him. Speaker 1: And as a judge? Speaker 2: Well, that's both teaching and judgment. As a judge, you need to go in with the understanding that you're there to serve all the people, whether they voted for you or not, and you're there to uphold the law, and you're there to help people as much as you can. Now, an incident about that is, when I used to have teenagers who had come into court, I didn't wear my robe. I wore my blue jeans and my sweatshirt because they were already intimidated by coming to court. Because their experience was that every time somebody comes to the courthouse and go upstairs to the courtroom, they left there on their way to the chain gang. That was their experience. So I had to make sure that they felt at home. And I always asked the parents to come with their children to court. And my explanation to the children was, if it was something like a speeding ticket, this is going to become your permanent record. So I'd talk to them and tell them the importance of staying within the speed limit, and what could happen. And I'd ask them a few questions and have them write me an essay and not charge them, so they wouldn't get anything on their record. And white parents as well as black parents appreciated that. So, once they see that you're there to give them service and you're going to give it efficiently and courteously, then you don't have a problem with them. They depend on you, and you have to be able to step up to the bat. So you have to go in with the attitude that, you know, if I don't know, I'm going to find out, I'm going to do what it takes. Because what seems like a minute problem to you, might be a big problem for them. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: You have to always keep them in mind. Story_ID: 360172 Speaker 1: Now, how do you want to be remembered? What do you want people to say about you? Speaker 2: I just want people to say that I tried to treat everybody right, and that, and that I tried to help everybody who came across my path for help, and that I went out my way to help them. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what do you want your legacy to be? Speaker 2: I want my legacy to be one of love. The Bible tells us we should love God first, and then we should love our fellow man second. And on that, all of the other laws hinge. I want people to know that I tried to love, and I tried to serve. And so, I want to be a legacy of love and service. Story_ID: 360173 Speaker 1: Tell us about this picture, as much as you remember. Who's in it, if it was taken for a special occasion or by a professional photographer? Speaker 2: This picture was taken in Washington, D.C. when we first started celebrating my [maternal] grandmother's [Katie Neal Hunt] birthday. That's my grandmother sitting in the middle, and we started celebrating her birthday. And all of these are her children. Seated on her right is my Aunt Charity [Charity Hunt]. On her left is the baby of the crowd, that's Aunt Marian [Marian Hunt]. And over to the far left is Aunt Mae [Mae Hunt Warren], my mother, Uncle Charlie [Charles Hunt], and William [ph.] who we call Uncle Batey, Uncle Bill [ph.], Uncle Buck, Aunt Julia [ph.], and Aunt Gladys [Gladys Ingram Smith]. And of all my uncles, Will was dead at that time. So, that's ten of the eleven children that she had. And my grandfather [Wilkins Hunt] was dead. And out of all of those children, only five of them were still living. Speaker 1: Okay. And how old was she there? Do you remember? Speaker 2: I don't know how old she was right there, probably in her mid-fifties or sixties. Speaker 1: Now, this is you. Tell us about this one. Speaker 2: That picture was taken when I was four years old. And I didn't want to take the picture, I guess that's why I'm looking so mean and mad on there. But it was before I went to New York [New York] with my Aunt Edith at age four. Speaker 1: And you have on your favorite dress? Speaker 2: I have on my favorite maroon velveteen dress. When I put it on, I thought I was on top of the world. Speaker 1: So this was around what, 1946? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Was this in Sparta [Georgia]? Speaker 2: It was in Sparta. Speaker 1: All right. Was it at a studio or-- Speaker 2: I don't remember where it was. Speaker 1: And this is the original photo? Speaker 2: Yes, it is. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Okay. Now tell us who is in this photo, and if we can say what year it is approximately? Speaker 1: I have no idea of what year it is, but that's my grandfather on my daddy's side, Joe B. Ingram [Joe Ingram]. He lived on 4th Street in Atlanta [Georgia]. He's sitting on his front porch. Speaker 2: And this was after he and your-- Speaker 1: He and my grandmother [Lillian Ingram] divorced. Speaker 2: All right. But this was after your father was grown? Speaker 1: After Daddy was grown, yes. Speaker 2: Okay, so we can say it's in the '30s [1930s] or the '40s [1940s] possibly? Speaker 1: Possibly. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: This is my mother and father, Robert [Robert Ingram] and Katherine Ingram [Katherine Hunt Ingram]. I believe this was taken in the late '90s [1990s] when they had an appreciation program for me at the church. And this was at the youth center where the reception was. And we caught them at the moment they were laughing about something. But that's Mom and Daddy. Speaker 2: And what church was this in Sparta? Speaker 1: Macedonia Baptist Church [Sparta, Georgia], which is where the program was. And this is at the youth center across the street from here, that the reception was held. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: On this picture, to the far right in the red suit is my sister Kathy [Katherine Ingram]. I'm in the blue. My brother Jerald [Jerald Ingram] is in the blue coat on the right side, and that's his wife in the green shirt, Jeannette [ph.]. My brother Robert [Robert Ingram] is the one with the big Afro, and in front of him in the navy is his wife Mary [ph.]. In front of her in the aqua is Pamela [ph.], who is Robert's daughter, and my mother and father. Over on the far left is Quinn [ph.], who is my brother Jerald's son, and Tanishia [ph.] who is Robert's daughter, and Javon [ph.], who's Jerald's son. We were, the church was having a project with photos of family portraits, and this was taken here at the house with the backdrop on the wall. And that was our family at that time. Speaker 2: And what year did you say this was? Speaker 1: This was in the early '70s [1970s]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: This photo was taken at the University of Georgia at the Center for Continuing Education [Athens, Georgia]. I was making a presentation to one of the other judges for years served, I believe that's what the occasion was. And I was on the awards committee, so I was making a presentation to her for her years served. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: This is the same, at the same setting. This is one of my fellow judges, and I was making a presentation to him at that same meeting. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: This photo is my brother Robert, my father, and myself. We were at the courthouse, inside of the courthouse. And I would say that picture was taken in the late '80s [1980s]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: In this photograph, we have Senat- Representative Grace Davis [Grace W. Davis] from Atlanta [Georgia], Senator Charles Walker [Charles W. Walker] from Augusta, Georgia, and me. And it was taken at the State Capitol [Georgia State Capitol] in Atlanta. I don't remember what year it was. Speaker 1: And what was the occasion, you said? Speaker 2: I think that the Coalition [Georgia Coalition of Black Women] had gone there to meet with the senators and the representatives during their session at the Capitol. And we were trying to get some money approved for a project that we were going to do. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 360174 Speaker 1: In this photograph, I'm standing in front of the courthouse here in Hancock County [Georgia]. You can see the sign that says Hancock County of over my shoulder. And it was just an occasion where somebody came by to visit me and wanted to take a picture, and that was in '93 [1993]. Speaker 2: Okay, ready. Speaker 1: In this photograph we have Rita Samuels [Rita Jackson Samuels] standing beside Governor Zell Miller. And on the far end of him is Mayor Gresham [Emma Gresham] and myself. I don't remember the other ladies' names except for Anita Conley [ph.] in the pink coat on the other side. We were all members of the Georgia Coalition of Black Women, and we had gone to meet with the governor concerning funds for our project that we had in mind of doing. Rita Samuels was the founder and CEO of the Georgia Coalition of Black Women. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: In the picture to the left, you have some people from the Ford Foundation [New York, New York], John McCown and myself. And this was the occasion where the Georgia Coalition had had a program, and we were standing around talking about the meeting when this photo was taken. And over on the right side is a picture of me in my office sitting at my desk. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: At the top on the left is me standing beside my car in front of the courthouse; that was in 1968. And on the right side at the top is me and a guy named Marvin Ransom, who incidentally was my high school classmate [at L.S. Ingraham High School, Sparta, Georgia]. And he was the first warden, the first black warden of our prison system here in Hancock County. At the bottom on the left side is me at my desk at the courthouse. And on the right side is a picture of the march that we did for school desegregation. The lady in the picture is my Aunt Edith, she was helping to lead the march that day. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: These are Georgia's fifty most influential black women of 1984 that was chosen by the Georgia Informer which is a newspaper in Macon [Georgia]. And they choose people based on their service to the community. And I was chosen that year and several other years as one of Georgia's fifty most influential black women. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In this photo, at the left side is my class at Hancock Central [Hancock Central High School, Sparta Georgia], my second grade class. On the right side is Annette Warren and myself. She was the teacher next door to me. And the bottom picture is a picture of my class in Griffin, Georgia when I taught at Moore Elementary School [Griffin, Georgia]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In this photo, I'm in the records room of my office. This was probably taken in the early '70s [1970s]. I'm showing someone the books in the back, how they were labeled Colored and White. They kept all the marriage records separated. And the books would actually say Colored and White, and I'm showing that to somebody who's visiting the office. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: This photograph shows on the left side, me. And on the right side it shows Adam Clayton Powell [Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.] in black, and that's his boat. And at the bottom, I'm standing on his boat at the left and on the right. I'm looking at him. We were going to South Bimini [Bahamas], and when we got off the plane the ferry had broken down that was supposed to take us from the airport to South Bimini. And he was there; he has a home in Bimini, and he took us across on his boat. His boat's name is Adam's Fancy, and he rode us across on his boat. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In this photograph, this was in the early '70s [1970s]. You have John McCown who was chairman of the board of commissioners, myself, Whitney Young, who I believe was with the Urban League [National Urban League] then, and Dr. George Green who was one of our commissioners, and James Smith, who also is the other black person on the board of commissioners at that time. We had had a meeting on economic development that day. Speaker 1: Okay, ready. Speaker 2: On this photo, it just shows a lot of snaps of people that I've married. And the bottom one to the left is where I married my first interracial couple, and they're still together. And on the far right over here at the bottom, this man, I married him and a lady, and both of them had six children. And you see the sheet tied around the tree. That was when that song was out about, "Tie a yellow ribbon around the old oak tree." They had tied a yellow sheet around the old oak tree. And they got married and their underwear on the areas of the car, his on the front and hers on the back. And they were getting ready to ride through town and let everybody know that they had gotten married. And they had sprayed it on the car with shaving cream, "Just Married." Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: On this photo I guess you can find me. I'm over to the right side, about the third or fourth row, back there in the aqua with a scarf around my neck. But this is a picture that was taken at the University of Georgia where we had our annual meetings. All of the probate judges from all over the state would come in for the annual meetings at the Center for Continuing Education, and we'd always take a group photo. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: On this photo you have Ambassador Andrew Young [HistoryMaker Andrew Young] from Atlanta. I was visiting his office, and we took a photograph together. He was also the mayor of Atlanta for a while. And then the ambassador. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: This photo is me giving the oath of office to Leroy Wiley [Leroy S. Wiley]. He was appointed clerk of the superior court when the white clerk resigned. And he was the first black in the United States, I believe, to be elected as a clerk of the superior court. I appointed him, and then he ran for the unexpired term and was elected. And he's still the clerk today. And the lady in the black is his wife, Louise Wiley...