 Story_ID: 99320 Speaker 1: All right. My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Neculai Burghelea. Sir, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Eddie Joseph Jenkins, Jr. That's J-E-N-K-I-N-S-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and Jr. And my father is still alive--I'm a Jr. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: August 31st, 1950. Speaker 1: And where were you born: Speaker 2: Jacksonville, Florida. Speaker 1: Okay. And, sir, what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm an attorney, but currently, I'm the chairman of the Alcoholic Beverages Control Commission. I sit also as an administrative judge, along with two other commissioners as a, as the chairman. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is February 14th, 2007. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We are on Causeway Street in Boston [Massachusetts], 239 Causeway Street which is right across the street from Banknorth Garden where the Celtics play. Speaker 1: Okay. All right, used to be Boston Gardens, right? Speaker 2: Used to be Boston Gardens, yes. Story_ID: 99321 Speaker 1: So, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight "People Magazine"-ish type questions that management compels me to ask, and they only require a short answer. And the first one is do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And what is it? Speaker 2: I know it's kind of corny, but it's peanut butter (laughter), crunchy, extra crunchy peanut butter. I can eat that almost any time when I need to be full. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Brown. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: I think the favorite time of the year is the fall. It's the--my birthday is in August. I always feel I'm one of the last of the harvest. Yes, it's in the fall--love the fall, love the colors, the brilliant colors of the fall, the beautiful temperatures of 70 degrees where you don't need air conditioning or heat. Speaker 1: Okay. And do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Recently, it has been Dominican Republic. I love the spirit of the people there, the beautiful people. Your dollar goes further. And I'm actually doing a little bit of development there now. Speaker 1: Okay. The big connection with the baseball players and the U.S. over there-- Speaker 2: Yeah, that's so the Red Sox training camp-- Speaker 1: --are just diverted but, you know, there's a lot of them--so many over there are over here playing ball now. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's, yeah, in fact, in the Dominican Republic, my favorite place in the Dominican Republic, one of the favorite is San Pedro. And San Pedro is a town that is filled with promise and hope. It's a very poor city. And you see the kids playing actually what we call stickball on the streets. But they play it with the top of a whisk bottle in that little cap, so they'll hold six or seven of them in there. And they'll throw it, and it'll take all kind of curves, and they'll hit it. And they'll throw it, and, and get a person out, so you know when they come to American baseball, they have seen it all. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Top of a whisk bottle? Speaker 2: A whisk bottle--I just cannot believe, and they would stand on line. You could be on an errand, and you'll stand on line to take your turn back, and then you go back to doing what you're doing (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. And the last question is do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Favorite phrase or saying? People would say who listen to my radio show--I have a radio show. Umm is my favorite word because I'm always messing it up (laughter). I think that probably that I say is that "God will never give you more than what you can handle" probably most often. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 99322 Speaker 1: Now, I'm going to ask you about your family history. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side. But we'll start with your mother's side. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: My mother's full name is Essie Rae, R-A-E, Jenkins, J-E-N-K-I-N-S, and that's Essie with E-S-S-I-E. Speaker 1: Now what was her maiden name? Speaker 2: Jenkins. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: My mother's date of birth--well, first, her place of birth is Jacksonville, Florida. Her date of birth, I think is--well, I know today is her birthday, so February 14th--I'd say 1925. Speaker 1: Okay. And-- Speaker 2: So that would make her eighty-two, I believe. Speaker 1: Okay. And what do you know about her side of the family? How, first of all, how far back can you trace the ancestors on that side? Speaker 2: Well, we've had some difficulty getting together to do that. But what I do know is that my mother's mother, Jessie (ph.) Jenkins was part-Cherokee from Walterboro, South Carolina. And my grandfather, who I've never met, he had a family in Walterboro who, I guess, he left behind. He was a white man. And he started a new family, and I believe his name is Jake Jenkins. And he married my grandmother, and they had twenty-one children--I think twelve girls. Three of the children, three or four died within a short period of time, so maybe they probably raised fifteen or sixteen. My mother has a twin--I think they had three sets of twins. And they lived in Jacksonville, Florida. Speaker 1: Okay. Twenty-one children. That's a-- Speaker 2: Twenty-one. Speaker 1: Yep. Speaker 2: And she--he died after the last one was born, but she lived up until the time of--then she lived to 1973 or '-4 [1974]. I think I just finished playing the [Miami] Dolphins when she passed. Speaker 1: Okay. Now are there any stories on that side about what your family was doing back in the slavery days or how, or the days of Reconstruction or-- Speaker 2: None, none of my--because of the losing my grandfather so early on, not knowing much about his family--only the story about his funeral. And they went back to Walterboro from what I understand. And my grandmother took the girls, pretty girls. So, you imagine my mother is very fair and they had the long straight hair, and they go to the funeral parlor to have this funeral. And his family is there also, but because of segregation, they're sitting on separate sides--even at death. And I thought that, that was just such an amazing story, but my mother said how my grandmother took her prettiest girls. And they're all pretty, but she took the prettiest girls. And that means she probably took them all, 'cause they were all pretty. And she said the girls are looking across the aisle, looking at each other. And the similarities of, you know, are striking. Because the same father, the similarities are striking, so even though there's segregation, people recognize the truth of the matter is that we ain't far from one another. We might be three or four degrees, you know, of mela-, melatonin, you know, but we're all the same people. And they say it was kind of striking to see the girls looking at one another. Who are these people, you know? So, I don't know much from my mother's side about that any further. We haven't researched it that well. And that's a problem, but we have on my father's side. Story_ID: 99323 Speaker 1: Okay. So, did your mother talk about growing up? Did she have stories about growing up she shared with you? Speaker 2: Yes. She told the story about how she met my dad, and how he came into this party with this shiny Buick, you know, him and his friend showing off, shooting guns, saying we're here, and how she ignored him, and did not give him the time of day until she--he came properly, you know, to meet her through her mother. But she also told me how my grandmother had developed a great relationship with all the people in the neighborhood. And my mother's twin brother was Rayfield Jenkins. He became a great golfer. And Charlie Sifford [Charles Sifford] and all the great golfers would come to my grandmother's house. And they would just eat and hang out because, you know, because of segregation, you only could play on the black golf courses. And Jacksonville still had some of the better areas in Florida, you know, Jacksonville was still known as a golfers' kind of place to go. But back then, they had some really historical golf courses. I played on one of them--very, very beautiful, interesting, a golf course, off of Golf Fair off on 95, so just take Golf Fair, get off at 95, and you're right there. And so, she would tell me about all these people that would come through. And my grandmother would just feed, and there were all these black golfers, 'cause that must have been a strange thing back then, you know, golf and black people. There was no money in it, and people would just do what they had to do, you know, to survive. Speaker 1: Well, I know this story is all here. I don't know if that's the case but often, you know, in sports, in black sports that are not attached to the pro circuit, people just bet on games. That's how they earn money. Speaker 2: Yeah, they probably were hustling. So, that's kind of the stories that she [Essie Rae Jenkins] would tell about growing up and about all the girls. Speaker 1: But is Rayfield Jenkins still alive? Speaker 2: No, he was murdered in Harlem [New York City, New York]-- Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: --probably in 1965. It was a very tragic story. We believe the person who murdered him actually came, and my mother cooked dinner for, like the night before. But she said she felt something strange that my grandfather--I mean, my uncle was trying to tell her something, was trying to talk to her, but the person kept following him around as though he was already under authority, even at the house. And he was killed the next day--they believe by the same person. They tried to solve the case, but the police told them up in Harlem, unless they could solve the case within a week, they couldn't waste any more resources. So, and my uncle wouldn't tell them who did it. I think he was afraid for my mother. So, he thought by telling them, that he would put her life in peril, so he just died. Speaker 1: That's a terrible story. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 99324 Speaker 1: Any other story? Did she grow up in Jacksonville [Florida]? Speaker 2: Yeah, we grew up in an area called Durkeeville. It's the area where they have the historic black stadium where Hank Aaron played. And there were the projects right there in Durkeeville. And, in fact, Booth Memorial Hospital, where all the blacks were born, was probably a stone's throw, and then it was the projects. And then, there was this beautiful stadium that blacks with the Negro League played. Jacksonville had a team. And so, Hank Aaron was actually on that particular team and they tell me the story about Hank Aaron and about how they had the, the whites could sit in the covered area. And the blacks had to sit in the bleachers. And the sun was killing you, and then and my--they would tell me about how my--my father [Eddie Jenkins, Sr.] would tell me. So, my mother [Essie Mae Jenkins], she wasn't too much into baseball, but I could tell you a story about Durkeeville and my father mostly. He said that my grandfather had this tree he'd climb up in. And no one could get in his seat in that tree, 'cause it was covered and that was his spot. He'd beat anybody up that would sit in his tree. But my father told me a story about Hank Aaron--his last day, how they took up a collection for him and passed it around to all the blacks. They gave him money. And he said a big wind came and blew, and blew all the money (laughter) all over the place. He said it was like a really funny thing, but he said everybody collected every dollar, and gave it to Hank Aaron. But it was just great to have Hank, have Hank, had Hank, had Hank Aaron play in this particular city before he went to the Majors. Speaker 1: That's something--that's quite a story. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: With the money, that's something else. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: And if they ever make a movie of it, they've got to have that scene. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 99325 Speaker 1: So, now, your mother [Essie Mae Jenkins] met your father [Eddie Jenkins, Sr.] in Jacksonville [Florida]. Speaker 2: She met him in Jacksonville. Speaker 1: And you were born there? Speaker 2: I was born there. I was the fourth of--I was the youngest, so I was born in '50 [1950], and we lived there in these projects till 1955. My parents wanted us to get out of the--Jacksonville was a very hateful town. Jacksonville is the Old South. I mean, Florida has many different degrees in terms of--most people think, or some people think of Florida as Orlando, Disney. Some people think about Southeast. But if you were in Florida in 1955, it was some of the deepest South you could ever go to. And my father did not want us to live in that particular town. So, he, basically, you know, pulled us of there, and we actually drove up and moved, and we went right to Flushing [New York City, New York] right away. He had went down and bought a house. My father was a Pullman porter. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so, I know it's just switching back to my father. I know you wanted to stay with my mother. But so, yes, they met in Jacksonville. And, like I said, all her sisters--and she was the only one to leave, so of all these girls, like twelve girls, my grandmother didn't want her to leave. But, you know, they decided--she followed her man, you know, so they took up stakes and left. And-- Speaker 1: So, he was familiar with New York from being a Pullman porter, being a-- Speaker 2: That's right, yeah. He was, you know, being--actually, he was a dining car waiter, but it was similar to the Pullman porters. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, he was a dining car waiter. Story_ID: 99326 Speaker 1: Did your mother [Essie Mae Jenkins] talk about--did she have any opportunities in Jacksonville [Florida] to go to school and stuff like that, or did, or how was it for her? Speaker 2: No, she said it was very racist and so, the schools were crowded. There wasn't many--there were still, there were job opportunities, but it was always in hotels. And so, you were kind of almost learning a trade. It wasn't like you were learning to go to school to go to college, even though I had two aunts that did. With such a large family, she was helping my grandmother. My grandmother actually supported the family by washing and ironing clothes, believe it or not. She'd get like three cents a shirt, and such a lot of shirts. And so, that's what she did. And so, my mother would help her iron clothes and just, you know, help her try to take care of the rest of the family. Speaker 1: That's interesting. While there were so many children, so many daughters, I guess you could--you might be able to make it all three--I mean, you know, it adds up, I guess, the faster you can do the shirts so-- Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, and they had chickens and, you know, and pigs and they would--they did a little bit of farming there when my father was alive--my grandfather was alive. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, I'm going to--did, oh, I just want to ask you, do you know the name of the black school there in Jacksonville? I think what you-- Speaker 2: No, I'm sorry. I don't remember the name of the black school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: When I left there, like I said, it was '55 [1955]. And they used to send me back every summer, so had to get rid of me out of New York. And so, that's what I came to know about Jacksonville, my summers there in Jacksonville. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And just how different it was for whites and blacks was very, very--it was very segregated. I never had felt such a fear as the people, coming from New York, and then going there, and the people saying, you got to watch this, you got to be careful. Don't look at the person. You got to look at--if you see a white woman, you got to look down. You can't look in her eye. It's, it was (laughter), it was kind of a different trip, you know, going to New York, and you just, you know, it was different. Story_ID: 99327 Speaker 1: Let me ask you. Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Same as yours, right? Speaker 2: Same as mine, so it's Eddie Jenkins. That's all I know his name to be. Speaker 1: And did he have any nicknames or anything or-- Speaker 2: Big Ed is his nickname--Big Ed. And the kids called him Big Ed-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --after he kind of became their mentor and friend. I could tell you a story about how he did it. You can, we can, or we can go back to his side. I don't know how you want to do it. Speaker 1: Well, since this is on the tip of your tongue now-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --tell us his story. Speaker 2: Well, he was--my father ended up coaching a baseball team. In Flushing, New York, where we end up growing, it was a pocket of a black community, about a six-block radius. And it was surrounded by a whole Jewish neighborhood--I mean, Flushing was mostly Jewish. And so, we wanted to, you know, my father wanted to enter us into this league. And we didn't have any money for uniforms, so they donate the uniform. The uniforms, they didn't want, they donated it. And we had tryouts, and all the rejects from all the other teams had nowhere to go, so they kinda came up. My father said he coached them. So, he coached the kids in the neighborhood, so my father was their first coach. My dad was the first coach, and he treated me just like anyone else. So, he became the parent in the neighborhood everybody liked, you know, the kids liked because not only did we play baseball but, you know, he laughed at us. But we won the championship. And they made him the commissioner, so he became the guy that people knew. And he was the mailman for the neighborhood, so he knew everybody's business. So, for instance, if--in New York City, there was some kind of lawsuit because people said that they didn't report to the Selective Service Board because they didn't have any money. So what they start doing is that they started putting a token in the envelope giving no excuses. So, my father would see that Selective Service envelope and get that token. He--my father knew everybody got drafted and they put--it's kind of a sad story, but he was telling--I mean tell everyone, so and so got drafted today, or so and so got drafted. He was the bearer of the bad news. Mr. Jenkins, please don't tell me you know (laughter) you got that envelope for me. He's shaking it and say, I'm sorry, son, but here it is, you know. So, he, but he became the guy that people could joke with. Some of our, you know, people in the neighborhood, some boys didn't have, didn't have fathers. And he became the father for a lot of kids in that neighborhood and he's still known as Big Ed. Speaker 1: Okay, okay-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --that's good. Story_ID: 99328 Speaker 1: Now, what do you know about the ancestors on your father [Eddie Jenkins, Sr.]'s side? Speaker 2: John Jenkins is the earliest ancestor. There's an Owens family that goes, even before 19-, 1837. And so, and those were some mixture of African Americans and some Native Americans out of the swamps of Florida. But the first real tie that we had is John Jenkins in 1930-, '37 [1937]. He married a slave named Millie (ph.). Speaker 1: John Jenkins, was he a free black man or white or what? Speaker 2: He was a slave. Speaker 1: Slave, okay. Speaker 2: And he married-- Speaker 1: And he married a slave, another slave. Speaker 2: --he married another slave. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And they were in the Florida, Georgia area. And so, I could--I mean, there's more of a history that, you know, the Gazette, you know, it's the Gazette. I want you to kind of focus on a little later on 'cause it really gives more of a chronology. And I find out about these during the family reunions, you know. One of my cousins--she's the genealogist of the family, you know, and she has done studies in America, and just take us back to 1937. And so, some real interesting stories about the romance of the two slaves. And she's had dreams about how--and visions about how one of the slaves actually was raped. I mean, so some of this is not even historical but, you know, when you start studying, God can send you some information. And so, she's even had dreams about either one of the slaves. She said, you're not going to believe it. She called me in the middle of the night--I can't sleep. I just had a dream, you know, our ancestor so and so, back in 18-, well, she got raped. And so on and so forth. And I was like, well, how do you know this? You weren't back there. She said, it came to me in a dream. So, but it's John Jenkins and Millie, and they go up various generations, that they end up in a town called Shelborne. And that's where my grandfather, my father's father, John Jenkins, actually did sharecropping. So, I can't give you the actual names of all the people, but we do have a chronological--But I would tell you that my father ended up a sharecropper and a farm on, in Shelborne, Florida. He was the youngest of four children. Speaker 1: So this is your father, but you're saying that your-- Speaker 2: My father's father ended up marrying and living in Shelborne. Speaker 1: Okay. So this is your grandfather there? Speaker 2: My grandfather, yes. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: And I didn't know him either. Speaker 1: Yeah, all right. Speaker 2: But when my grandmother died, my father said my grandmother died about--when he was about five years old. And so, my uncle Romy (ph.) and my uncle Johnny (ph.), and my aunt Emma continued--my aunt Emma kind of raised my father and she was about six, seven years older. And so, she raised by father 'cause he didn't have, you know, back then, you just didn't bring a woman into the house, so he ended up--my grandfather end up kind of raising these four children. But they were sharecrop--had to drive that mule, and my aunt Sweetie (ph.), who lived in Jacksonville, had no children--couldn't have children. And her husband, uncle Jake, they were doing well in Jacksonville. And so the word is that one day, my uncle Johnny and my father, they actually ran away. And aunt Sweetie assisted them, so it's like she kidnapped them, and took those two children with her to Jacksonville, Florida. And that's how they got to Jacksonville, you know. And he was--I think about ten years old, so if he's born in '25 [1925], I mean '22 [1922], so this happened like 1932. Story_ID: 99329 Speaker 1: Now, this is Florida--I guess he grew up in the Florida of Zora Neal Hurston stories, in some ways. Speaker 2: Yeah, well, I know that area of that area-ish. Speaker 1: She writes, yeah. Speaker 2: Yes, I know that area where they were going to actually plow through the road. I think it was Route 4 or something. And then, the town actually adopted her and she saved--she was dead by that time, but her legacy saved the town in Florida. Speaker 1: How, well, how, how? What, I mean-- Speaker 2: Because they decide--they declared it a historical town. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They were about ready to level the whole town. They said this is (unclear) and they're-- Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: --this and so every year, they have this major week that all these artists come back and because just the power of her-- Speaker 1: Of this, this-- Speaker 2: --literary history saved this town. Speaker 1: Did any of your relatives know her or meet her? Speaker 2: No, no, that wasn't part of the legacy. But-- Story_ID: 99330 Speaker 1: What they, what my father [Eddie Jenkins, Sr.] did know is and, historically, is the whole legacy of the town in Florida where--that got shot up and burnt down by the whites because-- Speaker 2: Rosewood, Florida. Speaker 1: Yes, so Rosewood, Rosewood is not far from Jacksonville [Florida]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So Rosewood story lives very strong in the hearts. Speaker 2: That's right 'cause they're catching the train for Jacksonville and the (unclear). Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So Rosewood, that whole thing about Rosewood, is very strong about what happens if you get out of line. And that, never give up the land, you know. You better get the land. Never give up the land because that's what Rosewood was all about, you know, people trying to develop and fighting over land, but how they could come and destroy a whole, you know, neighborhood and burn you out. So, they were even telling me that when I was younger that, you know, this whole thing that, you know, the white people could come, and they could just destroy you. There's a town right near Jacksonville, they just came and they just burnt the whole town down (laughter). So, I didn't learn later until it was Rosewood that they were talking about. Speaker 2: Yeah, okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And there's--and incidentally last week, I got--was end up doing research on--and I didn't do it on purpose, but I've been bumping into it on Google--a site that described the wars between the U.S. government and the free black independent city stakes, a place called the Negro Fort back in 1830s. And they, you know, a guy named John Horse and Abraham, like fought--actually signed a treaty with somebody in Mexico and moved a whole body of people via the Caribbean to Mexico from Florida. I mean, this is like big--a war. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Andrew Jackson was down there fighting-- Speaker 1: Well, he was vicious. Speaker 2: --against the Creeks and the blacks. The blacks were the majority of the people? Speaker 1: Yeah. Andrew Jackson was very vicious when he came to our rights and the rights of Native Americans--very vicious. Speaker 2: Yeah. There's a lot, there's a history down there. I think a lot of people don't know. And we're just now picking up all this now and trying to put it together, so there's a lot of history in Florida. Story_ID: 99331 Speaker 1: So, did your father have an opportunity to go to school when he was growing up? Speaker 2: He said he was--he said he dropped out of the sixth grade, but he went to business college. I said, dad, how did you do that? He said, I did--hear me. And my aunt paid--we call her aunt Sweetie, but she was like my father's--she was like my father's aunt, but she kind of raised him. My aunt Sweetie paid for it. I went to business school, like you know. I don't know how you did that, dad, but, you know, I guess they weren't accepting transcripts at that time (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah, a lot of the credentialism we have now didn't exist. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And people could just say they--and move on. Speaker 2: Yeah. So he was a smart man. He understood business very well, but he, he always talked about Philip Randolph and about how great--he was the greatest African American who ever lived and-- Speaker 1: A. Philip Randolph. Speaker 2: A. Philip Randolph. He talked about him and how he really liberated black people. And I happened to read a book by this person who works for the Boston Globe. He just wrote this book about A. Philip Randolph for what he did for the middle class and black America. Now, I understand what my father was talking about. Speaker 1: Okay. So, so your father, of course, you know, starts working as a dining car waiter for Pullman, right? Speaker 2: Dining car waiter, and it was--it wasn't making that money actually. So, when we got to New York, he had--our family already--Jacksonville [Florida] being a port, there were two things that you could do if you wanted to make money. You could work the port actually, but the longshoremen, the whites were getting an equal share of that. It's one of the few places where black longshoremen actually could work. But if you didn't, if you couldn't get the job unloading the cars, then you had to get on the ship and go. And so, we had several uncles that were part of being a--they call them longshoremen, and they were on the boats and or Merchant Marines. And my father say, he's in Merchant Marine--he say, he was in the [U.S.] Army, but then after he finished the Army, he went into the Merchant Marines. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And I grew up thinking the Merchant Marines was some kind of military thing, but actually, it was kind of a seaman. You were a seaman, a commercial seaman. And he'd bring his pictures from all the world and say, he'd been around the world four or five times--they give you certificates. Have you been to Iceland? No. Have you been in Japan? No. Have you been to South Africa? Tell me you went to South Africa. He said, I went to South Africa--I had to walk in the sidewalk. White man walks--I mean, I walk in the street. Only the white man walks on the sidewalk. It's like, what in the world is this? He said, this is South Africa. He's saying, South Africa is worse than the South--much worse. He said, I'd rather live in Jacksonville any day than in South Africa. You know, I hate Jacksonville (laughter), you know. So he'd bring back the stories, but the problem is he'd go away for two months at a time, you know, because his, you know, crew ships, they--you, you're gone. Speaker 1: That's an interesting comparison though, comparison, I've never heard that before. Speaker 2: What's that? Speaker 1: A comparison by somebody grew up in the South comparing life in South Africa with, yeah. Story_ID: 99332 Speaker 1: All right. So, so family moved to Flushing, New York in '55 [1955]? Speaker 2: Yeah, we moved to Flushing. Speaker 1: Did--is there any story as to why he chose Flushing, New York? Speaker 2: Well, my father [George Jenkins, Sr.] said that he--when he got off the ship one time, he went, and he was trying to get out of Harlem [New York City, New York] 'cause everyone saying, you got to go to Harlem. He was like, I am not moving to Harlem. And so, he went, and he signed a--he signed a mortgage, and on a handshake with this person that was in Jamaica, New York to move, to buy like a three-bedroom house. And he said the man, on his handshake, he actually let me move into this house. And I promised that I would pay him--I think he said the $500, over like a four-month period. And he said he came there religiously and gave the man a hundred dollars every time he came down there. And then, the person took back the mortgage on it, and he stayed up with his money. And, you know, we were glad to be there because when we moved into this neighborhood, Flushing, New York, like I'd said earlier, is what this, this area is mostly Jewish. But they had a couple of little small, little streets that African Americans were starting to move into. And I think before my family moved there, there was maybe one or two other African American families. And we all moved on the same street called 75th Road. And that became the power road for our neighbor called "da Ville". We call it "da Ville", "D-A V-I-L-L-E", "da Ville". You know, I guess people can't say "da Ville", but it was "da Ville". And it was a four-block square where, then African Americans started moving in, in Flushing. So, so to live in Flushing, you know, because you're not in Jamaica, and you're not in downtown Flushing, so it was a real pocket of small blacks. And we, we developed a certain independent style of thinking. It wasn't all the way you might think that some people develop. We had the ability of getting to know white folks in an integrated setting, a truly integrated setting, because we were only about 10 percent of the school base, maybe five, 10 percent. The rest were Jews. Story_ID: 99333 Speaker 1: Okay. You're saying that in "da Ville", you all had your own independent way of thinking? Speaker 2: Yeah, we did. I mean, because we, we had developed a particular freedom to, to think freely--more so than just being identified just as blacks, like some people in Harlem might feel that they were branded because we went into an integrated forum where Flushing [New York City, New York] was probably 95 percent Jewish. And so, our school systems were basically Jewish school systems. But they had the--I don't know if you ever heard of the, the SP system of, of giving a kid in the third grade these tests of math, music, and language. And from those third grade tests, it would set you up for your entire educational public school stratum and system. And I thought these were discriminatory back then because, you know, just think about the, the Jewish students were actually going to the Temple and they were learning Hebrew. They were getting music and so, you know, with any other foundational math, they were way advanced. And so, what this does is set you up in a class, numerically, with the quality of teacher and classmates you're going to be with. So, and we call it smart people system. Speaker 1: It's a tracking system, yeah. Speaker 2: Tracking system. So, if you were in 3-1 to 3-4--I mean, they may say there were twelve classes--you would get the better classes. And then, the 3-6s, 3-7s, were the middle, if you were in 3-9, 3-10, 3-11, 3-12, you were in the dumber classes. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And so, everyone in your class thought you were dumb. I always shot to be, like in the middle. Give me a, give me a 5-6 (laughter), 6-6--I don't know. You have my elementary pictures. Let's see how well I did 'cause it actually has a number there of what class you were in. So, it was a stratum that you realize, and I was like, how do I get out of this stratum? I wanted to learn Spanish. I wanted to learn French. I couldn't do it. They were--I wanted to learn more math. I couldn't get it, and I couldn't get music. Speaker 1: So, you're in a tracking system, kind of locked into a middle ground. Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a, it's very interesting how we got into this tracking system. In fact, it continued through junior high school. I remember the teacher made a mistake of giving us one time--advanced math. Now, if we--I think if we had advanced math preparation, we'd have been fine. So, the scores were horrendous. So, teacher says, okay, all right, I know it's unfair (laughter). I'm going to double your score. And so, one of my classmates said, hey, hey, man, you got a, you got like a 40. Why are you laughing? I said, I'm laughing--my friend next door, he, he got an 18 (laughter), you know. So, so I mean I got a 40, but a double--I got an 80, you know, but it was just unfair. The whole system of education was just unfair. And I was able to, ultimately, get out of that system and go to a private school. But most of my foundational things had been developed in that public school system in "da Ville". Story_ID: 99334 Speaker 1: What-- Speaker 2: My friends and all my relationships were solidified before I started going to private school. Speaker 1: Now, now you moved to that neighborhood [Flushing, New York City, New York] early. You were--what, five years old, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And, but I just wonder how did the exposure to Jewish culture impact you? They, you know, they're a minority, too, but they, they do things a little bit different than black people do. Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: And it's--they're a little more controlled in what they do. So I, I just wondered how you, how, if you felt that was-- Speaker 2: Well, I, you know, I, I noticed that the particular weight that they placed on getting good grades and studying and homework. They were always prepared. And like I said, always trying to get the best courses--I mean, the best, and the best teachers were in the best classes. How that, the conduct, they were, you know, most of the time, they were under control, and, and how they just didn't focus on athletics as much as we focus on athletics--the few of us that were there. But also realize they didn't have much to do with us at, at the class. There was very little--in spite of the fact we went--we weren't visiting in their houses, and they weren't visiting us. My parent wasn't talking to their parent in school, you know, of the parent, you know, week, where it was still--you still see the--though we went to an integrated school. There were--we were formed to not really get, get along because their parents would pick them up and walk them out of the black neighborhood, you know. Or there were monitors or police set up till they get these four blocks where they then cross over to the white neighborhood. So, you know, and we, we were, we had a good neighborhood. There was none, none of this violence is that but, you know, people had concerns, still had concerns about, you know, who you are, and so forth and so forth. They still went to our, went to the schools that are in, in our neighborhood. Speaker 1: So the school was in your neighborhood actually? Speaker 2: Absolutely-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --'cause they, they were once all Jewish schools. They moved into, you know, more luxurious homes, and so, we--this is what, where we moved in. The schools were fine. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They were good schools, very good schools. Story_ID: 99335 Speaker 1: Let me ask you--we always ask this question. Do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: Yeah, Durkeeville [Jacksonville, Florida]. I remember seeing a rat (laughter). I remember, you know, I remember the--I told another time, I remember going to the washer and dryer there on a dirt floor (laughter), you know. I, I remember that. And in my earliest memories in the neighborhood were, you know, basically, I remember a boy picking on me. And, and I was kindergarten or first grade, a white kid jumped me--big kid, too, and I remember my older brother coming to my aid and, you know, and saved me, you know. Speaker 1: How many siblings did you have. Speaker 2: I had two brothers and a sister. Speaker 1: Okay. And where do you fall in there? Speaker 2: I'm the last one. Speaker 1: Okay, the youngest, okay, all right. Speaker 2: So, I mean, so I remember, I have vivid memories of living in "da Ville" [Flushing, New York City, New York], from the barbecues, to the talent shows, to the weightlifting contests, to the beauty--we used to have these barbecues that it was a wonderful thing of a community coming together. It was a neighborhood that if you disrespected any one adult, that one adult had the right to chastise you. And if you went home and complained to your parent, your parent would talk to that person, and they would both getcha. So, if it wasn't one parent, it's the other. It really was a village raising a child. It really was a respect for your elders. You, you couldn't have the big ego. Someone would take you down in terms of ego. And so, it was that kind of neighborhood. It was those kind of values that allowed me to kind of nurture this kind of edge I have towards community and towards service. And so, if you ask me, and you might ask me one time, why do I think that I'm eligible to be choreographed? I mean, like a videography or whatever--it, it's only that I, I might have done some service, and that I might encourage some other people to do some service. But it's that service in that community that I first saw. I saw community meetings, you know, come together-- Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: --that people would talk about things that are happening in our community. I remember the meeting with the police, 'cause the police at that time were all white. And they, they did not let us hang, they did not let us hang in the park. I mean, you had to go home at a certain time. And the police would shine these bright lights and say, are you in there, you know, are you in there? And so, it was like, why are they even bothering us? This is our neighborhood, you know. But they didn't want you even in, in the park at night. And it was in the park that you learned all the--at that time, black radio wasn't at the level it was now, but they had this thing called the Symphony Sid Show. And if you remember Symphony Sid, that was the Latin jazz. It was the finest music that ever come, but he wouldn't come on until like 10:00 at night--the Symphony Sid Show. And you, you would get all the great music. So I grew up on black and Latino music, you know, we call that Latin. And, you know, it would be Eddy, Paul, Mary, and the LeBron Brothers, and everyone would go down to the St. George Hotel in Manhattan [New York City, New York]and party. And so, but you learned from your, your elders--information about things. They would transfer you--what's going on here and there. And the park was the place, the park was the place that we all learned how to live, and learned how to get along, and learned how to grow. And the park still exists, and they have a neighborhood reunion every summer. Speaker 1: What's the name of the park? Speaker 2: It's, it's 154 Park. It's for the elementary school (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And a lot of great things happened in that park. I learned how to play stickball and skelly. I don't know if you know what skelly is--it's get on your knees, and you shoot these little tops into these boxes. And, yeah, and you, you score points, and you can knock other people off. It's like shuffle board on your knees. Think about shuffle board on your knees--these little tops. And you shine your tops up, and skelly was real big. And handball, handball was very big in New York. So, I played stickball, handball, skelly, you know, we had daredevil clubs where you jump from one roof to another. You'd go--oh, yeah, so it, it developed, and then they had the sham. The sham was a right of passage that the younger generation had to, had to endure with the older generation. It's just like initiations for a fraternity. And every spring, they would have a sham, and if you're, if you're a certain age, you couldn't go into the park--go home. And if you did, they would beat you, but they wouldn't hurt you, you know, they'd beat you and rough you up a little bit, but they wouldn't hurt you. But it was just the older kids saying, we own this, and you got to go through this rite of passage--be tough. But we would get together, five or six of us, and beat up one of those big ones (laughter). And we would hide out. And so, it was like, it was a game, it was like playful game. There were no weapons. No one could ever stab anyone, shoot anyone. It, it was just playful and you couldn't hurt anyone. You couldn't leave a mark on them--that was the key. If you left a mark on them, it was--the people in your generation would just take, take care of it, you know. And you never, never told your parents. They would say why? I really don't want to go out today. That's strange, you know, why you're sitting there (laughter). You would go out when you get other friends and you would, and so if you saw someone coming from around the corner in the car, you'd all run. And it was just, it was just a wonderful time of growth that we all talk about. That was the male part-- Story_ID: 99336 Speaker 1: Women were kind of a little shut out of that experience 'cause that was male on male. I felt bad for the women because they didn't have the same, you know, ability to develop, you know. You know, like women have cheerleaders. You know, as men go sports, and then they, they would, but the women who were athletes were great. We had great handball players--I mean, great handball players. And, and we would have a mix, mixed, mixed doubles, handballs. So, you get this girl who's a--I want to play with her, you know. So, the women actually developed with, with the men--two things. They were great runners, and we'd have these relay races. We had these races and where we would try to beat some of the women. And some of them, you couldn't beat. Sheila (ph.) was one of them. She's a great runner--you couldn't beat Sheila, you know. And, and some of the handball players, Joanne Hartley (ph.) and some of these--they were so, such great handball players. You didn't want to be embarrassed and shamed, so you didn't play the girls in the handball, man. They were just too tough, you know. And so, we, we had the ability of really developing relationships through athletics for women as well. It was, it's just a great time in our life. I learned--I was never the best athlete. I was good. I got better as I went on, but I had to pay my dues in everything I did, in everything I did--in basketball, in football, Pop Warner, and as I got discovered, you know, if you can call discovery. I got discovered for football playing Pop Warner. That was our outlet. There was a group of us--rag tag football again. We play in the Lots, a place called the Lots. In between this development, a white and black community, was this wooded area where the people would dump stuff. Well, in the middle of it, we carved out a football field, and we created a football field. And it was called the Lots. And it allowed you to play cowboys and Indians, and you'd also basically play football. And white folks would not want to walk through the Lots 'cause they were afraid. The girls were afraid of getting raped, and, and the white boys were afraid of getting beat up. And not to say that any of that occurred, but it's the fear. So, they walked all the way around the Lots on both sides. And the Lots is about six square blocks, so it was a big area, oh, yeah, oh, yeah. It was a big area. And, and that's where we learned how to play football. And so, we became a-- Speaker 2: So it was the black, the black community? Speaker 1: Yeah, we got together to play football, we got together to play football. Everybody come--the girls there and everybody. We'd come down there, and it would be like, like the NFL, or like the best college ball. It like 50 to 100 people on any given time, besides the players playing. Yeah, it was a place to go, man. Everybody would--the park would empty out. We'd go down and, and play. And so, so it was a good for the other kids 'cause when we wanted to play football, then they'd get a chance to play basketball, or they had to play in the little basketball court. When, when we would leave, we say, what are we you doing in our basketball court, you know, and they'd leave and go now. But, but that was just a great area. It helped develop--I developed the skills. But anyway, long and short of it, we had this team called the Sumurai Warriors Seniors and the Peewees. My brother played on the Senior Team. He's five years older than me, and myself and Willie played in it. So Willie Jenkins is, is five years older. My sister, Emma Jenkins, is six years older. And my brother, Ronald Jenkins, is one year older. And Ronald and myself played on the Peewees, and that's where we got discovered. And, by the way, the Senior Division and the Peewee Division, first year, went undefeated. And we're playing in mostly an all-white league. So, again, you know, I go from my father being the coach, and we win it all to, to going Peewee, and we win it all. And my brother wins it all as a Senior. And it was just amazing partnership and, and team building. That's why you see something like TO (ph.) today. You don't understand it. What is this? If you even thought about saying something to the coach, you bite your tongue, my friend. Your teammates will jump all over you. This did not happen. You didn't argue. We were very disciplined. Story_ID: 99337 Speaker 1: And long and short of that, someone from the Catholic school system saw me play--saw the three of us play, and, and said that we're interested in you. There's a little bit of scholarship money. Would you like to come and take a test? And I got on one bus and three trains, and two and half hours later, I was at St. Francis [Preparatory School, Fresh Meadows, New York], but I went to school in Brooklyn. And I said to my father [Eddie Jenkins, Sr.], why would I want to go to school here? It's two and half hours away from all my friends. It's all male--75 percent passing, six courses, and if you mess up, you go to school on Saturday. Who wants to go to school here? My father said, that's where you're going. There was no debate. So I end up going there for basketball and football, even played rugby. And my rugby team went to--I didn't go, they went to Ireland, played St. Mary's. So I got to expose myself, ran track to, to various different things. I was on the French and Latin Team, so there were, there were other things that I could do. But the sacrifice of going and living in New York, if you've ever done New York, if you've ever done the train thing below, below the ground, you know, a two and half hour commute each way, and carrying a football back and a briefcase, wearing a coat with a tie, going through Brooklyn looking like that--Eli Whitney, where these kids, mostly Hispanic, are laughing at you because you got this suit, ridiculous-looking jacket, and this tie on, you know. It wasn't a, it wasn't a good thing to do, but you know, what? It, it made me a razor--it hardened me. Story_ID: 99338 Speaker 1: Now, now, who were your--did you have like a--are there any particular mentors in grade school or in high school? Speaker 2: Yeah. In, in high school, there was Vincent O'Connor, and he's in that book--I showed you the back of the picture. Vince O'Connor is the winningest coach in New York State history, and he's still coaching. Vince got like, you know, 400 wins. Vince is still coach and won the championship two years ago at age seventy-eight? Seventy-seven? So he was a, he was a mentor. I remember Vince O'Connor telling me, stand, you stand right here next to me, you know. You're not going to play right now. I want you to do something. I want you to watch the people in that position, and tell me what they're doing, and tell me how you can, can do it better. I want you to watch, and he got me watching the game. And he said, if you stand here and watch me learn this game, I guarantee it--you'll get a scholarship to college. And for me to hear that, and man, I'm like fifteen years old, like are you serious? Man, I can go to coll-, you'll get a scholarship. If you can learn this game the way--well, anyway, I learned the game. I played on his team. My high school team went undefeated, and we were ranked nationally. Larry DiNardo from [University of] Notre Dame [Notre Dame, Indiana] was part of it; Paul Houlihan who went to [University of] North Carolina [at Chapel Hill]; Richie Sharoll (ph.) who went to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. They broke all the records. I was part of this, this national team. We won the championship, and set all kind of records for touchdowns, and for--you're not giving up touchdowns. Speaker 1: Now, what position did you play? Were you-- Speaker 2: Well, yeah, when we won the, the championship, believe it or not, I was a defensive end (laughter). I wasn't good enough to play offense (laughter). That's what I'm saying. I was never the best athlete. They had great athletes, and I was like third string, man, but first string, defensive end. I was quick. I could jump over the center, and just grab the quarterback and I would come out. I was fast (laughter) and a little strong. But I was a defensive end when we won the championship, you know, different than what I'm, I'm doing--well, I did, later. But, but it was a great, great team. It was teamwork. I, I remember playing this Boise High School, Boise High School, and everyone has heard of Boise High School. Boise High School had national runners--Jesse (ph.) Clare (ph.), who might have run like a, a 969-700, and it had all these great players. And I remember playing them. And we actually saw them like, you know, running down the field--catches, like, you know, it's like you see the people dunk before the game (laughter), you know that. We like, wow, they fast! We end up beating them 60 to nothing because they were disorganized. We saw them fighting, you know, it was, it was just a disheartening thing to see an all-black team just disintegrating before your eyes, and, and hear the black fans call us Uncle Toms, the five and six blacks that played on this mostly white team (laughter). And we like, why do we have to endure this? All we did was show up and play a game of football because you go to a white school, why does that make us Uncle Tom? It was, it was kind, it was kind of hard to kind of live with. But we ended up being on a great team and doing some great things. Story_ID: 99339 Speaker 1: And I end up playing basketball again with some greats--Jimmy O'Brien [Jim O'Brien] that went to (unclear), and coach in Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio]. Remember Jimmy O'Brien? Speaker 2: Oh, Jim, yeah, yeah. Now, he's-- Speaker 1: Yeah, he was my--Jimmy O'Brien was my teammate. Speaker 2: --he's still coaching in the--some place in the-- Speaker 1: He, he went somewhere recently, but Jimmy O'Brien. Kevin Stacom, that played for the [Boston] Celtics, my teammate. Speaker 2: Kevin, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. So, I had--but, you know, our job--I remember when Bob Cousy came to look at Jimmy O'Brien in, in a small gym. See, it--St. Francis Prep, believe it or not, is so small if you saw the school. It was like, you know, you know, how most high schools are. We had about six, 700 students, maybe 800 students. It wasn't even a third of a block long. It was, it was cramped conditions like fifty people in, in those little, you know, those little flip desks (laughter). It's like fifty people in a class, you know. And, but we competed--St. Francis Prep competed in like sixty sports. We used to win the, win the championship in swimming, and we didn't have a pool. I mean, but it was, it was hard-nosed tough people. When you think about the incentive to go to school, and you have to go two and a half hours, and there were people that went further than me. There was one guy that went three hours a day. There, there's gotta be--it built, it, it builds it in here. There's something that builds it in here. Well, you don't need motivation anymore, you know, just give me an opportunity. Story_ID: 99340 Speaker 1: How, how early would you have to get up to, to get to school? Speaker 2: Five thirty. And my sister and brothers were, weren't, they weren't delighted because I didn't have to do any house chores. So, they're like--he gets the privileges and gets all the recognition, and what do we get--because he's going to school. And I laugh and say, I'll trade you any day, you know, for that school around the corner for the one I go to, 'cause it was a hard school, you know, and it's tough school. I mean, I liked it, you know, but none of your friends are there. None of your friends are ever at any of the games. I would have to pick up a few and take, but, you know, so you're going through your life, and no one is appreciating it, but your parents. My father [Eddie Jenkins, Sr.] was at every game, father and mother [Essie Rae Jenkins], every game. They never missed a game. And he'd do his paper route, and drive two hours, and get over to Brooklyn, an hour and a half to go to Brooklyn--just watch the games, you know. And so, just having your parents there was, was enough for me. But I know my brothers, and I talked to some of them. It, it bothered them a little bit that, you know, looked like mom and dad put a lot in me. And so, whenever I can help them out, you know, now (laughter), you know, we try to make up for it, but you know, they were giving me a lot of love--put it that way. Speaker 1: Okay. You're obviously academically capable 'cause you're a lawyer now, but were you a real good student in those days? Speaker 2: I had to work hard. I would say that I had, I had to work hard. It, you know, things didn't come easy. I remember I word--I read Word Power in 30 days, man, I thought I was the smartest guy in the world. I remember like one percent of those things, but the Latin helped. I think the Latin, four years of Latin, helped probably better than anything else--three years of French and four years of Latin. Latin still helps me. Speaker 1: Yeah, they don't teach it anymore in the public schools. At least-- Speaker 2: Yeah, the Latin, the Latin School here, they do (laughter), you know-- Speaker 1: Yeah, uh-hum. Speaker 2: First public school in America, the Latin School. But, but you're right. That, that's something that helped me--would help me with the prefix and so on, so on. So I, I could kinda figure a word out by Latin. But, yeah, it was, it was a great experience and-- Story_ID: 99341 Speaker 1: And during that experience, one year, with the help--I think with a scholarship through Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], I was one of the inner city kids who they sponsored to Outward Bound. I don't know if you know much about Outward Bound. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I've heard about them, yeah. Speaker 1: It's in Hurricane Island, Maine. I was HIOB [Hurricane Island Outward Bound] 6, 7, so that's a seventh class ever at that particular school. And it's on Hurricane Island. And so for thirty days, you go through survival mode, you know, you get up at 5:30, 6:00 in the morning. You run five miles. You jump off a cliff with your combat boots on, and then you like go to breakfast at 7:30--eat good fish. I mean, they ate, they ate well, but they grew it all there. And, and then, you go through rope climbing, you know, mountain climbing, rappelling down mountains, learning how to swim. They tie your hands, throw you in the water, tie your feet, then tie your hands and feet, make you dive down, and grab this thing in your mouth, and come up. They teach you about ecology. They teach you about the things to get, so you end up eating sea rocket, and all the different things that are in the ocean, around the ocean. So, you end up making your own vegetables, to build you up to your own solo, and your own island with no food, and just water, and some matches, and a Bible, and, and a sheet of plastic. Everybody does their own island for three days, man--no one comes by. Speaker 2: There, there is actually an island available for you--everybody will be on it. How, how do-- Speaker 1: In Maine, Maine has thousands of islands. I mean, Maine literally--you could own your, you could buy your own island in Maine. And this one time, I remember, we went on this one island. A guy had a bowling alley. He had a house and a bowling, his own bowling alley. I mean, (laughter), Maine is just amazing. People--that's why people call Maniac (unclear), but think about the freedom and the life they have there of having that kind of land, that kind of beauty, and it's all yours. It's like having your own country. Speaker 2: Now, how old were you when you went to Outward Bound? Speaker 1: I was sixteen, sixteen. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And I remember that we were in a boat because they, they first train you how to, to sail. We're sailing to Bar Harbor, and we hit a storm. And I remember that you're supposed to take turns in terms of who was at the helm, and so forth and so on. I remember how kids made the decision in this storm, with the boat rocking back and forth and, and us rolling, that we put the brightest kid, the kid that all of us didn't like, 'cause his father was a member of the Yacht Club that he was just so privi-. We put him--said, you now in charge--get us through. We're--some of us fifteen, sixteen. We thought we were going to die. I mean, you know, because we were in a storm and, and it was in a whale boat. And the whale boat, by the way, is about the safest boat you can, in terms of buoyancy, it's hard to flip it. It's heavy, it's wide. But they lost contact with us, and they're supposed to be charting us. They tried to get us out of that storm, and there were about four boats going up. We could hear this ferry coming, hmmmmm. And that's when we make that decision because we knew, at some point, that ferry was going to cut us in half. And, and this kid put us at a rowing speed, that we missed that ferry, that it still sloshed up on top. They didn't see us, but it could have turned us over. If he hadn't, if we hadn't put him there, if he had made the decision to tack a certain way, and to get us rowing at a certain level, we'd all been dead. So it's quick--how you're fifteen, sixteen years old, you come to, you know, to that decision. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 99342 Speaker 1: So, yes, that's--well, what a, what an incident here. So, we were talking about Outward Bound when you were sixteen? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: And this was, was this an experience that you engaged in as a result of being at St. Francis [Preparatory School, Fresh Meadows, New York]? Speaker 2: I, I--it was, it was my high school coach. Vin O'Connor [Vincent O'Connor] actually was able to get me into this program. He thought it would have, you know, like a life-changing effect, and it did. I mean, the most important thing was not the denial of food for three days, 'cause I learned how to muck for clams. And I got the sea rock and I made myself a little salad--I was able to eat. It was the fact that being totally alone with yourself. See, sometimes we--people think they're alone. They go home. There's a TV, there's a radio, there's outside. When you go, when you get dropped down in your own island, man--the first thing after the intensive, you know, program they do every day is that, wow, I'm glad to be here 'cause you, when you're intensely programmed from 7:30 to 10 at night, 'cause at night, they're teaching you about survival skills. They're teaching you how to tack boats. They're teaching you about how to use a basic radar equipment and so forth and so on, if you're alone. So, so they're teaching you how to use a compass. So, you're, you're still being educated and, and programmed till 10:00 at night until you just go, go to sleep. When you first get that three days, you say, man, I'm glad to be here. Then, the boat drops you off and you look all around. You walk around that island and you realize--hell, I'm on this island, man. And, you know, the first fear, you know, the first fear comes back--suppose he never come back? So, the first fear is suppose he never come back is a trust thing. I know they come, I know my parents would know, you know, but you realize your parents are in New York City. Then, you know what the next thing is? The next thing is you start having conversations with yourself, man. And the next thing is that you get totally alone, 'cause that little man inside you--he's got questions. He's got questions about who you are, what your purpose is, and, and, and you can't answer them. So, there was, there was a reason why they gave you that Bible. So, I started really, for the first time, 'cause I had been raised as a Catholic, and you don't get much Bible as a Catholic. You get what they want you to have on Sundays. So, very fair to some people say, okay, let--we're going to do Bible study. They don't do that. That's a Christian community does that. So, I started over for the first time, man, I read Genesis. I said, whoa, you know, and I was talking to God, brother, I was talking to God. I was yelling so, so, but I hadn't prepared for the night. I hadn't prepared for anything, so I didn't put my tent, 'cause they taught you how to take that sheet of plastic, get some sticks, make yourself a tent. I didn't prepare for it. So, the storm comes. They said, when you see that loaf of bread in the sky in Maine, rain is quickly coming. I didn't pay attention to it. And rain came. And it wet up my sleeping bag, so I couldn't, I couldn't sleep. My matches are wet--I couldn't light a fire. So, Maine summers go from almost 95 or, during the day. On these islands, it drops like in the 40's in the summer. You drop 50 degrees and I was cold and wet. Do you know I walked back and forth this one path, and I was trying to stay warm. And I slipped, and I fell into the ocean off this little cliff. And now, I'm scampering, I'm scampering. I'm--so I'm really wet now. I did get back. And I was more careful about walking, so I kept walking back. I walked for nine to 10 hours back and forth--paced about 20 paces. Did you ever that in your life? I walked from probably 10:00 that night until the sun came up, so it's maybe seven hours. And I remember people say, well, how, how is it when the sun come up? And I told them, it's like this. It's like (laughter). And it was this big smile. I had never seen the sun like that before that, man. I was so wanting that sun--the warmth of the sun to dry me off. It was so wonderful to have that sun. So, even on this island, man, even though you can kill yourself, you know, or you're not, if you're not careful. But I was able to pray--I was able to find out a lot about myself. And, but I would tell you--the guy said, well, you know, what is the first thing he said? I said, when that boat came, I was glad to just touch someone. I was just so glad to see someone. People I had really never paid attention to--I was looking at the lines in their face 'cause I never thought I'd ever see a person again. So, I can imagine what people have gone through who have had, you know, major separations from people, and I never want to have that again. I never want to have--but I learned--it taught me some stuff so-- Speaker 1: That's interesting. Speaker 2: --Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Okay. Story_ID: 99343 Speaker 1: Yeah, so that's, that's quite an experience. Speaker 2: Yeah, and in sailing, and in sailing, and we sailed the beautiful island to see the beautiful seals jump out of the water and, and surround the boat and, you know. And so, we, we did have some great days sailing back--two or three days in the ocean--just twelve people. No one over sixteen is old. Sailing back, and staying in a whole island that was, you know, all these sheep--you wake up in the morning, and there's all these sheep in the meadow. And it, it was, it was just a beautiful kind of stay for a, for a, you know, a New York City boy 'cause, you know, you know, I was born in Florida. I--pretty much a city boy by that time. Speaker 1: Were there any other black kids on the-- Speaker 2: One other--his name was Caul (ph.), and he went to one of the public schools. Speaker 1: Uh-hum. Speaker 2: And I remember Caul couldn't swim. And they had this rule that when you did your run, if you did not jump in the ocean, no one ate that morning. And so, Caul had told me earlier, you know, I, I have a fear of water--I, I can't swim. So, when we finished the run, Caul looked down there at that water. Caul said, ain't doing it. So they said, Caul, if you don't jump, man, we don't eat. So, Caul said, I not doing it. So, they actually--they were foolish enough to run at Caul, and to try to get Caul to throw him into that water. And Caul was throwing them--chuckin them left and right. Now, he's about 6'3", 240 pounds, 250 pounds. He was throwing them left and right. Caul was not going to have it. So, I said to them--I said, why don't you give him, just give him a jacket, you know, like a flotation jacket, and just let him walk down there, and so that--they didn't say how you had to get in the water. Let him put his feet in a little bit. And that's what they did. So, we, we ultimately ate, 'cause see, that brother was not happening. He was the only other brother in this whole thing. And there were-- Speaker 1: Were most of the participants athletes? Speaker 2: Some were athletes. Some were, were just given opportunities. I think, like I said, I think Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] paid for me. I don't know. Somebody paid for me. I think Harvard was giving extra money to different kids. It might have been in the back doorway of Harvard getting, getting to know people because I, I was--Harvard was one of my, you know, places that I thought I, I would go. But it was a great, just great exposure to Maine, to a different kind of a system of, of life that you would never, ever have an opportunity in your life to, to experience it unless it was a military training. Speaker 1: Uh-hum, yeah, that's quite a summer (unclear). Speaker 2: By the way, Outward Bound was developed by the English Navy when, after World War I, when they, they didn't have a Navy prepared enough. And they need to have a Youth Corps, and so, they developed Outward Bound in England to train their Navy. That's why this particular base in Outward Bound is one of the first. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: All right. Story_ID: 99344 Speaker 1: So, now, when you were in high school, did you run for class officer or anything like that or did you-- Speaker 2: No, I was basically just, you know, just a good--I think, a pretty good athlete, and just try to--you see, when you don't have girls around, it, it's not as much fun running for office (laughter). It's an all boys' school (laughter). You know what I mean? Why would I want to be class president there for, you know, trying to impress you, you know? Naw, I'm just kidding. I, I don't know. It, it just didn't, didn't dawn on me to run. Speaker 1: So, so was your social life basically back in your neighborhood and it did develop? Speaker 2: Yeah, I had no social life-- Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Speaker 2: --basically, no social life. That's what I told my father, man, you know, you know. I said, when it was time to get the scholarship, I had, I had chances to go to other schools. I mean, I remember the coach from Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia] came in with this Gator bag and these Gator shoes, and was telling me in the other room--man, Hampton got seven women to every man, and so forth and so on. And my father [Eddie Jenkins, Sr.] overheard him, and (unclear) my father--you're not going to Hampton. I'm--why, dad, they--it's a great educational institution, man (laughter). So I, I heard what he said, you know (laughter). And so, I want to go to Florida A and M [Florida Agricultural & Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida], 'cause my brother went there (unclear). But my father said, you're not going, you're not going to Florida A and M. It's just, it's--so, you need to think about the, the East. And back then, your parents kind of steer you. Speaker 1: Now, Florida A and M, now was your brother there when-- Speaker 2: Bob Hayes was. Speaker 1: --"Bullet Bob" Hayes? Yeah, and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, oh, yeah, he knew Bob Hayes very well. Speaker 1: And, and who's the other--there's another real fast brother was back there in the back field of Bob--return kicks and-- Speaker 2: I know who you're talking about. Speaker 1: --both were really superfast. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, no, I wouldn't say, (unclear), but something like that, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, I, I know, yeah. Speaker 2: And Bob Hayes from--he's from, he's from Jacksonville [Florida]. Speaker 1: Uh-hum. Speaker 2: So, but, but the thing about it is that they, they didn't want me to go there. So, it was between, like [College of the] Holy Cross [Worcester, Massachusetts] and, you know, Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], but Harvard wouldn't, wouldn't give us all the money. Harvard has this thing--they don't give you all the money. And so, I, I couldn't do Harvard. And I went to Holy Cross and it was like, all male, all white, Worcester, you know. Speaker 1: Is there a reason why you chose Holy Cross over some of the other schools? I mean, was it--what was it? Speaker 2: Well, I, I think, I think that--that's a very interesting question. Besides my father steering me there, you know, and saying, I think this is the best place for you. I remember going to a meeting one time, and they were bringing all these basic athletes from the Catholic schools. And they brought into one room in Manhattan [New York City, New York]. And in those, in that room, I saw these old men walking around with drinks in their hand. And then, my coach says, look, man, this is the best place you need to be right now. I said, why? He says, these are alumni of Boston College [Boston, Massachusetts] and Holy Cross. And the other interesting thing about it is that they're all FBI agents. And if you go to Holly Cross, man, or Boston College, you could be an FBI agent. And I'm like, FB--that's the last thing I want. [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] had just gotten killed--what do I want to be an FBI agent for, man? This is not--(unclear) "I Spy", you know? So, you know, so I was like, I wouldn't want to--I didn't want to hear it, but it was between Boston College and Holy Cross. And Jimmy O'Brien, you know, tried to recruit me for Boston College. But I remember going up to Holy Cross. And then, this article also might--this piece might appear in, in "Businessweek. And I remember Ted Wells [Theodore Wells, HM], who is Scooter Libby's lawyer, was with me, and Jeff Dickerson, who's a lawyer out in Los Angeles. I remember we're sitting over this hill. And, and Tom Boisture, who became the player person of the player personnel manager, the New York Giants. He's the coach, and he's sitting up this hill, and we're overlooking Mt. St. James. And he says, you know, you, you Negroes are going to love it here. But, but he had the Southern accent, so it didn't come out that way. And you take Negroes with a Southern accent, you know that, you know that sound like back then? Speaker 1: You niggers-- Speaker 2: Niggers. And, and we know he wasn't saying nigger, but it was Nigros (ph.). And, and Ted and myself--we looked at one another. We said, yeah, yeah, I think we're gonna come here. We're going to come here because we're going to change this environment up here. And of all the schools, you know, we, we talk today. Why did you come--I think 'cause of the challenge. Story_ID: 99345 Speaker 1: Now, [College of the] Holy Cross [Worcester, Massachusetts] is known mostly as a basketball school. I mean, in those days, you think of Holy Cross as a basketball-- Speaker 2: Yeah, Bob Cousy, [Tom] Heinsohn, Eisen (ph.) and-- Speaker 1: Yeah, you wouldn't think of it as football? Speaker 2: Oh, no, it actually won the--Holy Cross had actually, like twenty years earlier, was big time football with, with [University of] Notre Dame [Notre Dame, Indiana]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And we were playing, at that time, Syracuse [University, Syracuse, New York]. We were playing Boston College. We were playing--so we were playing Division III football. Speaker 1: Yeah, Boston College--I get the sense that they're foot-, you know, from-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, but then-- Speaker 1: Holy Cross, I don't, you know, I always think of them as basketball but-- Speaker 2: Right, and but academically-- Speaker 1: --but that they were--you say, were-- Speaker 2: --we're, we're somewhere between Boston College and Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], academically, you know. Speaker 1: Uh-hum, okay. Speaker 2: So-- Speaker 1: So, they were a football power at one time. Speaker 2: Years ago--even before I knew about it, but we were playing this, this independently. And it was killing us because they were limited in scholarships, and the teams were playing. And we were going to play Syracuse the year--I think they won the Lambert Trophy [Lambert-Meadowlands Trophy]. And I remember looking down the bench, and seven of us were knocked out at the same time. (Laughter). I mean, I mean, about seven athletes were all with ice bags on our heads--we were like, what is this? Because of the weight differential, the size differential, the speed differential--it makes a difference. So, so, why were we even playing these schools--because our alumni wants us to be able to continue to play this type of football, where now, they're playing the "Patriot League". But back then, we were playing big time football without the big time (laughter). But, anyway, Ted Wells [Theodore Wells, HM] ended up playing freshman football with me, and then he decided to, to just go academic. And they let him keep the scholarship. He says, I just want to study and be the best student there is. And to Holy Cross' credit, they didn't take his football scholarship. Speaker 1: That's just interesting. Speaker 2: Yeah, they let him, they let him stay--it, you know, and keep that scholarship. It was amazing, but they did. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 99346 Speaker 1: So, football was, was good. I ended up having a great freshman year in the--having one game against Boston College [BC, Boston, Massachusetts], like running for three touchdowns going a hundred, running 135 yards. I actually ran for one more yard, than the entire BC football team--my first time ever playing running back. Speaker 2: So you, okay, this is your first time playing-- Speaker 1: Freshman, it was my freshman team though. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Back then, freshman, they have freshman teams. Speaker 2: 'Cause you were back in high school finally, right after you-- Speaker 1: Finally, but I was a, I wasn't a starting back. I was like a blocking back for a great runner (laughter). Speaker 2: And that's, so that's interesting. So, you developed kind of slow in terms of being a star? Speaker 1: I was, I always had better athletes no matter where I went, you know. But I had to show--I did the--maybe the smaller things that maybe they didn't do, that some didn't do. I was, you know, if you wanted me to block, I'd block. If you want me to play defensive end, I--whatever you want, what do you want me to do? But-- Speaker 2: That's a critique against something. That was always a critique against Jim Brown. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: He wouldn't block for anybody. They say he was great but he wouldn't-- Speaker 1: Yeah. But I, you know, I would--and so, so at, at St. Francis Prep [St. Francis Preparatory School, Fresh Meadows, New York], Pat Diamond was at BU [Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts]. I mean, Pat Diamond was the running back. He ultimately went to BU. And when I went to [College of the] Holy Cross [Worcester, Massachusetts] for that first year, I was great. Then they said, there's a brother across the way--he's going to transfer. He's going to come in next year as a freshman. His name is Joe Wilson--say he's a great runner. I said, well, what am I (laughter), you know? Joe, and Joe Wilson is a great runner. I know, blocking for him, and he had to be my roommate and my best friend. So, so it was, you know, we really kind of interesting story. But the next year, after having such a good year, the whole football team came down with hepatitis. So, after playing two games, our season got knocked out. And we had dedicated our season right to the team that had crashed and-- Speaker 2: Marshall [University, Huntington, West Virginia]-- Speaker 1: Marshall. Speaker 2: --yeah. Speaker 1: And the interesting thing about it, then we got wiped out. And then, San Diego State [University, San Diego, California], the next year, dedicated their season to us, 'cause we got wiped out. Speaker 2: Yeah, but nobody--did anybody, nobody died, did they or (unclear)? Speaker 1: No, but, but it was 120 people sick, so they converted a dorm to a hospital. Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: And, you know, I mean, I was, I was sleeping maybe twenty hours a day for about, for about at least a month. Speaker 2: That's 120 guys on the team? Speaker 1: Well, you know, you figure that the football team, its staff, and so, we probably had about sixty guys. There's, you know, there's other personnel, so I think maybe, maybe close to maybe eighty people. Speaker 2: Did anybody there, is there an analysis of how that happened? I-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, believe or not--in Worcester, think about, think about how life can happen. A little kid had urinated--he, he had hepatitis. He was about four years old. He urinated around the water hose (laughter). That's why you always run the water (laughter), you know, for a while (laughter). At the same time, the next day, there was a fire downtown Worcester. When there's negative pressure, hoses suck in, so it sucked (laughter), it sucked in whatever it had into the water system. That's what Atlanta [Georgia]--'cause they may sent the Atlanta, Atlanta disease center [Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, CDC] here to--'cause they were going to shut down the campus and bring the National Guard in because that's how fast that hepatitis B [sic, hepatitis A], I think, can spread. I think it was hepatitis B. Speaker 2: That's amazing. Speaker 1: It's the least harmful one. I can't get it again. Speaker 2: That's amazing. Speaker 1: But, and so, what they did is that they basically quarantined us. So, not only was our season down but, you know, it, it didn't help the studies as well. And, at that time, I was taking a course called linguistics. Can you imagine how I did in linguistics? I think it was the lowest grade I ever got in college so-- Speaker 2: That sounds terrible. So, this was your, was this your sophomore year? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So, my senior year--my junior year, we didn't win a game, so we went, we went (laughter). So, it and it, and so, when, when you think about it, I played probably less than twenty games in college and, yet, I was drafted. Speaker 2: Now, what happened your senior year? Speaker 1: We won all four games. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: And in one of the games, I broke the NCAA--I tied the NCAA record. Speaker 2: So, were you as a running back, is it? Speaker 1: Yes, I think, as a running back--no, as a-- Speaker 2: Were you a receiver then or, or-- Speaker 1: I was both. They would flank me, or I think at that time, I was running as a receiver. Speaker 2: Yeah, it's interesting they, they did like a flanker kind of position. It was kind of a-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, they kind of flanked me 'cause Joe Wilson was the runner. Make no doubt about it-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --he was the best runner. And I blocked for him as a fullback. Do I go and flank. And so, I, I remember against Boston College [Boston, Massachusetts]--it was, they wouldn't, they wouldn't play me 'cause they say we were running the wrong holes for Joe and myself. And they put him in--the first time he touched the ball, he runs the ball ninety-four yards, block, runs through seven people, runs for a touchdown (laughter). Then, they put me in the game. They get the ball back on our own one-foot line, a one-yard line, and they throw me a pass. And I run it for ninety-nine yards and broke a tie--you can only tie. You can't run over a hundred yards. You--I tied a NCAA record. And I think that's--I got in, to kind of--I got on the, maybe the map for the NFL, and that's what they started focusing on me. Story_ID: 99347 Speaker 1: Okay. So, was there anything else interesting at [College of the] Holy Cross [Worcester, Massachusetts] your senior year? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, oh, yeah, we, we had the major walkout. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: See, and, and it must have been in my junior year or sophomore year. It could have been my--it was my freshman year. The--General Electric had come and recruited on campus, and General Electric was doing a lot of the military operations. And so, we--well, not we, but there were a number of students who protested against General Electric coming in. And as a result of that protest, they suspended--there were four black students. They suspended all four black students. And there may have been 50 white students, so only like two white students got suspended. So, we said, well, whoa, whoa, we don't get this. How come 100 percent of all the black students get suspended, and only two--so the answer was because we know who they are. (Laughter). Well, they ain't good enough. Everyone who participated should either get suspended, or leave them alone. And they wouldn't listen to us. So, we decided, okay, even though we don't even like these four, you know, because the four blacks got suspended--they were like these kind of people who just get involved in, like anti-war protests, and so and so, and this--all kind of stuff going on. If I'm going to fight, I'm fighting civil rights. I ain't fighting the war. Speaker 1: That's it. We used to call it blippy (ph.) in those days. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. So, so we, so we--there's so many things to protest. And we're here to get an education, so we, we backed them up. So, we said, we're going to declare a Day of Absence. Remember the movie [sic, play], "Day of Absence"-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --when all black people left the town? Speaker 1: Yeah, it's a play by Douglas Turner Ward [HM]. Speaker 2: That's right. So, we decided that we were going to leave campus. And we--I remember we talked, all of us talked to our parents very carefully. My parents said, you know, you're giving up a scholarship. Do you know what you're doing, son? I said, mom [Essie Rae Jenkins] and dad [Eddie Jenkins, Sr.], remember when you marched with [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.], and you did the certain things that was important in your life? Well, this is our lives, and we think this is important. They said, well, if you think it's important, okay, all right, but, you know, just understand that, you know, we think that you're making a mistake so-- Speaker 1: Now, did your parents march with Dr. King? Speaker 2: My, my, my, my mother and father both went to, went to fundraisers that he did in New York--not march with him-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --but, you know, he came to their, to their church. And they, you know, they raised money, so they didn't march with him. But that was--they stood up for whatever they would--thought was important. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And they did strikes in New York and stuff like that. So, you know, they would tell us about the strikes they did. But, long and short of this is that I--we thought it was important. So, I remember Ted Wells [Theodore Wells, HM] was one of our leaders. And I remember, even Clarence Thomas packed his bag, and came reluctantly, 'cause Clarence didn't want us--he didn't want us to go. He was like, man, this is the greatest education. We're giving up too much, and so forth and so on. And besides, I don't even like them people. It's like, it doesn't matter. Speaker 1: This is, this is now Supreme Court Justice Clarence Thomas? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, now. Speaker 1: He was, he was a classmate of yours? Speaker 2: Yeah, Clarence Thomas came in--when I came in as a freshman, Clarence came in as a sophomore. He had, he had already come from a seminary, and he left after, after King's assassination. Apparently, the story he tells is that one of the, the person who was going to be also one of the priests said that Martin Luther coon, or something like that, made some racial remarks about--it wasn't, first of all, it was a priest. They're on their way to be a priest. I--what do they call them? I know-- Speaker 1: Acolyte or something or, or a-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yes, yes. And so, he left. Speaker 1: --nova. Speaker 2: The nuns sent him to, or gave him a referral to Holy Cross--that's how he got into Holy Cross. So, he came in the same year, but there was this major battle over what we should do. And, so Ted said, you know, Ted, Arthur Martin--they both went and negotiated with Father [John] Brooks, who was the dean and president, and Father Swords--not only this particular issue. But while we're talking, let's talk about African American studies that's important. And so, we were able to then have them come up with curriculum, which was more inclusive, was more inclusive for African Americans, for some funding for the Black Student Union because we needed to have a van. And we needed to be able to have more of a warm home, you know, a place to go and meet, and so forth and so on. So, we, we negotiated a, a real commitment from the college to us. And I think--when I was telling you about the article that's coming out in Businessweek, that's what it's about. It's about what our impact was, and Father Brooks' impact is on us, and how that partnership got together where you have some white people in America who basically have partnered, and have developed a social peace when it comes to affirmative action. And Father Brooks, I think, is one of those people. And so, I think Businessweek is talking about him. He's a former president of Holy Cross. So, so that was the, the major takeover we did. I think the next year or the senior year, we changed up the buildings again because of some other reason. And by that time, all those brothers--we thought they were on their way to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut]. So, they had me walk outside and make the statement (laughter), you know, because they said he's going, he's going to play for the [Miami] Dolphins (laughter), so he's got nothing to lose. So, but anyway, those were the kinds of things that, that happened when we were at Holy Cross, yeah. Speaker 1: Holy Cross is the oldest Catholic college in the country, I believe, right, isn't it? Speaker 2: It's one of the oldest. Georgetown [University, Washington, D.C.] might be the oldest. Holy Cross is 1843. Georgetown and Holy Cross, Boston College [Boston, Massachusetts]--I think they're all close. They're all pretty close--those three are very, very close. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right. Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: Okay. So-- Story_ID: 99348 Speaker 1: Now when did you--now, what was your major in college [at College of the Holy Cross, Worcester, Massachusetts]? Speaker 2: English. Speaker 1: English? Speaker 2: Yeah. I was an English major--so was Clarence Thomas, so was Gil Hardy. Gil Hardy was the one who introduced Clarence Thomas and Anita Hill. He was a very good friend, very bright. Brother could, brother could speak Greek (laughter), you know what I mean? Very bright man. He was, he was-- Speaker 1: Gil Hardy, huh? Speaker 2: Gil, Gilbert Hardy. Speaker 1: Gilbert Hardy? Speaker 2: Love--a great brother. He was in the same law firm with Ed Brooke--Yale, with the Yale Law School, very bright, probably the brightest of all of us--Gil was from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. Just an outstanding student, smart, kind of naive, but just innocent, just a good brother. He was a good brother, and he was Clarence--he became Clarence Thomas's best friend. And so, when Clarence was in D.C., Gil became his base of support. And I joined them later in D.C. also, and I worked for the Department of Labor. But, but getting back to, to Clarence, the Black Student Union meetings were absolutely the greatest theater that anyone could ever imagine because it was Clarence Thomas playing Booker T. [Washington] and Ted Wells [Theodore Wells, HM] playing W.E.B. Du Bois. And every Sunday at 7:00, that debate would start then, and it wouldn't be trying to be W.E.B. It'd be an issue that W.E.B. might address like the "black corridor". Why do you all want to separate and live on the "black corridor"? Well, white folks are saying you separate, but when 10, 20, 20 white folks sit at a table in a lunchroom, is that segregation? So, we would say, we push back on that theory--that African Americans have a right to feel comfortable in their own environment. And if a white person wants to move up where we live, fine. In fact, they did. But if we want to have colorful walls with paintings of Africa on the walls, and if we want to have, --the Muslims want to have their own salmon dinners and, you know, and cabbage and bean pies--let us, you know, let, you know, let, let freedom reign. And so, we had this debate because Clarence would say, basically, that we came to Holy Cross to integrate with white people. And we said, absolutely not--we did not come to integrate with white people. but to learn the skills. so that when we do immerse ourself into commerce and education and medicine that we'll have the proper skills as a strong black man, you know, to be able to develop ourselves--has nothing to do with me trying to get next to you, or get next to your house, you know. But we're trying to use education, you know, as a powerful weapon of change. And that's why we, we all got together. And so, these debates would go on and on and on and on, you know. It was always a different issue every Sunday, you know. It was also Ted Wells for fifteen minutes and Clarence, and it was high theater, high theater. Story_ID: 99349 Speaker 1: So you were at--we were talking about the debates and the Black Student Union. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And was it surprising to you in later years--I mean, the career, the turn that Clarence Thomas's career has taken, has that surprised you any for-- Speaker 2: It, it has. I'll tell you why. Clarence actually took some courses with me--English courses. And he, he also took--well, Gil Hardy was in the class and Ed Jones was in the class. And I remember taking--reading one book called "The Spook That Sat by the Door" [by Sam Greenlee]. And I always thought that we, meaning a consensus of us, of the blacks that were taking this course, understood that, you know, you got to do some things to get to where you are going, you know, because we would listen to poets like Paul Laurence Dunbar--we're, we all wear masks, hides the, you know, the guile and smile, you know, that deep down inside, we were hurting, and that you had to pretty much keep that mask on until you get where you're going. And then, when you get where you're going, you know, you could do, you would have much more control, or they'd knock you off early on. You can't let people know your mind. We always say, you know, there's two minds. There's the white mind and the black mind. And the important thing is--never let them know you got the black mind because once they know you have the black mind, and you're trying to be in control of your own destiny and future, my brothers and my sisters, you might as well become an independent because no longer--you can no longer be controlled to some extent. So, if you want to become independent, you have to develop, you know, your money, your capital base to do that. And, and we thought that--and I thought that Clarence had played the game well, man. I, you know, I saw him and later, I saw him on the [Capitol] Hill. And he was in Senator [John] Danforth's office, and we were talking--he was telling me that he was, you know, being mentored by Danforth. I saw him later at education [U.S. Department of Education]. And later, he tried to get me to come and work with him in education. And so, we kept in touch and, you know, I, and so, I, but he started sounding more and more because he was referring me to certain Republicans, like his, his boys out in California--certain conservative Republicans. And, and, and I started listening to him more and, and I thought that I don't know--does he believe in this, too? And so, I think that once he went to Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut], he really changed a lot. Ed Jones [Edward Jones], I talked to Ed Jones often about this. Ed, Ed, Ed has his own take because, you know, Ed's an author now, and he's not kind of forthcoming as much as some of the brothers might be forthcoming if we came--you know who Ed Jones is? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: Ed Jones won the Pulitzer Prize two years ago with his book, and it's called--I'm blanking right now. He's written Hagars--Aunt Hagar's ["All Aunt Hagar's Children"] is one that, that's--those are the essays. And the other one is "The Known World"--won a Pulitzer Prize. Speaker 1: Oh-- Speaker 2: And it's about blacks owning slaves. He won the Pulitzer Prize. Speaker 1: Yeah, I, I've heard of him, yeah. Speaker 2: And he's an interesting story because Ed Jones sat in--Ed Jones went and he edited tax manuals for like twenty years. And he would always write these stories and keep them around. And, finally, and he, you know, he never owned a cell phone, didn't own a car--leave, lived like a very simple life--never married. And, finally, someone recognized one of his stories, and he, he gave him some money to actually publish more. And he actually won the Pulitzer Prize. Speaker 1: So, he was at [College of the] Holy Cross [Worcester, Massachusetts], too? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Wow, yeah, there's quite a-- Speaker 2: And so, Ed Jones, myself, Clarence Thomas, Gil Hardy, we're in this literary class. And, you think, man, wow, we got it. We know what, what the plan is, man. Speaker 1: Who was your teacher? Who, who was teaching? Speaker 2: His name is, his name is Professor McLean (ph.), and he's from Trinidad, I remember. And I, and I thought that the Trinidadian Brothers, the brothers from Trinidad, Barbados, they had a history. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: They, they kept with the arts. They understood the Harlem Renaissance. It was--they had a certain richness about them. Speaker 1: C.L.R James, Ross McConnan (ph.), George Padmore-- Speaker 2: Yes, yes, that's, that's right. Speaker 1: --Tony Martin. Speaker 2: Yes, Tony Martin. I, I met Tony Martin at Wellesley College [Wellesley, Massachusetts] and, and used to go to a lot of his lectures. And he would tell me constantly how the Jews were trying to take him down. Tony was, man, Tony--when Tony took the mask off, he had to leave Wellesley College, man, you know, they ran Tony out of town. It was not going to happen. Tony--I read two of Tony's books, man. Tony is brilliant, man, a brilliant brother, but this Professor McLean was our teacher. The first, first black teacher I ever had was Professor McLean. I had white teachers all my life. This brother blew my mind and we're sitting down there. There's about six of us in his class. And I thought that Clarence, you know, was on the same page with the rest of us. And when I started reading some of his opinions, you know, I wasn't too happy with him. And I'd made some statements--in fact, when he got sworn in the Supreme Court. I'd made some statements and because no one knew who he was, and I got some of the articles here. And so I, I was kind of defining him up here in a very favorable way, but he, maybe he didn't think that I was worthy of defining him. Story_ID: 99350 Speaker 1: And so, he didn't invite me to the Supreme Court. And so, I said, that's okay, I don't have to go. And Ted Wells [Theodore Wells, HM] called me and said, no, man, c'mon, man, he wants you to come. I said, that's all right--I'm not going. And so, for a while, he and I didn't talk for a while. And, finally, you know, we ended up communicating. He invited me to the Supreme Court. We had lunch together and so, we only talked about the positive. I didn't want to criticize him for his, his opinions, even though I talked to Charles Ogletree [HM] about him all the time (laughter). But, you know, I introduced Clarence to his first wife, Kathy [Ambush] and, in Worcester [Massachusetts], and we were friends, man. We, we went back, man. He was a great athlete. He could--Clarence Thomas could throw the ball eighteen yards, man. Speaker 2: Wow. Speaker 1: He had a rocket arm. Speaker 2: Did he play on the football team? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: He just-- Speaker 1: He was a gifted. He could throw the football. He could run. He could throw the football. I'm telling you, he would, he probably could have. He was built, man. He's, he's built, like we used to, we used to say, man, you got all Nigerian in you--you know that, right (laughter)? They didn't do too much miscegenation in your family (laughter). That brother is strong, man. And so, we would joke and, you know. And, and so I, so I said in the article, you know, after the class, we would have some wine and some of what (unclear), and he, you know, he didn't like that. He, he, you know, he didn't--I said, I said, that's okay, man. Look, look, you are Supreme Court Justice, but I know you as Clarence, man. I know you as Cooz because we called him Cooz, because he had this name, Cooz, 'cause he used to do things in basketball and stuff like that. Speaker 2: What happened--what, what was it? Speaker 1: He used to play--Cooz. He used to play--he was, he was a good dribbler. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So they called him Cooz. Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Speaker 1: That was his nickname. Speaker 2: --like [Bob] Cousy then? Speaker 1: Cooz, but he was, but Clarence Thomas was my waiter--[College of the] Holy Cross [Worcester, Massachusetts], we had waiters and maids. And he was one of the many waiters we had that would bring you some foods--say, man, call Cooz, bring me, you know, this and that, you know, I mean, so he was, so he grew, he--that's how he started out very humble roots at Holy Cross as your waiter. Speaker 2: Was it a dining hall? Speaker 1: Dining hall, man. We had combat boots, and the same combat boots and combat equipment or gear every day. He probably had at least six pairs of the same thing, but he never wore anything different. Didn't comb his hair, and he challenged you to say something negative or smart to him. He would, he would level you with words with twelve syllables in them. I mean, he was really bright. And that's why I can't understand why he doesn't speak enough on the Supreme Court--why doesn't he author enough personal opinions? I don't understand it and neither can anyone else. He is a smart man, but I don't know whether he's a revisionist, you know. I know that he loves his son--I think his son is Jamal. I remember when him and Kathy got divorced, and he'd take Jamal with us and we'd go out, hanging out together. He loves that boy. And so, I just hope that, you know, that he, he one day understands that there is maybe a greater purpose than what he--his body of work is doing right now for his people. I still have that hope. I'm probably in the minority of that but, you know, I remember what Malcolm [X] said, and that whether you are a Ph.D. from Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]--that you're still the "N" word to a lot of these people, man, remember that. And, you know, and so I have seen, you know, this brother, and I have been disappointed. Speaker 2: I think it was--I don't know if it's Frankie Freeman [HM] in St. Louis [Missouri]--was telling me that her opinion was that he was--he's very angry at the black community. Speaker 1: Yeah, I think so. Speaker 2: And he takes it all personally. Speaker 1: Yeah, he-- Speaker 2: And he, and he, he doesn't see the--what he could do because, but for the anger. Speaker 1: Yep. I, I think so. I remember when we were in [Washington] D.C., and I remember, even dating, you know, D.C. had a color problem then. And I think that, that might been part of it a little bit, you know, but he also didn't want to be an apologist for the way black people are. And I said, you don't have to be an apologist, but at the same time, you got to recognize that there are badges and the incidents of slavery that still handicap us. So, don't have to be an apologist, but understand the badges and incident argument of the 13th amendment that, you know, the Civil Rights Act of 1865 and 1866, you know, that Congress thought appropriate enough to pass, which would recognize that there are some restitution type of issues that we need in order to make us whole, though we'll never get 40 acres and a mule. And if I get mine, I want them down here on Newbury Street, you know (laughter). But, but the bottom line is that, you know, he was, he's, he's a disappointment, major disappointment. So, we kinda--we're going to kinda move on from there. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 99351 Speaker 1: You know. Speaker 2: All right, okay. Speaker 1: But, but back to my neighborhood [Flushing, New York], two things I didn't let you know about "da Ville", that Beverly--JoAnne Chesimard [Assata Shakur] lived across the street. Speaker 2: Right, that's right. Speaker 1: Black Liberation Army, so they, she was close to my, with my, with my sister, and my brother. And that Billie Holiday lived down the street. Speaker 2: Now, did you, I mean, did, did you have any indication that she was going to involved in the stuff that she was involved in, in those days? Speaker 1: No, no, no. But you know what I found out (unclear). I saw some, some abuse with JoAnne Chesimard early on in her life. She lives in a very dysfunctional household family--alcoholics. She, she--they found her sleeping in the car half the time, so there was some abuse there, man. So when Joanne Furley (ph.) finally saw--I guess it was Sinkay or whatever his name is, or whoever kind of gave her a feeling, a purpose, man. I can see how she could use that, and with her anger, could, could, you know, end up where she was, you know. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: So, one day, I'd like to go to Cuba and talk to her, but she wouldn't know. I was just Emma's little brother at the time, so she wouldn't know who I was anyway. Speaker 2: Okay. And you said that Billie Holiday lived down the street? Speaker 1: Down the street, yeah. My parents used to tell me all the time--Billie Holiday's right there on the bus stop with the shopping bag. I was like, okay, you know, like who's Billie Holiday, you know? I'm, I'm five years old, you know. Yeah, who's Billie Holiday? Speaker 2: Yeah, it's some-, something. Speaker 1: So, yeah, she lived right there in the projects, man. But the projects in Flushing weren't the projects. You know, I mean, nice, like garden apartments--I mean, when we say projects, they're really garden apartments, you know what I mean--Flushing? They were garden apartments. Even city, even the city apartments there--people are still trying to get into them. They're like the best city apartments called Pomonok. I don't know if you've heard of it, but they're the best city apartments in New York. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: The Jews lived there and they're still living there. And it's just the best subsidized housing there is in New York City--Pomonok. People live there forever--clean, safe, you know, taken care of, accessible to Manhattan [New York City, New York], yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 99352 Speaker 1: Now, well let's talk about--now, how, when did the [Miami] Dolphins--when did the NFL start really? When, when were you aware that they were scouting-- Speaker 2: When they called me one day and said, hey, look, we'd like to come up and time you in the forty [40-yard dash]. And I remember I said, okay, fine, I'll go run the forty. And the guy standing with a stop watch like this, right. Here's the stop watch, and then he just turned around, and hid it on the other side (laughter), when he realized--I can't run straight, you know. But I still ran about a 5, a 4.05 forty. I mean, I was pretty fast for a big guy. I'm 6'2.5", you know, 212, 215 pounds. So, I--they looked at my size and my speed, and they said, wow, you know. He, he doesn't have much experience 'cause, you know, basically, playing in [College of the] Holy Cross [Worcester, Massachusetts] and the league I played in, and I haven't played that much. And we never won more than five games in four years (laughter), three years (laughter) so, you know, what could I contribute? But the Dolphins drafted me, thank God. One of my teammates had been drafted the day before. And everybody still walking around, saying, hey, when is your turn, Eddie? And, like, hey, man, I don't know, man, c'mon, you know. I, I don't know if I--I'm going to law school, you know, I'm just defeated, you know. And I remember, I get a call and, and you know, when you're in a, on a (unclear) with all men, and all brothers, and the jokes kinda get to be (laughter), you know, if you, you had, if you had thin skin, you couldn't make it. And so, I get this call--hey, Eddie, Eddie, Don Shula's on the phone, man (unclear). And I, so I go down there, man. I say, yeah, yeah. I said, now, look, MF, where do you go (laughter)? And he said, excuse me, this is Don Shula. I said, oh, Coach Shula, I said, oh, man. He said, he said, we just drafted you, you know, in the so and so round. I say, oh, yeah. He says, are you ready to come down? I say, yeah, I'm ready to come, Coach Shula. A couple of days, I got on that phone and I said, I'm going to kill you guys. They say, we told you he was on the phone (laughter), you know. Story_ID: 99353 Speaker 1: So, yeah, so I went down and I, and so I said, I got, I got to get ready. So, you know, you saw my graduation pictures where I went in water, the dashiki, and no one at [College of the] Holy Cross [Worcester, Massachusetts] have done that. And I was protesting-- Speaker 2: Now, what, what was--yeah, go ahead, yeah. Speaker 1: --so I was protesting about--see, first of all, Ted Wells [Theodore Wells, HM] and Stan Gray, we all, and Jeb (ph.) Dick, we all had said, we were going to do an African regalia. But them brothers were going to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut] and Georgetown [University, Washington, D.C.] and, you know, they was like, and Boston College Law School [Boston, Massachusetts], they were like, they changed up on me, come graduation. But I said, for, for, you know, for civil rights and for our own identity, I still wore the robe. My girlfriend, she (unclear), sewed the robe. I was going to wear it. And so, I wore it and people looked at me. He really is crazy. He has really lost his mind, you know, breaking with a tradition like that. But my mother [Essie Rae Jenkins] said, could you please put that robe, Holy Cross robe on, and take a picture? Boy, you done lost your mind (laughter). So, I still took a picture with my mother. But I wore it and so-- Speaker 2: So-- Speaker 1: And Father Brooks and everybody say, hey, you know, we--it's--times are changing, you know (laughter). He just broke tradition, but that's okay. So but, so I graduated and I wanted to go train. Story_ID: 99354 Speaker 1: So, what I did is that I went to Jacksonville [Florida], and I ran the stadium steps where Hank Aaron played every day. That was my training. I said, if Hank could make it, I could make it. And so, I ran the stadium steps about four times a day--ran around the stadium. Speaker 2: So you lived with your relatives in Jacksonville? Speaker 1: Yeah, I went back and when--'cause, 'cause, you know, the climate here is not like Miami [Florida]. I gotta get used to that Miami heat, man, so I went there for a week. Speaker 2: So, this is 19- Speaker 1: Seventy-two [1972]. Speaker 2: Seventy-two [1972], okay. Speaker 1: Seventy-two [1972], and, and I remember getting on a plane heading to Miami that morning. And I ran into a sister that was like one of the key, like directors at the Black Caucus. And she said, do you want to come on over to, to the beach? They're having a Democratic Convention. So, I said, yeah, let, let's go over. I, I got plenty of time. I had lost track of what I was doing. I must have lost my mind. So I get over there, and they got all kind of demonstrations, and it seem like they were burning cars and, and it was a mad house. I got in a cab, got a Cuban cab driver--I said, man, please, man, do you know where the Dolphins' training camp is? But you got to take me there (laughter). So, they take me to the Dolphins--and I'm late now-- now, I'm late. So Don Shula was pissed at me. So, I hurry up and dress and get out on the field, right? And you, you got to go to these drills, and I go through my first drill, you know. And they're tackling the first day, by the way, and I dropped the ball then. I mean, I fumbled the ball (laughter), fumbled the ball. And my coach always said, Eddie--he said the most important thing is they got to know your name (laughter), you know. Well, he learned my name the first day. That's not what I was talking about, you know, I think the coach would, would say. No, he's got to know your name for the good stuff you do (laughter). So, I decided that, you know, he would know my name for the good stuff. So, when I would run a, a particular of a running back, 'cause I told him--I said, I didn't want--I said, please, could you transfer me? I don't want to be a wide receiver behind Paul Warfield and those guys. I said-- Speaker 2: They had Paul Warfield who is something--the greatest that-- Speaker 1: Marlin Briscoe-- Speaker 2: Marlin Briscoe, the magician. Speaker 1: Howard Twilley-- Speaker 2: Howard Twilley. Speaker 1: --and, and (unclear). And I said, I said, could you just put me behind Mercury Morris, you know, Jim Kiick, Hubert Ginn, and Larry Csonka (laughter). I got a better chance with those guys. So, they transfer me to running back. And, and so, so, but, but I actually would run down the field and act real crazy--run 50 yards past the thing. And, and it kinda got me in shape, and so I remember that I played in one game, and I ran for a touchdown, and it got Shula's attention. Speaker 2: This is a pre-season game? Speaker 1: Pre-season, yeah, yeah, pre-season, a scrimmage among ourselves. And I, and then I remember once, once the veterans came back that a lot of the other guys would not study the playbook. And one thing that [College of the] Holy Cross [Worcester, Massachusetts] let me do is they let me apply myself, so I didn't make any mistakes. I would test--'cause they gave you tests. I test well. I would apply myself. And they had brought in, like fifty rookies or players, to try out--before the veterans got there. I remember--even more, I remember the day that, that happened that my roommate, who is my roommate for two weeks, would tell me every day--hey, man, I heard your coach, your coach is talking. They said, they're going to get rid of you. And this is the guy who's a veteran, but he had been playing on a number of teams. But that was kinda mean--that he would tell me every day, hey, man, I heard the coach talking about you (unclear). Well, guess what? Well, they got rid of him. And so, I didn't do know that, so he knocks on the door. He said, I just want to say goodbye. Bye--why? He said, come on outside, man--went outside. Everybody was getting in these station wagons. I said, oh, man, I said--he said, don't worry, man--you made it. I said, I made it? You made it, man. He said, isn't that ironic? Every day, I'm telling you, you're gonna, you're gonna get cut (laughter), and you, you make the team. And out of about, like I said, fifty, sixty people, only three people made it, and I was one of them. God is good-- Story_ID: 99355 Speaker 1: Now, yeah-- Speaker 2: --God is-- Speaker 1: --yeah, this is quite a-- Speaker 2: --God is good. Yeah. Speaker 1: Well, this team, a historic team, you know, went undefeated, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: The only NFL team in history to go from-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --beginning of the season to the end of the season without a defeat. Speaker 2: Right. And I tell people--not only did we go undefeated, but you know what was amazing about that run? The playoffs were not the way the playoffs are now. Home field was not determined by, by your record. Home field flipped every other year. So, we actually went on the road and, and had to win a game, even though we were undefeated. So that's, that's what was kind of an interesting about this. But we were, you know, I think, you know, I think what happens that we still played the underdog because even though we were 16 and 0 going to Super Bowl [VII], do you know the Washington Redskins were still favored? They were still favored. Speaker 1: Now, who did they have? And I forget who they, they had in those days. Speaker 2: Oh, they had, I think-- Speaker 1: Was it-- Speaker 2: --was it Kilmer? Speaker 1: Was it Billy Kilmer and that-- Speaker 2: I think Billy Kilmer. Speaker 1: --that, that, it was George Allen. Speaker 2: Yes, George Allen, it was George Allen. Speaker 1: Redskins, yeah, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Veterans, mostly veterans, grizzled guys? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. And they, and they, and they were favored. Speaker 1: Uh-hum. Speaker 2: They were favored. And, and it was just a wonderful run for me. Story_ID: 99356 Speaker 1: Let me ask you this. Here, you're playing at [College of the] Holy Cross [Worcester, Massachusetts]-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --who, and I still tend to think of it as a basketball school. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But you're playing football at Holy Cross, and then you jumped to the NFL with the Miami Dolphins. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: What--was it a, was the NFL more intense than the, than the level you were used to? You were used to playing Syracuse [University, Syracuse, New York] and these other teams, but what was the difference? Speaker 2: Do, do you know what the difference was? The difference was--I tell people all the time, I finally got me some blocking (laughter), you know, I mean, Holy Cross was horrible practicing. I got hurt more at Holy Cross running through, getting beat up, no line--cold practices up in Worcester [Massachusetts]. I mean, the NFL physical part wasn't that bad when it comes to, 'cause I got beat up. I got beat up enough. I got injured. I probably have over twelve broken bones in my body. So, college, you know, was intense in terms of the physical, but I think the, the game's speed, the preparation, not making mistakes, having your head into the game, learning what to do with free time, learning not to get involved in a lot of stupid, foolish stuff is probably the difference between the success of--college we get more distractions and the pros you have to really focus, 'cause [Don] Shula, the way he worked it, you were out on that field an hour and a half, and no more, no less. If you made a mistake, he stopped, and made you do it over. And so, you got into this perfection thing where you, you got your head into the game--focused, for an hour and a half, we're going to focus. That all I want you to do--focus for an hour and a half. And so, I want you to study. I want you to watch film. And so, this [tapping head] was beginning to take shape--not just this. I think my body just naturally developed. Story_ID: 99357 Speaker 1: Back then, we didn't lift weights, you know. This wasn't--we didn't--this lifting of weights and stuff, that's something new. I didn't start lifting weights until I went to the Buffalo Bills to play behind "Juice" [O.J. Simpson]. I couldn't believe these guys lifting weights every day. I always thought that if you lift weights during the season, that would weaken your--but, no, it's, it's the opposite. It actually makes you strong. Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: And it's a whole concept of the body. Speaker 2: I know that talk in those days was that if you over lift, you become--you're not as flexible. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: You can't, you become muscle bound, they used to say. Speaker 1: Well, that's, that's right. And so, I was kind of afraid--a lot of people afraid. The Dolph--very few people in the Dolphins ever lifted. The Bills, the Buffalo Bills--when OJ Simpson ran those 2,000 yards, they were lifting. Speaker 2: And that's just a couple of years later, right? Speaker 1: Yes, yeah. So, I mean, I didn't know. They probably were doing it all along but, you know, there are various concepts in terms of building. People were just beginning to get the training. The, the, you know, the twelve month now, it's where my son [Julian Jenkins] plays for Tampa Bay. He's training all the time. He has trainers all the time. He's always working on his body someway or another. Back then, it wasn't so. You go get a job. You play, and what am I going to do? I'm working--work on a truck, you, you know, it wasn't the, the type of a common need that you have today where you have enough security where you just go and do other things. Speaker 2: So, you were on the cusp of change in the NFL, I guess, in that regard because I know there was a time when the guys smoked cigarettes and-- Speaker 1: They still smoke-- Speaker 2: --in the locker room-- Speaker 1: --they did smoke cigarettes-- Speaker 2: --and walk-- Speaker 1: --in the locker room. And, and, and what I couldn't believe is that on Fridays, there'd be a barrel of beer and shrimp. Man, that shrimp was good (laughter), you know. And so, you know, beer is fine. I mean, you know, I, I--what? But the guys would sit there and the jock--they wouldn't even take the jocks. They would sit there and smoke cigarettes, sitting there and smoking cigarettes. And I got pictures of them smoking cigarettes, like smoking cigarettes, man--what, what is up with this? But that was the culture. Speaker 2: So even, even guys like Larry Csonka, as powerful as he--he didn't lift, he didn't, he was the only-- wasn't a weight lifter? Speaker 1: No. Word was like, he was just Polish. We thought he was a coal miner's son (laughter), you know? You know, so he was just strong. Now, very, very few people lift-- Speaker 2: So-- Speaker 1: --at least on that team. Story_ID: 99358 Speaker 1: Yeah, so they kind of--Mercury Morris probably had the fastest feet of anybody? Speaker 2: Mercury lifted--no, Mercury lifted. Mercury was, Mercury Morris was per pound the strongest man in the NFL. He, He did--I remember we had to do like--you had to do like twenty dips. You had to do like, you know, fifty pushups, you know, so on and so on. And as you're training, 'cause there's a minimum that you got to do, to get on the field. I remember them telling me--I didn't see him do it--they said that they had to tell Mercury to stop at eighty-five dips. You know how hard it is to do a dip--do one? So, imagine, with his triceps, you, you'd get hurt running into the back of his arm. I mean, he was the strongest man. I think he bench-pressed 410 pounds. He was only 180 pounds, 185 pounds. Speaker 1: Yeah, I, I remember plays where they'd knock him off balance. And somehow, he adjusted himself in the air and come back. Speaker 2: (Laughter), yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: He-- Speaker 2: Yeah, so, yeah, so he was a--I remember before the Super Bowl that week, he didn't go in. He didn't go, and a lot of guys didn't go in town 'cause we, we were in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], but we stayed right outside of L.A. And I remember him telling people later that I lifted the whole week. He had weights put into his, his room, and he was lifting. He'd go back and lift. He wanted this. We were focused, man. There was nothing that was going to turn us around. We were focused. Speaker 1: Now, you played behind--one of the guys you played behind was Paul Warfield? Speaker 2: Well, I, I was drafted behind Paul, but I never played. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But Paul was a consummate professional. I watched Paul Warfield work out. Paul Warfield actually would count the steps. It was a science to him. His movements were so detailed. He knew the spacing, and he knew how many would take to beat you on a certain pattern, and he would not waste a move. He was so smooth--he like, it was like he would glide it through the air. And he taught [Bob] Griese, in my opinion, how to throw the ball to him over the middle. You never throw the ball to the middle up--you throw it down. You throw it where it hit the ground. All they got to do is tag me. You never jeopardize my vertebrae up. You, you let me go down. And I used to see him throw that ball down, man, and poke, grab it, and just hit the ground, first down. Beautiful play, man. So, he showed me how to protect your body. Paul Warfield would throw a block and, you know, how people commit themselves? He would throw a block from the shoulder, just bump you, and just knock you off balance, 'cause he would get his feet under him, and just use the way he had, and get his leverage. He was a master player, you know, probably the--one of the best athletes that I've ever seen--master. And not only that, but he would read the Wall Street Journal. Paul could talk about business. He could talk about, you know, he was one of the few people that Bob Griese actually talked to. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He was-- Speaker 1: That's interesting. We have to-- Speaker 2: --he was very, very smart, very articulate. And he was, and he would talk to Marlin Briscoe like, 'cause Marlin was very smart--first black quarterback in the NFL, you know. Marlin has his own history. One day, you'll do Marlin's story but, you know, he's certainly someone you should talk to. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 99359 Speaker 1: We were talking about the Miami Dolphins team of '72 [1972]-- Speaker 2: Uh-hum. Speaker 1: --and some of the personalities. And one was Marlin Briscoe who was one of the first black quarterbacks in the NFL. He may have been the first, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. In fact, he has, he has a book. Speaker 1: And he, when he played with Buffalo, right, he was a Buffalo Bill? Speaker 2: Well, no, you know, the thing about it is that you gotta get this on tape. Marlin tell, told me his story a number of times. I mean, by the time I met Marlin, he was already jaded up to some extent about the league. And Marlin started out with--at the Denver Broncos. And what happened is that Charlie [sic, Steve Tensi], the quarterback, Charlie--I forget his name--had gotten hurt. Speaker 1: I know who you're talking about. Speaker 2: And Marlin, who had gone home (unclear), substituted for him. And that year, Marlin won like nine or ten games, even beating Bob Griese in, in Miami [Florida on the Miami Dolphins]. And the, and the coach [Lou Saban] at that time was a person by the name of--a real crazy man. I will remember his name in a second--'cause he end up being my coach in Buffalo [New York on the Buffalo Bills]. I, I forget his name, but anyway-- Speaker 1: Not Sid-- Speaker 2: Lou-- Speaker 1: Lou-- Speaker 2: --I, I'll remember his name. But anyway, Marlin said that one day during the off season, he actually walked into a, a department store and bought a record, and wanted to exchange the record for the same price record, and went and put the record in the bag and, and left. And the security camera, I guess, caught him. And they accused him of larceny. And it was a small amount of money, but then they found out it was Marlin Briscoe, it hit national news, like quarterback, you know, larceny. So, he said he calls the coach, and he says, coach, you got to back me on this now. I did not steal anything. He says, he said the coach said something like, you know, you're out of here, and doesn't back him. And, later, Marlin goes through his, his bag. And they cut him, by the way--Buffalo cut him. Later, Marlin--I mean, them to cut--later, Marlin goes through all his possessions. He finds the receipt. They sue, and get a big settlement. And, but the damage had already been done. Marlin couldn't get a job in the NFL--went to Canada, and was a defensive back in the Canadian Football League (laughter). And Marlin's just a great athlete. And so, he said after that, the season was over. Buffalo told him, why don't you come on up and play with us? So, he was playing defensive back with Buffalo. And he said that he would some-, sometimes sub for the wide receivers who were out of breath. And he started subbing for them, and he realized that he could catch. And in the, the next year (laughter), like being, he said it was, he said it was--he said, OJ Simpson's rookie year. He said, he actually was overshadowing OJ, 'cause he was like leading Buffalo, leading receiver, like the next year. He goes from being like the--a great, a good black quarterback to wide receiver--I mean, to defensive back in Canada, to now--he's a Buffalo as a wide receiver. And I think Ahmad Jamal (ph.) [sic, Ahmah Rashad], we think--I think, at the time, his name was Bobby Moore (laughter) or something like that, from Oregon, you know, was on the team. And J.D. Hill and--I, I think, Marlin, so, you know, ultimately, Marlin was sold--his rights were sold to Miami. That's when he came with me, but he was already jaded about his experience. Sad story, though. Marlin ended up, after the Dolphins, end up going--playing with the [New England] Patriots, and I think, he ended up coaching in Colorado. And then he went back into crack cocaine, went back into it, went through a lot of money. All of the money he had invested in that, in that house and that apartment, he told me. And I think it's in his book. He went through about $400,000 in one year--crack cocaine, end up being homeless, sleeping underneath the bridge. Sad story, but now he's kicked it. He is working in the Boys and Girls Club and outside of Los Angeles [California]. He's, he's doing very well so, but he's got a hell of a story to, to tell, and it's, it-- Speaker 1: Yeah, one of the all-time great athletes in the NFL. Speaker 2: --it's in his book-- Speaker 1: Uh-hum. Speaker 2: --it's in his book. So, you can, you can kind of read his book and, and find out more about him. But I think he'd be a great person for The HistoryMakers to talk to about, about really what he's overcome. He's got a good testimony. Story_ID: 99360 Speaker 1: And you mentioned, you know, we were talking about Paul Warfield. I just wanted to ask you--you must be reading the Wall Street Journal? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: He was a part of the Black Economic Union that Jim Brown had, had formed in Cleveland [Ohio]-- Speaker 2: I didn't know that. Speaker 1: --which included a lot of black athletes-- Speaker 2: Really? Speaker 1: Walter Beach, Kareem [Abdul-Jabbar], before he became Kareem when he was a-- Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: --Lew Alcindor. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Ali was in it. Speaker 2: I, I, I wasn't aware of that. Speaker 1: Yeah, he was part of that. Speaker 2: Paul was a very measured person in the sense that his--he, he always was very thoughtful of what he said, thought about a bit, didn't speak a lot. But everything he said to me was just, you know--I thought to be the work ethic. It was so important, you know. I was very impressed with Paul, very impressed with his work ethic, the way, the way he carried himself, and the manner in which he treated any--and he always had a word. I mean there were some people that wouldn't speak. I'm a rookie, and there's some ego tripping on, you know. People ain't got time for you. Paul always had time for you--always had a good word to say to you. Speaker 1: You, you said now, this, this must be significant. You said that's--he's one of the few people that Griese would actually talk to. Speaker 2: Well, when I say that, I mean that Griese, you know, Griese had--Griese was not a very-- Speaker 1: Bob Griese, uh? Speaker 2: --yeah, friendly person, you know. He wasn't the kind of Tom Brady leader that, c'mon, guys, let's, you know, you know, he--I, I, you know--there, there was--and Marlin Briscoe could tell you more than I could. I mean, I've seen--he showed me. And one of--I'd say, a receiver showed me pictures where, you know, he said, look, look, he's looking right at me, he's looking right at me. And, and, I'm in the end zone waving my hands, and he's not throwing me the ball. I'm not going to say who said it. I'm not going to say what the picture said 'cause I'm looking at a still picture. But there was some talk about, you know, he may not have liked certain people, or he was favorite to some. And it probably happens on every team. I mean, I, I had--I might have said two words to him in the two years I was there 'cause I was there a second year. We won the Super Bowl the second year, too. So, here I am, twenty-one years old, in the first Super Bowl--twenty-two years old when we won the second Super Bowl. Where do you go from here? Speaker 1: Now, what, what about Don Shula now? He--what, how was he as a coach? Speaker 2: He--I thought Don Shula was a very decent person who, you know, he cursed a little bit, but, but he was fair. He was smart. He could get you ready. He'd get into your head, you know, and he could get to people to get to you. I remember, I remember one time when I was a little, and I was a little distracted. And the coach thought I wasn't, you know, 'cause I wasn't playing, and he sent Larry Little to me. He said, coach said, hey, man, let's take a ride with me. Coach says you, you know, you're a little distracted, man. I think you need to like--hey, man, this is a good life here, man. Don't you like this life, you know, yeah, yeah. So, he sent Larry Little to me, man. So, so he, he knew how to get to you, you know what I mean? Speaker 1: Okay. Now Larry Little's all pro guard (unclear). Speaker 2: Yeah. Larry Little is a great guy. Speaker 1: One of the greats, you know. Speaker 2: I think heart and soul with that offensive line was Larry Little. Larry Little, you know, didn't back down for anyone. In fact, he'd beat up on me--Joe, me and Joe Green when we played, had to play Pittsburgh [Steelers] at the Super Bowl. I mean, me--me and Joe Green were big. Larry Little took him on, man, and, and was the man. Larry was just a very nice guy, Southern boy, you know, did right from the small school that he went to, Bethune-Cookman [University, Daytona Beach, Florida]--I think was cut by San Diego [Chargers], and the [Miami] Dolphins picked him up. And Larry Little had the, the biggest thighs in the entire--when you're an athlete, your thighs are the power. That's where the power center comes from. Larry had the biggest thighs, man, and it was strong. And he was fast. And so, when Larry pulled out, and you're a running back, can you imagine someone 260 running as fast as--we seen some things where Mercury Morris tried to keep up with him (laughter). I mean, I mean, Larry is running down. He's not hitting people and falling down on the ground. He's hitting them and moving--get on my hip and don't give me no lip, you know (laughter). I mean, Larry, you know, he could float like a butterfly, sting like a bee, man. He was beautiful in terms of his art work, in terms of how he blocked, and how he moved. We had a great team, [different people coming up.] Story_ID: 99361 Speaker 1: Let me ask you about this. This is something that we used to sit and talk about in the living room watching the [Miami] Dolphins play in those days. And I, I never thought I'd be able to ask anybody, but we used to watch it in the days when, when Jim Kiick and [Larry] Csonka in the back field-- Speaker 2: Uh-hum. Speaker 1: --and when they acquired Mercury Morris. We wondered--they, you know, it's always Jim Kiick, Jim Kiick. That's--Mercury Morris is better than Jim Kiick. Why don't they play? I said, they, they didn't want an all-white backfield. What is going on? Speaker 2: Well, I, I think, you see, a couple of things are going on. I'm not gonna, I'm not going to affirm or deny that statement, but I will say this. I knew Jim Kiick, and I knew his skill. And I've seen Mercury Morris's skill. And they had different skill sets. In my opinion, Jim's, Jim Kiick was the--one of the best third down guys that could catch the ball out of the backfield. Jim Kiick was one of the best guys at the goal line. He had a tremendous drive. He was a Jersey City [New York] boy, man. Jim Kiick was tough--pool player, don't take no stuff from nobody, so in his own right, Jim Kiick was good. Mercury Morris was just--had the zig and the zag. I mean, he could, he could throw a moving, just--you could break your ankle trying to watch him. And then, he'd run over you. So, they had different skills. And [Don] Shula had the ability of playing them--keeping them all at that level. I don't know how much time you're going to play. I don't know when I'm going to put you in. And if you're in that level where [Larry] Csonka is your base--do, do, he's giving it to you every time. There is no substitute for Larry Csonka. But if I can move Jim Kiick in and out of the game, what does that do to your defenses? So, they both were good. Speaker 1: Well, it was a successful formula to be sure and-- Speaker 2: But in terms of the media, of course, you know, they did "Butch and Sundance" thing with, with Larry Csonka and Jim Kiick, so they got the national play. Speaker 1: Right, yeah, yeah, that's right. They call them "Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid", right. Speaker 2: Yes, where Merc didn't get the commercials and international play, I'm sure he's a little jealous behind that 'cause he saw what he could do. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And I keep in touch with Merc to this day, man. He and I--we're on--you know, he's on my phone. I can call him right now--you could talk to him, you know. And, and he wouldn't give me the time of the day back then. Mercury Morris--I don't care, Merc, if you're listening in. Mercury Morris started giving me the time of the day after he went to jail. And he wanted to connect to me as a lawyer because he became a jailhouse lawyer. But at the time, he wouldn't give me the time of the day. But now, he appreciates what I do. And I brought him here to Boston [Massachusetts]. I had him teach, teach at Suffolk [University] Law School. So, I've him talk to my law school class because I wanted them to see at what level the love of the law can take because jailhouse lawyers are more salubrious than, than most lawyers because they memorize texts and sights, where we research them and forget about them. They internalize them as a, as though it's a Shakespeare play, and you're on stage. And that's how jailhouse lawyers, lawyers talk. Merc is a jailhouse lawyer. Speaker 1: They're trying to get out. That's-- Speaker 2: That's right. And, and he's argued before the appeals court, and he's won. So, I want my lawyer--I want to say--first of all, I let him speak. And then, I asked them--now tell me, how many years of law school has he had? How many years of experience has he had? And they say, oh, he's got to be out ten, fifteen years. He's got to be arguing before the appeals court or Supreme Court. I said, no, he learned how to do this in jail. He never went to law school. And if he can do this in jail, then look at the great opportunity you have being a free person--having a law degree can do in your advocacy ability. So, I bring him for a corporation. He came to Polaroid to speak. And last time, I took him 'cause I was, I was the host of the National Conference of Liquor Administrators. I brought Merc here to talk to corporations about, about not just, 'cause he, he went, he went against Nancy Reagan when she said, let's, you know, say no to drugs. He said, no, it's not important--just not to say no to drugs, it's important to say yes to life. So, he had a powerful message that he became--and became branded with this message. Story_ID: 99362 Speaker 1: I said, Merc, when you come to Boston [Massachusetts] to speak to Corporate America, can you go down to the Suffolk County Jail, and let's go talk to the inmates? And we took him down to the jail just this year, just last year. And he started revival in that jail. The sheriff called me--said I never seen anything like it. He starting the law library and built those people up. And he went to the addiction center. He said, you are sitting here blaming the rest of the world because your own selfish fault. You got to take responsibility for what you did, first of all, before you'll walk out of here. And you could start today. He had them on their knees. I thought the brother was--I said, man, you need to get you a church. They were crying, man. So, that's the power he has today. Speaker 2: Very intense person, I would guess. Story_ID: 99363 Speaker 1: Okay. So, well, in terms of--I was going to ask you, in terms of your own experiences of, as a football player, what's your--do you have a, a game where you actually got a chance to play and, and do-- Speaker 2: Yeah, and that's funny. You know, I--most of the time, I was a special team, team player. I remember I, I didn't really get a chance to play much until I left the [Miami] Dolphins, you know. And I became--I remember I ran for election for play representative for the New York Giants. I got traded to the Giants. I remember Ron Johnson coming up to me and saying, you know, Eddie, I was one of the few that didn't vote for you, and I didn't vote for you because I like you. And I'm like--and Ron Johnson is always a smart guy. And I'm like, what in the hell is he talking about? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So, I'm driving home, thinking about what he said. Then I forgot about it. I come the next day. Bill Arnsparger, who is my coach at the Dolphins, is now the head coach of the Giants--says, Ed, we're moving in a new direction. Speaker 1: You got go. Speaker 2: And so, we have to let you go. I got cut the next day. Now, I know what Ron Johnson was talking about. Don't get involved in union activity, brother. And, you know, I said to him, I said, if you know, I did, I, I did it for the right reason. But the NFL, as a group, needs to just put the stars out there as the union reps. Marginal people like me don't ever need to be union reps 'cause we'll--because the way they deal was get rid of us. And they just put other people in there that they can basically control. Speaker 1: So, so you were traded to the Giants in what year in-- Speaker 2: Seventy-four [1974]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was the year of the strike. They had a strike that year and I, I sat out the strike. I sat out like everyone else. And I came in late, and I remember it was a pre-season game. And I, 'cause I had demanded to be traded if I wasn't going to play. And, and I remember against Chicago [Bears]--I, you know, New Orleans [Saints], when I think I caught a touchdown pass pre-season. And then, I walked into [Don] Shula's office. He says, you got your wish. You just got traded (laughter). So, they traded me to the Giants, and I think I'm going back to New York, man. I'm home. My friends are like, wow, but, you know, the Giants are playing in the Yale Bowl, the Yale Bowl, my friend. We're training in an upstate New York--what's the name of that sunny, one of those colleges up there? Speaker 1: Sunny, okay. Speaker 2: And, and we're playing in the Yale Bowl. It was not--I mean we're getting in a bus after the game. And the bus is driving fifty yards. You're getting out, and you're walking to a locker room. And, and just one funny story about--I remember the Giants were doing bad. And I remember what's his name, the quarterback--they never liked him. Was it JC Snead [sic, Norm Snead], one of them--remember him? Speaker 1: Maybe so, yeah, I-- Speaker 2: I think JC Snead was a quarterback. And I remember "X-Ray" McQuay [Leon McQuay] was in the bus, and he was a very scary guy. He was scared of, scared of everything, but he was the fastest man in football. He may, maybe he ran a 4.2-40 [yard dash]. He was the fastest guy in the football (simultaneous). Speaker 1: "X-Ray" McQuay? Speaker 2: Yeah, he played in Canada. And it's--Leon McQuay was his name. And I remember them. His name was Norm Snead--was the guy. And I remember them shaking the bus. We want Norm--I mean, angry. We want Norm, we want Norm (laughter). And Leon McQuay got so scared. He said, he's in the other bus (laughter). I said, you would turn this other bus over? And he says--it was just so funny--that the fans can get angry, man. He's in the other bus, you know. But, you know, the Giants were a bad team, man, bad management. I liked Andy Robustelli, but he just didn't know what he was doing. So, I went from the best--and I start sliding down to the, to it, so I get cut. So, I go home and now I'm depressed, to be honest. Story_ID: 99364 Speaker 1: So what did I do? What did I think that I never got any credit for in life from ever doing anything? Remember, I told you my father [Eddie Jenkins, Sr.] always told me, you're going to go to college, and you're going to--so my--he let my brother work with his hands. My brother became an electrician. The other is, you know, a very good auto, you know. I never learned how to work with my hands. My father told me, I couldn't pound a nail. So, what did I do--I put together a bookcase, and I just got the wood, and started to screw it in. And I remember my father say, when you move from that house, he couldn't--it took him a week to tear that bookcase down because I wanted to build something. I wanted to do something constructive. And so, I built the bookcase, and put all my books from [College of the] Holy Cross [Worcester, Massachusetts] in there. I said, I'm going to go to law school. Forget about this--this is crazy. Well, I get a call from this guy. Oh, the person's name was Lou Saban that cut Marlin Briscoe. Speaker 2: Oh, Lou Saban, right, right. Speaker 1: So, I get a call from--my, my dad said, hey, someone from Buffalo is on the phone. So, the guy says, hey, this is Lou Saban--says, I want you to come to Buffalo [New York] to run behind "The Juice". I said, you mean, O.J. Simpson? You're coming to run behind "The Juice"--do you want to come? I said, I'll be up there tomorrow. So, I drove. A friend of mine--it was a bad, it was, the economy was bad. And a friend of mine, he was working for UPS, and he was out of work. He was a manager. He was pumping gas. I rode into the gas station in my 240Z and I say, I say, hey, Dickie (ph.), how much you making here a day? Man, I'm doing about, you know, $25. I said, I'm glad you told me that. I said, how about I pay you a $100 just to drive me to Buffalo? We're going to Buffalo, man? So, he was so happy, he's about (unclear). Man, he went home, took him fifteen minutes to pack, and he drove me to Buffalo. We get there the next day through a snowstorm and everything, man. So, we end up in Buffalo. And I end up meeting OJ Simpson. I remember the first weekend after we play. He got us in the game. Muhammad Ali was fighting one of the Joe Frazier matches. And we went to this club called Mulligan's. And, and I got to get to know "The Juice" a little bit. So, I end up staying there. And I told you about the union activity that O.J. got involved in, and he was a union buster, you know. We knew he was married to Hertz and he was a corporate guy, but I didn't think he walked into an actual union meeting and say, don't join the union. And I told him, I said, you know, what, man, that's good for you. But for the guys like me, I need the union. And so, someone said to me, said, man, you shouldn't have said that to him. And I was like, yeah, maybe I shouldn't have (laughter), but, you know, I was telling him the truth, man. He--it wasn't, it wasn't fair. How does he stand up in a union meeting that he shouldn't even be in the room and tell people not to join the union? I, I didn't get that. That's how much power he had. I saw him yell at Coach Saban. Coach Saban was yelling at, at Bobby Ferguson. And this is just to go to show you how things have changed and how some athletes, and OJ was above the game. Speaker 2: Oh, this is Bob Ferguson that's played Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio] years ago as a start-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: --who played with [Paul] Warfield? Speaker 1: That's right. So, so, no Joe Ferguson, no, their quarterback. Speaker 2: Oh, oh, Joe Ferguson? Speaker 1: Joe Ferguson. Speaker 2: Joe Ferguson, okay. Speaker 1: No, Joe Ferguson. So, so he was yelling at Joe Ferguson--do this, do that, do this, do that. And I remember "Juice" turning around in a huddle and saying, Lou, shut the hell up! My jaw dropped. Can you imagine me saying that to Don Shula? And Lou shut up (laughter), you know. And, and "Juice" kept doing what he was doing, you know. It was a crazy place. I mean, Lou Saban walked through on Fridays, instead of like getting the, the, you know, the shrimp in Miami [Florida]--we had the shrimp and the, and the beer--and, and Buffalo was chicken--it was Kentucky Fried Chicken. They have a box of chicken or whatever, and he's eating chicken, right? 'Cause, 'cause after practice every day, he, you had, you either had to play basketball, play racquet ball--I think they had a pool, or you were invited to play 500 Rummy with the coach. Five hundred Rummy with the coach? And "Juice" was sitting there playing 500 Rummy every day, but Lou Saban--they sitting there playing Rummy. I never heard of anything like this. Your head coach playing Rummy with a player? I said okay. So, you know, so, so it was just a strange, strange place. So, so he would--Lou Saban would come, and we was eating some chicken. He say, "Juice", I need you to gain 150 yards--give me three touchdowns. Ahmad Rashd, I, I need two touchdowns. I had never heard a coach tell someone the--exactly what they needed, where they can measure that, you know? That was deep, man. I said, if you could pull this one off, you bad boy, you know, but he's telling you what you need. So, everyone had their own different coaching styles. But anyway, I remember we're playing against the [Miami] Dolphins. I went to, to knock either Jake Scott or Dick Anderson, you know, in on a kick return. And, and as a result, they got by me. And he, and he, and, and so the next week, he's looking at the film. He stops the film, turns around--Ed Jenkins, I don't believe you let me down against your old team, you know, (laughter). And within a week, I was gone to the Patriots--ended my career with New England. Story_ID: 99365 Speaker 1: And, you know, I decided that they [New England Patriots] weren't playing me that much. Actually, what they did do--people don't know this--is that they released me. And I ended up going--being picked by the Green Bay Packers. I don't tell people this. Everyone might think the Patriots was my last stop. But in that one year, I played on three teams. The next year, I was going to play on another one. And so, I ended up going--they had a guy by the name of Bart Starr who's the, who is the-- Speaker 2: Yeah, he's the-- Speaker 1: --former quarterback under (unclear). Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, the first mistake I made was that--and no one told me this--that when Bart Starr raises his arms like this, you're supposed to run to him and take a knee, like Vince Lombardi did. I didn't know that. And I'm back there talking to someone else, you know. And so, he didn't like that. But it wasn't my fault--I didn't know. But he was a non-, most non-communicative coach I've ever seen in my life. And he just didn't have it. And as a result, they, they bumped him, but may, he might have been a great quarterback in his day, but he's just a terrible coach. So then, I walked up to him one day, and I said you know what? I'm not playing that much, and if I'm not playing that much, you know, I have a great, a great chance of going to law school. It starts on Monday--this is a Friday conversation. I said, why don't you let me know now--whether you think I'm going to make this team? And we had one more pre-season game left. He says, well, maybe you need to go to law school. I said, well, maybe I do. And I said--and he said, thank you, I appreciate your honesty. I got on that plane and left--went past Oshkosh [Wisconsin], you know-- Speaker 2: B'gosh-- Speaker 1: --which is Green Bay, Oshkosh. I didn't even know if it was a Oshkosh. And I, and I finished football on Friday. I started law school on Monday. Speaker 2: And where, where did you go to law school? Speaker 1: Suffolk [University] Law School [Boston, Massachusetts]. Speaker 2: Is this here in--it's in New York. Speaker 1: Yeah, it's here in Boston. Speaker 2: Okay, in Boston, okay. Speaker 1: It's about maybe a half--it's right, right near the state. It's about, about maybe half a mile from here, about ten blocks. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. So, this is 1975 or-- Speaker 1: Seventy-five [1975], yes. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. Story_ID: 99366 Speaker 1: So, well, how did you like law school? Speaker 2: Well, you know, after three years of no, of not, you know, reading--to be honest, I couldn't read. I couldn't read at that level. To be honest, I couldn't read. You know, that was the biggest part. So, but just to get the energy back, I went and bought a motorcycle (laughter). I'd ride my motorcycle into the law school, and I had these Buffalo, this Buffalo Bill jacket with the fringes flying up and, you know. And so, when I walked in, they think--who in the hell is this? It's, you know, a Buffalo Bill (laughter), you know? But I got in there, and I went into this program and worked with this one professor. And she had myself, and this other gentleman who's a dean, who was a dean, and the other gentleman was a judge. And she had these three blacks. And we all had the same problem of not comprehending, and not being able to research at that particular effective level. And I went from not really being able to read that well to being the best oral advocate that year. I won the competition, the moot court, and then I finished third overall in the whole school. Speaker 1: So, you just really just got--the whole NFL experience just kind of took you out of the reading mode then? Speaker 2: Yeah, you know. I, I told my son--I said, Julian [Jenkins], I said, you know, you, you're right now at Tampa Bay [Buccaneers]. But I said, you, you were going to take the LSAT last year. You didn't get around to it. Take it now because every year, you get dumber and dumber (laughter), you know, in terms of your ability to be at a test. You really do. It doesn't help you that many years out of school. So, those years out of school, it was very difficult to come back and read and write. Remember, I was an English major, but, but legal writing is the opposite of, of literary writing, where words are fancy. No, you want less words with more meaning in literary writing, you know. You want less substance and more reading-- Speaker 1: In the legal stuff, yeah. Speaker 2: --and more, more meaning in, in legal writing. And so, it's the complete opposite of literary writing, so I had to learn how to write, too. Speaker 1: Okay. So, did you concentrate on any particular kind of law? Speaker 2: I think that it, you know, I got a general feeling for the law. And then, I, you know, I will always see myself as an advocate. In fact, when I went to, to St. Francis Prep [St. Francis Preparatory School], I wrote. And someone always reminds me of this essay I wrote, in saying that I wanted to be a professional football player and a, and a lawyer (laughter). And so, here I was entering law school, and 'cause it was always one of my dreams. And, you know, so when I finished law school, there were no jobs available here in Boston. It was bad. Speaker 1: Now this is what--'7-? Speaker 2: Seventy-eight [1978]. Speaker 1: Seventy-eight [1978]. Speaker 2: It's [President Jimmy] Carter--it's, you know, it's a bad time. And it was the years we had the--remember, we had the gas crisis (laughter), you know. It was a bad time. And so, I went and interviewed, 'cause I had worked with the [U.S.] Department of Labor during the summer. And they actually had a job in Washington, D.C., representing miners, the rights of miners, so I worked for this, this company. It's called MSHA, Mine Safety and Health Administration. And then, they had just come up with this new Congress--come with this, with this new act, where they wanted to, basically, you know, help, help miners. And this, this one test case that I actually handled was one of the first test cases. And see what, what I would do is I would go out to Appalachia at least every other week--Beckley, West Virginia; Pikeville, Kentucky--those were my areas. And, and I would go and try cases there. And so, one case, I tried a case with a person by the name of Kenneth Yablonski. Kenneth Yablonski's father was with the United Mine Workers, and he had gotten killed. And Ken had become a lawyer. And Ken and myself tried this case called the David Pasula case [David Pasula v. Consolidation Coal Company]. It was one of the first case in, cases in mining history that really challenged Consolidated [sic, Consolidation] Coal Company, one of these mining companies. And it, and we actually went down in a mine. In fact, a little funny story-- Story_ID: 99367 Speaker 1: All right, okay, yeah. Well, tell us about this case, this case. Was it-- Speaker 2: So, so what happened is that there was a miner who--a continuous miner is a machine that has about ten arms. And it, it mines this, the roof, and the size of a coal mine. And it makes this screeching noise, you know, it's like taking chalk--imagine taking chalk on a blackboard, and making that ten times that force. Well, anything over 96 dBA is permanent hearing loss. Club music is played at about 120, 110. So, imagine, your iPod is played at about 1-, 105. That's why these kids are not hearing anything anymore. That siren going by--that siren might be about 95. So, what, what I want to do is go there, meet the miners, and develop the case. So, I go there on a Friday--get your--little Washington is a little town outside of Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania]. So, you get on a train. It's like a country train and it's beautiful when you get on there. It starts getting dark. They let you off. You're like on the--it's like the Wild West on the side of the road, and all you look around, you see is a bar. He say, well, let, let me walk down to this bar down the hill, and ask some of these people. So, you go in the bar--you remember Eddie Murphy, "48 Hrs.", remember how he walks in, into that bar? That's the way I felt--black man walks to this bar. All the music stops--everybody looking at me. So I tell them--I said, I am looking for the union hall. They say it's in the back, it's the back of the bar. So, they--I go in this, I walk in there. Now, I see walking there is about 150 white males, a couple of females. And I said, my name is Eddie Jenkins. I am--Dave Pasula and your union lawyer. These guys started laughing--oh, you're our lawyer? Now, I know we going to lose this case. And they just start laughing at me, man. So I said, guys--I left my card--I say, I'm staying at the hotel. I, I left--I was pissed. So, I'm going back, man, heading towards the train station, and they come running over. Do you remember "In the Heat of the Night" when Sidney Poitier (unclear)-- Speaker 1: Mr. Tibbs and kind of giving-- Speaker 2: Yeah. So, they said, c'mon, man. You, you say, you know, you take yourself too serious, you know. You got to come on back, man. So, so I said okay, so I go back. And they say, come here, you got to have a drink--a drink before the meeting? We're going to have a drink, man. So, I said, okay, give me a Heineken. Awww, man, you could hear a pin drop--Molson's. Okay, give me a Molson's 'cause, you know, in Pennsylvania, it's drink Molson's, you know. So, they were more concerned about me not drinking Heineken, you know. I deal with this, you know, foreign company that Molson's--where you have a Pennsylvania company, so I drank Molson's. And so, we build up a strategy that I would go into the mines. We would take tests, and then I would go and find an audiologist who would testify about what it means. And that's what we did. I've never been in the mine before--went about seven miles below the ground. And I don't care how many times you wash afterwards--you got, you're going to have coal dust in your nose, your ears for days. And that's just down there for about three hours. Can you imagine what these people go through? And they didn't even have these, the--well, all we were asking for is to give them something to put over their ears, so they could either--they didn't want to do that. And so, we tried the case. Ken Yablonski [Kenneth Yablonski] and myself tried the case in Federal Court and won. And at that time, it was the biggest case in mining. I didn't know at the time. And I got called by high-level people at the Department of Labor. And they took me down over to the main office and congratulated me, so on and so on. I didn't get a good case after that for the next two years. Story_ID: 99368 Speaker 1: I still went to Appalachia, and I still tried cases, but see, that wasn't a good case. You have to make it what it is. In fact, when we had breakfast one time with Johnnie Cochran--we had some business with Johnnie, Johnnie came to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. I was president of the Mass. Black Lawyers [Massachusetts Black Lawyers Association]. And Johnnie said something very, very important. He says, you know, a lot of people look at me and they say, look at Johnnie Cochran. He's one of the best black lawyers, or one of the best lawyers in America. Isn't, isn't that great that he has, has this, this, this great case that he won? He says, he says, let me tell you about this. He says, what most of you don't know is that I was a former prosecutor, and now a public defendant, and that, you know, I've had some losses, too. But the most important thing that you have to know is that I had an opportunity, and I took advantage of that opportunity, and so will you. And it's that opportunity, it's having that particular seed of discontent, or seed of a disadvantage that when you, in fact, overcome that, it makes you greater. It makes you stronger, and that's what I did. And, and it was very remarkable that he was--it's very humbly stated, 'cause we all, in our lives, have at some point an opportunity. Most times, we don't recognize it, but I, I just thought that, that was very great. I mean, at that time, I, I didn't think the Pasula case [David Pasula v. Consolidation Coal Company] was that big. Apparently, they didn't either. That's why they gave--why would they give it to me--not having ever tried a case in my life, give it to me? Did they think it was a loser? But they didn't think much of it at all, but we made it big. You make it big, you know so-- Speaker 2: So, what year was that case adjudicated? Speaker 1: It was in probably 1979. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause I only worked there [U.S. Department of Labor] two years. Story_ID: 99369 Speaker 1: And then, I was called back. Some people, you know, 'cause I was constantly sending resumes around trying to really get into the trial court 'cause that's administrative law. I wanted to be a trial lawyer. So, the Middlesex District Attorney called me back to be a district attorney, assistant district attorney in the priority prosecution unit. And so, I ended up prosecuting cases in the--over the next four years trying over a hundred jury trials from assault with intent to murder, to rape, to gaming cases. And so, I had a lot of variety of difference cases I tried. Speaker 2: So, you were in Middlesex [County, Massachusetts], you said? Speaker 1: Middlesex, yes. Speaker 2: Middlesex-- Speaker 1: Middlesex District Attorney's office. Speaker 2: Okay. (Unclear), okay. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: Were there any particular cases that stands out that you-- Speaker 1: Yeah, I think the--probably my most famous case was the case where a Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], third-year Harvard student, was raped by a black man who had, had a life sentence. And he had been paroled. And he got out, and he had married a woman who had been coming up to the jail for years. And he now had a great career. He was a welder. The guy had everything going for himself, but he couldn't control himself. He was walking through Harvard Square. And, you know, how some of these people are not mindful of some of the things they do? Well, this particular woman--she was leaving her, her drapes open. And she was, she had, she, she was putting this cream on herself, you know, and, and she'd do this more than one time. She'd do it every day on the same time--put cream on. She had the windows open, so forth and so on. It was like to the back of the house. Well, this guy was always walking--looking for opportunities. So, he sees her--knows what time she does this. And he climbs in another window and drops his tools. And the, the roommate hears him. And they didn't think anything of it because he knocks the glass off--oh, I know what it was. It was a whiskey glass holding it up. He knocks it over and it breaks. And he sweeps it up, so the roommate hears this (unclear) and say, oh, this, you know, must have been someone in, in (unclear). So, then he proceeds to walk in there, and walks into this bedroom of this woman. And she's butt-naked in the room. And he said to her, did you call the police? And he said--and she said, no, I didn't. He says, well, you're a dumb so and so, and commences to raping her. So, before he could penetrate her, she said, you know, you know, I don't want to have any children. Just let me, let me just get a condom for you. So he says okay. He's laying upon the bed, you know (laughter). And she goes to the dresser, and she darts out of, in the room. And then, her roommate comes out, hears this. And so, she said the roommate comes out, and this black man has grabbed her now. He got a knife to her, you know, her throat. And so, the roommate comes out and looks. She says, stupid, don't just stand there calmly, you know, something like that. And so, the roommate runs. He releases her. He actually gets in the room, puts on all of his clothes, and gets away. Within three minutes, the police said they got there in three minutes--gets away. So, finally, he runs down. The police is looking for him--they don't find him. So, the guys, let me just check this one car--looks into the car, sees him. He says--they said, don't move. Well, anyway, so, the DA [district attorney] calls me and says, I'm going to give you this case. Story_ID: 99370 Speaker 1: But then, about two, three months later, he calls me and says, I'm thinking about changing you from this case. I say, why? He says, her parents are Mormons, and they don't know, you know, they heard about you. But, you know, they don't know if you're going to win this case, and the guy being black, and your being black and, you know, he got a black lawyer and (laughter). I'm like, ohh, oh, my God, you know. So, and the black lawyer is a famous black lawyer, one of the most famous black lawyers in this town, and a good friend of Johnnie Cochran's. His name is Henry Owens, Henry Owens. And so, I'm going up against Henry Owens. And so, we tried this case. And the guy came up with a good excuse--said he met the woman in the supermarket. And, you know, he said that she invited him back and, you know, and they were back in the room. They were having sex, and they had sex, and all of a sudden, he said that he had to go home to his wife. She said, wife--you got a wife? And she gets all mad. And then, you know, he thought that, you know, that he ran because he thought that society wouldn't understand it, 'cause here he is an ex-con, and, you know, they wouldn't understand. So I, so I went through the whole thing with him on cross-examination. I said, you know, I said, you know, the roommate didn't understand you 'cause you were staying out with her roommate. You were naked, right? Yes. And you said you ran because you figured the police wouldn't understand you because you, in fact, are ex-con. That's right. And I said, so, tell me something--how do you understand this? I took the panties that he had taken from her, and put them in his pocket. How do you understand that? I threw the panties down and the panties slid along the counter--had came up to his tie. And the lawyer jumped on him, and he said, hey, man, you didn't have to throw the panties around his neck (laughter). But anyway, I think that was a great cross. And anyway, he got convicted. And the judge sentenced him to this crazy sentence--something like sixty-five years from and after the life sentence that he didn't even have to do. He died in jail at about two or three years later. I saw Henry Owens. I say, Henry, hi, buddy. He said, my client died in jail. He said, you sent him to a life sentence--he was in jail. So, it was those kind of cases that I think that I appreciate the opportunity having tried. Story_ID: 99371 Speaker 1: You know, and so, what happened was, I went and worked for a law firm for two years. And then in 1989, an interesting thing happened, and you could look at the papers and follow this stuff. This makes it very interesting. A white woman [Carol Stuart] was, was shot and killed in the Brigham and Women's [Hospital] area of Boston [Massachusetts] as she was going to, to either have a sonogram, or I think she was going to a Lamaze class, or something like that. She was with her husband, and the husband said that it was a black male who tried to rob them. Speaker 2: This is Charles Stuart case, yeah. Speaker 1: And I remember I was married at the time. My wife said--and we were coming down--we saw the ambulance coming by, 'cause we lived in that area. We said, what, what, and we found out that it was--so, and the police for at least ten days went through the black community--was kicking down doors like the Gestapo, looking for this guy. Speaker 2: That medium size black man with a medium build-- Speaker 1: You got it-- Speaker 2: --medium hair, medium-- Speaker 1: --you got it, you got it. Speaker 2: Yeah, that could be anybody. Speaker 1: And, and I had, and I had felt, and others had felt--criminologists had felt that always look at the husband first, but they didn't. And, finally, when they started focusing on the husband--because what happened is that the brother [Matthew Stuart] had told his girlfriend what his brother had said--that he, in fact, had killed his wife. That, based upon that case, I said that our community could take no more. And the district attorney in this case, besides Charles Stuart, has really--is incompetent. And I ran against Charles Stuart. And it was the first time a black man has ever run for district attorney in the entire Commonwealth of Massachusetts. So, I ran in 1990 against Newman Flanagan, and you have to see some of the notes there. And to be honest, Newman had $650,000, and I raised about $40,000. And I didn't get the majority of the black community behind me, you know--first, our community is lethargic. Secondly, they didn't know me. I was an unknown quantity, and didn't get much press. And so, they kind of suppressed the race. I did get a couple of nice articles, but I attacked Newman's record. We researched to attack his record--show how, in cases of rape, how he allows probable cause hearings, how he allows some of these drug cases to be dismissed, and so forth and so on. Any civil rights case against police officers, he doesn't take up. They always find that there is no probable cause. And so, I, I ran against him, ran against his record. And a lot of people were, were angry at me. When you, when you call an Irish politician in this, in this town incompetent, they say, Eddie, you'll never work in this town again. Well, I, I don't care. I ran for office, and only with maybe 20 to 25 [thousand dollars], even as much as 40,000 [dollars]. I doubt it, but we got almost 40 percent of the vote, first time running. And what happened was that we damaged, you know, him so much that he decided not to run the second time. And they, they, you know, it's the Peter Principle. They elected him head of the National District Attorneys Association. Story_ID: 99372 Speaker 1: So then, it came time for the governor to appoint successor. And I thought that I would be the most natural person to be appointed. A lot of people also felt that way. Governor [William] Weld was the governor at the time. And I got a call from this person, who I knew in law school, named Ralph Martin. And Ralph said to me, Eddie, I'm throwing my hat in for district attorney. I said, you? I said, who knows you? What have you ever done? You know, 'cause Ralph--no one knew him. And he had, you know, basically, didn't--hadn't done anything, you know. And, see, he said, yeah, I'm, I'm running. So, as we got closer to this thing, I realized that Ralph had the inside track on the job, so he gets the job. I'm out of a job. I'm out of my time, but I support Ralph. He's a Republican. See, the whole thing was that, I guess, you had to be a Republican--say you're going to be a Republican. I wasn't going to be a Republican. So, even though Ralph was relatively unknown, Ralph came into office. And Ralph Martin did an outstanding job as district attorney. He was credited with being part of the Massachusetts Miracle. He's a professional and very nice. I know his wife, Debbie, you know, met his family. And Ralph ended up coaching with me last year. We--I coach, I'm a volunteer coach in this program called "No Books, No Balls". In other words, you have to--to come to this program, kids gotta bring their report cards. We have to go through tutorials until they can play in this basketball league. And Ralph, I was one of Ralph's coaches last year. So, we kinda, you know, came back full circle, and ended up being, you know, friends and working together. But he did an outstanding job, but he took me out of my time. Story_ID: 99373 Speaker 1: So, rather than that, I ran for city, I ran for [Boston] City Council citywide. And I made the final eight, but it wasn't enough. There was a year when some of the best were running and, and I didn't make it. And that time, you had no blacks on the city-, citywide, citywide. There were only, only two that ever, ever won in our history. And so, during that whole period, I didn't win, but I continued doing public service. I was the president of the Multicultural AIDS Coalition because of the--AIDS had spread through our community. And that was probably from 1995 to 2001. You know, I did--I was, believe or not, the youth pastor in my church. New Covenant [Christian Church] was the largest black church in New England under Bishop Gilbert Thompson, so I taught Sunday School and did youth, youth pastorship. Speaker 2: This is a Baptist church or-- Speaker 1: It's non-denominational-- Speaker 2: No? Speaker 1: --non-denominational. Speaker 2: No, non-denominational, okay, New Covenant Church. Speaker 1: But it's one of the best teaching ministries on, on the planet. Bishop Thompson is worldwide--he's world, world-known. And so, I continued working out in, in our community, on the Mainstreets Board. And now, I'm putting a, donating a lot of my time because I had gotten into too many boards, you know. I was on Healthy Boston, Healthy Baby. That's dealing with, you know, prenatal, all the prenatal things in terms of death. Then so, I'm the chairman of Urban Edge. Urban Edge is the largest non-profit housing corporation in, in New England. We're involved in several multimillion projects. One right now is--I can give you a copy of it--is developing 230 units of residential housing. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. Speaker 1: So, I'm the chairman of the Urban Edge, which is doing a lot of non-profit housing development into the minority areas of Jamaica Plain, Roxbury, mostly. And we are developed, as a result of stopping 95, 'cause people are trying to put 95 through the black community. And when they stop that development, those communities that would have been wiped out were developing, Roxbury and Jamaica Plain, mainly. And so, I'm the chairman, and we have, over the next seven years, have the largest non-profit development in New England. So, we have--it's, it's a collaboration of, not only community people, but the city and the state government as well. So, it's a major project that we're working on. So, that's the kind of volunteer work I'm doing. I'm also teaching--as you probably know, I teach at Suffolk Law School [Boston, Massachusetts]--been teaching for ten years. I teach a pre-, a pre-trial litigation course. And that's very rewarding, 'cause I get a chance to mentor many of the students and, and new lawyers that are going to be developing. And that's where I am then. Story_ID: 99374 Speaker 1: Yes, tell us about what you're doing now, this-- Speaker 2: All right. I am the chairman of the [Massachusetts] Alcoholic Beverage Control Commission. I, as the chair, I have total administrative responsibility for the entire state for licensing and enforcement--enforcement like service to underage, service to intoxicateds, if there are drugs, prostitution, or gambling in any particular establishment, meaning bars, restaurants. We license every airport, every train, every boat that is in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. So, it's a job that I took on, having campaigned in the same kind of areas that the treasurer campaigned in. What happens is that they, they became a political problem in this state where the governor, at that time, who's running for president, Mitt Romney, attempted to dismantle this agency, saying that it can run without so much enforcement. What happened is industry leaders came to the legislature and says, you can never let that happen. We will be back at the time for prohibition, and they were never going to let this happen. And so, the legislature actually took this agency from the governor, and gave it to the treasurer. And so, the treasurer wanted to have someone who he believed was not subject to a lot of political swaying persuasion--an outsider. He knows that I've run for district attorney somewhere, and I, I wanted to serve the many years. He gave me this opportunity to serve. I have at least twelve investigators and about eight licensing personnel. I do prevention work, ecologists, we also-- Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION). Speaker 2: Okay, all right. I'll pick up where we left off. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: But-- Speaker 1: And so, I sit as administrator law judge and actually have--I've written, over the last three years, probably over a hundred opinions in licensing decisions. So, it's, it's, it gives me that kind of quasi-judicial kind of experience that has probably prepared me for my next, my next role. Speaker 2: Is there an interesting case here that you want to discuss with us that-- Speaker 1: There, there have been numbers of cases, mostly tragic, where people have gotten--been overserved and gotten into car accidents. So, when you get to my level, it doesn't get interesting--it gets tragic, unfortunately. We do, we do cases from people who are having various problems in strip bars to, you know, everyday situations. But when you deal alcohol, it's, it's a very volatile substance, and not too many nice things happen when they get to my level. It's mostly tragic-- Speaker 2: Okay, okay. Speaker 1: --mostly tragic. Story_ID: 99375 Speaker 1: All right. Well, so, so what, what are your future plans? What would you like to do? Speaker 2: I think that, I think that I'm getting ready to fit another type of role, you know, where a real judicial role--I think that, that's where I'm headed. I talked to the governor about it, and we'll see what happens in the future. Speaker 1: Okay. Your new governor here-- Speaker 2: Deval Patrick [HM]. Speaker 1: Deval Patrick, right. Do, do you know him very well? Speaker 2: Well, you know, I campaigned for him, led him through parades, you know, just door knocked for him, you know. If you lived in Massachusetts over the years that I've lived here, you owed it to yourself to do the best you could--to put a man who has his type of qualities in office. It was a treat to work for this campaign. I had never seen a grassroot campaign like it. I think, in all due respect, to Barack Obama [HM]--and the two of them know one another. They both went to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. I think that the blueprint for grassroots campaigning was established nationally in Massachusetts. When you take a man who started in the hick towns of Pittsfield, Massachusetts and Greenfield, and these, these places that are almost rural America, and have town meetings, and no one takes him serious. And he is by far off the radar screen, and he can run a grassroot campaign of taking small contributions for over a year and a half, build himself up--the delegate count to almost shut out the front runner, at the National--I mean, at the State Convention, and then beat them all, beat all the, the people who are favorites in the primary, and then trounce the Republican candidate. And after all the negative campaigning, I don't know if you heard about all the negative campaigning because he, he once, as a civil rights lawyer, tried to help someone out that was, in fact, incarcerated wrongly. He just tried to get the DNA test, and they trounced him as being a person who just loves criminals. And, and they uncovered the fact that his sister's husband had, had a domestic violence case, and trounced and, and just stepped all over that family's privacy rights. I mean, they really pulled everything to destroy him personally as a man. And for him to, to not be negative--I mean he had the mind of Christ, and it's rare that you see that. People talk about it. You read in the books. I've never seen it happen, I never seen it happen. And that for his fair-mindedness, for his optimism, for his hope, people pulled the ballot. We gave them a ballot, and overwhelmingly, support him and says, you know, we want a new direction for this country, and we think that color is irrelevant. That's amazing, that's amazing. And, and people don't even really know the story outside of Massachusetts. It's just so improbable that it would happen in this place where they had busing. His--this place where athletes refuse to come because of the perception of racism--that you would have a black governor with, with a person not denying his blackness, that's amazing. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Story_ID: 99376 Speaker 1: All right. My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. We're--today is September 11th, 2007. And we're continuing the interview we started last April--I believe, right. And, we had, we had just finished talking about the Deval Patrick [HM] campaign. And I want to ask you about Urban Edge. Now, what, what is Urban Edge and-- Speaker 2: Urban Edge is a non-profit housing corporation that is developed to really allow low-income people the ability to develop within a community and have a stake--hopefully towards ownership. We both manage and develop rental property, but we also develop property towards low-income purchase. And so, we are probably the largest, or one of the largest, non-profit corporations in New England that is about the mission of maintaining a certain amount of security for people within the communities where in Boston [Massachusetts], as you know, has probably one of the highest rental areas. And also, it's probably per capita, one of the highest areas--I mean, for home purchase. So, we're trying to develop a place where we get subsidies from the Federal government and the state, and develop with the ability of people to own and control their own communities. And we're, we--this corporation started about thirty years ago. I'm the chairman. Interesting story is that I began my relationship with Urban Edge by trying to stop it from coming into my community. And the reason why I did this is because they were trying to bring in the Pine Street Inn, into community as a partner. And Pine Street, if you don't know, is probably the largest homeless shelter in New England, out of Boston. And your, your first inclination is not on my street. And then, I thought about it, and I said, you know, that's, that's basically wrong. So, I tried to have some openness about it. And they said, you know, why don't you go down and look at some of the things that Pine Street does? And then, I got educated about homelessness. I mean, that we all think about homelessness as ground zero in terms of psychology, ground zero in terms of wealth, and, you know, ground zero maybe in terms of intelligence. And, and we, we could be less far from the truth. On any given date, at any given time, the perfect storm of the--some things happened in your life psychologically, the perfect storm of, of having a bad financial situation can occur and career-wise. And they could all intersect at a certain time where you just lose it. You just don't know how--you just don't have the ability of taking care of yourself. And, and I found that by going to the shelter, there were many people. Some people were Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] professors. Well, you know, it's, it's a series of rebuilding and steps that you take. That first step is just get, getting off the street, getting a place to stay, getting a subsidy of some food and some clothing. There are many, many more steps that people would take in rehabilitating himself with some help. Give a person an opportunity. Give them a chance to rehabilitate themselves and, most times, they will. And that's what Pine Street did. So they have various other levels, and they were trying to build some transitional housing within my block. And I (unclear) them until I understood really what we were talking about. I saw some transitional housing that I would want to live in. They were taking schools, remodeling them, and making them apartments. People that you met--everyone had a story, and their story was very positive. I mean, it, it had a happy ending. And you don't meet people like that, that said how I came over. I mean, we hear it in spirituals all the time, but to actually see a person talk about how they got over with God's help, and with the help of some people who really care about them. And I thought to myself, how selfish could I have been from the very beginning to stop this project? And as a result of feeling bad about it, I said, well, you know, how can I help you? And so, they said, why don't you become a board member? So, I became a board member, and for three years, continually working with, with them doing this type of non-profit development of ensuring that our people get a chance to, to really get a break in life and get, and get some quality housing. They raised me up to ask me to be their chairman. So, you know, four years ago, I was the protester, and now I'm the insider. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so, that's what we do right now. Story_ID: 99377 Speaker 1: Now, is--does Boston, is there a lot of predatory lending going on in Boston [Massachusetts]? Speaker 2: Yes, there is, and 'cause we [Urban Edge] were subject to predatory lending, and we'd gone through phases where the Fleet Bank [Fleek Bank Financial] and the Bank of America were some of the, you know, banks that were doing a lot of predatory lending. And, and we worked out certain consent agreements and agreements where they would, in fact, you know, give some forgiveness and some forbearance. And some, in some situations, the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] got really involved with them about ten years ago. And we continually work with, with these major banks because when people think about predatory lending, they think about some of the smaller banks. But when you think about that the fact that we don't have access to credit that very often, even the larger banks sometimes, you may not label them as predatory lenders. But certainly, we don't get the preferred terms. But this whole thing about inclusion, about getting more people involved, certainly made us jump at the first time that there was a ten percent, twelve percent, knowing that a person didn't have the ability to really sustain themselves. And the predatory lenders, in terms of feeding the economy and giving the points, basically made a lot of loans to a lot of people who really had no ability to really maintain the property. They didn't have a history. They didn't have--understand account--you know, so basic accounting principles--how to save money, you know, how to take care of the property, how to take care of the taxes. As a result, it became that cycle. They were losing this property, and so, we do an educational project. Now, the Bank of Boston, or we call a Bank of America, these are now our partners in trying to prevent predatory lending. So, we do have a relationship with some of the banks in Boston that are assisting us in doing this. Story_ID: 99378 Speaker 1: Now, there's a--you mentioned er-- off-camera there's a large project at Jackson Square that-- Speaker 2: Yes, we, we have probably the--one of the largest non-profit housing developments with, with a partnership, with JP [Morgan] in [Washington] D.C. And we're trying to put together approximately 300 units of, of mixed, affordable and, and market housing. We're trying to put together a, a really, a family resource center that, that will be available for people to come, and to--for further education, and learning and, and counseling. We're even going to put together a, believe it or not, a hockey rink. I know when they first proposed it, I said, what is this--something like a Jamaican bobsled thing where you're trying to get all these African American kids at the ice skating? Well, you know what? That's an idea because when you take some of theirs, and mix it with some of ours, very often, when you get that combination, that partnership, and that exchange, culture exchange, they learn, learn a little bit about us, and guess what? We learn a little bit about them, and we, and we realize that these barriers that we set that black African Americans and Latinos can't ice skate--these are false barriers. We actually can ice skate and we're going to be very good. We're in, we're in that National Hockey League, and so forth and so on. And then they have to come into our community to skate--breaks down the barriers of them fearing coming to our community because we put the ice skating rink right in the middle of it. So, it, it breaks down these barriers and you know what? It allows some resources to open up, 'cause if you stay on that side of town, if I say on this side of town, not only is there a cultural divide, but there's clearly a resource divide. And we're always on the, on the bad end of that one. So, if you mix it in, that means you get something, we get something, and we get it together. Story_ID: 99379 Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, tell us about "Basic Training". This is a radio show, right? Speaker 2: It's a radio show. It's my second entree into the media. The first one I had was in television. It was called--I know many from, from my legal--it's called "The Public Advocate". And what I would do in radio and television is there were, there were--Boston has the largest number of, probably one of the largest, per capita, of non-profits there is in the United States. And I developed a television program where I would go to the non-profits, figure out what they're trying to do. What is it that you do best and, and, and use their fundraising mechanism for my TV program. So, when they would have an event, when a particular star would come in town, like I interviewed Spike Lee. I would interview Muhammad Ali. I would interview Sinbad [David Adkins], you know, and then use that as the, the marquee piece because that gets people's attention. And then later, go back to the sghte, show them how the money is being spent. I wanted to, to develop non-profits in a way of marketing themselves, and using my show in order to basic further market themselves by using it as a powerful tool to their, their sponsors and supporters. So, I took that TV show. We did approximately twelve or thirteen pieces, and ten years later now, I'm doing radio. Speaker 1: Okay. So the TV show was "The Public Advocate" and now-- Speaker 2: That was the public advocate. Now, it's "Basic Training". Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In, in Boston [Massachusetts], we used to have this radio show called WILD. Anyone who has ever gone to school here knows that in Boston, in AM radio--first it was AM. It's tough to listen to, you know, and the kids never want to hear it because it can't compete with FM. But when you--and that's the only station you can get some rhythm and blues, you listen to it until about 8:00, and guess what happens? You lose it. WILD was 10, 1090. We shared it, by the way, with the same frequency out of Baltimore [Maryland]. So, all of a sudden, the Baltimore, you know, kind of phase radio with--c'mon, you kinda hear it in a distance. You get the Baltimore Oriole games (laughter). So, you would lose radio. Well, anyway, Radio 1 purchased it, and then sold it, so we had no radio station. So, one of the brothers decided he'd put together a number of people. And they developed a low frequency FM station called Touch FM. And it's touchfm.org, follow the same audience, and it's 106.1 in Boston. It's low frequency and it has maybe a frequency of three to five miles. But guess what--guess how large the black community is? Speaker 1: Three to five miles. Speaker 2: Three to five miles--so, we cover seventy-five percent of the black community. I have a show on Tuesday morning. It's called "Basic Training". Now, I thought about this because one of the things that I believe is information will free you up. Information will set you free. And so, what I wanted to do is provide information via this radio show, mixed in with some nice music, that will educate our people about the availability of certain programs. So, "Basic Training" actually, there are three jewels, jewel of spiritual health, physical health and wealth, and financial health and wealth. These are the three jewels towards the crown of happiness. And so, we talk about the three jewels in the morning. You know, that you are more than a conqueror because of his love. You know, if I am in crisis, if I am in you, and you in me, you do great things. Without me, you could do absolutely nothing. You know, and so, we would give scripture. We would give health tips. And we would give financial tips, and it was a journey as though in any journey, you have to be prepared. So, this journey was twelve weeks. Twelve weeks would take you from being homeless to acquiring appreciable assets. And so, when it came to homeless, we would have the person who runs the homeless shelters on the radio. And she would tell you, and make you feel good, but look, if you were homeless, listen to this radio right now. Don't feel bad about it, don't feel depressed--anyone could be homeless. And so, we would take you from this whole trip. I'm not feeling bad to coming down and getting the resources that you needed. And I--it dawned on me from doing this thing with, with the Urban Edge and having done the Pine Street [Inn] that you know what? There's some misin-, misinformation about being homeless. And most of the public, and most people feel embarrassed about it. And most people kind of--may not be living in the street, but you're living with a relative. You kind of sleep, and sleep in two or three in a bed and, and, you know, you're probably pretty much homeless. So, don't be afraid to come and get some resources because this could end up in transitional housing. So, we would do the homeless. Then, the next week, we might say, okay, a person is--has dropped out, so let's do a piece on getting your GED. And we'd have the person in the state who runs the GED grant. And we would talk about GED and certification, and how really people who pass the GED exam, 'cause I used to teach it--actually in better shape of passing the college boards because it's a validation and a testing. When you learn how to test, you actually will pay yourself better than if you pass along with the exam in, in school. So, so these kind of validated testing--this is very important for your development. So, we go from that point. Then we go--people who are uninsured. And we talk about how to get insurance. And we talk about what the Urban, what the Urban League does in terms of some of their training. So, we go through the training programs that are available--the Urban League, and we're, and we're talk about credit. We have a person who, who basically, before we even talk about predatory lending, talked about credit. Story_ID: 99380 Speaker 1: And there are organizations. Charles Stith, Reverend Charles Stith [HM] from Massachusetts, used--was the ambassador to--c'mon now, help me with it, the one that got blew up in Africa-- Speaker 2: Kenya. Speaker 1: Kenya, Kenya, was it Kenya? Speaker 2: Kenya is there, where the bomb-- Speaker 1: Where the bomb, yeah, Charles Stith--well, he teaches at Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts] now. Well, Charles Stith developed this Organization of New Equality [Organization for a New Equality, ONE]. And the Organization of New Equality actually has advocates who, who do the same thing--will try to build you up. They have credit counselors who work with you to, to repair your credit, and to advise you about how you bounce your checking accounts, and advise you about how you pull yourself really up in, in the financial world. And so, one, counselors would come on the phone and talk to people. And then, we talked about people who basically from the trade unions--how do you become a painter? And at Roxbury Community College [Boston, Massachusetts], they had, they had like a painting program where you, you could actually, for the summer, they would teach you how to paint. And, you know, the lines filled up so quickly. And when we got on the phones, they couldn't take any more people in. There were so many people unemployed who wanted to become painters. And we said, look, it was for Mother's Day--say, look, look, sisters, I know that there's some brother. And let's, let's get rid of the baby-momma thing, but that man wants to go out and to raise some money--support your child. Do me a favor. Take that $200 that you may have gone to do your hair, get ready for Mother's Day--buy him a scholarship to this apprentice program. And people were buying scholarships, man, getting their men hooked up to paint because it's, it's really how you take your resources and use them properly. That's basically what we're talking about. So, "Basic Training" went through twelve weeks of acquiring appreciable assets. Then, we got to the twelfth week--we said, what will we do? So, we didn't know what to do, so we decided that let's just select a topic a week. And so, we're kind of evolving towards a book club. But on the way, we, we talked to people who talk about (unclear) DeBasi (ph.) a sister who teaches out of--when I say, sister, I'm referring to just a person who's a good person--teaches out of Boston College, (unclear) DeBasi. National Book talks about predatory practices of advertising to our children. She came on. I talked to a, a person who, who is an evangelist who, during this Michael Vick stuff, who, who, actually is a person who was the chaplain for Florida State [University, Tallahassee, Florida] when they, when they won the national championship last year out of Gainesville. So I, I think it was Florida University at Gainesville [University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida]. So, he actually worked with these young black athletes at the time when people are, are really condemning our young black athletes, and thinking we're criminogenic. This man came on the, on the radio. And he has a book which caters to fathers and, and sons, and, and black men trying to be responsible and with full of scripture. And, in fact, Tony Dungy, he was Tony Dungy's chaplain when Tony Dungy was, was with Tampa Bay [Buccaneers]. And so, so we're trying to reverse a lot of this negative feeling about our black people through the media. So, the show I have every week, we are talking about very important community issues that shape our minds. So, that's what I'm into. I'm into to, you know, being a Renaissance Man of developing a radio show that really shapes important community issues. This morning, it, it was 9/11. And we had a person, a deputy mayor, former deputy mayor of New York, Stan Grayson [Stanley Grayson], who had a compelling story about how he was, in fact, offered the job to be head of the Port Authority. And he turned it down a few weeks, a couple of weeks, before the 9/11. And he says, there's no question in his mind that he would have been in either the North or South Tower at the time the planes hit because that would have his job to be there. And, so I said, well, Stan, what floor it would have been? He said, oh, I would been above the 83rd floor. I think every, I think, no one survived above the 83rd floor. So, we had a special 9/11 piece today where, where people could stream all over the country because you can get it at, you can get it on the web, and people calling in--say, look, I heard the story. It's very compelling how this guy in New York, you know, feels that God has given him grace because he didn't take a job. There were people who showed up late, and did not get into that building because they showed up late. So, we want to talk about, you know, some things that shape people, and why--how they were given a, a bigger chance 'cause 9/11 is a very, very painful thing. I mean, you think about this world. Jesus Christ came into this world and really divided time--the most, probably compelling story of all. Then you think about, in, in American civilization, you know, how slavery was, was so important to African American people, and just changed our lives. It changed the very fabric of who we are--took away identity. You think about the Civil War--how it separated the North from the South. And you have to almost go to the Industrial Revolution to think how we've changed the way we, we do things, in terms of manual versus some type of scientific and leverage and machines. We have to almost go to the day Pearl Harbor was bombed to think about 9/11--how it really shaped and changed the world. And so, we did a special 911 show to, to show how, not only this was really--impacted us 'cause Boston, too, the planes left. Flight 11 and Flight 175 left out of Boston. So, we feel that we're really an intricate part of this. But also, because 9/11 has shaped and changed us because immigration issues. It has shaped us financially. It'll never be the same financially for many of us. Many of us will be shut out. We'll never be able to own appreciable property. The debt that we've acquired because of this particular war will be borne and, and carried on the burdens of our children, along with social security. 9/11 has changed the world and so, we want to have a 9/11 show. Speaker 2: Okay. And it's 9/11, even as we speak today. Speaker 1: That's right, 9/11. Story_ID: 99381 Speaker 1: What about--you mentioned Michael Vick? And as a former pro-football player, that, that's been a hot topic in the news the last couple of weeks. What, what are your thoughts about what happened to Michael Vick? I think it's an unprecedented kind of case in a lot of ways. I, I can't think of anybody else's case that had the same kind of-- Speaker 2: When I think about Michael Vick, and, and I was listening to sports radio this morning. And, and the sports radio station I listen to is mostly white males over thirty-five. And I can only take so much of it, but they kind of shape what, what I think the--some of the norm is in terms of talking about us. And isn't it interesting that they see the Michael Vick piece in terms of its impact, like the OJ [Simpson] piece? And it has even probably a wider span because the animal rights people are, are so large in this, in this country and this world. I remember Dick Gregory [HM] used to say, said you want to stop--this is the Vietnam Era. He said, you want to stop the Vietnam War? You tell those people who have sons that are going over there--you tell, no, no, we're not going to send your sons anymore. We're going to send your animals. We're going to send your dogs over there. He said, that'll stop the war tomorrow. He said, man, people love their animals, man. Now, that's saying tragic now. You think this is a hyperbole that I'm trying to say. But the reality is that the dog world and, you know, a dog is a man's best friend, and so forth and so on. The dog world--innocent, loyal animal is revered in this world, more than a human being. So, I heard that Whoopi [Goldberg] say the other day--she said, you know, what animal, animal, you know, fighting and stuff, dog fighting--that's a Southern thing. You know, people thought she was trying to justify it. But then, I've heard people say this--you know, if he had gone to, to the jury, what his lawyer needed to tell the people straight up--hey, it's tragic, but it's not a human being. It's tragic as it is. Remember, it's not a human being because sometimes we lose a sense of things. We think that, wow, this man murdered humanity. God has put us in a trust position over all lower creatures. And so, I'm not trying to say that we have to or, or, that we have the ability to abuse any of God's creatures, but it wasn't a human being. And so, my point is that this has expanded, even the OJ piece, beyond what some people may not--had naturally intended to do and to the animal world lovers. And that's one that you do not want to deal with in this country. It's unforgiving. I mean, there's people that will play golf right now with OJ. They wouldn't mind being a foursome, but they'll never be able to respect Michael Vick. Now, how do you figure? Speaker 1: Okay. Now-- Speaker 2: I think Michael Vick will get a second chance. I, I heard Jim Brown talk about him the other day that, you know what, I mean, God is merciful. And, and there's redemptive power in God, you know. And so, once this man, and, you know, everyone has assumed that he's going to do some time--not necessarily, who says he does--have to do time? Speaker 1: He has a lawyer. How do you feel about that? Is that-- Speaker 2: Well, what side am I on? Am I--'cause I've been both. I've been a prosecutor and defense lawyer, but-- Speaker 1: I probably, as a defense lawyer in this case, I think I, I think I'd get that kind of (unclear) too. Speaker 2: As, as a defense lawyer, I'm sure they are going to look for all the redemptive things they can find about this situation, and try to get this man probation. Who, who am I to say that he's going to do time? But I think that once, if in fact, he does time, that he has the right, and the obligation to put all his talents back to work. And if that's to play football in national football league, then that's fine. But he's got to get it straight in his heart about the trust that God has given him over all of the things, and not just, not just the dogs. I mean, this is for all athletes. And I think this was what some of the athletes, like Michael Jordan and other people trying to say to some of the younger athletes, that this is a profession that you are in this business. And you are a businessman with trust over a vast amount of equity and money. What are you doing with that? You have to account for that. What you doing? How are you investing it? Look at Magic Johnson's model. I mean, Magic's the extreme, but there are others who have owned franchises, have taken care of their money, taken care of their families. Speaker 1: Terms on the positive side, yeah. Speaker 2: On the positive side. So that, so we have to work as athletes toward showing how there are many athletes. I tell my son a little story, you know, I kid, kid him all the time. I say, you know, Julian, I only played three years. But my first two years, you know, I went to the Super Bowl. I'm still spending the money I made thirty-five years ago. So, you remember that, you know. It might be the most money you'll ever make in your life in one year. Invest it wisely. I'm still spending my money, and you need to think about that also. Story_ID: 99382 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, when, when you played--I mean, did you ever run across--I mean, I know this can't be new--the dog fighting and so forth and, and-- Speaker 2: You know, it's funny. Speaker 1: --did you? Speaker 2: Let's, let's just talk about animals and the level of animal threat, and that, that I've encountered in my life. When I was growing up, it was a German Shepherd that you were scared to death of. You just didn't mess with a Shepherd. I will still think the Shepherd is one of the smartest dogs I've ever seen. Then we, we graduated to the Pinscher--neurotic, you know, animal, just, just one, I don't think you ever could trust, never liked it. It was too thin to cause so much razor sharp damage. And then it went to the Rottweiler, and, and we saw those in South Africa. I said, I'm never going to trust a Rottweiler. When it got to the pit bull, it was in this whole thing of rap music, and so forth and so on. And, you know, it's, you know, it got equated with, with black males, young black males. So, we never would have seen pit bulls because bulls weren't popular. You would never have seen Rottweilers 'cause it just wasn't popular. So, did we see German Shepherds? People gambling, by fighting German Shepherds--no. I mean, I'm sure pit bulls were--it was a Southern thing. I never got to them. Most I ever seen was people throwing craps up against the, the wall. And, you know, and the rest is, is when I--rest I tell is in my book deal. It's not for this particular program (laughter). Story_ID: 99383 Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay. Now, now recently, I guess in, you said, in this past March there was an article in Newsweek about you and three other former black students at [College of the] Holy Cross [Worcester, Massachusetts]-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and, and your mentor there? Speaker 2: Yes, Father [John] Brooks. The name of the--it came out in Businessweek, in fact. Speaker 1: Businessweek, okay. Speaker 2: I, I believe it was, I believe it was March. I'm surprised that we were here in, in April. But if you notice the difference for our viewing audience, I got younger. I don't have the beard. I do a beard in the winter--tried to intimidate my law school class by coming in with the beard. And then I shave it off after I take in the finals in the spring. But, yes, there was an article that was done. It talked about the Holy Cross Brethren. And it had Father Brooks who is--was a former president of Holy Cross for over twenty-five years. Father Brooks was, was mainly responsible for development of many of the African Americans and, and white students in--at Holy Cross because he was a man who understood the times where protests was something that others were looking to kind of demonize about--Father Brooks kind of embraced it. Story_ID: 99384 Speaker 1: Yes. We were talking about Father [John] Brooks. Speaker 2: Yeah. Father Brooks--at the time when there was the Vietnam War going on, the time there were civil right protests, [College of the] Holy Cross [Worcester, Massachusetts] was a still a very conservative school. When we came in, in 1968, prior to that year, they had only admitted two blacks in every year. And I think maybe only twenty blacks ever attended Holy Cross. And Father Brooks made a, a plea to the admissions department, after [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] had gotten killed, to increase those numbers. And so, I believe there were over seventeen--sixteen, seventeen blacks that came in, in my class, including Ted Wells [Theodore Wells, HM] and Ed Jones. And, as a sophomore, Clarence Thomas was admitted as a sophomore. And so, when, when there was a protest at Holy Cross, and we all walked out, Father Brooks emerged really as a person who had the ability of showing, not only compassion, but showing that the school had a good negotiator that understood where the future, hence, the future of the college. And so, as a result of cultivating these relationships over the years, he became pretty much a national player among the Jesuit community in terms of how do you deal with diversity? How do you deal with talents who don't look like you, don't sound like you, but are every bit as intelligent as you? And so, rather than fear it, Father Brooks embraced it, enhanced it, brought in more black professors, allowed us to have black literature courses, gave us the resources to be able to travel around the state, fostered forums, provided scholarship monies for African Americans to come to Holy Cross. And as a, as a result of that, he has a reputation--over twenty-five, thirty years as being someone who had really transformed the Jesuit style of education. And so, he got a major tribute in Businessweek for the types of people that he cultivated. And it just happens that one of them was a Pulitzer Prize winner [Edward Jones]. One of them was a Supreme Court Justice [Clarence Thomas]. One of them is the--one of the best lawyers in America [Theodore Wells, HM]. And I don't know what you would say I am--and one of the (unclear) of the former deputy of New York. And then, I'm pretty much the community leader of Boston [Massachusetts], you know, one of the many community leaders who is just a hustler. I'm just a good hustler who understands community principles. And so, it was just great for him to get that tribute. And now, they're doing a book and, and a movie. Speaker 1: So the movie is going to be based on-- Speaker 2: Diane Brady-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: -- of, of Businessweek is actually--she wrote the article and she came back. She's writing a book. And Father Brooks called me up today. He said, you know, we're doing, we're doing a movie. So I said, well, who's going to play you, Father Brooks? He said, of course, you, Eddie Jenkins. I mean, who else is going to (laughter)? I said, no, I got, I got to find somebody to play me, you know what I mean? So, no, it's, it's a lot of humor. And he's being celebrated, he's being celebrated throughout the country. There's a celebration in New York that they're having for him--anything honor celebrated throughout the entire country for really being a standup person, like Father [Robert] Drinan, and like the Berrigan Brothers [Daniel and Philip Berrigan] in the war protest. As Jesuits are, you know, the Jesuits are a different breed, you know, they are of all the Catholics, the revolutionaries of the Catholics--the, probably the most scholarly of all the Catholics. And, and they, basically, he saw what was coming ahead. He embraced what King had talked about in terms of the content of the person's character, and he really believed it. And as a result, he put it on practice and brought people into the school that never would have been there. And I'm one of them. Speaker 1: Okay. So, that, that movie should be out by the time somebody watches this one. Speaker 2: I, I would think so-- Speaker 1: So, yeah. Speaker 2: --I would think so. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's, that's exciting. Is there a working title for it? Speaker 2: I think it's called "The Brethren". Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: (Laughter), you know. Story_ID: 99385 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what, what are your future plans? Are you, have you--now, you're a well-known personality in the city [Boston, Massachusetts]. You've worked on other people's, you, you had some camps, some politician campaigns on your own. What's your future? Speaker 2: Well, I, you know, it's a, you, you know, I would be dishonest to say I don't know. Certainly, there are things that I would like do. I run the alcohol industry here, both on the prevention side, and the licensing side, and enforcement side for over three and a half years. One of the reasons why I took this position is because the treasurer, Tim Cagle (ph.), who was campaigning for me when I was running for district attorney, thought it was important to put me in a really point position at a critical time in the state when, when alcohol needed control. And so, as a commissioner, I've sat for three and a half years. I've authored over 150 opinions. And so, you know, let's see what the governor [Deval Patrick, HM] has in store for me. Certainly, I've made some overtures towards the governor. And we'll see whether God has in store for me some plans to provide some, some further leadership and guidance in the area of law. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: I know it doesn't say it all, but it, it points me in the right direction anyway. But also, I want to continue to do financial literacy. I think that one of the reasons how our young people really fail to develop is because we don't have the inheritance of wealth to administer inheritance. I think that there's three things a parent, you know, brings into the world and does with a child. Besides giving you, bringing you into the world, they have to bring you to God. I think that's a responsibility for them to bring you to God. And I think that they also have to, if, if it's possible, to allow you to inherit some wealth, so that you don't have to start all over again, and we're not doing that. But it's also the inheritance of ideas. That's what we're not getting from our parents. And so, when it comes to wealth, it's both--you need the wealth, but you also need to have pretty much the, the game plan, or the instructions on how to use it. That game plan--those instructions come very early on in your life. So, I think that what we can do in financial literacy is start in the kindergartens, in the elementary schools, and have people understand what wealth is all about. You know, how do you use it? That penny that's, that's in your house, that nickel, that dime, that thing that you won in the store, they're, they're possibilities, many of them. You don't have to go and buy some chewing gum with it. There are ways that you can take it and, you know, you can get two packs of chewing gun, you know, if you want, but you can save it. You can invest it. You can put it with someone else's, and you can develop a partnership. There are many different ways you can invest wealth. I think one of the things that we have to stop parents from doing is to tremendously killing off the creative minds of our children by letting the television and advertisers and the programmers--program our children, and take away the creative and positive thoughts that they have to self-develop. And we have to get into our schools and, and to have the parents understand that as long as those stimuli are coming into the household, then they'll always be poor because the children are always going to demand things that they don't need. I think it was Will Smith, said that, you know, poor people always buy stuff that they can't afford, to please people that don't even respect or like them. So, the thing about it is that we have to educate the parent and the child at the same time because until we start rethinking about how you develop wealth and the resources that we use on a very small level, then how are we going to work when the money gets a little larger? We become conspicuous consumers of expensive cars, expensive stereos. We start with the Game Boys and they just build on to the fact that we're always going to be a paycheck away from being homelessness. I do not want to have to continually do the "Basic Training" show all my life for all my people when we have the ability of changing around, planting that seed of a benefit that grows within a child's life where he can see that there is really an opportunity to really become happy, to have the ability to maintaining a life that's self-supportive, that you can create the conditions around you, that you can have, in fact, a nice, clean place to live that's safe, that you can have a loving wife who feels safe, that can buy nice things, that she can, in fact, have a beautiful career that could support you. I mean, we need to start instilling these values among our children, but we can't instill them among our children unless we also, to some degree, have parents respect these same particular values. If we talk about it in the schools, and they don't see it at home, there's a particular dichotomy and disconnect. Then, I'm not sure--allows our children to develop. So, financial education, which comes back to basic training, building the three jewels toward the crown of happiness, spiritual health and wealth, physical health and wealth, and, in fact, financial health and wealth. Story_ID: 99386 Speaker 1: Now, in terms of spiritual health and wealth, you, you mentioned parents teaching their children about God. Is there a specific religion you advocate, or do you take into account the diversity that, that is--we were all in today? I mean, some people don't, don't really believe in God. Speaker 2: I, I understand. Speaker 1: Can they, can they have spirituality without that kind of--I mean, how, are you defining it as belief or as how you treat other people or what? Speaker 2: Well, you know what? I never tried to define something that I don't believe in. So, I imagine that at some point, you're going to have other guests, other leaders who can talk about their experience. I can only talk about mine. And with me, it's clear. It's being God-centered, having Jesus Christ the center of my life. Speaker 1: So, Christianity would be the-- Speaker 2: It's, yeah, it's Christianity for me because it's, it gives me purpose, and I can't see, you know, you have, you have to think about it this way. Who is greater than God? Did not God create you? Did not God create me? Is He not the Creator? Did he not make the product? So, if God is the Creator of me, then should not I read the instructions and the manual for how this Creation is to be developed? Speaker 1: Oh, that's true for those who believe that a God did those things, but not everybody believes that. Speaker 2: That's right, no, and, and I'm only directing this towards those people who, when I say a word to, can accept the word. You're very often--you take the children, for instance, there are times when there's something I want to say to my child. And, and when I say child, just--let's just, for instance, talk about this analogy, but think about how God speaks to us. There are things that I say to my child that I know they're not ready to hear. And you can see I'm falling down. And it's not until they humble themselves. It's not until they run out of wind. It's not until they run out of options are they willing to listen. Why is it our people all the time have to be humble, humiliated, put in this position before they hear from God? That's what happened to me. That's what happens to our people. And what I would like to do is to be able to just plant my seed in my own--not preach to anyone else's children, but very often, it is a situation that we do not hear from God until He allows us to fall down and to humble ourselves. So, if you are humbled before God, and you're walking with God on a daily basis--in a very positive sense, He'll speak to you. The manual that I've found is the Bible--it's the word. It's been tested. It's good for correction. It's good for direction. It's good to edify. I mean, really a lot of things that the Bible can do for you and it has done for me, and I can't say it ain't for everyone. But for those who will open up their hearts to hear, for those whose eyes will be anointed to see, they'll be able to understand that there is some direction and some purpose in their life. Story_ID: 99387 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, do you have any other hopes and concerns for the black community? Speaker 2: Yeah. I, I believe that looking at, especially in Boston [Massachusetts], having been here since pretty much, without leaving at times, since 1968, having left for three periods at a time. I have seen that there has been many transformations that take place in Boston, but none of those transformations really have affected the indigenous black man of America. Now, I know it's hard to call a black man indigenous, but from slavery times, the African American, and not the African Cari-, not the, the Caribbean African, the Caribbean American, and I make a distinction between this. The blacks who came here from Charleston, South Carolina and various places, came up here and did not develop in-, into the trades like many of the people from the Caribbean Islands. And they moved from trade to trade and they, they traded with one another. And they developed the ability of sustaining themselves, their family sustaining, and they developed a history among themselves--and the Latino, the same thing. The African American in Boston did not develop and did not protect themselves and did not rise and control their future. The resources did not control the educational systems. And, as a result of that, became pretty much a victim of facile forces that moved many different times through discrimination, through busing, and never really developed a middle class in this town. And what you're seeing here is--you might see it in Miami [Florida], you might see it in Buffalo, New York. You might--there are certain cities that don't have the middle class, like Chicago [Illinois] and New York, and, and some areas of Washington, D.C., and Baltimore [Maryland] where it's a stronger community that gets support from downtown that's able to support their businesses. It's able to develop community control over their schools and, and have quality schools within, within their communities. When you don't have that--what you're seeing in Boston is, is a watering down, even what we had when I came. And a further dispersement--what Urban Edge does is try to stabilize communities, try to prevent displacement, but we're seeing tremendous displacement, 'cause people can't afford to buy, can't afford to buy homes. They don't have quality jobs. And so, the, the community in Boston, (unclear) Roxbury shrinking, getting smaller, whereas the South End, where a lot of richer people are moving, is getting larger. And so, the poor people in Boston are moving to Brockton [Massachusetts] and Springfield [Massachusetts], and some of the poor areas. Coming in to replace the African Americans, who normally would have those first, second level jobs are the new immigrants. What the particular studies in my tier are showing, that with these corridors of information, that is a knowledge corridor that's also being developed from Springfield to Amherst [Massachusetts] to Holyoke [Massachusetts] to Hartford [Connecticut]. These particular knowledge corridors are being developed and, and Route 128 knowledge corridor is over to Cambridge [Massachusetts] where they're doing all this biotech. Many people think they can invent Frankenstein over there, okay. But we are not getting those jobs because we are not trained in the sciences and math that's going to enhance us. The new immigrants coming in and taking the cleaning jobs at McDonald's, and the jobs that we're not taking, and they're becoming smaller contractors and buying homes. So, we see new immigrants coming from South America and Asia and India, but we don't see the, the path of the African American who came from the South to get opportunity around the Industrial Revolution up in the Boston area. We see dispersement. So, we are trying to hold on here to the African American community by making sure that we support our schools and provide housing and make neighborhoods safer so that people don't move out of our communities, but we're losing that battle. Story_ID: 99388 Speaker 1: Okay. When you look back at everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could? Speaker 2: This is the regret part of your show? You know, there are a lot of regrets I have--personal, relational, career-wise. But when I look at how God has blessed me and carried me over the years with my family, I would say that, I would probably say the only thing that if I could have done better is I could have done the thing that when God went to Solomon and said, of all the things in the world, what would you want? I'd have asked God just to give me wisdom. Wisdom alone would have allowed me to make some of the better choices that I've made, and that speaks to it all. Story_ID: 99389 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, tell us a little bit about your family. Speaker 2: My mother [Essie Rae Jenkins] and father [Eddie Jenkins, Sr.], I'm very blessed. They're still alive. My father is eighty-five--well, he'll be eighty-five; my mother is eighty-two. They live in Florida. They live in a place called Deltona which is halfway between Daytona and Deltona. Because of the harsh winters in New York, I bought a home in that area for them, and they're living down in Florida now with my brother--near my brother. But my father is very active. He still does his tai chi. He worked the U.S. Open. He does security at the U.S. Open. He--well, actually, he works in the parking lot (laughter), one of the lots. And he's able to, to do some of the wonderful things. He has two major gardens. My mother works in the church. My mother has been a prayer warrior all her life. And I told her the other day, I said, mom, all those years that we were kind of looking at you in that room and thinking that, you know, you were a little strange sitting there with the Bible open--still would, looking at that same page. We realized later that you were just meditating. But we thought that your mom was reading real slow. She's got the same page. But she's been a prayer warrior. So, having my parents alive has kept me young--has, has, I've been blessed with just spending time with them. You know, I've been blessed with two children. My, my daughter is a junior in college. My son [Julian Jenkins] graduated from Stanford---had an opportunity to play with the Tampa Bay Buccaneers. I mean, I've been truly, truly blessed with family, brothers and sisters all alive--everybody's well. You know, I come from a family, as I told you before, my grandmother had twenty-one children. So, my mother still has sisters alive. My father's brother just died--Alzheimer's is a terrible, terrible thing, way to go. But, you know, we have been blessed with cousins and friends. And so, I'm the only one up in the Northeast. I'm the only one that chose to come to Boston [Massachusetts]. They all thought I was crazy. All my friends in New York said, why are you in Boston? I mean, remember the Yankees? Remember, you know, the [New York] Knicks. You know, remember all the great things in New York? What does Boston have? Well, well, they have some pretty good championship teams, but it's not New York. And Boston has always had these connotations of being a racist city, a cold city, too many Irish people, too many, you know. And so, New Yorkers don't understand it--how you, why, how I could've survived so long? But, you know what--with each kind of a challenge, there is a seed of equal benefit if you can overcome. And I guess I've been the one who's always been--so I need to go where I'm called. And if it's a city that may not appear to be the glitzy city of lights, like New York, and of opportunity like Chicago [Illinois]. I came and I figured I wanted to make a difference in this community. And I hope I, I am continuing as I reinvent myself, continuing to make a difference, working in partnerships, working in community organizations, finding where God has in, in store for me, and in working through his plan. Story_ID: 99390 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, that leads to a question we always ask. And that is when you look back at everything you've done at this point is what, today, as we sit here, would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: Boy, that's a tough question. What would be my legacy? Aww, man, can anyone answer this easily? I mean-- Speaker 1: You're still young, till you got-- Speaker 2: What's the difference between a legacy and obituary (laughter)? Speaker 1: A legacy, what-- the things that you consider the benchmark things you've done to this point, I guess? Speaker 2: All right. I think, politically, I think when I took on the establishment in 1990 and ran for district attorney--the first African American to ever run for district attorney, to challenge the establishment when the Charles Stuart case, when, you know, I was, I was that black guy, you know. And who called the district attorney, a white Irishman, incompetent, who challenged the way he did probable cause hearings and allowed our community to be really imperiled with the police who had no limits chasing this phantom, particular murderer, knocking our doors down on, on, on stop and search policies. But it allowed me to kind of, you know, what I call paving the road--putting a brick in for the district attorney, a black African American who came behind me. We both were up for appointment. He had the cards. I didn't. He got appointed. I supported him. And, and I continually will try to lay other bricks. I ran again for district attorney, ran for city council, you know. These are the particular barriers that we have faced in this town that requires professional, qualified people to run, regardless of your resources. And so, I challenged him, and I ran. So that might be something that most people forgot, but it's service. It doesn't depend--it doesn't matter if you win or not, but you got to continually serve. I hope that my service here, that the things that I'm doing in terms of mentoring younger people and bringing them through the system, helping them get jobs. It's continually laying the particular bricks and foundations that we all can drive on, that we all can walk on towards a better life in, in a town that doesn't really offer a lot of opportunity to African Americans the way some of the larger cities are with a, with a middle class where you have various leaders you can point to, where you have inside power that you can point to. I mean, the fact of the matter is that we do have a governor here, but you know, in between the governor and where most people stand, there are, there's, there's a lot. It's a major void, and so we have to build those bridges over. We can't expect, because he's a black governor that necessarily, he can reach down and lift us all up. But we have to continually build those bridges up, so that he can make the case to the legislature that there are people here that we can't leave behind, because he has represented all the people, and not just some. And so, we have to constantly make the case to, to him and to others that we are those people. We count. We are the resources that you're going to need towards this new Boston, to develop. And I believe that things that I'm doing, especially with, with youth mentoring-ship, mentorship, and some other things that I've done in the church, and programs we've done for working and turning around young black males is, is going to be important for us to continually save our young black men. They're, they're imperiled right now, and we got to be able to pull one back--one person at a time. We'll work on the CORI records now where your criminal record may determine really where you--if you have the ability of being sustainable, and if that's determined at a very early age. I mean, when I was assistant district attorney, we could, we could read a person's history. And if you could look at that child, and you can say when they're four and five years old whether, in fact, they're going to be a winner or a loser, something is wrong in America. And we got to be able to change that. Speaker 1: What is the--just for the record, what does, what does CORI stand for, and how do you spell it? Speaker 2: Criminal Office of Record Index-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --Record, oh, no, Criminal, Criminal, excuse me, Criminal Offender Record Index [sic, Criminal Offender Record Information]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Criminal Offender. Story_ID: 99533 Speaker 1: You were writing a book, tell us about it. Speaker 2: Yeah, yes, I'm writing a book. I mean, you figure--all these different jobs. I started writing a book about five years ago--oh, actually, a little longer, about a person who came to me--worked on my campaign. And she was very, very upset one, one day. And I said, what's wrong? She says, you probably don't notice, but I was adopted, and I don't know anything about my parents. And she said, you know, how it is to go through life, not knowing who your parents are? And I said, well, no, I don't. She said, well, you know. And so, she was so disturbed by this whole piece that it opened up the door for me to, to have her share with me. And she started sending me information. And it was eerie, 'cause I could see what she's looking at. She went to the adoption agency. They sent her a little something about her mother, but not the name of her mother--the fact that her mother was good at playing the piano. She's very gifted at playing the piano. And something about her father. So, I have, I have a book. I've written about three or four chapters. I've re-, I've recreated her life. And I'm going to spend a little time with her and travel down to North Carolina. And I'm going to try to get through most of it. I've had it in my mind. And I actually told the whole story one time to this writer. And he told me, do me a favor--don't ever repeat that to anyone again. He said, it's a wonderful story. So, it's a novel, but it has some truth in it. And it's really to capture the plight of people who basically got adopted and what they go through. So, that's my first novel. Speaker 1: Okay. When do you project to, to be finished with it? Speaker 2: In about a year and a half. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Ed Jones [Edward Jones] is my classmate, the Pulitzer Prize winner. He said the key to writing is to write a little bit every day. So, when I get some time, maybe that's what I'll commit to doing--writing every day. Maybe Ed Jones will be, you know, will help me through this. I mean, he's written a couple of novels. I don't know if you read "The Known World" and Aunt Hagar's thing. I think it's called "Aunt Hagar's Daughter" [sic, "All Aunt Hagar's Children"] or something like that--short stories. And so, I mean, he's an incredible writer. Remember, Ed Jones is the one that took black literature courses with Clarence Thomas and myself, that actually worked for a tax editing company for like twelve years before he wrote his first book. He had never owned a cell phone. Lived in a rooming house. And from writing short stories, someone discovered him, and within a year, he wins the Pulitzer Prize. So, you know, you writers who were like, frustrated like me, and not had gotten your story told, we got to start committing to putting this down-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and to finally write it out. Speaker 1: We've got--got to give us Ed Jones' number. Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 99534 Speaker 1: Now, is there any other thing that we have not discussed that comes to mind right away before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: No, I think that you have covered everything. And to keep asking me questions, then I start making stuff up (laughter). No, I think you guys have done a tremendous job, been patient with a person who tends to ramble a little bit about a lot of stories that happened in my life that were important to me. And I hope that the viewing audience finds that some of those stories, some of my life experience really will touch you in, in a very real way that it touched me. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, our last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different. Sir, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Very simply as a person who used all of his talents in a way that touched someone's life. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, thank you very much. Speaker 2: Thank you so much. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 99535 Speaker 1: This is a photograph of the convention of all the district attorneys, assistant district attorneys, in Middlesex County [Massachusetts]. Speaker 2: For what year? Speaker 1: For between the years of 1980 and '84 [1984]. Within this photo, approximately one-third of all of these people here are, are now judges. And four or five of them became district attorneys in various other counties. Actually, there is--I noticed there is one other person who I helped bring here--a very good friend of mine, who's now a judge, Michael Bolden right here. He's the only other African American in the whole county. For a while, I was the only African American in Middlesex County which is the largest county in Massachusetts. And then, I helped bring Mike in from Washington, D.C. But it's a, it's a picture of all the DAs. Speaker 2: Got it. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, good. Speaker 2: I'm sorry, I didn't have all those other pictures. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. So, tell, go ahead and tell us about this one, please. Speaker 2: This is a autograph picture of the 1972 World Champion undefeated Super Bowl team [Miami Dolphins]. You could see a lot of, you know, famous players in here from Bob Griese to Mercury Morris to Larry Little. Speaker 1: I'm sorry (unclear) left over here, yeah. I have to tighten this up. Some of the stuff-- Speaker 2: Now, you're, you're fine. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): No, they're here. Speaker 2: There I am right there. I was a rookie, number 20-, yeah, number 28. And, you know, it's--you see Don Schula sitting right here, one of the most famous coaches in NFL history. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): It's (unclear) again-- Speaker 2: So these, these are my teammates. And, interesting about this is that a number of them are passed. My friends keep telling me that it's important for, in terms of sports, to get an autograph of people who have passed. And when we sign this, I think it was right after the Super Bowl so, you know, everyone was alive. And we had some really fond memories of many of my teammates. In fact, I still keep in touch with about four or five of my teammates. And we're having--we're coming up on our 35th reunion, and that's going to be in Miami [Florida] this year. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: And from-- Speaker 1: (Unclear) that's Rick Smith, look out-- Speaker 2: No, no, what's his name, the big guy from, from Dallas [Texas], you know? Speaker 1: Oh, the Whiskey (unclear). Speaker 2: The Whiskey, yeah. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, ready. Speaker 2: Aren't you get the wrong way? Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): That's, we, we can turn it-- Speaker 2: Turn it? (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): --on the computer. Speaker 1: That's just a picture of Paul Pierce and Navitsky and this woman. Incidentally enough, it's kind of crazy running the Michael Vick thing. She was a person who actually saved a lot of dogs (laughter) in this area. But, but I was, I was asked by the treasurer to represent the treasury that night, "Heroes Among Us", and I got a chance to talk to Navitsky during the Dallas/Celtic game just-- Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): What, Navitsky (unclear) so, okay, we're ready here. Speaker 1: This is a just a picture with the treasurer with a few of our staff members at one of the annual meetings. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Could you-- Speaker 1: That's, that's the treasurer there and-- Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): And yourself? Speaker 1: Yeah, myself, and-- Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): And what's the treasurer's name? Speaker 1: Tim Cahill. That's the picture at the state house walking down the state house steps and then, the rotunda. It's an inauguration. I took a picture with former governor and our mayor, Richmond, Doug Wilder [Douglas Wilder]. Interesting thing about is that he was telling me--isn't it interesting how quickly one can become irrelevant? I told him that I was going to send him an article that I wrote about how-- Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, right. Speaker 1: This is, this is a picture of me and my two kids in Atlanta, Georgia. We were just enjoying a little Father's Day dinner. We're actually sitting in Puff, Puffy's Place. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: Puff Daddy's Place. Speaker 2: P. Diddy. Speaker 1: P. Diddy. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): (Unclear) of them, right? Speaker 1: Hanging out with Julian, you know, just--this is during the Stanford [University, Stanford, California] around, and we were in Palo Alto [California] around town, his graduation. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next one. Speaker 1: Did we get this one? Speaker 2: Yeah, no, not, we didn't. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Not yet. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, ready. Speaker 2: This is Julian and Jasmine as they were working on my campaign for district attorney. They, all of them, both of them always worked on my campaigns--glad to have them. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Which year was that? Speaker 2: This campaign--it looks like it was 2002-- Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): 2002, okay. Speaker 2: --2002 for district attorney, five years ago. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, okay, ready. Speaker 2: That's just a picture of Julian as he's coming from one of his games at Stanford. I tried to attend as many games as I could. Speaker 1: What position does he play? Speaker 2: Defensive end. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): I don't think we ever got Julian's full name, did we? Speaker 2: Julian Jenkins. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): All right, sir, I'm ready. Speaker 2: That's just a picture of my parents and my sister and my niece and my daughter at a family reunion. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Could you name them? Speaker 2: This is my--that's Jasmine in the bottom--oops, you want it this way? Speaker 1: No, we had it like-- Speaker 2: It has to go that way, okay. That's Jasmine; and that's my mother, Essie Rae Jenkins; my father, Eddie Jenkins, Sr.; that's my niece, Janelle (ph.); and that's my sister, Emma; and, of course, that's me in the corner. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): So, go ahead and tell us about this one. Speaker 2: This is from a roll of film that I first started shooting photography. And some of my friends say, this is one of the best shots I've ever taken because it's a little out of focus. It has the kind of feeling of a, of a painting. And I, I've realized from that point, I have an art. And I probably shot over 5,000 frames of photography. And I exhibited it with Fern Cunningham Sculpture in a museum, upstate New York years ago. And I, you might see--I, in my house and other places. I may have about fifty or sixty pieces similar to this of various still life, and mostly still life and, and some, and some print of photos of people, but mostly still life. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Was that shot in Africa? Speaker 2: No, shot in the Caribbean. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Kind of looks like Africa, huh? Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Well, I'm just--they're be coming like seven, okay. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Ready. Sorry, not that. All right, go ahead. Speaker 2: This is my father; my brother, Red; my son, Julian; myself; my very good friend from the "da Ville", from "da Ville", Dickie Duvall; and my cousin, Johnny. We're all getting together after one of Julian's games. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, okay, ready. Speaker 2: That's a picture of me and Reverend Al Sharpton [HM]. I did a radio fund with Rev. Sharpton to raise money in New York. On one occasion, I was visiting my parents. And I was one of the contributors on this radio fund to raise money. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Well, approximately when, when was that? Speaker 2: Approximately 2001, 2002. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 2: This is at a reunion with Ted Wells [Theodore Wells, HM]. Ted was my roommate in college and, ultimately, a representative of Scooter Libby, as well as some other famous people. "American Law Journal" says he's in the top one or two lawyers in America. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Oops, (unclear), okay now. Speaker 2: Did you shoot-- Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: That's my son at Stanford--just one of my visits to Stanford. That's a pretty famous archway at Stanford. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Uh-hum, okay. Could I get that other one back? Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Still-- Speaker 2: Yep. By the way, Ted, Ted is allegedly the one who gave Clarence Thomas the defense, high tech lynching. Speaker 1: Oh, really? (Laughter). Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: That's Ted Wells; myself; and Stan Grayson. Stan Grayson; Ted Wells; myself. Stan is a former deputy mayor of New York. Speaker 2: Okay (unclear). Ready. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, ready. Speaker 2: This is a-- Speaker 1: Go ahead (unclear), say it again. Speaker 2: --this is just a photo of Julian when he was in little league baseball--my son. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next one. Speaker 2: This is a photo of Julian and myself hiking up in Vermont. Speaker 1: We participated in a Christian camp one summer where I was a camp counselor. And we ended up hiking up in Vermont with, with the other kids, and went to the top of this mountain--kind of scary experience but (laughter). Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, all right, next one. Speaker 1: Picture of my brother, Willie, and my, and my dad. My brother, Willie, just retired as a clerk in the New York City Criminal Court system. Speaker 2: Here in the campaign, when I ran for district attorney, and it's just them getting together before they get in the car to go back home. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. So, that's your parents. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's my brother, Red; that's my sister or Ronald--his real name, Red, we call him; my sister, Emma; there I am; that's my mom; my dad; and my brother, Willie, in the back. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next one. Speaker 2: When I, when I--it's just myself and Spike Lee when I told you I used to do this show called the "Public Advocate". This is from one of the interviews I did with Spike Lee...