 Story_ID: 29385 Speaker 1: My name is Julieanna Richardson, and I'm the interviewer. And Neculai Burghelea is the videographer, and our observer is Theresa Bourgeois. And I'd like to have you start out by stating your name and spelling it for us, including middle name. And I'd like to also have your date of birth. Speaker 2: My name is Shirley Ann Jackson, S-H-I-R-L-E-Y, A-N-N, J-A-C-K-S-O-N. My birth date is August 5, 1946. Speaker 1: And I'd like to have today's date? Speaker 2: Today is September the 22nd, 2006. Speaker 1: And our location? Speaker 2: We're sitting in the office of the President at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute in Troy, New York. Speaker 1: And I'd like to have your occupation? Speaker 2: I am the President of Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute in Troy and Hart-, New York and Hartford, Connecticut. Speaker 1: But you're physicist, right? Speaker 2: I'm a theoretical physicist by-- Speaker 1: Trade. Speaker 2: --education, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 29386 Speaker 1: Now, I wanna start out by just asking five People-Magazine-ish questions, short answers. I'd like to know what your favorite food is? Speaker 2: Can we come back to that? Speaker 1: Favorite color? Speaker 2: Red. Speaker 1: Favorite time of year? Speaker 2: The fall. Speaker 1: Favorite place to vacation? Speaker 2: Anywhere. Speaker 1: Favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Aim for the stars so that you can at least reach the treetops. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color, you don't have to have a favorite color. Speaker 2: Favorite color is red. Speaker 1: Oh no, I mean favorite food? Speaker 2: No, because I sample many different things. Speaker 1: Okay. No problem. Story_ID: 29387 Speaker 1: I'd like to start out and have you talk about your father. And I want to have his name and you to tell us about what you know about his growing up and his background? Speaker 2: My father's name is George Hiter Jackson, and Hiter is H-I-T-E-R. My father grew up in rural Virginia in Louisa County near a place called Mineral, but he was actually living in the country. His mother, he grew up primarily in Virginia, but his mother later moved to Washington. His father's name was Hiter Jackson, but I'm told he didn't really know his father. His mother later married someone else, another, she remarried. And so he grew up with two stepbrothers. But he was significantly older than they were. So growing up with them is probably not a great statement. My father was a quiet man. He read a lot, but the thing I most remember about him is how hard he worked. He worked two jobs the whole time I was growing up. He worked in the Post Office which was his primary job, and I'll tell you a little bit more about that. But then when he came home from that, and after cleaning up and changing, he would go and drive a taxicab for four to eight hours a day. And he did that the whole time we were growing up. Speaker 1: Dr. Jackson, did he share any stories with you? I mean I know he was a quiet man, but about his growing up? Speaker 2: Not a lot. His, he started working as a teenager because, you know, his father, I think died fairly young, but as I said he didn't--when he was fairly young, but he didn't really know him. He didn't complete high school because he went to work, but he was also in the army. He was in the army during World War II. And he was actually at Normandy at D-Day [June 6, 1944]. And so I probably know more about my father's adult life. He didn't talk all that much about his growing up. And, so the one thing I really know about him from early on is this capability with numbers in his head and mechanical things. And I'm sorry-- Speaker 1: It's okay. Speaker 2: And so he, I mentioned that he was at D-Day. And he was there when they were landing. And a number of the amphibious landing vehicles lost their ruddering mechanism. And so they couldn't make it to the beach without it. And my father, on the spot, using whatever was available, fashioned a ruddering mechanism for them. And so that actually contributed to a number of troops being able to land safely. For that, he received a special commendation for doing that as well as having his photo taken with Benjamin O. Davis. You remember the name as first black general in the army. And so my mother [Beatrice Cosby Jackson] has a copy of that citation. And so that told me a little about my father's history there. Speaker 1: Did he ever talk any more about his time in the service at all, you know, what his experience was, because he did receive a Bronze Star, right, for that? Speaker 2: That's correct. No, I mean other than the fact that he was in the segregated unit. And we sort of had to pull out of him, even the story about, about Normandy. So. Story_ID: 29388 Speaker 1: Now, let's talk about your mother. What is her name? Speaker 2: My mother's name is Beatrice Cosby Jackson. Cosby is her maiden name. And my mother as well grew up in rural Virginia near Mineral, in Louisa County. And she was orphaned by the time she was about fourteen. Her mother passed away when she was eleven. And then her father [Phil Cosby], by the time she was fourteen. My mother was the youngest of seven children. And her older siblings, particularly one of her older sisters and an older brother took care of her. But she actually went off to boarding school around that time, actually about a year before her mother died. And her siblings pooled resources to pay for that. Speaker 1: Do you know the name of the boarding school? Speaker 2: Sure, it's called Virginia Randolph School. And then she went to St. Paul School, St. Paul's and then she got, she finished in about three years, and she taught for a while. And she went back for advanced study at Hampton University [Hampton, Virginia]. And she was at home in the summers, but she was at the boarding school before that. Her father, his name was Phil Cosby, was, worked on the railroad. He was a Pullman porter. And her mother stayed at home because she was raising her children. And my mother's siblings, we knew at least most of them. My two aunts were around a lot when we were growing up. One of them lived in Virginia, and one had moved to Washington [D.C.]. And then she had a number of brothers who were spread between Baltimore [Maryland] and Richmond [Virginia]. And her older sister, in particular, had ten children. And they spanned our ages, and because of that, we interacted quite a bit with them when we were growing up. In fact, I have a cousin who is my Aunt Edith's youngest daughter, who is, in fact, my age. So we would get together. Speaker 1: And did your mother talk about her growing up, you know, what it was like. You know, she had two stories, one being, you know, the youngest of seven-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --and then going off? Speaker 2: Well, she talked about hating being at boarding school, more because she was off by herself, although she enjoyed the work. And she talked about some incidents that occurred in Virginia with, you know, the night rider-type thing. And-- Speaker 1: Do you remember one of those? Speaker 2: No, because I don't probe what are necessarily always difficult stories, but she talks more about school and about reading very fast, doing her math faster than everybody else. And so she got bored in school, and she told me she used to pick fights and (laughter) because she was bored. And, but she also was taught by her older sister that she needed to be tough because she was the youngest in her classes typically. Speaker 1: So now, how did your parents meet? Speaker 2: I think they met in Virginia. And-- Speaker 1: So were the towns that they were from, were they close to each other? Speaker 2: They were in, both in the country. Speaker 1: In the country. Speaker 2: But the town that was closest was called Mineral, which is in Louisa County, just down toward Richmond [Virginia]. And, and then when my father [George Hiter Jackson] was in the military, they moved to New Jersey. My father was stationed at Camp Kilmer which is actually near Rutgers University where I ended up at one stage in my career. And so my, they lived in Newark. My mother actually came up, and she worked at a factory then. And she never went back to teaching. And then they moved back to Washington [D.C.]. My father's mother was there. And then they began their life together there. Speaker 1: Now, wait, let me, now, you said moved back to Washington. I-- Speaker 2: I mean they moved to Washington, I should say, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I think my father had been there earlier, and that's what I, what I meant when I said, moved back to Washington. Story_ID: 29389 Speaker 1: Now, what is your earliest memory of growing up? Speaker 2: My fifth birthday party. Speaker 1: Your earliest? Speaker 2: One of my earliest, right. Speaker 1: And tell me why? Speaker 2: Because it was my golden birthday. You know what the golden birthday is? It's when you turn the age of the day you were born. So I was born August the fifth. And so my fifth birthday sticks in my mind because we had a party to celebrate my golden birthday. And so I kind of remember that. And I remember some other things. We lived in, we lived with my grandmother for a while, my father's mother. And then my parents [George Hiter Jackson and Beatrice Cosby Jackson] moved into an apartment of their own in Northeast Washington on Kenilworth Avenue. And so we lived there. And Kenilworth Avenue which is even more of a busy road because 295, the highway runs through there now. But my parents never wanted us to cross Kenilworth Avenue because it was always very busy. But you know how kids are, and we would sneak across. And then one day, my father [George Hiter Jackson] caught us, and my father never gave us spankings. But he did that day because he was worried about, and he wanted us, and wanted to reinforce the message of not doing dangerous things. Speaker 1: Now, with your, can you describe or first, let me ask you to give your siblings' names and birth order? Speaker 2: My, the eldest, the oldest is my sister, Barbara. Barbara Jackson Avery and Barbara is a vice president and dean of student life at Occidental College in L.A. [Los Angeles, California]. My sister who's younger than I am is Gloria Jackson Joseph and she is an attorney with the National Labor Relations Board, and she's director of administration, which means she basically has all of the administrative functions as well as security and CIO [Chief Information Officer]. Prior to that, she was deputy assistant general counsel of the National Labor Relations Board. And then we had a brother who was the youngest, who passed away in 1984. Speaker 1: And he was a junior, his name? Speaker 2: His name, no, his name was George Lewis Jackson. And the Lewis was because, my mother's [Beatrice Cosby Jackson] original middle name was Lewis. Her name was Beatrice Lewis Cosby. And it came from her mother's name. And then it was passed to my brother as his middle name. Story_ID: 29390 Speaker 1: Now, Dr. Jackson, can you tell me how, what family life was like, you know, sort of growing up? Speaker 2: Sure. Well, I would say it was good. We, well, let me sort of kind of give you a bit of a progression because it changed quite dramatically when we moved from the apartment on Kenilworth Avenue to the house where my mother [Beatrice Cosby Jackson] still lives today in Northwest Washington [D.C.]. Speaker 1: So let's deal with Kenilworth Avenue first. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: How old were you, I mean what was the span of time that you lived there? How old were you--? Speaker 2: I don't remember exactly how old I was when we moved. I think I was maybe a couple of years old. And then we moved from there when I was seven to the house where basically, I grew up most of the time. So I think we were there from when I was maybe age two or so to, maybe three, to age seven. I started elementary school there. When we started school, the schools were segregated by law. And so my sisters and I, my brother was too young, my sisters and I, but particularly, my older sister [Barbara Jackson Avery] and I, took a bus from Kenilworth Avenue to what was called the Charles Young School, which was on Benning Road in Northeast. And it's interesting when people talk about busing because we couldn't go to schools that were closer. And we went to Charles Young which was actually a pretty good school. But my sister and I were always together, and our mother told us never to leave each other. And my sister always put me on the bus first because I was younger than she was. And so I do remember an incident where we were getting on the bus, and the bus driver who was not very friendly, and I got on and then he closed the door on my sister's leg. This is Barbara [Jackson Avery]. And I'm beating on the guy's back because he's about to pull off with my sister with one leg in the door and one leg on the ground. And then he finally sort of, he may have inched a little bit, and then I'm beating him, and he stops. Then I get off the bus and then we wait for the next bus. But I think all these things taught us a lot of self reliance, familial loyalty, looking out for each other because we had to do it. And, you know, my parents were not able to take us to school. So we had to (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Because they were working. Speaker 2: That's correct. Speaker 1: Right, okay. Story_ID: 29391 Speaker 1: Now, in your neighborhood, so on this--would you call it a neighborhood on the street? Yes. Speaker 2: You mean originally? Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Well, it was an apartment complex. Speaker 1: It was an apartment, okay, okay. Do you remember any of the neighbors or what you, who was around you or? No. 'Cause you were young (simultaneous). Speaker 2: Not a lot because actually, I was young and I frankly played with my sisters. Speaker 1: So you and your sisters, you know how sometimes kids don't get along and parents are saying, will you please? You know you've got your sisters play with, you're saying that there was a real sense of a unit there? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. I mean we went through our little wrinkles, more when we were in junior high school, maybe early high school, but no, we would do that. And I used to fight for my sisters. I was probably the more aggressive one. And so if anybody did anything to my brother [George Lewis Jackson] or to any of my sisters, I would then go outside and take it up with those people. Speaker 1: (Laughter) That's cute. So you were not naturally a typical second child in many ways? Speaker 2: Well, I don't really know about that-- Speaker 1: What a typical--? Speaker 2: --but maybe not. Speaker 1: Now, when you, tell me about the move at age seven, when you decide--. Do you remember your parents [George Hiter Jackson and Beatrice Cosby Jackson] even saying anything about, you know, any anticipation, you know, that there was gonna be a move? Speaker 2: Yeah, they told us about it, that we were going to be moving into a house, and that it would be in a different part of Washington [D.C.], that we would really like it. But there wouldn't be so many Negro kids around because they moved into an area where there were just a handful of what we call African American families today. And it was neighborhood that was beginning to change. It had been predominantly white, and as blacks started to move in, then the white families started to move out. Now, what was interesting about it is that when we first moved there, which as I said was in '53 [1953], it meant that it proceeded the 1954 'Brown vs. Board of Education of Topeka' decision and therefore, we actually had to go past the white primary school to go to the one for, as we said, "Negroes." And so we went past Barnard School to Parkview. And, now that was too far to walk to, and there were no real busses. There was no direct public transportation that would stop near where we lived, and then drop us near the school. The thing about going to Charles Young ironically, when we lived on Kenilworth Avenue was that a public D.C. transit bus would stop very near the complex we lived in and drop us off essentially in front of where the school was, but not when we moved to Northwest Washington [D.C.]. And so the men, the few African American families there pooled their resources. And the fathers would alternate taking us to school because then we had one car. And then another would pick us up in the afternoon. And so we were in that school about, I was in it about two years. And then the schools were desegregated in 1955. And then we went to Barnard School, and Barnard was walking distance from our house. It was about three blocks, maybe four, but again, initially we couldn't go there, at least not for the first two years we lived in the neighborhood. Story_ID: 29392 Speaker 1: Now, in that time, so you guys were excited really about this. You had a, you were living in a house-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and there was a tremendous sense of excitement. Can you describe the street that you lived on? Speaker 2: We lived on a quiet street, residential street in this-- Speaker 1: Name? Speaker 2: Farragut Street, Northwest. And we lived in what people refer to as a row house. It was three stories, and then it had an attic and a first floor, you know, little small foyer, living room, dining room, kitchen and a back porch and upstairs, three bedrooms and a bathroom and a back porch, and then a basement, which my father [George Hiter Jackson] finished. And it had a bathroom there. And so that's where we would play when the weather was bad or in the evening, we'd play in the basement. And then we had a backyard, but it was, it was narrow but a long backyard and it went up a hill. And so we would play in the backyard, particularly when we were younger so our mother [Beatrice Cosby Jackson] could keep an eye on us or just so we would be close by. We had a front porch, and what's interesting is (laughter), it's interesting how things come around. We had this porch furniture. It was metal, and we used to have this thing we called a glider. And you know that that glider is still on the front porch (laughter). So, but it got painted over and over and over again through the years. And so we would spend time there. And in those days, you know, we all had our chores. Now, my sister's, particularly my older sister [Barbara Jackson Avery] had allergies to things. So I, because I was the next oldest, I spent a lot of time with my father, helping him cut the grass, you know, raking leaves, cutting flowers. We had these beautiful rose bushes in our backyard of all different colors. And then we had this one rose bush that was very deep red. And the way you would go into the basement, we could go into the basement from the outside. And the basement was kind of half submerged, so we would go down these steps. But this rosebush formed kind of an arch over that stairway, and, so we could cut fresh flowers. And so we would do all of those things. And then in the front, we would have begonias and then we all had to take turns watering the grass and, you know, that kind of thing. And that's how I started getting interested in collecting bumble bees. Story_ID: 29393 Speaker 1: Now, was your father the gardener and your mother wasn't or did they both-- Speaker 2: That's correct, see. My father [George Hiter Jackson] was the gardener. He did the outside work. My mother [Beatrice Cosby Jackson] would water the grass sometimes. But she did the internal work, the cooking, a lot of it--although my father was a very good cook, and the cleaning. And we would have chores, we had assigned chores for the week to do certain things, and do the ironing and all of that kind of thing. And so we, some of us helped my mother and some of us helped my father. And so one of us might be assigned to iron the clothes in a given week, and someone else had the assignment to clean the bathrooms. And someone else had to do the kitchen and then someone had to vacuum, although in the early days, it was more sweeping. But someone had to vacuum. And then we watered the grass and washed the porch down and washed the front walk. And then once my father cut the grass, then wash the walk to clean it all up and water the grass. So on, so it was a, in a way, when I think back on it, it was pretty organized. And so, but we just did it. I mean it was the way it was. Speaker 1: That's exactly what my--you know, I was saying, this is an organized structure, you know, and you think about that in terms of childhood and how you're raised. I wanna ask you what sights, if you take yourself back to Farragut, you know, there, and you're seven, eight, you know, nine, but tell me what sights, smells and sounds remind you of growing up? Speaker 2: The smell of cut grass, the smell of the roses, the smell of cars. We weren't so much with catalytic converters in those days. The smell of my mother's perfume. We used to like to use her perfume. The smell of my father's after shave lotion, the smell of food cooking, those kinds of things. We also had certain meals we had on certain days. You know, certain days of the week we had meatballs and spaghetti. On Saturdays, we would have pork and beans and hot dogs. Some other days, on Sundays, we would typically have a roast, you know, a roast beef or sometimes roast chicken. And then we would have fried chicken or other things and maybe Friday, we'd have fish. And so we would, as I said, when I think back on it, we didn't think about it at the time, it was pretty organized. And then initially, we didn't have to do all these things. My mother did a lot. Story_ID: 29394 Speaker 1: And when we were young, when we first started going to school on Farragut Street [Washington, D.C.], one of my mother's daughters came to live with us. And she wanted to move from the country--one of my sister's daughters-- Speaker 2: Mother's [Beatrice Cosby Jackson] sister's daughters, your cousin. Speaker 1: Cousin. Her name is Mildred. And Mildred came to live with us. And she lived with us for a couple of years, and she wanted to come to Washington [D.C.]. Her parents wanted her to be in a safe place. And so she stayed with us. And she would help with the chores and with cooking and looking after us and the like. And then gradually, she went out and got her own apartment. And then we started doing more and more of the things that she and mother used to do alone. And my mother went to work, and so we all knew we had to be home at a certain time, and we were. And we would start our homework. And as we got older, then we would actually start dinner. But before we would wait, you know, when we were younger, we'd wait for my mother to come. She would, or if my cousin, Mildred, was there, she would cook. And so it was, it's an interesting existence, but if you actually ask me about it, I thought it was fun because I loved school. I actually liked doing housework. I like working in the yard. And in the summers, I would love to ride my bicycle to the library, to the public library. And we could take out five books at a time. So I would always take out the maximum number of books. And, and what I loved about it is I could just structure my life the way I want. Now, my, and my mother was working. My sisters were doing their thing. So I used to have this routine where I would make Kool-Aid, remember Kool-Aid? And I'd have, I loved saltines. And so I would sit in the basement and I would read half the day, sipping my Kool-Aid and eating these saltines. Now, usually in the morning in the summer, before I'd start reading, I went to take swimming lessons at a pool at Coolidge High School. Now, it turns out I never really learned to swim (laughter)-- Story_ID: 29395 Speaker 1: So you were saying everyone had chores to do? Speaker 2: Yes, now, when we were very young, before we really moved up to Farragut Street [Washington, D.C.], my mother [Beatrice Cosby Jackson] didn't work. But then once my cousin came to live with us, my cousin, Mildred, then my mother went to work. And she worked at a home for retarded children in Laurel, Maryland. And so she actually had to go there on public transportation. Now, how that all worked, I cannot tell you. I mean it started with her walking down to Georgia Avenue, Northwest, which was a couple of blocks away, early in the morning before, really before daylight, particularly, in some parts of the year, and catching a bus and then going off to the Maryland line and getting onto something else, and ultimately, ending up in Laurel. And even though Laurel is only twenty or so miles from downtown Washington [D.C.], it took a long time for her to get to work. And she tells us a story about walking to Georgia Avenue one night, early one morning, but it was still dark. So she hears these footsteps behind her. So then when she sped up, the footsteps sped up. And then she sped up some more, and the footsteps sped up some more. So then she starts running, and she runs down, and finally gets to Georgia Avenue. It's more light down there, and it's my father [George Hiter Jackson] (laughter). And he was following her because she had forgotten something. And he was trying to catch her. So, but it just says something about her going off. Now, I'm not sure she would want to be doing that these days. But that's what she did. Speaker 1: He didn't call out for her (laughter)? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Speaker 1: Like a stalker (laughter) and it's her husband. Speaker 2: (Unclear) But he was quiet. I mean he didn't wanna frighten her, he said. And, but he was, because I don't think he realized how much she could hear his footsteps and so on. But he was a thoughtful person actually, and would do a lot for people. Story_ID: 29396 Speaker 1: So tell me, what was the difference in your parents, and, you know, who was the disciplinarian and who was the nurturer or? Speaker 2: Well, I would say they were both nurturers. My mother [Beatrice Cosby Jackson] used to read to us a lot, and she taught us all to read before we went to kindergarten. And I think that's how, we're all readers. In fact, if we get together these days, my sisters and I, or my sisters with my mother, people would say, well, you guys don't talk to each other, because we do talk. But then we'll sit and we'll read. Somebody's reading the paper. My mother's working a crossword puzzle. Somebody's reading a novel. Somebody's reading a magazine, and that's the way we were. And then my father [George Hiter Jackson] used to read a lot. He read, he used to read current events. He was keeping up with the political scene. And he used to read a lot about business, and he didn't have the formal education that my mother had, but he knew a lot of things. And then he also would read 'Popular Mechanics' and 'Popular Science' and things like that. And he would build things. He built a dark room in the basement, in the back of the basement, and he developed his own pictures. And he loved cameras, you know, really nice cameras. And so he loved taking pictures and developing them. My mother, both my parents in some ways, people would say were quiet and are quiet. But if a person got to know them, then they would talk. My father was shy. I think my mother was just more taciturn. And, but she'll talk to you. It's not that she's afraid because she was tough. My mother was a tough one, and she was probably somewhat more the disciplinarian. And what that meant was then, if you ever were disciplined by my father, it was the end of the world. It meant you had really done something that was, really crossed the line. And, but they taught us hard work, the value of hard work. Story_ID: 29397 Speaker 1: We didn't really look at TV very much. We had a TV, and I don't remember when in the course of things we got it, but we used to look at some programs, classic programs, 'Howdy Doody Time,' 'Mickey Mouse' and all of that. There weren't a whole lot of programs on targeted to African Americans in those days. But we would read a lot. And so for me, to go to the library and spend time in the library, to take out the maximum number of books, to ride my bicycle back home and then to sit in the basement or to sit on the front porch and just read, was to me a good time. I had a good time doing that kind of thing. But we also did sports things. I was anybody's varsity athlete, but we would do the jacks, and we would do hide and seek with the kids in the neighborhood. We would do Hop-Scotch and Double-Dutch and then we used to play a ball game that we played called Drive back. Now, let me tell you what Drive Back was. It was interesting because the name described the game. We used to play it in the alleys between the streets because we lived on a city street, and we weren't gonna play in the middle of the street. So all Drive Back was, was you had a ball, and you just kicked it back and forth, and the idea was to drive the other team back to a certain line, right, ergo, "Drive Back" (laughter). The other thing we used to do was to race go carts. And we used to race them in the alley because, again, we weren't going down the middle of the street. But we would race, and, but we would cross the street because we would go from one alley, across the street, down another one until we had no more downhill slope. And my father [George Hiter Jackson] used to help us design our go-carts, and so we just, we used to love that. And I really liked it, and getting into what it would take to make the go-cart faster and so my sister, Gloria and I, in particular, used to like this, doing these go-cart races. Speaker 2: Now, let me ask you. You're, go-carts, I usually think of with young boys-- Speaker 1: I-- Speaker 2: --and not girls. Do you think, now, was your brother [George Lewis Jackson] born at that point? Speaker 1: He was the youngest, and he was not born when we first, well, he was born when we first moved to, but he was a toddler when we moved to Farragut Street. And therefore, for a lot of the early growing up, for him all of us were--but we were like stair steps, so each of us were two years apart. Speaker 2: All of you? Speaker 1: All of us. Two years, plus some months, two years, plus some months, two years, plus some months. It's almost as if it was planned out. But be that as it may, so I think because I had more of an interest in these things because I was interested in how things worked and because of our being older than our brother, I think my father spent the time doing things with us and with me in particular, that one might associate with it. But I also had dolls, and we used to make our dolls clothes, and my mother [Beatrice Cosby Jackson] taught us how to do that, and you know, taking care of the hair and all of that. And the dolls, you know, we would lay out and have kind of a little fantasy world associated with them. But then we went from having doll, making dolls' clothes, actually to making clothes. I actually made some of the clothes that I actually wore in junior high school and high school. And I mean really the clothes that we would go back to school in. You know, how at the beginning of the school year one had one's one or two new outfits. I used to make those clothes. Speaker 2: The McCall patterns. Speaker 1: That's right. All of the above with the Singer sewing machine and so forth. Story_ID: 29398 Speaker 1: I wanna ask you. Do you remember the first time you entered a library, how it felt to you because, I mean you have this love. Do you remember? Was it--? Speaker 2: It was probably when I was in elementary school, once we had moved to Farragut Street. And there was a library called the Petworth Library that was in walking distance from our house, a good walk, but walking distance. And I just liked the smell of that. You had asked me about the smell. I liked the card catalog and just all the books around. And there was a kind of quietude about the library, but a comfort that I really enjoyed. And so I could sit there for days and just read in the library. But my parents [George Hiter Jackson and Beatrice Cosby Jackson] had their rules, and so one was gonna be back home at a certain time. But I used to go to the library to read, and then I'd take the books home and read at home. But in the summers, I would go to the library, take the books and go back. The reason is that I liked riding around on my bicycle just looking at the different neighborhoods and different streets, and being outside and smelling things. And so that's what I did. Now, during the school year, I would go to the library after school to do my homework a lot. And then I'd be done with it by the time I walked home. And also because it was kind of social. One would meet one's friends there and so on. Speaker 1: Did your sisters have the same fascination with the library as you or were you more the academic sort of--you used the term academic? Speaker 2: Well, all of us, my younger [Gloria Jackson Joseph] sister was probably a lot like me except her interests went more to the language arts and mine went more to science and math. My older sister [Barbara Jackson Avery] actually did not go to college initially. She went to work for the government. And then she moved to California with her husband. And then it was when she had moved there, after she'd had a child that she actually went to school. And she started in a two-year, and then she ended up going to the University of California at San Diego. She did extremely well. And then she started graduate school there and then finished her doctorate at Pepperdine [University, Malibu, California]. My younger sister went to Trinity College in [Washington] D.C. for a year, but then she ended up transferring to the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan]. And she finished at Michigan and she went to Michigan's law school. So that's where she got her law degree. And so in some sense we all ended up in similar places, but my younger sister was very highly ranked in her graduating class as was I. Speaker 1: Now, what was the young Shirley Jackson like? Who were you like and what did you think about and-- Speaker 2: Well, I-- Speaker 1: --when you were riding around on that bike or in the library or--? Speaker 2: Well, it's hard to say. I was quiet in my way, but focused, I think. I could spend a lot of time by myself and not feel especially alone, but I also liked parties. I liked doing things. I was, I used to organize the kids on our block to sweep the streets, to sweep the sidewalks. And what one could do is to sweep the sidewalks, and I'd have people do the areas in front of their homes, their houses, and then a little bit more because there wasn't a kid per house. And we would sweep the sidewalks and then sweep things into a pile and sweep it right into the street, right against the curb because in those days once a week a street sweeper would come by and cleaner and they would suck up all this. And so we'd keep the sidewalks looking really nice. Now, don't ask me why I felt that I wanted to do that because I really don't know. But I did, but I've probably always liked things to be neat and to take pride in where we were and probably influenced as well by school. When we went to Barnard, there was what was called the Barnard Improvement Council. And I was a member of the Barnard Improvement Council, and it was about keeping the playground clean and so forth. And I even remember a little song, a little ditty that we used to sing. I was a school patrol, you know, helping kids cross the street. And I used to like that. I thought it was important. Story_ID: 29399 Speaker 1: Now, I wanna talk about the difference between the first school, not--before Barnard because Barnard was after, was in 1955-- Speaker 2: Fifty-five [1955], right. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Parkview. Speaker 1: Parkview. What was the difference, except, you know, one was all black? What was the difference or was there? Speaker 2: Well, when we came, went to Barnard, by contrast, Barnard had more resources. It looked like it was somewhat better taken care of, and at that point, just looked newer and bigger library and all of those things. So that was one difference. The other is that the competition increased. And there was more exposure. Some of the kids in my classes, you know, a number of them were white. They were essentially all white in elementary school. It wasn't until I got into junior high and high school that it began to re-segregate at a certain level. Speaker 1: I see. So now, so how many, how large do you think Barnard was or how many--? Speaker 2: Well, a couple hundred kids. Speaker 1: And how many were black? Speaker 2: Probably in the early years, maybe 10 percent. Speaker 1: Do you remember any discussion about 'Brown vs. Board of Education' and--? Speaker 2: More at Parkview, not so much at Barnard-- Speaker 1: I see. Okay, so talk-- Speaker 2: --because it was going to change where we went to school. So the teachers talked about it because some of us who lived further away would be leaving Parkview because of the schools being desegregated, and therefore, we could attend the neighborhood schools, but that we should expect it to be different without a lot of discussion about how it might be different. Speaker 1: And how was it different? Was it--I mean, were the kids any different or--? Speaker 2: Actually, interestingly enough, I don't remember things that were particularly negative from the kids. We had, as I said, mainly white kids, but, you know, of all religious backgrounds, a number of Jewish kids. And I remember an Asian kid who was in my class. And the irony was that there was a guy there in math, and he and I were neck and neck all the time. His name is Bob Pearlus (ph.). And his father was a math professor, but he and I were always neck and neck. And then when we finally got into the high school, they had moved. His father became a professor at Purdue [University, West Lafayette, Indiana]. And I never saw him after that until I went to register my first year of graduate school at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. And he was coming to MIT to study math, and I was starting graduate school in physics. And then I've seen him intermittently since then over the years. And so it's kind of an interesting story because that was the nature of the competition I had at Barnard because a lot of the kids there were from very middle class and beyond families, and particularly, the white kids were well educated. And that's what I meant about the changing nature of the competition because I'm competing with this kid and his father is a, is a professor in math and my father [George Hiter Jackson] worked in the Post office. So, but I enjoyed the competition, and I, it never occurred to me that I wasn't as good or better than anybody I competed with. Speaker 1: And your father was messaging about "reach for the stars"? Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: Okay, during this time. Speaker 2: My father always felt that one had to reach beyond where one was, and that one had a responsibility. And I was also taught that by my teachers in high school, that one takes the talent one has and does the most one can with that talent. And that's the best pathway to success. Story_ID: 29400 Speaker 1: So none of--your teachers at Barnard, they had high expectations for you. They were all white or were they--? Speaker 2: They were predominately white although some black teachers. Speaker 1: Did any of the Parkview teachers end up at Barnard? Speaker 2: None that I remember, none that I remember. But what also happened is that we were tested in the sixth grade after, and, you know, this was in the post-integration of the schools period. A tracking system was put into place in Washington [D.C.]. It was what was called the basic track, business, college prep and honors. And honors was an accelerated track. And so the first year these tracks, the tracks were put in, which was going to be the year I started seventh grade. In the sixth grade, we all were tested and that first test was an intell- it was an I.Q. test. And so based on the results of the test, then we were put into different tracks. Now, after that, they still tested, but they didn't do it as an I.Q. test. So I ended up in the honors track going into what we call middle school here, but junior high school, the seventh grade. And then that's when the acceleration began. But in the, in grade school I would always work fast and I'd get into trouble because I would blurt out answers to questions. And I always, we had reading circles, and I'd read faster than everybody and the teacher thought I was a bit of a pest. So she put me out of the circle. Speaker 1: So that's why your mother [Beatrice Cosby Jackson] understood you, wasn't it? It's very similar to what she said was her-- Speaker 2: Exactly. That's right. And in fact, I got into a bit of trouble because I kind of went after a teacher once (laughter) who had put me out of the circle, but I was still shouting out the answers from where I was sitting. And she told me to shut up. And then I kind of went at her. And so then, of course, my mother had to come to school. But when she came, she said she would punish me for doing that, but that the teacher needed to give me more work and more challenging work to do. And so after that I would have some special reading assignments and math problems and things like that. And then, as I said, once I went into seventh grade, then I started into this honors program. Speaker 1: Did you like the honors program? Were you or was that, was the guy, the one who ended up at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], was he in that program or he sep--left at that point? Speaker 2: He was there. Speaker 1: He was there. Speaker 2: But then he left, you know, as we got toward high school. And so it was, I didn't think of it so much as competition as fun. I know it sounds a bit corny. But I did like it. I used to love doing all the math problems I could. And then, I would, I started taking Latin in the seventh grade, and I actually studied Latin for six years, five years in formal courses, and then the last year I just did readings with my Latin teacher. And so I used to sit on the front porch and read things in Latin. That was like reading a novel for me, and I enjoyed that. And, but it wasn't all work and no play because a group of us formed the, a group of African American young ladies, we formed a club, the TOP's. It stood for the Teens of Personality. Speaker 1: Who came up with that name? Speaker 2: I don't remember. It might have been Marilyn, a woman named Marilyn Stewart. We had thought about Girls of Personality, but as you know, that parallels a political party. So we decided that the TOP's were better, besides, we said we were tops. So the Teens of Personality seemed to work. And we even had our own little uniform, little dress code, which we would wear, all of us on Fridays. We had green pleated skirts, white blouses and little white leaved blazers and we had these little hats, little cloth turn-up hats that were green, that had T-O-P on them (laughter). And so that's what we wore on Fridays. Speaker 1: So who put on the T-O-P? Who did that do you think? Did you--? Speaker 2: You mean how did we get it on there? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I think when we got our clothes and we got our parents to pay for it and had it actually stitched into the hat. Story_ID: 29401 Speaker 1: Now, what else was significant with you during that time period that was happening because you're sort of maturing. You know that you have, that you're a good student, you know, and you're being acknowledged for that. Are there, what else is influencing you because up to this point, it seemed, even though your parents are working, that you're almost very focused on the family, you know, and very influenced by family? Speaker 2: Well, I haven't told you the whole thing really because, especially once I went into the accelerated program, I used to participate in a lot of different things, spelling bees, model U.N. [United Nations] I was on 'It's Academic,' different things like that, a special program that the American Heart Association sponsored on the, lectures on the cardiovascular system for student, science fair projects and very involved in our church. Believe it or not, with my voice I actually sang soprano in the church choir. But then, not very long, but I did sing in the church choir the whole time I was in high school. And we used to have youth services on Sunday and the young people would actually give the message. And so I did that. And then our church sponsored an oratorical contest, and I actually won our church oratorical contest with a subject that became, that I used as the subject, but expanded for my high school valedictory address. I was the valedictorian of the class. And then I participated in a spelling bee in the church, but then also citywide spelling bees and things like that. And then, but we had our club. And so the T-O-P's would have a party every Friday. And we would have it at someone's house, and we'd invite our boyfriends over and have food and the little red bulbs in the basement and playing the records and so on. So, (laughter) and I liked to dance, and I could dance. I thought I was pretty good. And, so we would do that. And then on Saturdays I would go to choir rehearsal and to youth programs at the church. And on Sundays, we'd go to church service. And then afterwards, we would take rides around the city. My father [George Hiter Jackson] would ride us around and show us different neighborhoods. And then we, in those days, we had cousins, and this was even before I was in high school, people didn't call you up to say, "Well, are you busy on Sunday afternoon? I'd like to stop by or Saturday afternoon." The bell would ring and there would be some cousins from Richmond [Virginia]. So they had driven up from Richmond or another part of the city [Washington, D.C.]. Some of them lived in the city. And then, of course, just cook more food and lay it all out. And then my mother [Beatrice Cosby Jackson] would get together with some of her nieces and nephews because what was interesting is that some of them were closer to her age, even though they were her sister's children. Some of them were closer to her age than to our age, so they actually socialized. So they would play cards and all of that stuff on Saturdays, and the kids, you'd be standing around looking. And they'd say, go down to the basement. You don't need to be standing around here. So, and then when they, they brought some of their kids over, then we would play with them, you know, get into trouble. But in many ways, you are right. Many of the early social things were with family, my siblings, but also my cousins and those kinds of things. But also then, neighborhood focused where we would play with the kids in the neighborhood, fight with the kids in the neighborhood, you know. But then we also had school-based social life because that's where, you know, the boyfriends came from; that's where the T-O-P organization started. We'd go to each other's houses for parties. And then we used to roller skate. And my older sister [Barbara Jackson Avery] really liked to roller skate. And so she was the one that really got into that, and there was this rink called the Kalorama Rink. And it was a fairly long way from our house, but we, maybe it was a couple of miles, but we would walk. And we would go skating, interestingly enough, if we'd done all our homework and all of that, on a Sunday evening, and then we would walk home. And it would be dark. And I remember passing these little hotdog stands. And we could buy a hotdog for a nickel. It shows you how long ago it was, and carrying our skates slung over our shoulder because we had our own roller skates. And those were the days with the four wheels as opposed to the in-line wheels, but people would, you know, be doing their little thing with the music, you know, dancing. You know, how you had those kinds of dancing way to skate. So we used to do all that. I wasn't the best, but I could do my thing. Speaker 1: I was gonna say because I was--so you, there was a special tradition around skating rinks. Speaker 2: That's right. And, yes, so I used to roller skate. And I used to go with my sister, my older sister, in particular, and then we'd walk home. And we had to be at home by a certain time, and we did that. Story_ID: 29402 Speaker 1: Okay, my question was, what was sort of, because Barnard was white, and that's right after Brown vs. Board [of Education, 1954], but then you go to-- Speaker 2: To McFarland (ph.)-- Speaker 1: To McFarland. Speaker 2: --Junior High. Speaker 1: And that was what? Speaker 2: That was, it was mixed, but-- Speaker 1: It was mixed. Speaker 2: --but, yeah, well, a fairly large number of white students. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then Roosevelt. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Theodore Roosevelt High School, and there were some white kids, and then over time and by the time we graduated, it was predominantly black. Speaker 1: That is amazing because that's saying a lot about the neighborhood. It changed. Speaker 2: Well, the neighborhood was changing-- Speaker 1: Changed, okay. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Okay, so-- Speaker 2: So I went to Charles Young which was segregated, and that was the one where we had to take the bus from Kenilworth Avenue to get to school. Then when we moved to Farragut Street, it was Parkview, which was segregated. Then after the Brown decision in '55 [1955], that's when I went to Barnard. And Barnard was definitely predominantly white. Then after Barnard, went to McFarland, I went to McFarland Junior High School, and McFarland still had a lot, a fairly large number of white kids, but it was definitely, you know, more and more black kids, maybe fifty-fifty or more. Then in high school, then it seemed to even accelerate more. So by the time I graduated, it was predominantly African American, and so that's kind of the progression in the schools. So it, the schools were integrated and then became de facto, re-segregated. Speaker 1: Okay, so what is happening on the teacher side with this? Is that, because that's really relatively a short period of time. Speaker 2: Well, obviously in schools like, in schools like Charles Young and Parkview, the teachers were all African American. Speaker 1: I'm talking about from, you know, Barnard, from Barnard on? Speaker 2: There were quite a few white teachers, although there were certain black teachers who were invited to come teach there. Then at McFarland, there were a lot of white teachers, but some black. At Roosevelt High School, the principal was a white male, the assistant principal for girls was a white woman. The assistant principal for boys was a black man. My teachers at that point were predominantly black teachers, women, but there was an under, under theme here that goes with this. When the schools were integrated, there were certain teachers who were recruited, some of them recruited from out of the city and from other states to come and teach. And they wanted people of a certain type who had a certain education, certain kind of experience, and some said, looked a certain way. Speaker 1: Can you discuss that? Speaker 2: Well, a number of them were fair, very fair. And, but they also, but the real characteristic of these women was that they were extremely bright. Many of them had gotten their first degrees at a HBCU [historically black college or university] but had gotten master's degrees at predominantly white institutions. And they were women who, if they had lived in my time, would have been classics professors or could have been if they wished to, instead of Latin teachers. A Latin teacher could have been a mathematician as opposed to a math teacher, an economics professor as opposed to an economics teacher and so it goes. And now, and so that's who my teachers were. I had a few men, but mainly women. And I was, those women had a big effect on me, particularly, my math teacher who just passed away within the last year [2005-2006]. Her name was Marie Moss Smith. And she did work as a mathematician sort of statistician for the government for a time. But my Latin teacher, Mrs. Davenport, later Mrs. Ariner (ph.) was a big influence as well. And she was the one with whom I studied Latin for, you know, all of high school. Then Mrs. Blackburn was my economics teacher, and her husband was dean of students at Howard University [Washington, D.C.] and a professor. She tried to talk me into gong to Howard instead of MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. But I decided I would go to MIT. And so it went. And these women were just first rate, first-rate minds, very focused. And they would talk to us about careers and life and they were all really well educated for their time. And we enjoyed that, and because of the way we were placed, our classes were small. And the math class was especially small. We had about seven students in the class, but as well, the other classes were small by today's standards with ten to no more than twenty kids. And so, and we got a lot of attention as a consequence. And they pushed us a lot. And so I finished the standard college prep curriculum a year early. Speaker 1: When you were in eleventh grade? Speaker 2: Right. But I didn't go to college then. Instead, I studied advanced subjects and did what kids would call AP [Advanced Placement] courses now, and some college-level courses. And that's how I spent my senior year. Speaker 1: But that was structured for you, really by your--? Speaker 2: Well, it was structured for those of us who were in the honors program. Story_ID: 29403 Speaker 1: So the honors program began at seven? Speaker 2: That's correct. Speaker 1: The seventh grade, sorry. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And continued really sort of-- Speaker 2: Through high school. Speaker 1: But almost uninterrupted. Were you with the same kids sort of? Speaker 2: Pretty much. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In fact, I spent a significant part of my educational career with a couple of students that I met at Barnard Elementary School, and then we went all the way through. Speaker 1: Do you remember them? Speaker 2: Well, one in particular is Camille Clay, Dr. Camille Clay. She's a psychologist, and she has her own practice in [Washington] D.C. and then another whom I met in junior high school is Linda Anderson, Linda Barry Anderson. And Linda started her own business based on having a Hallmark franchise, and then a couple of them, including one at the Pentagon. And then she had a bridal shop. And we still get together. And we were all in the T-O-Ps together, okay. And Linda was a really good math student as well. And then we used to get together for probably over twenty years, every Christmas Eve or some time during the holiday at Camille's house. And so we've all, we all came, a number of us came together when Mrs. Smith passed away. Speaker 1: Now, what made Mrs. Smith special, and what did you know really sort of about her background and her sort of love--obviously, she had a love of math. Speaker 2: She did. Well, you know, she was a talented person. She did very well in school herself. She got her master's degree and actually did some work toward a doctorate in her field. She worked for the government for a time. She taught in the South, and then she taught in Washington [D.C.]. And, but she was relentless in terms of what she felt she wanted us to learn and her focus on never giving up and on high standards. And she also, in addition to what she would teach us, she made us teach each other. And so by teaching, we would understand the concepts. But it also taught us to help each other, to work with each other. Speaker 1: Now, were you helping each other or were you ahead of everyone in your, you know, in this small group? Speaker 2: I was probably ahead, right. I was ahead (unclear) (simultaneous)--. Speaker 1: So, you mean you were teaching others and (laughter)-- Speaker 2: I did a lot of teaching, right. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 29404 Speaker 1: But let me--tell me what about math, you know, really appealed to you and what about it, and was there a certain type, you know, was it all math? Speaker 2: It was all math. Speaker 1: It didn't matter? Speaker 2: It didn't matter. Speaker 1: Algebra, geometry-- Speaker 2: Algebra, geometry, trigonometry, whatever, calculus, all math. Speaker 1: What about it appealed to you, though, in the way that it did? I mean what, was it--oh, see we forgot the bumble bees, but I mean the bumble bees were different. But what about that, what did you like, the problem solving? Speaker 2: I just-- Speaker 1: The formulas? Speaker 2: Everything. I mean it's hard to explain. I liked doing geometry proofs. I liked solving the algebra. I loved doing trigonometry problems. I loved calculus and I loved it just for itself, but I also liked applying it to problems. And so I loved word problems where one had to apply it and to apply it in science. So I just enjoyed it. It was--some people like to read. I like to read, I love to read, but I equally well liked doing math. And so I loved it, in and of itself as well as the ability to use it to solve problems. But I also liked nature, and that's why I collected bumble bees. Speaker 1: But this whole story of you collecting, you know, bumble bees and really studying the bumble bees, what appealed to you or especially, the fact, you know, where you actually got bit much, you know, later in life, (laughter) by a bee (laughter) and then realized you were allergic-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: But I mean what about that, you know, intrigued you? Speaker 2: Ah, we used to have these things, they're basically like weeds, called holly hocks in our backyard. And so I used to watch the bees fly into the flower, and I would be watching them, you know, sampling. And I wanted to study them more closely, but they would fly away, of course. And so I decided that I wanted to capture them. I never was enamored about having an insect collection because, other than maybe the ability to do the anatomy, these were dead things. And I wanted to study them as live creatures. And so because of the nature of the holly hock flower, it was easy to close the petals and pluck the flower and drop it into a mason jar or a mayonnaise jar and punch holes in it. And so I was just interested in questions, and I'm still like that, questions that said, that tried to answer what would happen if there was a different diet and if one had an artificially produced diet, meaning sugar and so on, would that make these bees behave differently. If I put in the bumble bees with yellow jackets and wasps, who would emerge, and would they behave differently? And if I kept them in the dark or in a cool place, what would happen versus being in the light and a warmer place. So I used to keep them, you know, under our, I mentioned that we would go into the basement from the yard and go a half level down. And then to go up on the main floor of the house through the back porch, one had to go a half level up. So that meant that there was a distance under the back porch that was a crawl space. And so when I started collecting the bees, I knew we weren't gonna keep them in the house as such. So what I did was the space under the porch was actually cemented over, and I washed it, I used to wash it every week with a hose. And I would, there were boards under the back porch that provided like shelves, shelves, shelving. And so I would keep the jars on these shelves under the back porch, and then I could sit there on the concrete and do my thing, look at them, examine them, write things up about them based on what I had fed them the day before. And then I would take them out and put them in the sunshine for a while and put them out for varying numbers of hours and look at what would happen to them. Now, the tricky part was transferring, you know, to, if I had a wasp in one jar to get it into a jar with a bumble bee, and sometimes they would fly away and--but I had to be careful. But I liked, I would sit under that porch with these bees for a long time. I always tried to let them go though, before they died. So I had a kind of internal clock relative to, after having studied them for a while, relative to how long it would be before they would sort of slow down in this artificial environment. Speaker 1: Now, how long would it be? Speaker 2: Oh, it could be, depends on the insect and how mature it was. It could be a couple of days. It could be a week, but I would try to let them go before then. I didn't want to have a dead insect. Speaker 1: Now, how long did you have your bumble bee collection? Speaker 2: A few years. Speaker 1: Okay, now-- Speaker 2: I mean it would be summer project because obviously, there were no bees during the year. Speaker 1: Now, what, did you ever think about being a doctor with that, you know, because it--? Speaker 2: I did. I was interested in pediatric cardiology. But to be honest with you, my interest in math made me pick another subject. Story_ID: 29405 Speaker 1: Now, this last, tell me also in high school, are there other things, I know you have TOPs [Teens of Personality], but what other things are influencing you, you know, because we become, as young adults, aware of things. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: And you were active in church, right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And you were in a Baptist church? Speaker 2: That's correct. Speaker 1: Was it of the whole Baptist tradition? Speaker 2: Well, it depends on what you mean (laughter), but-- Speaker 1: Well, there're high Baptists and they're low--I mean they're-- Speaker 2: Well, we didn't, we had people who would get happy, but in general, it was not the Evangelical and that kind. It was a kind of quieter Baptist church. But, you know, in high school, I was in the Latin club. We had a lot of clubs, math club, I was the head of the math club and the Junior Honor Society, and the Honor Society. And there were meetings of these groups and we had projects. We also did service projects, and so it was a full agenda between school and school work, T-O-Ps, our boyfriends, skating, you know, the games in the neighborhood, American Heart Association lectures, spelling bees, oratorical contests, trips, all these things. So we would travel to visit our cousins down in Virginia, and that was interesting. And you might appreciate some of this. Even though schools might have been desegregated, other things were not. So even though this was a hundred mile trip or so, particularly going down to Richmond [Virginia], my parents [George Hiter Jackson and Beatrice Cosby Jackson] would make sandwiches. They'd have a, make a cooler with Kool-Aid. Then they would take toilet paper and bottles, jugs of water, and then we had a ritual where for an hour before we left, we couldn't drink anything. And so why all these preparations? Because we couldn't stop and use public rest facilities, and we couldn't stop and get food. So we would, my mother [Beatrice Cosby Jackson] might make ham sandwiches or cheese sandwiches. So if we, you know, were hungry, and as kids, we were always hungry. And then in the unlikely event that one of us just couldn't make it, then my father [George Hiter Jackson] would pull off to the side of the road, and we'd go into the woods and do our thing, and that's what the toilet paper was for, but that's what the water was, to pour it on our hands and wipe our hands, and, you know, kick some dirt over the tissues and continue on. And so I think that's also why when our cousins would show up, of course, there'd be more cooking because one would know that people were hungry. And the first thing people would do is run to the rest room, right, run to the bathroom. Story_ID: 29406 Speaker 1: Now, was there ever talk about, like the changes in the country, you know, what was going on, being first, you know, sort of proving the race? Was there any discussion about that with--? Speaker 2: In our house? Speaker 1: Um-hum, or around you-- Speaker 2: I would say the following. There were kind of several streams. One stream was one that had to do with being careful, understanding the way the world was, and understanding the nature of the risks that little black kids could get into if they went into certain neighborhoods and certain areas that were white areas. The second part of the risk factor related to traveling in the South and the extraordinary preparations that one would do so as not to have to stop, if at all possible between when we lef- pulled away from our house and when we got to our cousin or aunt's or whatever, house. So that was this whole thing about creating a safe space and behaviors that created corridors of safety. A second had to do with the opportunity once schools were desegregated, that even though life would still be hard, that there was more hope and therefore, the responsibility that we had by virtue of that opportunity, and that people like me who had talent, great talent, people felt the responsibility that I had to do well, and, of course, be a good example. And then there was then discussion particularly in the early stages of the Civil Rights Movement and when Dr. Martin Luther King [Jr.] came on the scene with what was going on in the South with the marches, with the sacrifices people were making, with the hosing of people by, you know, how people would march and the police would hose them and the dogs. And I was still in high school when there was the March on Washington. I wasn't there. My parents [George Hiter Jackson and Beatrice Cosby Jackson] thought it might be dangerous. And they were really focused on keeping us safe. And, but everybody, everything stopped. You know, nobody did anything that day. We listened to what Dr.[Martin Luther] King [Jr.] had to say. Speaker 1: Do you remember listening? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, and watching on television. And then I was able to get a copy, my own copy on a reel-to-reel tape, remember the reel-to-reel tape decks, of Dr. King's speech. And I've kept it. And it was very meaningful to me because I was a child of that era, and I was very sensitive about the risks people were taking in the South and very focused on the, you know, Little Rock and all of those things and James Meredith and integrating Old Miss [University of Mississippi, Oxford, Mississippi] all of those kinds of things. And, so those were always there, and we would talk about them. And they, but they came, didn't come to a head until I was applying to college. Story_ID: 29407 Speaker 1: Well, let's talk about that, you know, your [college] application because there were different views about where you should go, right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay, you already said you had one teacher who was a proponent of Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], but that was, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, but she also supported my going to MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: Oh, to MIT, okay. But you did, so talk about, because it was the assistant--? Speaker 2: Principal for boys who actually suggested that I apply to MIT. Speaker 1: Now, why was, how did he get in the picture sort of? That's (unclear) (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: Because I worked sort of as a volunteer in the principal's office. And so if I had a free period, I would go and help them do filing and all of that. And I did, yeah, it was an honor because I was a good student. So I did that, and there was an assistant principal for girls, but she didn't pay much attention to me. And the assistant principal for boys, Mr. Boyd, did. And he would talk to me about how talented I was and generally and particularly in math and science. And he thought I needed to get out of Washington [D.C.] and really go to an institution that really focused on that and would help develop my abilities. And he started talking to me about MIT. And then there was a counselor, his name was Mr. Brown, and he talked to me about, "Don't worry. We'll figure out a way for you to afford this." And so between the two of them, you know, I started getting warmed up about MIT. Now, I really didn't apply to very many schools. I took a test at Howard, and I think it was an admissions type test, but I never really applied to Howard, but they admitted me and gave me a big scholarship. And then I applied to George Washington University [Washington, D.C.]. And George Washington had a system then where you would take a test in language arts, grammar, composition, spelling. And if you got a certain score, in the nineties, you would be able to skip. It was like an advance placement, de facto. So three of us took it when we were juniors in high school. And one of us got ninety-five, one got ninety-six, one got ninety-seven. And then we took it again as seniors, and one got ninety-seven, one ninety-eight, one ninety-nine. And so George Washington admitted each of us and gave each one of us a four-year scholarship. And two of them went, two of my classmates went, but I didn't. So I was actually about as good in the language arts as I was in math and science. When I took the SATs, I did, you know, well in both of them. I don't remember exactly what it was, but it was above seven hundred and so on. Speaker 1: So you were clearly, you know, a cut above everyone. I mean there was no question that you were gonna be, not be valedictorian, let's put it that way? Speaker 2: Pretty much. There was, you know, there were two other women, one--we had two salutatorians and they were in the, they were in the T-O-Ps and, you know, they were close, but not close enough to be the valedictorian. They were, one of them was more language arts focused and the other was a good math student, but, yes, I was the best math student and the best in the Latin and so forth. Speaker 1: Now, what fascinated you about MIT? Was it the way it was described? Was it, you know, your father [George Hiter Jackson] had heard--? Speaker 2: My father had heard of it and he was thrilled about the idea that I might get in and might be able to go to MIT. And what fascinated me was at this time I was clearly more and more firmly committed to doing something in science or math. And the idea of going to a place where there were a whole bunch of other smart kids and people were really focused on that, I thought, well, here, I could really do my thing. I wouldn't be a square. I could do all of that. And so that's why it fascinated me. And the more I read about it, the more I became interested in it. Speaker 1: Now-- Speaker 2: By the way, Rensselaer [Polytechnic Institute, Troy, New York] was on the radar screen too. But at that point, Rensselaer's, the women students had to live off campus at Russell Sage. MIT had built a residence hall for women, and so I decided that's where I should really try to focus. Speaker 1: And this is nineteen sixty-- Speaker 2: Three [1963]. Speaker 1: Three [1963]. And now, your mother [Beatrice Cosby Jackson] is not so big on the idea though, right? Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: She took a little convincing. Speaker 2: Well, remember my mother grew up in the South. She spent a lot of time by herself in a big house where she had to worry about whites coming through who were threatening and so forth. And the Boston Strangler had only recently been captured just before this. And she believed, and she was almost right, that I would be the only black female there. And I think she had been through her own version of being alone and being the only one, and she knew the world was not a friendly place all the time. And so that was her greatest concern. It wasn't that I would be far away necessarily because they all, both of my parents really were focused on continuing our education, our continuing our education to the highest possible levels. So that was never the issue. Story_ID: 29408 Speaker 1: At a certain point, it was a special moment in time. And I do tell people that what really changed my life was the coalescence or the confluence of the Brown decision [Brown vs. Board of Education, 1954] and the Soviet launch of the Sputnik satellite. The Brown decision, not only, it didn't open, it opened the doors in the classic way. As I said, there were a broader base of kids I would compete with. I went to a school that had more resources and so on. And that's the standard thing that people think about. But in an ironical way, because this tracking system was put into place, and I was in this accelerated track and because of the way the desegregation of the schools happened, it brought these very talented teachers who were predominantly women, African American, in these subjects in math and economics, in Latin, in particular. Those were where I really had these teachers. And I had them for multiple years. So it, there were multiple points of contact. And they were just outstanding in what they did, and they spent time--of course, they had me teaching sometimes, and, because I was the most advanced student. But they, themselves, spent time to really teach the students they had things, and to, to have high expectations. And that was the real issue. Now, to be honest, there was an undercurrent where the expectations weren't so high from the white teachers I had, okay because I'm trying to remember whether I had an encouraging word from the white teachers because I was the best student. And, and I was the most advanced, and I got straight "As" even from them. But I remember having a biology teacher and I would take a biology test, and I would get a hundred [100]. But he would say, well, you wrote "Homo Sapiens" and sapiens should have a lower case "s" so I'm taking off a quarter of a point. So I'd get ninety-nine and three quarters [99 3/4]. And he says because nobody's perfect. And then we had a social studies teacher, and she would go around room and ask us questions and depending upon whether you could answer the question or not, you'd get a check if you could answer the question or "F" if you couldn't answer the question. And so it went. And so there was this bifurcation, but it just so happened that with the teachers in these core subjects, including my English teacher, English grammar and composition, they were all African American with this cadre of women in particular. And I think that made a difference because it really helped develop my abilities, gave me a chance to do unique things, and they were always pushing, pushing, pushing, pushing, pushing. Speaker 2: And that was the thing about the black community then too. They would find the stars, you know, the kids who had promise and they would almost surround them and propel them forward in many ways, right. Speaker 1: That's right. There was, there was great expectation. Story_ID: 29409 Speaker 1: And in point of fact, when I went to MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], and I told you about Mr. Brown, interestingly enough, his name was Shirley (laughter). Speaker 2: It was Shirley? Speaker 1: That's right. He was the one who had me in or put my name in-- Speaker 2: He had initials he went by? Speaker 1: S.O. Speaker 2: Oh, S.O., okay, right. Speaker 1: He put my name in for certain scholarships and encouraged me to apply. So I ended up with two scholarships that really were the enablers for me to go to MIT because I didn't get any scholarship aid from MIT. And I had a four-year scholarship from the Prince Hall Masons, you know, and I had a four-year scholarship from the Martin Marietta Corporation. And it was Mr. Brown who had the nerve to feel that I could compete for this Martin Marietta scholarship. And what happened was, Martin Marietta, which is now part of Lockheed Martin, gave three scholarships in a year that were these four-year scholarships that paid part of tuition and gave money to the department in which the student would major. And they gave one to a student from the Maryland suburbs, one from the Virginia suburbs and one from Washington, D.C. And that's where I competed. And I remember going through the whole process. And then I was brought to Baltimore [Maryland] to interview with this committee. And here's this, what looked to me like an enormously long table with all these white men sitting around. And so they're questioning me about science and math and current events and so on, but I was well read, well spoken and so on. And then they asked me the following question. If you look back twenty years from now at everything you've done, what would you like to be able to say about what you've done if you looked back, if you're sitting there twenty years from now? And I said, well, sir, I'd like to be able to say that I took what ability I had and developed it to the fullest and done something useful. [Unclear] (whisper) And then so I won the scholarship for the [Washington] D.C. student, and this was all these other high schools, Wilson and all these special schools, but I got the scholarship. And I went to MIT. And then the kid who got it from the Virginia suburbs and the kid who got it from Maryland all went to MIT. So all of us went to MIT. And one majored in math, one majored in physics, that was me, and one in engineering. Speaker 2: So two whites and one black? Speaker 1: Two white males. Speaker 2: Two white males and one black female. Speaker 1: Right. Story_ID: 29410 Speaker 1: So let's talk about your entry into MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] because you went sight unseen? Speaker 2: That's right (laughter). Speaker 1: You know, in the days now of college tours, you went sight unseen? Speaker 2: Definitely, sight unseen. Yeah, I was-- Speaker 1: Your parents. Speaker 2: I was admitted, and then with the help of Mr. [Shirley O.] Brown and then my parents [George Hiter Jackson and Beatrice Cosby Jackson] worked all these jobs, you know, I was gonna be able to go, with the Martin-Marietta, and-- Speaker 1: Prince Hall Masons? Speaker 2: --with the Prince Hall Masons, those were key enablers. Speaker 1: How much was the tuition? Do you remember? Speaker 2: It was seventeen hundred dollars [$1,700]. And each of these gave me a thousand dollars [$1,000] so it was a little more than the tuition. So then some of it went to the room and board. But then my parents [George Hiter Jackson and Beatrice Cosby Jackson] paid the difference. And so I packed up to leave my boyfriend behind. I was upset. And we left on a September day. And my parents drove me up to MIT. And they stayed at the Elliott Hotel. I remember that, and they took me to the dorm, helped me to unload. And then they left. And there I was. And the beginning of an interesting experience. Speaker 1: So let's talk about what that was, like even your first day of class there. Do you remember that? Speaker 2: Well, well, first I had to go and get registered-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --and there were long lines and so on. Speaker 1: But there's not many people, the thing about it, I know you had been in an environment, you know, where you, you know, at Barnard, you know, when you were (unclear), but this feels a little different and Boston's [Massachusetts] a different place? I mean, you know, it has a different feel to it. Speaker 2: Well, there're a couple of things. One is, I lived in "the" women's dorm. I lived in a single, and I think that was probably deliberate. And I lived right across the hall from the rest facility. And I lived in the same room the whole time I was an undergrad. Right, Room 405 in McCormack Hall. And, and I would say from the beginning, there was a kind of distance. I mean there were a couple of women who were sort of friendly, but actually, many of them, particularly in my class, were not. And, but I registered for class. People didn't say much. And then when I started going to class, people didn't sit around me. Nobody would sit next to me in class, sometimes behind me. But if they could avoid it, not in front of me either. Now, when I kind of saw this pattern, then I used to always sit in the middle seat of the second row. The reason is because the seats went up and typically the professor would lecture on a raised kind of platform. And then I could look him more in the eye. And so that was my beginning experience that people wouldn't sit next to me in class, wouldn't talk to me really. Now, there was one other black woman in my class. Her name is Jenny Rudd, and Jenny is a gastroenterologist today in New Jersey. And she's a friend of mine. So, and I call her up whenever I get nervous about something with my health, I call her up, and a very nice person. And when we were at MIT, people would call her Shirley and call me Jenny. And she lived in the women's res [residential] hall, the dorm, we called it then, for one year. And then she moved out into an apartment. I remained in the dorm the whole time. Speaker 1: Now were you in classes at all-- you weren't in the (unclear)? Speaker 2: Well, the curriculum is pretty standard in the first year. But interestingly enough, Jenny and I didn't--but nonetheless, everybody took physics and calculus and chemistry and so on. But we didn't end up in the same sections of physics and calculus and chemistry. So we would mainly see each other in the res [residential] hall. And, but then, less when she moved off the campus. But that first year, if I went to the dining room and sat at a table, if it was empty, it tended to stay empty. And if other women were there, they would tend to get up and leave. And then I've, I've told people the story of the first physics problem set, I had been working on it for a period of time, was working my way through the problem. And then I got up to go to the rest room. So when I went out into the hall, I see all these women on my floor out there working on these problem sets. And so I went in and did my things and washed my hands, went back to my room. And I gathered up my papers and went out and said, may I join you? And one of them looked up and says, "go away". And I said, 'well, I've, I've done half the problems, and I think the answers are right, and I think I know how to do the other half.' Another one, "Did you, didn't you hear her? She said go away." So I went back to my room, and actually cried for about half hour, forty-five minutes. But then I decided I had to finish my physics problem set and so I went back to the problems. And I was still sniffling, but I, you know, finished going through them. And so this kind of thing tended to go on. So after a while I kind of gave up on trying to get people to work with me or sit next to me because I figured it just wasn't working. So I had to work on my own. Speaker 1: And were your parents aware of this and was it--because this was your mother's [Beatrice Cosby Jackson] fear in some respects? Speaker 2: That's correct. Speaker 1: Isolation. Speaker 2: No, I didn't tell her. I didn't tell her because this had been her fear. I didn't tell her because I didn't want her to be worried and upset. And I didn't tell my father [George Hiter Jackson] because it was so much his dream, and I didn't want him to be upset about it. Speaker 1: Now, were you and Jenny able to share at all? Was she having, have you talked, I mean since you're--was she having the same exact experience or was her experience different? Speaker 2: Well, yes, in the first year, but then when she moved off campus-- Speaker 1: She became more normal? Speaker 2: Well, that's, at least more of a normal existence. But in the classes and so on, some of the similar experiences. Speaker 1: Now, which, so tell me, I'm just trying to understand the population there? Speaker 2: Sure, sure. Speaker 1: Okay. How many students are in the class that you're in? You know, like your first-year class? Speaker 2: Okay, my freshman class, there were about nine hundred students. Speaker 1: Large. Speaker 2: And forty-three women and five African Americans. Speaker 1: Okay, so the dorm was holding, it was gonna hold a hundred [100] women, a brand new dorm, was it--? Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a brand new dorm. Speaker 1: Brand new dorm, okay. And so forty-three, so this--the women themselves have issues? Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Okay, and this is-- Speaker 2: And prior to this res hall opening, the year before the women had to live off campus in Boston [Massachusetts]. And so then Ellen Dexter McCormack who was an early graduate of MIT gave the money to build this dorm. And so it was the class before mine where women first started really living on the campus. Speaker 1: And these five black students, where were they? Two in the freshmen year--? Speaker 2: No, no, no. There were about eight to ten spread across the undergraduate body. Speaker 1: Okay, eight to ten black students? Speaker 2: Right, but five were in my class. Speaker 1: I see, okay. Speaker 2: And they were from different parts of the country. Speaker 1: Oh, but two women, three--? Speaker 2: Three guys, three men, right. Speaker 1: Guys, okay. Speaker 2: But three of us graduated four years later, the two women and one of the men. Speaker 1: Okay, so attrition was much lower for the men. Okay. Speaker 2: You mean it was higher for the men. Speaker 1: I'm sorry. (simultaneous) Speaker 2: Lower for the women. And then the whole time I was an undergrad, there maybe were two to three or four students in a class. And so the number, you know, was roughly, you know, ten-ish the whole time. And there were essentially none in the graduate school, although a little bit later there were a couple of blacks in the graduate school. Story_ID: 29411 Speaker 1: So was there any sharing, you know, I mean because sometimes people cluster. Was there some of that or what--I mean the basic things, like where to get your hair done? Speaker 2: Well, I'll tell you how that one happened. Now, Jenny [Rudd] did her own hair. She had the curlier hair so that's how she did it. And she just kept it cut. Now, I had to get my hair done. But what happened was, I asked around. And I gradually, but I did my own hair. And (laughter) this is really funny. I used to do my hair late at night. I used to wash it and then, because, you know, I was pressing it--you know that drill, and curling it. So I used to do it late at night like when people were supposedly (laughter) asleep. So then one night I'm doing my hair, doing my little thing with the straightening comb, and wouldn't you know it, a girl on my floor comes around into this lounge where I'm doing it. And she says, "ah." And she got, she was cool. She says, "oh, what are you doing?" She says, "well, you know, I have to iron my hair." I said, "well, I don't think ironing will work here." But, you know, that's what, so then my (laughter) sophomore year, I got to know some black women who were in college in the area, a woman who had gone through junior high school with me, although we went to different high schools. But she lived on the same street, but a couple of blocks away. So she was in one school zone, and I was in another. She ended up at Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts]. And then she was pledging Delta, and they found out about me, and I was asked if I wanted to pledge. So I pledged Delta Sigma Theta sorority. Speaker 1: So that was in your sophomore year? Speaker 2: That's correct. Speaker 1: So that created a little community there? Speaker 2: That did, quite a bit. And that's where I found out about where to go get my hair done and other essential things. And we pledged for six months because we had women from all over New England. It was a New England regional chapter. It was called Iota Chapter of Delta Sigma Theta. And so we had women from Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts], Boston College [Boston, Massachusetts], Wellesley [College, Wellesley, Massachusetts], Radcliff [former women's coordinate college for Harvard University], Pembroke [former women's coordinate college for Brown University], which was part of Brown [University, Providence, Rhode Island], U Mass Amherst [University of Massachusetts, Amherst], Northeastern [University, Boston, Massachusetts] and MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. And, and we would get together on the weekends. But we weren't a recognized chapter, and they wouldn't recognize us on the college campuses. So we would rent space. We would either use the "Y" [YMCA] and then when we were--or rent space, especially if we wanted to have a party or a social function or some gathering. There was a thing called the Negro Professional and Businesswomen's Club and they had a building on the edge of Roxbury, and we would rent from them. And then there was a firehouse that had an upper floor that would be rented out, and we would rent that. And then when we had the parties, the actual parties, we had to have security. That was a city ordinance. So we had to pay to have off-duty policemen be present, so many per so many heads, one per so many heads. And so that's what we did. But, so we would structure it to exactly cover our costs to pay for the food and the liquid refreshments--we never served alcohol, and to pay to rent the place and to pay to have the security. And then we would invite fellows from the schools around, some in the fraternities, the Omega Psi Phi, Alpha Phi Alpha, Kappa Alpha Psi, you know, the whole grouping. And, and so that's how we would socialize actually. Speaker 1: Now, were people saying--were they having similar experiences as you, you know--? Speaker 2: It varied. Some of the schools had a higher-- Speaker 1: Concentration? Speaker 2: --concentration of black students-- Speaker 1: Black students? Speaker 2: --even Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], and therefore, and some of the schools were a little more hospitable at that time in terms of people being able to use the campus facilities, although I don't remember any of the sorority and fraternity parties being on the campus, but rather being in a rented space. And ours always were in a rented space, even though we had sorors from all these different schools. Speaker 1: Dr. Jackson, would we recognize any of the names of people who were in that group, you know, that pledged with you, do you think? Speaker 2: I'm not sure. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 29412 Speaker 1: Can you talk about, was it a case of you pledging, you know, AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha] or Delta [Sigma Theta] or was it because, you, Deltas really have been historically more educators? Speaker 2: Well, that appealed to me. You know, the Deltas were the educators and women from all walks of life, I mean they had their share of women from the upper socio economic end, but they also had women who had come up from modest backgrounds, women who had a reputation for being very smart and women and the organization itself, being focused on social action and community service. And that appealed to me because in my freshman year at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], I actually worked in Boston City Hospital. The name has changed now, but it was the city hospital. And I worked in a pediatric ward with kids from birth to about three, with kids who had orthopedic problems, leukemia. There was one little boy, blonde hair, had no real face. You know, he had been born with no real eyes or a deformity for a nose and mouth. I mean, and some of this could be fixed later with plastic surgery, but otherwise, beautiful baby, beautiful body. So, but no one came to visit him. So the first thing I used to always do when I went to do my volunteer stint is I would pick him up and just hold him for a while and rock him. And it was, that was important in two ways. Another thing I was always taught was that if I had talent and ability, if I had my health and opportunity, then I should try to do something for somebody else. And I was not happy at MIT at this point because I, it was the first really hard exposure I had directly to the racism and some gender bias and just the absolute aloneness in terms of having to work alone, no real social life on the campus, eat alone. And I was a person who could keep my own counsel, which is why I think I was able to deal with all of this. And at a baseline level, I had self confidence, but it's one thing to choose to stay and sit on the porch and read. It's another thing when one tries to reach out to be rejected. And so it was hard. So I started doing volunteer work at Boston City Hospital. And I have to say I believe I helped those children But it helped me as well. But it also kept me from being as bitter as I might have been in the following sense. A lot of what I was experiencing was racially based. And I would have thought it was some gender bias as well, which there was, except that the white women were not helping me particularly either, particularly the ones in my class. That kind of stuff can sew real seeds of bitterness and division. For one, that kind of thing was inconsistent with how I grew up. Those were not the values that my parents [George Hiter Jackson and Beatrice Cosby Jackson] taught us in spite of what they had been through. They wanted us to be careful. They wanted us to know the world could be hard, but they didn't teach us to hate other people. But in addition, those lessons were reinforced because a lot of the kids that I was dealing with in this pediatric ward at Boston City Hospital were white kids. But they had serious illnesses, physical deformity and what that taught me was that misery is spread around. So, in spite of how I might have been treated by some of my classmates and people at MIT, misery is spread around. And so that, I think, kept me from having a pure race-based kind of bitterness. I'm not gonna tell you I didn't have some bitter feelings sometimes. But, but that was important in my freshman year. Story_ID: 29413 Speaker 1: So the teachers, how were they? You've talked a lot about the students, but I mean teachers also have a-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --I mean were you invisible or were you visible? Speaker 2: I'd say it ranged from invisibility to neutrality to later on, warming up. And I'd say that early on, I mean I couldn't have been invisible, but in terms of how I was dealt with, invisibility to neutrality I would say in the--except for one or two cases where I felt I was unfairly graded on something. But for the most part, it was neither here nor there. And I probably was a little bit nervous initially about going up to the professors after class. But over time, I gradually got my nerve up. And I would say they didn't go out of their way to help me. But on the other hand, they weren't excessively nasty to me for the most part. I did have a couple of instances. Speaker 1: Now, how was what you were learning there different? And how did you, because you wanted, originally, you came in thinking electrical engineering? Speaker 2: No, I actually came in thinking math. Speaker 1: Math. Okay, but then wasn't there--? Speaker 2: I was an electrical engineering major for a semester. Speaker 1: Okay, I see. Speaker 2: Right. But then I took quantum mechanics, and I loved it. Speaker 1: Who was the teacher? Speaker 2: Well, let me think now. Let me see. Well, I took, the way I started doing, really liking Physics came from Tony French-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --who was my freshman physics teacher. And we had a text called PANIC, but it stood for 'Physics: A New Introductory Course.' And he was great. And, and he was very friendly. He was very personable. And, and I think I got hooked as much because I was fascinated by his personality and how he talked about things. But I wasn't really committed to physics. I enjoyed it, but everybody had to take physics. You had to take two years of physics to graduate from MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge Massachusetts] no matter what you majored in. So it was easy in a way when I finally decided because I had been taking physics. [phone ringing] Story_ID: 29414 Speaker 1: So we were talking about, you know, Tony French and why the class was-- Speaker 2: Well, in just the way he animated the subject matter, with the demonstrations, with how he would explain things, the way he would bring things to life, and his personality. And he was approachable and accessible. And so I loved it. So did a lot of other people. And so that, I think, began to plant the seeds in my mind about physics, but for some reason I thought electrical engineering was what I wanted to do or should do. Speaker 1: Now, why? Speaker 2: I'm not sure why to be honest with you. Now, when I was a freshman, I took a course in materials science and engineering and I really loved that course. I got an "A", did extremely well, much better than everybody else. In fact, I was asked by the-- Speaker 1: Professor. Speaker 2: --professor, if I would let, mind if the next person down got an "A"? I said, no, I don't mind. But I think that got me thinking that engineering might be interesting because this was in the School of Engineering. But I felt if I majored in engineering, I should major in one of the "mainstream subjects" like electrical engineering. And also electrical engineering was in some aspects, closely related to physics. And I liked the math in it. And so I took, I started there, and took network theory and so on. But then, at the same time, I was taking quantum mechanics, and I really got hooked. And, and then I decided to switch my major to physics but with a focus in what was then called solid state physics which was closer to materials science and engineering. And then I happened to have a professor in materials science, who in retrospect may have thought he was trying to help me. It was the class I had gotten the "A" in, and I got my nerve up to go ask him for a job, a summer job, and he asked me if I could cook. And I said, "cook what?" And he says, "well, I don't really want you to cook. I just figured if you could cook, you could work with your hands." And so, I'll hire you. Now, earlier, this same professor had told me that colored girls should learn a trade. Colored girls should learn a trade. And he used to call me and Jenny, Tweedle Dee and Tweedle Dum. And so it was, there were a lot of mixed signals. And I think he thought that he was trying to convince me to major in materials science and engineering because I was doing so well. But that, but his way of suggesting it--and he probably thought that physics would be too hard or less accessible for a black female, but that really upset me. Speaker 1: Now, when he said you should learn a trade-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --but, you know, colored girls should learn, was he saying he don't belong here at all or was he saying-- Speaker 2: No, (unclear) (simultaneous) I think what he was trying to say-- Speaker 1: --a trade was material--? Speaker 2: That the less theoretical, the more accessible subject would be materials science and engineering as opposed to trying to do either electrical engineering or physics, which I was talking about. And, but I think what he was really trying to do was to get me to major in materials science and engineering. And similarly, even though that all happened, and, but I got the "A" in the course, I had the nerve to go and ask him for a job, for a summer job. And that's when he asked if I could cook. And so coming on the heels of all this other stuff, I'm thinking, what does he want me to be, his maid? And then I said, "yes, I can cook, but why, you know, what for?" He says, "well, good, you're hired." And I said, "hired to do what?" And that's when he said, "well, I figured if you could cook, then you're good with your hands." So I actually started working in his lab, and then working with a junior faculty member named Bob Rose who also worked in, with him. And I more and more went over to working with Bob Rose and then I met a woman, Margaret McVicker, who was the--I had actually met her in the women's dorm. She was the physics tutor, and she had been a physics major as an undergrad, but was then working on her Ph.D. in materials science and engineering. And she influenced me to really talk to Bob Rose, to Professor Wolfe-- Speaker 1: Wolfe, John Wolfe. Speaker 2: --John Wolfe, about getting a job and then introduced me to, to Bob Rose because she had done her thesis work with them. Speaker 1: Now, this is, are you talking of, this is the summer after your freshman year or after--? Speaker 2: That is correct. Speaker 1: So you end up staying in Boston [Massachusetts] that summer? You didn't go back home? Speaker 2: I did, I did [stay]. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: In fact, I spent only one summer at home once I went to MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: And what summer was that? Speaker 2: The summer after my sophomore year. Speaker 1: Now, that's, so you mean all that being beat up, you didn't have enough to go home, running home and just saying-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. But you obviously enjoyed what you were studying. That was sort of the counter balance? Speaker 2: That was the counter balance. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 29415 Speaker 1: And did you, and what about physics besides, you know, Professor [Tony] French being so, you know, lively and, you know, engaging and making it fun, what about it though, how did it differ from, you know, though it has mathematics to it, what was different about it? Speaker 2: Than? Speaker 1: Mathematics. Speaker 2: It was because you could, it required a high level of math to do, which I liked. But now you were using the mathematics to help understand the physical world and physical phenomena. So you could use the math that I had always studied primarily just in and of itself, but I liked applying it to problems. But you could use it as a high-level tool to do a lot of interesting things. And math was the, I mean physics was the most mathematical of the sciences. So I think there was a natural affinity for that on my mind, meaning for me. Speaker 1: Now, how did the intro, so you took introduction to physics, then you took quantum physics? Speaker 2: I took, there was a sequence. I had taken Introduction to Physics, PANIC [Physics: A New Introductory Course]-- Speaker 1: PANIC. Speaker 2: --and that was freshman year, and then I started taking Electro-Magnetic Electricity and Magnetism, Electro-Magnetic Theory. I took Special Relativity, and then I started taking Quantum Mechanics. Speaker 1: I see. But during that summer, let's talk about the summer-- Speaker 2: Yes, and all I had had then was PANIC. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I had taken this materials science course and other things, calculus and so forth. Speaker 1: So, let's talk about that summer and then what was, did you have any idea what you would be doing? Speaker 2: No, not until I, well, I did talk with Professor [John] Wolfe and Professor [Bob] Rose about what they wanted me to do. And then I just went in and started doing it. And at that point, they were trying to make gold iron alloys for certain studies they wanted to do, having to do with particular ways to study ferromagnetism in certain materials. And so I learned how to formulate these alloys and, you know, take ingots and mix in different materials and put them in furnaces and swage them. So I learned a lot of techniques, working with a lathe and all of this business. And I liked it, but also they were probing the electrical and other properties of these materials. And then as I went over to more working with John Wolfe, Professor Wolfe, to working with Bob Rose, I got more and more into super conductivity. See, I worked the first summer there doing the gold iron alloys and all of that and learning how to fabricate these subjects. It was very, I mean these substances, so it was more focused on fabrication than understanding the real properties of the materials. But it, nonetheless, got me hooked. And so I kept taking courses when I had elective space in my schedule along these lines. And, but it was relaxing to be in the lab. And I had more friends in the lab. And if you look actually at--and I thought about this a few years ago, I looked at who were my friends in the end at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. They were not my classmates. They were people who were ahead of me, interestingly enough, or behind me and some of the faculty. And so there was almost a kind of estrangement with the folks in my class, but with some of who came in the classes behind me, I became friends with some of them, and with some of the people who were ahead of me, I became friends with them and some of the faculty. So it was an interesting kind of experience that I had. Speaker 1: Now, Dr. Jackson, did the lab approach the same feeling as the library to you? Speaker 2: Yes, I mean I could spend hours there. It was quiet and I could just do my own thing. And, but I had friends within that context. And these were some of my first real friends at MIT and I was getting to know people in Boston [Massachusetts] and so forth. But these were my first real friends at MIT. Speaker 1: So how many people were working in the lab? Speaker 2: Just a couple of people. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then there was a woman who was an archeologist who was working in an adjacent lab. Her name is Heather Lechtman and she was using metallurgical and other techniques to do her studies of cultures, particularly in South America. And I was fascinated by that. And so she and I became friends as well. Speaker 1: But in that summer, you learned more about material science than Physics? Speaker 2: I did, I did. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But, but it's root to be able to understand the phenomena that govern material properties. You really have to know the physics. Speaker 1: Physics, I see, okay. Is that why you really were more focused on condensed matter? Was it--? Speaker 2: That's right, that's right. Speaker 1: Okay, then, I mean at the beginning, just because of that and the material--? Speaker 2: That's correct. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Story_ID: 29416 Speaker 1: Now, okay, so talk about, remember you said to talk about the Vietnam War. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: We're now, because we're now in, let's see. We're still in like sixty--? Yeah, but I wanna talk about something before that. Speaker 2: Okay, sure. Speaker 1: Now, I told you there was one summer only that I-- Speaker 2: You went home. Speaker 1: --I went home. And that was the summer after my sophomore year. Speaker 2: And what made you decide to do that? Speaker 1: I was offered a job by Martin Marietta, and they were located just north of Baltimore [Maryland]. And they had given me the scholarship, and so I felt I should go work for them. Now, I wanted to do some real science, but they told me that I needed a security clearance and all of that, and they couldn't get it in time. But I felt, I guess, an obligation to, nonetheless, go work for them because I had this scholarship from them. Anyway, I went to work and at that point, my parents [George Hiter Jackson and Beatrice Cosby Jackson] had two cars. So they actually let me use one of the cars to drive to work because there was essentially no way to get there otherwise. And the job they gave me was--well, let me back up. You see in the early days of computation, you know, early computers, you had to use these decks of cards. You know, you had to punch holes in them, and they'd be run through the machines and that's how the computations were done. So the job they gave me was matching up, when the printouts came back that had the results of the computations that the scientists and engineers were doing, my job was to match up the decks of cards with the printouts and wrap them up in rubber bands and put 'em on shelves in these spaces assigned to the different people. So all the time I kept asking, well, why can't I do some of this work? Oh, no, no, you can't really, you know, do this work. And, but okay, so I'm being a good sport. They'd given me a scholarship. So I had a lot of free time on my hands. And so I would like to, I, I would then, I would bring a math book, and I'd just sit and do math problems when I, when there weren't cards to be matched up by me because I wasn't gonna just waste the time. So I had this supervisor, and he would come around and say, "Why are, you know, spending this time just reading here?" And I said, I'm waiting for the cards to be delivered. So he would march me over to this bin to see if there were any cards there. And they typically weren't because they were delivered at certain times of the day. But he would always have, give me, harangue me about reading. Now, I'm not reading 'True Romance.' I'm reading, you know, 'Differential Equations' or a Physics book. So then I went to talk to the ladies who operated these collating machines for the cards, and I'm talking to them about how these cards, these machines worked. So then he comes up and he says, "Why are you keeping these women from doing their work?" I said, I'm not keeping these women from doing their work. I'm just trying to find out how these machines work. So I'd go back, marched me over to the bin--this was very demeaning, to where the cards were. So this went on for a while. Story_ID: 29417 Speaker 1: And then I found out that the two people, the two guys who got the scholarships with me had real jobs, that were more related to science and engineering. And so I started getting a little angry. And then I went back to, nonetheless, trying to talk to the ladies about the collating machines. I was more interested in how they literally worked. You know, this is from my father [George Hiter Jackson] with the mechanical stuff. So this supervisor comes back, the same one. And he says, "Why are you bothering these women?" I said, well, I just wanted to learn how these machines work. "Well, they've been working these machines for twenty years. It takes a long time to really know how to do this." So at that point, I guess I had had enough, and I said, you know, I think I could work these machines in a day, but I don't intend to be working here twenty years from now. And I walked out. Now, because the other thing he'd done was he came and saw me lifting boxes of cards and wrapping them with this rubber band. And he started giving me a hard time about (laughter) why I wasn't working faster. And I said, "they're always done when the people come to get their boxes of cards and their printouts." He says, "Well, you ought to be lifting two and three boxes at a time". And I said if I try to do that, it's gonna hurt my shoulders. He says, well, if you had a disability, you should have reported it when you started working. I said, I don't have a disability, but everybody has a limit to how much they can lift, but in addition, I get all this done super fast anyway. And so then when the incident happened, yeah, when, somebody told me. I never verified whether these guys were working in science or engineering or not, but someone told me. But then when this incident happened with the collating machines, and I said, look, I don't, this is not what I aspired to. I have not spent two years at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] to learn how to use a collating machine, and twenty years from now, I don't intend to be here. So I actually left. I walked off the premises. So then I get a call from the people in the scholarship office. And they're nervous. They said, "Well, Ms. Jackson, I mean, you're one of our scholarship winners and really this is not a good thing if you just quit." And I said, "Well, let me work in a lab. Well, we told you you'd have to have a security clearance." I said, "I'm sure not everything you do is classified." "I'll just be a technician," I said, because I've worked in this lab at MIT in materials science. I'll be happy just to help out. No, no, I don't think we can do that. And I said, "Well, then I don't think I can keep working here." So they said, "Well, you know, you're one of our scholarship students and so on." I said, "You know, I know, and I would hope, based on what you told me were the criteria for keeping the scholarship, that you're not gonna take it away, but I really can't stay and match punch cards with printouts," and I left. And when I got home, and I told my parents about it, my father was really upset because he felt, he just knew they were gonna take the scholarship away. Speaker 2: He was upset at you? Speaker 1: Well, not so, he was upset at the situation. Speaker 2: At the situation, okay. Speaker 1: But he was worried about the fact that-- Speaker 2: That you were gonna (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --I would lose the scholarship, and then how would we afford to pay-- Speaker 2: What would happen, afford to pay (unclear)? Speaker 1: --for me to stay at MIT. Speaker 2: But they didn't take it away. I mean I had good grades and so on. And so I went then to see my high school counselor, the one who had helped me get the scholarship in the first place, and I told him what had happened. And I first went to Mr. Boyd, then I went to the high school counselor. So they sent me down to the Office of the Superintendent of Schools, and at that point, the superintendent hired a lot of college students who had graduated from the public schools in Washington [D.C.]. And so there were a group of students there like me, some, you know, had just finished sophomore year, some junior year. And this was our job, our job was to read books. See the superintendent would go to conferences and summer conferences and have to give talks and so on. So our job was to read books on education and educational issues and summarize, you know, write book reports, remember, the old books reports, for the superintendent of schools. Well, this was a cake walk because what did I like to do? I liked to read. What did I spend my whole school life doing before I went to college? Doing book reports, a little more sophisticated than the book reports we did then. And then I was hanging out with this group of students who were at various colleges, Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], Brown [University, Providence, Rhode Island], you know, so on and so on. And here I was, some of whom I sort of knew. And so I had a fun summer because, but not for the first month that summer. Story_ID: 29418 Speaker 1: So you came back and it was your junior year, right, after summer? No, was it, no that-- Speaker 2: That was the summer after my sophomore year. Speaker 1: So you would have come back and entered your junior year. Speaker 2: My junior year, right. Speaker 1: So now-- Speaker 2: Now, the other thing I should tell you about my sophomore year, if I can. Speaker 1: Sure. Speaker 2: And sort of the beginning of my junior year is, I spent a lot of time off campus. I was-- Speaker 1: Was that with the Deltas [Delta Sigma Theta]? Because of Deltas and then the volunteering--tutoring (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: Well, but that wasn't it. A number of the Deltas were from the Boston area. And they lived in Dorchester and so on. And I got to meet their families. So they would invite me to come over on the weekends and have dinner and stay for the weekend. And so I used to do that. And then Monday would roll around, and I really couldn't bring myself to go back to campus. And so I would maybe just figure out a way to fiddle around, futz around, and I wouldn't go back to campus. So I would just miss my classes on Monday. Speaker 1: On Mondays. Speaker 2: But I always had my school books. So I always read and kept up with the assignments because we had the whole syllabus for the courses. But I just had a hard time. And I think that was the closest I came to being really depressed. Speaker 1: So you mean that was even, so it was just that was it sustained where you had had two years there really. Speaker 2: Well, it was really sort of partially through my sophomore year that I really started doing this. Speaker 1: Okay, I see. Speaker 2: So I probably went through a semester doing that. And it was hard to come back, and so they treated me so well. But I had my books. I always loved the subject, you see. And then I finally snapped out of it and said, I've got to do better than this, you know, because I walked into one of my classes, my humanities classes, and the professor said, "Oh, Ms. Jackson, how was the Riviera?" And I said, "the Riviera?" (Laughter) And he says, well, I figured you must have been on the Riviera, you've been gone so long (laughter). So I said, well, maybe I'd better get myself together. And, but I still was doing, you know, pretty well, even though I, you know, would miss these classes on, on Monday. But I was always studying anyway, doing my work. Speaker 1: But it's hard when you don't have any nurturing of any sort or any positive-- Speaker 2: That's right. But I had the nurturing from-- Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: But I had the nurturing of (unclear) (simultaneous) of my sororities. Speaker 1: Right, right, which is good cause, well, it might have been hard to make it without that. Speaker 2: And then I was tutoring at the Roxbury "Y" [YMCA], and so I liked helping these kids. And I would tutor math, you know, algebra, geometry, trigonometry, and I kind of liked that. I liked helping these kids progress, and they were mainly black kids. Story_ID: 29419 Speaker 1: Now, when did you take quantum physics? Was that your junior year? Speaker 2: I think I started my sophomore, late sophomore year or early junior year. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. And now when were you required to declare a major? Was that your--? Speaker 2: Sophomore year. That's when I declared electrical engineering. Speaker 1: Oh, okay, okay. Speaker 2: But then I switched. I think it was the second semester of my sophomore year. Speaker 1: So who was influencing you there? I mean who were the people there who were sort of the physics stars in terms of the professors? Speaker 2: Well, there was [Jerome] "Jerry" Friedman. I had him for physics my sophomore year. Actually, he later got a Nobel Prize in physics. And he was the first person, other than--Tony French was nice, but at a distance. I actually got to know him better later, but with Friedman, I really got to know him more. And he was more encouraging, very fair, you know, very warm. And, and I think the combination of my interest in the subject anyway and having him really gave me that boost to stick with it. I also had become friends with Margaret McVicker who, as I mentioned, was the physics tutor in the women's dorm. She worked in Bob Rose's lab. She was a graduate student. And that's how I got interested in material science and engineering, and then over time, as I was consistently doing well, then professors would talk to me. And then I actually was encouraged in my junior year by one of the professors to apply to MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology] for graduate school. Now, I also had a pretty good freshman advisor, but he wasn't in physics. He was in the Sloan School of Management. His name was Jay Forrester, and he is the father of operations research. And, and he was very nice to me and very helpful. And I think that sort of gave me some early encouragement. But then I didn't see him really much after my freshman year. He was just my freshman advisor. Speaker 1: Now, are you thinking that you are going to go to graduate school? I mean is that sort of in your mindset to go directly? Is that what's going on or? Speaker 2: I really wasn't planning that far ahead till about my junior year, midway through because then it had become clear that if one intended to do physics, really, one had to get a Ph.D.. And, and so I think that's when I really started thinking about it. Speaker 1: Can I--are you aware of who else, I mean other black students studying physics, no matter what-- Speaker 2: You mean at that point? Speaker 1: Yeah, at that point. Speaker 2: No Speaker 1: So you're an island sort of like, okay. And so, okay, so this one professor, you said his name was, just the one who won the Nobel Peace-- Speaker 2: Jerry Friedman. Speaker 1: Jerry Friedman, what about him was--what did you learn from him sort of, or his, you know, his teaching technique or his theory that--? Speaker 2: He was just very clear, focused, high standards, but kind. And at that point, it was less about his teaching technique per se than his kindness. And I found great physics, a great physicist and a kind person in the same body-- Story_ID: 29420 Speaker 1: We had just finished talking about his, you know, that he, Professor, I keep forgetting-- Speaker 2: Friedman. Speaker 1: [Jerome] Friedman, he was clear, concise and nice. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. What was he known for though? What did he win the Nobel Peace Prize for? Speaker 2: I knew you were gonna ask me. Can we come back to that? Speaker 1: Okay (laughter). That's okay. Now, let me ask. What is, is there anything important in your sophomore year between your sophomore and senior year? Speaker 2: Anything important? Speaker 1: Well, I wanted to come, you told me to ask about, was the war, let's see, 1963 to 196--? Speaker 2: No,'64' [1964] to '68 [1968]. Speaker 1: Sixty eight [1968], oh, okay. Sixty-eight [1968] is when [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr]. Speaker 2: That's right. But that's my senior year-- Speaker 1: That's your senior year. Speaker 2: --spring of my senior year. Speaker 1: That's right, okay. Speaker 2: However, remember we had riots which happened after that, but we had the, a lot happened more when I was a graduate, early graduate school. Speaker 1: Right, I understand, okay-- Speaker 2: But there was, there were things heating up around the Vietnam War because we were building up in Vietnam at that time. Speaker 1: So there can't be really activism on campus, right because-- Speaker 2: No, there wasn't a lot of activism. Speaker 1: Okay (laughter) (unclear). Speaker 2: Right. I mean there started to be teach-in's and things like that at other campuses. Speaker 1: Yes, but not at-- Speaker 2: But not at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: (Laughter) There's only too, a few people. What are you gonna take, I mean you could take over, but you're not, you don't have the numbers. Speaker 2: That's right. But we used to do parties and have, try to have little small parties and invite the black students at MIT. Speaker 1: Now, let me ask was there, there's no one, what is the faculty like? Is there anyone on faculty at that point-- Speaker 2: There was one guy. His name was Jim, oh, what is his name? He was a professor of political science. Speaker 1: Was he there a long time? Speaker 2: Yes, he was there a very long time. Speaker 1: Okay, right, I know his, I've heard his name before. Speaker 2: And he was there probably the longest. Then there was another professor in urban studies, Frank Jones. And then a little later when I was a grad student, a guy by the name of Jim Williams came, and Jim Young in physics. And I'm running out of names now. Speaker 1: Well, Jim Young, he was a mentor of sorts, right-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --for you? But was there anything like in your junior year that was important, otherwise? Speaker 2: (Laughter) You mean other than my progressing and my education, you can just write it off. Speaker 1: (Laughter) I don't mean to write it off. Story_ID: 29421 Speaker 1: Well, actually there was. I was president of the Delta [Sigma Theta] chapter, Iota Chapter for two years, and I became the president my junior year at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. Speaker 2: And you could have, you know, because a lot of, you know, parents don't necessarily want their children in sororities because it can be distracting but yours was in a positive way. Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. Speaker 2: So there wasn't really, it wasn't the workload that was ever a problem? Speaker 1: Never. I mean I never had any particular difficulty academically. You know, I had my ups and downs, but there was a Dean's list. There was no Phi Beta Kappa at the time. But you had to have a certain GPA to be on the Dean's list, and I had to have a certain GPA to keep my scholarships. And so I was always on the Dean's list. Speaker 2: And there was no course that you found particularly challenging that you're like, oh, my goodness? Speaker 1: Well, when I was a freshman, I didn't like chemistry and it wasn't my greatest, you know, course. But other than that, it, you know, the physics was always good. Speaker 2: So you took, I had no idea, so you took a leadership role in your Delta chapter? Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. And so you're building a network really outside the university-- Speaker 1: That's correct. Speaker 2: --to help, you know, support you. And were you, now were you doing other things in terms--was your focus still Roxbury, you know--? Speaker 1: Well, remember, I did the Boston City Hospital. I worked for a time in a lab in applied biological science. It was called food and nutrition science, and I said I was a weigher of rats and feeder of chickens because I assisted this professor with caring for these animals that he did various experiments with. And I did the tutoring at the Roxbury "Y" [YMCA], and then I was the, helped organize social events. But then I was the president of the Delta chapter for two years. Speaker 2: And what things did you do as president of the Delta chapter. That's what I guess I was (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Well, we organized our community service projects. We did the volunteer work. We planned social events. And there was a fair amount of logistical planning just for our meetings because we had these sorors that came from these schools as far away as a hundred miles, if you go all the way out to U-Mass, Amherst [University of Massachusetts, Amherst]. And so to plan all of that, to plan what our programs would be, you know, where we would meet, arranging the space. Remember, we couldn't, we weren't meeting on campus. So we always had to do that and doing the budgets and managing all of that. Speaker 2: So how often were you meeting? Speaker 1: We would meet maybe once a week or-- Speaker 2: Once a week? Speaker 1: --or a couple times a month. Speaker 2: That's a lot of logistics for that. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Okay, right. Speaker 1: You know, between every two weeks and once a month. Speaker 2: Right, okay, no, no, but that's still a fair amount of logistics. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Okay, but it was the sense of community that made it worthwhile? Speaker 1: Well, the sense of community and the sense of belonging to something bigger because we were part of this national organization that had been around for a long time. And I remember, you know, going to a Delta convention in Trevose, Pennsylvania and learning about all these great African American women who had founded the sorority and ones who were in it and then seeing all these college-educated African American women, all in one place at one time. It was a thrill. Speaker 2: Now, tell us a little bit just about the history of, you know, Delta since you had--well, okay. Well, you know, there are some famous, you know, Dorothy Height is a Delta, and you know, but what about, just a little bit about the start, like about when it started and, you know, out of it was, around--? Speaker 1: Nineteen, around the turn of the century [1900]. And it started at, I believe Howard University [Washington, D.C.]. And it was, I'm trying to remember if it's older than the AKAs [Alpha Kappa Alpha] or not. I think actually not, but it was the largest, and it had chapters essentially in all the states and in a number of foreign countries. And it was known for scholarship and service. And our chapter initially had, it had kind of begun to wither away, but we had this new group of pledgees and so we were the ones then who really had to bring it back, recruit new members and get our program stabilized. And we did all of that. And, you know, we--Dorothy Height was an icon, Constance Baker, right. And so, you know, knowing about some of their history, and Mary McCleod Bethune. There's a lot of, you know, fairly famous African American women. Story_ID: 29422 Speaker 1: Now, so that, so let's talk about your senior year because the country is really sort of heating up-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --you know, there's the Vietnam War. There's a lot, cities are exploding, you know, around-- Speaker 2: Well, that was an interesting year because a group of us had started talking about the fact that there were so few African American students at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and the place wasn't particularly hospitable as well as not being totally hospitable to women either. But at that point, my focus was more on minority students. And we were sort of thinking about it and so, but then I was applying to grad school. That was my initial focus. So I applied to Penn [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], to MIT and to Brown [University, Providence, Rhode Island]. And I got into all of them, and I was invited to visit the University of Pennsylvania because they were talking about having me start doing some research the summer before I formally began grad school. Now, I was always, I was very focused in how I applied to grad school. I had worked in this lab which we talked about. And in those days, one had to do a bachelor's thesis, an actual thesis to get a bachelor's degree at MIT. So I did my work on super conductives, super conductivity. In fact, it was called 'Tunneling Density of States and Super Conducting Niobium Titanium Alloys.' And so I actually had to make up the samples and put the gold leads on them and attach these wires to do these tunneling measurements which was a quantum mechanical tunneling of current that you can't understand unless you know the quantum mechanics. And that's when my early work that I had done early on in materials science and engineering helped me. But the actual study was a physics study, looking at the electronic properties of these super conducting alloys. So by that time, I was pretty firmly committed to doing solid state physics which has since migrated to being condensed matter physics. And so I--the theory of super conductivity at that point, and we now call it low temperature super conductivity, was developed by three people, John Bardeen, Leon Cooper and Robert Schrieffer. It was called the BCS Theory of Super Conductivity, Bardeen, Cooper, Schrieffer. John Bardeen was at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. Leon Cooper was at Brown and Bob Schrieffer was at Penn. So I applied to Penn because Schrieffer was there, to Brown because Cooper was there. Harvard, in applied physics because that's actually where the work was going on in this area, and a guy named Paul Martin was there who was well known. And then I had heard not too good things about the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign in terms of how hospitable it was. And since I'd just gone through my things and issues at MIT, I decided not to do it, but there was a physicist by the name of Leo Falakauf (ph.) who was at [University of] Chicago that had worked with Bardeen and Cooper and Schrieffer and had done some of their early work in many-body theory that formed the foundation of their modeling. So I applied to Chicago because Falakauf was there. And, but then I was going to visit Penn on a particular day in April of 1968. And I was being driven back to the airport by a sorority sister whom I had met. And it came on the radio that [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] had been shot in Memphis [Tennessee], and we almost wrecked the car. And then it came on shortly thereafter that he had died. And so when that happened, that's when I decided that rather than leave MIT, I would stay at MIT, and I felt I had been too quiet. And in point of fact, MIT organized a memorial service for the Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, and they asked me to speak. And I had made this nice little speech, but then as I heard people go through their whole set of things and I reflected upon how I had been treated at MIT. And then I felt I had been too quiet, I actually ripped up the speech and then just spoke from the heart about how far behind I thought MIT was relative to having minority students, particularly black students and about how they treated the students who did come, the changes that needed to happen. And I decided essentially then and there, really, I had started thinking about it on the day Dr. King was assassinated. But I essentially really decided then and there that I would stay at MIT. Story_ID: 29423 Speaker 1: Now, shortly after that as well, a group of us who were there, black students, formed the black student union. And I was named the first co-chair with a freshman whose name was Fred Johnson. And we put together a set of demands to the administration about things that, well, MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] needed to do (unclear). In fact, I made a slight chronological error. Fred Johnson actually came in, in the fall and became a co-chair, but we put together these demands that we wanted to see the administration deal with, with recruitment, admissions, financial aid, bridge program that was originally called Project Epsilon, and then it became Project Interphase. And MIT had done its own little thing early on to bring in some black students and put them through this small bridge program. And there were maybe five students and I think a Native American student. And I'm not sure if there were any Latino students. And that was called Project Epsilon. And, you know, in math, Epsilon is a small quantity (laughter), so when we started really talking about what needed to happen, we pointed out that we couldn't have a Project Epsilon because it really implied that the institution didn't plan to do anything since Epsilon was a small quantity. And clearly, there was a small number of minority students that year. So MIT formed a task force on educational opportunity. And I was asked to be a member of it. Paul Gray, who later became president, but who was associate provost at that point, was asked to chair it. And it didn't really get started in earnest until my first year in grad school, but, you know, all of it came out of this spring of things that happened. I was also, likewise, stunned when [Robert Francis] "Bobby" Kennedy was assassinated that June. And I must say with Vietnam, with the [Dr. Martin Luther] King assassination, with the riots, with Bobby Kennedy's assassination, you know, one started feeling like the world really was coming apart, although there had been the Civil Rights Movement the whole time. And I remember one thing that I always thought was unfair. You know, a little later was Kent State [University, Kent, Ohio], which actually occurred in 1970, but in 1968, these black kids were killed at Orangeburg [South Carolina]. And nobody paid any attention to it, but they paid a lot of attention to Kent State. Now, maybe because it related to this larger protest against the Viet Nam War, and I thought it was a big deal as well. But I equally well thought the, what people referred to as the Orangeburg Massacre, was a big deal. And this had to do with black kids protesting. Speaker 2: Can you talk about that, about the Orangeburg Massacre. Where was that? Speaker 1: Well, it really had to do with a group of kids at this, I think it was South Carolina State [University] at Orangeburg, protesting conditions on the campus in the general context of protesting how blacks were treated and off campus law enforcement was called in, and they--I don't know what the trigger was, but they ended up shooting some kids and killing some kids. And so it was referred to in the vernacular among blacks as the Orangeburg Massacre. And, and that was there, but it got very little attention. And even I didn't find out much about it early on. But then, as I became more discerning and heard about things, then I remember thinking about it a lot at the time Kent State happened. Story_ID: 29424 Speaker 1: So let me ask this, so this happens, the activism with you starts in the spring of your senior year? Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Okay, and continues through, because it's not like you took a break. You graduated and you went on. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Now, how did it happen that there was this freshman and you as co-chairs? I'm just, was it because he was an active, outspoken person? Speaker 2: That's right. I mean he, he came in, and he was in that Project Epsilon group that was the summer program in the summer of 1968. And I was around there then. I was, always, I was still working the lab and so on and preparing for graduate school. And then I started graduate school in the fall of 1968 and Fred Johnson came, and as I said, he had been part of that group. And, yes, he was a very mature, very focused guy. And he wanted to be involved. And he was very articulate, strong presence, and so he and I were elected co-chairmen of the black student union. Speaker 1: So how many are in the black student union? How many women? How many guys, you know? It sounds like there were a lot of guys. I mean there's still a majority-- Speaker 2: Well, it was majority males. I mean in the early days, you know, ten, twenty, ten, fifteen because we still never had very many because the real change occurred starting with the class that entered in the fall of 1969. Speaker 1: But that was pretty quick movement, right? I mean and to, you're saying, what happened in the spring of 1968 actually was able to affect the fall of 1969? Speaker 2: Yes, that's right. Speaker 1: That's interesting. Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: That's quick action, panic, everyone was panicking. (Unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well, the task force was formed and there were some students on it, another guy who was a graduate student in physics, he was a couple of years ahead of me. I was on it. And we would meet every week for hours, sometimes all day long, hashing out the issues, talking about what the admissions standards should be, talking about how we needed to recruit, talking about what the financial aid should be and then ultimately talking about a new summer program, which would become Project Interphase. But as well, and this was my first year in grad school, I also went out, a group of us went recruiting. So I went out to high schools to recruit black students. And so I visited schools in Akron, Ohio, I'm trying to remember, in Cleveland, Ohio, in Detroit, Michigan and actually, not only talked with teachers and counselors, but met with groups of black students and met with some black students individually to talk to them about MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and why they should consider it. These were kids who had been identified as strong science and math students in their schools. And so I spent a lot of time between the Task Force on Educational Opportunity and traveling, you know, in my first semester, particularly, but my first year really of graduate school. Story_ID: 29425 Speaker 1: Now, the other question I have, Dr. Jackson, you said that that was the defining moment when you made that speech [at a memorial service for Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: But why? Was it because of the energy you got back, I mean that you felt that you were being heard? Speaker 2: No, it had more to do with my own epiphany, as it were, my own internal decision making and solidification of things that I had been thinking about for a while. I mean, look, I had gone through MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. We've talked about some of the early experiences, such a contrast to high school and how I had grown up. I had grown up with segregation, de-segregation, defacto re-segregation. But in that kind of a progression, I was living at home, living with my parents [George Hiter Jackson and Beatrice Cosby Jackson]. They were providing sheltering. They were very careful about managing risks, you know, keeping us in places where we had to, you know, we could be safer and essentially teaching us not to go into areas where we were not wanted because they were worried about our physical safety. I mean part of the time I was growing up in [Washington] D.C., we all, we had to go to segregated movie theaters or, you know, we would have to sit in the balcony but not downstairs or you didn't, we just didn't go to certain theaters. We just didn't go to certain parts of town because we knew we were not welcome. But where we lived was so comfortable. We had friends. I loved school, and we already talked about the great teachers. So it was idyllic in many ways. You know, the worse thing we did and contrast that to today, we had this little episodic set of activities we used to call "robbing cherry trees", namely, in the neighborhoods, these cherry trees grew, naturally. So there were cherries. So our big, bad thing to do was to get on our bicycles, get shopping bags and just ride around, I told you I always rode around the neighborhoods. So we would ride around, and then we would, of course, do the literal, low hanging fruit, you know, grabbing cherries, and climbing up on the lowest limbs and grabbing cherries and loading up these shopping bags with cherries. And, of course, we were eating them as we were going. So sometimes we'd be sick as dogs by the time we were done. But that was our big thrill, and that was the worst thing we ever did, right. And so here we go, I mean, and I was a girl scout, and you know, I did all of those things. We didn't talk about it, but I did all of those things and the church involvement, the family. So now, I go to MIT, boom. And I'm going because it's my great chance to be with people really like me, that I loved math and science. And I'm just really ready to get into it and have people I can talk to all the time and (humph sound), I get there, and they don't even wanna talk to me, you know, don't sit next to me, don't eat with me, don't do problem sets. They had their study groups. I was never in them, so alone, alone, alone. But I compensated with the external activities, with trying to do things for other people so I wouldn't be so selfishly I thought focused and being involved with the Deltas [Delta Sigma Theta] and, you know, I had my boyfriends and dates and so on. But they were never at MIT, okay. It was always away from MIT. But I, from an external observer, I was quiet, you know. I was just doing my work. I was getting good grades. I was working in the lab, going along. But all this time, the Civil Rights Movement is going on. Things are going on in the South. You know, people are doing lunch counter sit-in's. They're doing all kinds of things, and I'm sitting up here in Boston [Massachusetts] not being particularly well treated, in fact, being horribly treated at some point. One time I was mistaken for the elevator operator at MIT. And a faculty member got on the elevator and told me to press the floor. And I said, excuse me? He says, I want, I told you to press 3. And I said, if you want to go to the floor, you do it yourself, and I, you know, got off the elevator on that floor. So I had all these kind of incidents. And I really, we didn't talk about the rest of it. You asked me what was remarkable about my junior year. It was less about what was going on at MIT because that was kind of a continuation, but there were things happening in Boston. And I got, you know, had things happen to me in Boston, spit on and shot at and chased. So all these things went around, on when I was visiting some of my sorority sisters and things like that. So that was what was going on. And that was what was remarkable, if you wanna think about it that way. Speaker 1: Was that surprising to you, those things happening to you in Boston? Speaker 2: Well, how can you say whether it's surprising or not? Speaker 1: Oh, no-- Speaker 2: At a certain, let me explain it this way. Obviously, with, here I was at this great institution with all these brilliant people and looking at how they treated me while not violently, was certainly not very nice, okay, and people not speaking to me. And if I saw the women in the dorm, they would talk to me sometimes in the dorm, but if I saw them on campus, they wouldn't talk to me on campus. So all this was going on, and now, I go off campus where my respite really was, and these things happen. So one could say one could expect it, but one doesn't expect it to happen to one. Story_ID: 29426 Speaker 1: [We'll] start by slating it again. And then we'll start with the interview. So I want you to restate your name for us, and today's date and our location. I'm gonna start by saying, my name is Julieanna Richardson, and I am the interviewer. And Neculai Burghelea is the videographer. And our observer is Theresa Bourgeois. Your name, please? Speaker 2: I am Shirley Ann Jackson. I'm president of Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute [Troy, New York]. Today is Saturday, November the 4th, 2006. And we are sitting in the president's office at Rensselaer. Speaker 1: Can we start out, go back to your junior year in, at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. But before we even do that, let, you were going to give some background on the Deltas [Delta Sigma Theta], fraternity--I mean sorority. Speaker 2: Well, having grown up in Washington, D.C. and with Howard University being there, I, of course, knew about the Deltas. I knew about most of the primarily African American sororities. So when I was approached when I was at MIT as an undergraduate, I had a natural interest because I had heard generally about Delta, and that they were very academically focused, very smart women and very focused on social action and community service. I also was looking for an outlet. I didn't know any other African American women really, except for one who was in my class at MIT. And so I thought it would be interesting to explore. And when I explored it, then I learned more about who some of the founders had been, who some of the early Deltas had been, and who the current president--the then current president was. And so when I found out about people like Dr. Sadie T.M. Alexander who had both a Ph.D., I believe in economics and a law degree and I think may have been the first African American woman to get a Ph.D. in economics, I was extremely impressed. And at that point, the president or outgoing president was Dr. Geraldine Pittman Woods, who actually had a Ph.D. and I believe it was in biology. And so those sorts of things intrigued me because I was very academically focused. And so I pledged the sorority. And in those days, because we had a New England regional chapter, it was the IOTA chapter, we had women from schools as far away as nearly one hundred miles or more. And so we had both pledgees and sorors who were from places like Brown University [Providence, Rhode Island], then Pembroke College, from Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticutt], from U-Mass, University of Massachusetts at Amherst as well as schools in the Boston area, Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts], Wellesley [College, Wellesley, Massachusetts], Boston College [Boston, Massachusetts], U-Mass, Boston [University of Massachusetts, Boston] and, of course, MIT. So because of that we actually pledged not for the usual six weeks, but for six to seven months. In fact, the pledge class that I was part of actually pledged for seven months, I believe, but I joined slightly late. So I pledged for six months because we could only really meet on the weekends and do our activities together on the weekends, although we had a number of community service projects that some people did during the week. And so it was interesting to spend that much time, which was the good part of an academic year, pledging. And when I pledged, the chapter had an interesting bimodal distribution. There were a number of sorors who were about to graduate who were seniors. And there was a new pledge class that came in, a new class of sorors. And so in the end, I ended up being the president of the chapter because so many of the more senior members of the chapter graduated. And we essentially had to rebuild the chapter, which we did, because the numbers had gone down so low. And then in the end, we came back. We had a very dynamic program. And there was a black woman in the class behind me at MIT, Linda Sharpe, who I approached about pledging and she did. And so she is not only a former friend from MIT, but, in fact, a soror. And Delta had a lot to do then with what I did socially for the balance of my time at MIT because there weren't, as we may have discussed earlier, that many African American students at MIT when I was an undergrad. And so in order to have social activities, the African American students would come from schools all over the Boston [Massachusetts] area. And so we would have parties off premises because we couldn't use the school facilities because we were not a recognized school organization at any of the colleges. So we would rent space from what was called the Negro Professional and Business Women's Club, which was on the edge of Roxbury. And we would rent space in their building for parties. We also would rent space on the top floor of a fire house in Roxbury as well. And we had to pay for this space. Story_ID: 29427 Speaker 1: Can you tell me some of the programs that you worked on during that time, you know, that you were involved with in the Boston [Massachusetts] area? Speaker 2: Well, there were some I was involved in because of Delta [Delta Sigma Theta] and then there were some I was just involved in on my own. The ones with Delta really related to heavily tutoring programs through the Roxbury YMCA and so I tutored a number of students in math primarily and in some science subjects. We also did other community service projects and fundraisers to contribute to various philanthropic organizations. Now, on my own, early on, I did volunteer work at Boston City Hospital because I always was taught and believed that I had my health. I had ability. I had a great opportunity. And so it was more important that I do something for someone else and not just focus on my own academic progress. And I was able to do that and nonetheless, do extremely well academically at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], even though I worked in isolation for a lot of the time. Story_ID: 29428 Speaker 1: Now, what was the difference, did you find between the Boston [Massachusetts] community that you came to know and the Washington, D.C. community that you came out of? Speaker 2: Well, you know that's an interesting question in the following way. When I grew up in Washington, D.C., the city in its way was fairly segregated. The public schools were, in fact, were legally segregated when I started elementary school. And so there were schools we couldn't attend. And we lived in an apartment complex in Northeast Washington [D.C.], near the Maryland border. And we had to take a public bus to go to the Charles Young School which was the elementary for black kids that we attended. And so my sister and I, my older sister [Barbara Jackson Avery], would take the bus and, and then we would take the bus back. So there were no school buses. There was no cross town busing and so forth. Then my parents [George Hiter Jackson and Beatrice Cosby Jackson] bought a home in Northwest Washington where my mother still lives. And there was an elementary school about three blocks away, two and a half blocks, but it was for white kids. So we actually had to go past that school to go to a school that the black kids could attend. It was called Parkview. The school we passed was Barnard. And so the schools became desegregated after the 1954 'Brown versus Board of Education' decision in which case we could walk to school. But before that, our parents, fathers really, took turns driving the kids, the few black kids from the neighborhood to the Parkview School. And then we would wait and one of the parents would pick us up in the afternoon. And it was just a handful of kids. Now, in spite of all that and that change, and we had spoken, I believe, a little earlier about some of the actual educational process, it was an idyllic life in another way because Washington [D.C.] was a lot quieter, a lot smaller then. And so we would ride our bicycles around, and I loved to do that and go to the library and load up on books and come back and, and read all day. And then in the evening we would go out and play jacks and marbles and hide and seek and hop scotch. And then we played this game in the alleys called "drive back", and it was just that, driving the other team back, going back and forth. So it was in a way a very nice lifestyle. My parents worked, but the house would be open all day. And we might not be around because we were out playing around in the neighborhood. So the irony was, I lived through a segregated period but at a certain level, there was a high comfort factor because of a fairly quiet and sinecure that my parents had created by virtue of where they moved and how we lived and the nature of the times. And when we went to the movies, and we only went to certain theaters that blacks went to, and so we were kind of living this duality, this dual lifestyle. And we knew there were parts of Washington that we quote, unquote "shouldn't go into" because blacks weren't welcome there. So we, in many ways, you could say lived a fairly circumscribed life, but within it, we did a lot of things. Within it, we had really great education. Within it, you know, we spent a lot of time with our parents. Within it, you know, I was very active in our church. I actually sang in the choir. I sang soprano. You couldn't tell that today. And I would go to choir practices on Saturday and we had junior church for the young people. And so we would give our own sermons and bible lessons and so on. So it was an interesting life. The church sponsored an oratorical contest which I won when I was a senior in high school, and sponsored a spelling bee. And, in fact, I had given a speech in an oratorical contest at church that became the basis of my valedictory address when I graduated from high school. So I'm saying all that to say that except for a couple of incidents where there were some people who followed us, and in particular, a man who followed me one day when I was leaving the library because I used to go to, leave school when I was in junior high school, which people call middle school these days, and go to the library to do my homework. And the same in high school because that way I could access all the references that I wanted and needed. And I wanted to get the work done before I got home. And that way, I could just focus on what I wanted when I got home. But, in fact, when I got home, I would tend--this sounds a little corny, but I would tend to sit and read Latin. I would just read the Latin because I liked it or sit on the front porch in good weather and do math problems. I mean I literally did this kind of thing for fun. But I also had chores to do. And as we got older, you know, we had different assignments such as starting dinner before my mother [Beatrice Cosby Jackson] came home from work and so on. So we did all of those things. So it was a duality, segregation, and even after the legal desegregation, we nonetheless stayed in our places, so to speak. Story_ID: 29429 Speaker 1: So now we fast forward to MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. And going into the Boston [Massachusetts] area, interestingly enough, I felt a lot more hostility. Now, maybe it was because of not, being rooted in a black community, but now I was out there with many whites, although I had gone to school when the schools were desegregated with a lot of white students in the latter part of elementary school and going into junior high school. But this kind of directness of racial confrontation, slurs, that kind of thing. And as I had started to talk about at an earlier stage, I did have some incidents I went through. One where the Deltas [Delta Sigma Theta] had a semi-formal event at a hotel in downtown Boston. And I was leaving the event with a soror, and we were looking to catch a cab. And some guys, white guys came by in a car and came around the corner. And they stopped and shouted some racial epithets and one of them spit out the window on me. And so I was quite upset. I was crying, and I started to run up the street after the car. It's a good thing I didn't catch them, I think. And then on another occasion, I actually visited a classmate, actually someone who was a year or two behind me, but who lived in south Boston. And I was leaving her home and someone shot at me, again, from a car, but I was near a subway station. So I ran down into the subway. And then a third time, I was visiting a soror, and we were walking to the store, but we had gone out the back of her apartment. And some white guys came down and started chasing us and threatening. It's almost like keystone cops because then some black guys came out and her husband came out and jumped on these guys and so it was back and forth, but in the end, we weren't injured. So I had those kind of experiences which ironically, I had never had in Washington, D.C. with all of its segregation and so forth. Speaker 2: Now, did these three experiences happen all in your junior year or did they happen between junior and senior years? Speaker 1: Well, I'm trying to remember the precise timeframe. But since I know the one about being chased and the one with being spit on and actually, I think all of them occurred along about my junior or junior to senior year because the being chased and being spit on occurred after I had pledged Delta. And I pledged Delta for the large part of my sophomore year. Speaker 2: So those experiences didn't want to make you leave Boston? This is-- Speaker 1: Well, I'm an interesting person, I suppose in the sense that I believe in finishing what I start. And I felt a big obligation to my family and community to be successful. And I have this ability, this way to be able to kind of get inside to myself to stay focused. And I, I enjoyed physics, and I enjoyed doing science. And I started working in a lab in metallurgy and material science. And so interestingly enough, I had two avenues. You can think of escape, but both of them in a way either contributed to my academic progress or didn't inhibit it. And by that I mean on the one hand I got to the know the families of some of my sorors in the Boston area. They would invite me to spend the weekend sometimes. And so I would go for the weekend. And if I was kind of down, then I just might not go back to campus on Monday. So I would just miss my class, classes on Monday. But then I'd always go back. But while I was there, I had brought all my books. And so I was doing my homework and reading and so on because I always enjoyed the subject matter. On the other, when I started working in this lab in metallurgy and material science I really enjoyed it. And I got to know two other women scientists who became my friends. And when I was down, I preferred to go work in the lab. And so in a certain sense, one could argue that the science itself sustained me, and that, coupled with the fact that I knew it meant a lot to my parents [George Hiter Jackson and Beatrice Cosby Jackson] and my community. And then finally, I'm one who tends not to want to give people what they want if they wanna beat me down. And so I felt that if I left, it's like the water closing. No one would ever know I had ever been there, and people would get what they wanted. Story_ID: 29430 Speaker 1: Now, the three summers. Can you describe what you did each of the summers, just a little--? Speaker 2: During my undergraduate's career. Speaker 1: Undergraduate, yes. Speaker 2: Sure. Well, the summer after my freshman year, I went to work in the lab in metallurgy and material science. I went to work for the professor who asked me if I could cook. But I got hooked, and I had taken a course on the structure and properties of materials when I was a freshman. I had done very well in the course, and so and gotten an "A". And that's what got me to get my nerve up to go ask this professor, even though he had said some strange things in the course, in fact, calling me and this other black woman [Jenny Rudd] in my class, Tweedle Dee and Tweedle Dum. Nonetheless, I got the highest grade in the class. So I went to ask him to, if I could work in the lab. And he asked me if I could cook, and, of course, I was suspicious. I said, why? "Yes, I can cook, but why?" He said, "you're hired." I said, "To do what?" He said, "to work in the lab. If you can cook, I assume you can handle yourself." Anyway, but I got hooked. So I worked in the lab, and that's what I did. And then MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] had an undergraduate research kind of program. They hadn't formalized it as such, but you could take, you could work in the lab and get paid in the summer, which is what I did or work for academic credit during the academic year. And so I did that essentially the rest of the time I was at MIT, although early on, they were not giving academic credit, but you could still work in the lab. So that was what I did the summer after my freshman year. Story_ID: 29431 Speaker 1: The summer after my sophomore year, I thought well, gee, I hadn't gone home. So maybe I should spend the summer in Washington, D.C. And what really brought me there was that I had a scholarship from the Martin-Marietta Corporation. And they offered me a job at their facility outside of Baltimore [Maryland]. And so I took that job. I only worked there for, I don't know, maybe three weeks, a month because there was a supervisor there who kept harassing me about what I was doing and so on. And I never got the job that I wanted to work in a lab, and I had worked in a lab at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. And by that time, I had finished two years at MIT. And there were two other, two guys who were at MIT with me who also had scholarships, and they got jobs in labs. And so because of some things that happened, I quit. Now, my parents [George Hiter Jackson and Beatrice Cosby Jackson] were pretty upset because they thought I might lose my scholarship, but here I was driving all the way from D.C., past Baltimore to go to work, and it wasn't fun. So I quit. Speaker 2: What were the things that happened? Speaker 1: Well, I was given this job where, in those days, you've got to understand about computers and how people did computation. In the early days, people would use these punch cards, these things that were about the size of business, small business envelopes. And people would submit them to, you know, to be run on a machine. And they had to be collated. There were these collating machines and so on that read the holes that were punched in them. And so that's how the programmers would submit their calculations to be done. And then there would be a printout that would come back, multiple sheets. So the job I had was to match the printout with the punch cards, wrap 'em up with rubber bands and put them on shelves in bins for the programmers, the scientists. So I kept asking if I could work in a lab, try my hand at some of the calculations because I'd taken a fair amount of math, having been at MIT for two years. But that never happened. And, but, so there was a lot of down time because one was waiting for these programs to run and for the printouts to come back and the boxes of cards. So I would have a math book or a physics book and I would sit at my desk and I would read it, so that the supervisor would come around. And he would say, "well, you know, why are you wasting time? You know, shouldn't you be putting these cards on the shelves with the programs, with the printouts?" And I said, "well, there're none here." So he would, you know, make me get up and walk with him to check whether this cart was, had come back with the printout and the cards. And they weren't there because I would check about every fifteen minutes to see if, in fact, the cart had come back. And then I'd go back to do this. So this went on and on. Then there were ladies who ran these collating machines, and I was always curious. My father [George Hiter Jackson] was very mechanically minded. So I was interested in how the machines worked. So I would go chat with the ladies about it, and they would still be doing their work. But then he came around one day and saw me talking with them and said I was wasting their time. And I said, "well, I think they're still working, and I just wanted to know how the machines worked." And he says, "well, these women have been, you know, have been, you know, take, took twenty years for them to really get to this point to work these machines." So I just turned to him, and I said, "well, look. I have been at MIT for two years, and I'm not aspiring to do that job and twenty years from now, I don't intend to be here." So I walked out, and I went to resign. And the people who ran the scholarship program talked to me and tried to talk me out of resigning. And I said, well, let me do something else. And they couldn't have, think of anything else I could do, but they really wanted me to stay. So I quit. Now, my parents were not happy because they were worried, but I felt that, you know, I had a really good academic record and that I should be able to keep my scholarship. So then I went back to [Washington] D.C. I contacted my high school assistant principal for boys [Mr. Boyd] who I knew pretty well. And he put me in touch with my high school counselor, who then got me a job working for the superintendent of schools. And it was a pretty cool job because they hired a bunch of college students. And what our job was, was to read books and articles for the superintendent on various subjects and education and summarize them. But what was that but a book report. And what did I love to do but read. And then here I was spending my summer with other college students who had graduated from different schools in Washington, D.C. And we were downtown. So I loved it. So that's what I did the summer after my sophomore year. Story_ID: 29432 Speaker 1: Now, I want to talk one more subject from MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and then I wanna spin forward. But what about the research that you did? We didn't discuss that. Speaker 2: Okay, you mean as an undergraduate or graduate school? Speaker 1: As an under grad and then I want to go to graduate. Speaker 2: Okay, the summer after my junior year, I worked at MIT back in the lab in material science and engineering. I started out learning how to do various things to prepare materials for different kinds of electrical studies. And so I started out learning how to make gold iron alloys, you know, with ingots and furnaces and mixing the materials and then polishing them to get certain surface properties and so on. And then I went, graduated from there to getting more and more into things that related to the physical properties, to the physics of what was going on in super conductors. I switched from working directly for the one professor to working for a more junior professor who had worked with him, to working with a professor named Bob Rose. And he had more of a focus on super conductivity and the properties of super conducting alloys. And so, in fact, I did a bachelor's thesis on what was called the super conducting, 'The Tunneling Density of States of Super Conducting, Niobium, Titanium Alloys' and basically, it really had to do with kind of the lineup of certain properties, certain energy bands that allowed electrons to--it's complicated, but to tunnel through an insulating barrier. And that ability to tunnel related to the super conducting properties of the material. And so it was an experimental study. But then I had to do some theoretical analysis, and based on what was called the BCS Theory of Super Conductivity, that stood for Bardeen, Cooper and Schrieffer, John Bardeen, Leon Cooper, Robert Schrieffer. And they developed the first theory and the theory of the, of super conductivity for what are now called low temperature super conductors. And that actually played into what I ultimately did in terms of applying to grad schools and what I finally did after I got my Ph.D. although that's not what I got my Ph.D. in. So. Story_ID: 29433 Speaker 1: --of whether your thesis was in the material science, but you said, no, it was really a combination of the physics and material science. Speaker 2: Well, what happened was I had worked the whole time I was an under grad, essentially, most of the summers in material science and engineering. And I talked about the progression of things that I worked on. But I was actually a physics major. I went through the whole sequence for physics. And, but I took courses as well in materials, the structure and properties of materials early. I took other courses later in material science and in condensed matter, what was then called solid state physics. So my thesis was actually a joint thesis in physics and material science and engineering. So I did the thesis working for a professor in material science and engineering, but because I was studying physical properties, then it counted as my thesis for my bachelor's degree in physics. And in those days at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], one had to do a bachelor's thesis to actually graduate (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Now, who was your thesis advisor? Speaker 2: The same, Dr. Robert Rose, professor in material science and engineering, but I was a physics major. Speaker 1: Now, can you also review, as we were doing off-camera, the different areas in physics, you know, the different, you said there're eight to ten. Speaker 2: Well, they're more, you know, it depends on how many sub-disciplines one wants to look at. There's nuclear physics. There's high energy physics, which is kind of an outgrowth nuclear physics. It's sometimes referred to as elementary particle physics. And that's what my Ph.D. is actually in. There is condensed matter physics, which used to be called solid state physics. There's atomic physics. There's plasma physics. There's optical physics. There's astrophysics and so on. Story_ID: 29434 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, when we were last interviewing, we talked about the fact that you were thinking about leaving, you know, MIT [Massachesetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] to do your post-graduate studies, but then there was a seminal moment, you know, which was Martin Luther King's death. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: And that you wanted, you figured you could do both, you know, make a difference really in an institution that had, I can't, I want to say gave you birth, but it was a pretty isolated environment the whole time. But you figured you could really make a difference. So can we talk about your, you know, deciding you were gonna return to, I mean stay at MIT, I can't say return. Speaker 2: Well, it was a complicated decision. And it's really important that I can try to get this across. I did the thesis. It was a joint thesis, but it was essentially a thesis in solid state physics, condensed matter physics. And that was what I was interested in. And in particular, I was interested in theoretical physics because I had studied the Bardeen, Cooper, Schrieffer theory, the BCS Theory of Super Conductivity. So when I went to go, to apply to grad school, on the one hand I was being encouraged by my undergraduate advisor to apply to MIT and particularly if I had more, you know, would be more interested in nuclear physics or something related to that. But on the other, I had this interest in condensed matter or solid state physics. So I applied to schools based on what I knew. So Bardeen, John Bardeen was the University of Illinois [Urbana-Champaign], but I had been told that Illinois was not particularly friendly to African Americans. And don't ask me how I was told that, but that's what I had been told. But there was a gentleman by the name of Leo Falakoff [ph.] who was at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] who actually had worked with, had worked on many-body theory, developing that whole kind of subject that enabled the theory of super conductivity to be worked out theoretically. So then I applied to Chi- University of Chicago because he was there. I applied to Brown [University, Providence, Rhode Island] because Cooper was there and to Penn [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] because Schrieffer was there, to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] in applied physics and because they, there were people there doing group theory and things related to solid state physics, to MIT in both physics and material science and engineering. So I got into all these places. And then I was invited to come and visit a couple of them. I had been invited to Brown to come visit. I was invited to Penn. I already knew about MIT, obviously, and I had been back and forth to Harvard and around Harvard because of going to school in Cambridge [Massachusetts]. So I did visit Brown, and I visited Penn and on the day I visited Penn and was on my way back to the airport to go back to Boston [Massachusetts], a soror was driving me to the airport, and as I was being driven, the radio was on and it, the news, there was a news flash that Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. had been shot in Memphis [Tennessee]. And then a little while later, the newscaster said he had, he had died. So that really shook us up because I was a child of the [Martin Luther] King era, and even though I talked about living in a kind of a sinecure in Washington [D.C.], the March on Washington [Washington, D.C., 1963] occurred while I was still in high school. I was well aware of the, you know, the Montgomery Bus Boycott [Montgomery, Alabama, 1955], the, a lot of the activities in the South that I knew in the end led to the kinds of changes that would and did affect my life. And I also recognized that I had lived a fairly isolated life at MIT, probably half of it off the campus because of having few social outlets on the campus. I had done well academically, but it wasn't because I was part of a crowd or group and was fairly isolated. In spite of all of that, I felt that MIT was clearly an important institution. And I, I mean that was why I had chosen to go to college there in the first place. And I felt that it was important to both open the door wider for other minority kids, especially African American and to try to make it more hospitable as well. And so for this complex set of reasons, even though solid state physics wasn't a big focus at MIT at that point--it had been earlier, and it certainly is now, and it was, you know, it built up after I left, it wasn't at the time. But I decided to stay. I was interested in theoretical physics, but because at that point nuclear physics and elementary particle physics or high energy physics were so important there, that is what I decided I would do, one or the other. And I started out actually thinking I would do experimental nuclear physics, but then I switched and decided to focus in elementary particle theory or theoretical elementary particle physics. Story_ID: 29435 Speaker 1: What is the difference between those two? Speaker 2: Between--? Speaker 1: elementary particle physics-- Speaker 2: Theory. Speaker 1: In theory, and--? Speaker 2: Nuclear. Speaker 1: Nuclear, right. Speaker 2: Well, nuclear physics is just that. One is studying the properties of, you know, nuclear reactions and what happens with that. elementary particle physics, you can think of as going below and going deeper to look at the fundamental constituents of matter, not the, the, you know, the atom with the nucleus and the electrons around, the electron cloud, but actually looking at the fundamental constituents. Now, initially that focused on things like the protons and the neutrons and so on. But then people discovered that these particles had their own constituents and so the reason it's also called high energy physics is that to peel the layers, to go, probe more deeply, one has to inject higher energy to cause things to reveal themselves, to come apart and then to study how these particles interact. And so that's what, that's the sense in which elementary particle physics or high energy physics is an outgrowth of nuclear, but you're probing more deeply and to go beyond just the nucleus to understand the fundamental constituents that make up the nucleus and then that make up those things that make up the nucleus, and, and try to understand how all this comes together to give us the particles and the phenomena that we observe. And so I kind of got hooked on that. And I did my Ph.D. in that field. Story_ID: 29436 Speaker 1: Now, how was the Ph.D. program at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] structured and how many, you know, PhD students were there at the time and--? Speaker 2: I don't remember exactly the number of Ph.D. students in my class, but it was a fairly large number, maybe sixty students in my entering graduate class. But I, you know, it could be plus or minus, but we had a large number of undergraduate physics majors when I got my bachelor's degree, and I think over a hundred. And it may have been as many as a hundred and fifty. But there were a smaller number than that who went into the graduate programs and, and very, you know, much smaller from MIT into the graduate programs. But, but I always seem to go against the countervailing trends because I went in, and I wanted to do theoretical physics. I wanted to do elementary particle physics. The job market was really pretty bad for students in those areas when I started grad school. In fact, a professor essentially told us, you know, unless you think this is really the only thing you really want to do, and unless you think you're gonna be one of the best people at it, maybe you should pick some other area of physics or even opt out of physics. Nonetheless, I stayed. Now, when you say how the graduate program is structured, I mean it's an interesting structure. I mean there were courses that students would take in the first one or two years. But there was no proscribed curriculum per se. But there were subjects that one would take because one was expected to know certain things. The real gating points were these. There was a qualifying exam, and it was really meant to be more of a diagnostic exam to suggest what you might wanna take in your first year or two. Then the big exam was called a general exam. And the general exam was an exam that a student had to take no later than the first semester of the third year in grad school. And it was a multi-part exam. There was a Part 1 that essentially tested a student on essentially all of undergraduate physics and into beginning graduate subjects. Then there was a Part 2. And then Part 2 tested a student on the more advanced subjects, things that would show up in advanced graduate subjects and special areas, in nuclear physics and atomic physics and so on. And on the first part of the exam, one had to work all the problems. On the second part, one had to pick a certain number of the problems, and so one could select and do those. Then there was a take-home exam for a week where one would pick two of the problems that one didn't work on the spot, do those problems, but expand upon them in terms of a broader context of physics and do the background, go to literature and so on. And then there was a two-hour oral exam. And the way the--and it could be three hours, and typically did extend. And the way it worked is one would start out doing the presentation on the problems one had worked in the take-home part, providing the context in talking about one's approach to solving the problem. And the discussion would evolve and the professors would ask you about anything in physics they wanted. Now, you had to pass Part 1 to pass Part 2. So if you failed Part 1, you'd fail the whole exam. If you failed Part 2, then you could take Part 2 again. Now, the students who wanted to do theory typically would try to take the exam early. So rather than wait till the beginning of my third year, I took it after a year and a half, in the beginning of the second semester of my second year, and I passed. And so then I became a doctoral candidate at that point. Story_ID: 29437 Speaker 1: Now, who is advising you, you know, or mentoring you at this point? Speaker 2: Well, when we went into grad school, there was a graduate advisor for the given class of entering graduate students. And I think the professor's name was Ken Johnson, but, you know, you're really causing me to dig deep into my memory. And then after one passed the exam I described, then one became a doctoral candidate. And then one would go around to find a Ph.D. advisor. Speaker 1: So who was your Ph.D. (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) His name was James Young. Speaker 1: And he was--? Speaker 2: Yes, he was an African American. Speaker 1: --African American. Speaker 2: And I worked with him, but I also worked with another professor by the name of Roman Jakeef [ph.] on a separate Physics problem. Speaker 1: And what was that problem? Speaker 2: It really had to do with solutions to what were called Bethe-Salpeter equations. These were one of, kind of a theoretical construct for studying two body problems where two things collide and come out under certain circumstances, you wanna understand the quantum physics. And the Bethe-Salpeter equation also allowed you to try to go beyond a simple two-body problem to being able to in certain cases, look at the properties of three bodies. And it turns out that once you get beyond the two-body problem, it's very complicated. And so the interesting thing about my Ph.D. thesis was that what I was studying, you know, the title of my thesis was 'The Study of a Multi-Peripheral Model With Continued Cross Channel Unitarity.' That means nothing to you, but what it really was, was a way of understanding what happens when two particles collide at high energy. And then a bunch of stuff comes out. And you wanna try to describe that physics. But, what ends up happening in the fact, is when the bunch of stuff comes out, meaning, many particles, you can actually detect and measure the properties of one or two of these particles. And so let's imagine you could measure the properties of one, and then there was a bunch of other stuff that you didn't measure the individual characteristics of. But you could do some statistical averaging over those properties. Anyway, with this issue, with this approach of continued cross channel unitarity, which you don't need to know much about except to say that it allowed you to turn a problem that had to do with two particles colliding, a bunch of things coming out where you looked at one and statistically averaged over the other, you could turn it into a three-body problem, okay, where it was three particles in, three particles out and the continued cross channel unitarity where you had multiple stuff in the middle, allowed you to figure out this one body inclusive interaction, which was the two in, one out, the rest statistically averaged over. And the statistical averaging is a process that is embedded in all the terminology of the title of the thesis, okay. And so then it turns out that I actually was able to use some of the things I had learned working on the Bethe-Salpeter equation problem to actually do and figure out analytically how to approach this particular problem, and multi-peripheral just had to do with multiple collisions that occurred in a certain way with small forces or small momentum transfers. So that was my thesis. And so the two things played off of each other and actually, Roman Jakeef helped me get my first job at Fermi Lab, Fermi National Accelerator Lab [Batavia, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Now, at this point in the Ph.D. program, you're the only black female, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And are you aware, like are there other black female Ph.D. candidates around the country? Speaker 2: You mean in physics? Speaker 1: Physics, I'm sorry, in physics. Speaker 2: None that I really knew of at that point. There was another woman at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] that apparently was working in biophysics and we were, you know, more or less contemporaneous, but that was it. That's why I'm the first black woman to get a Ph.D. from MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] because there weren't many African American women working on Ph.D's there, period, and there weren't others in the hard physics in the country. But there was a woman who was working in biophysics. Speaker 1: Were you aware of that at the time (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, I wasn't. Speaker 1: You were not, ah huh. Speaker 2: Aware of, now, was I aware of what? Speaker 1: Your singular position, the singularity of your position? Speaker 2: Well, yes and no. I mean I was not out, you know, gathering data. There was no way for me to know. I mean I was at MIT. I was focusing on what I was doing. And so there was no way to know, and people weren't doing all this statistical database and let's gather all this detailed knowledge the way they do today. So, and, and so I, you know, but I anecdotally knew there couldn't be very many others because I never met any. Story_ID: 29438 Speaker 1: Now, did you, what I'm trying to understand, at this same, well, first of all, how long was the Ph.D. program? Speaker 2: I was there for about five years. Speaker 1: Five years. And at the same time, you're being very active in helping recruit? Speaker 2: That's correct. Speaker 1: So how did you balance the two because, you know, there're all these stories, I think you told about, you know, you would have students over at your apartment. You know, you were, you know, the numbers--I can't remember the numbers, but they like--? Speaker 2: Well, let me just start, when I was in my first year in grad school, there really weren't very many. There was a program called Project Epsilon that MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] started. And so and maybe five or eight black kids started in the fall of 1968. And they had come in a summer program. And there was a Native American student, and may have been a Latino student in that group as well. Then, but the fall of '68 [1968] is when I started graduate school. And so it was in the first year I was part of what was called the Task Force on Educational Opportunity. I also was a cofounder of the Black Student Union. And I was co-chair of the Black Student Union. And so I was actually on this Task Force on Educational Opportunity which would meet every week, hours and hours at a time, sometimes more than once a week. It was chaired by Paul Gray who was then the associate provost. And we hammered out an approach to recruitment, to admissions, on admissions criteria, to financial aid and so on. And then some of us went out to visit high schools that had large populations of African American students to recruit. And so I did that, and I traveled into the Midwest. I went to Detroit [Michigan], I went to Cleveland [Ohio]. I went to, I don't know, Cincinnati [Ohio]. I went to Columbus [Ohio] and so on to actually seek out high performing black students and talk to them about coming, applying to MIT and if admitted, to come. At the same time, we worked out the details of a bridge program. We called it Project Interphase. Epsilon, if you do math, connotes a small quantity. So it didn't seem that Epsilon was a good-- Speaker 1: Goal. Speaker 2: --terminology to use. Project Interphase was a play off of interface. So it was meant to be a transition from the high school experience into MIT. And so that interphase program had certain social and cultural aspects, but it was primarily academic. And so it had physics and math, chemistry, some lab work, etc. So the first year, which was the summer of '69 [1969], and that was when the largest number first came in, that we had gone from about five to eight a year, really more like three to five per year, of African American students to fifty-seven who entered in the fall of '69 [1969]. And a good fraction of them came through Project Interphase. And so I, in the first, my first year in grad school, I was taking my courses. I was primarily taking courses, but I also was on this task force. And then I went out to do some recruiting. And the summer between my first and second year in grad school, in the summer of '69 [1969], I taught in Project Interphase. I taught physics. And there were two options. One was a more traditional approach to physics, meaning, you know, going through the basic materials, learning how to work the problems, how to approach them and so forth. And the other was kind of more experimental and hands on. And in the end, many more of the African American kids liked--and that was my approach, the traditional one. And so then my, the second year we continued working on these issues and refining Project Interphase and recruiting. But I cut back on the recruiting because I was studying for my general exam, which I took that second semester of my second year. And I intended to pass it, which I did. Then the summer after my second year, I actually ran the physics option in Project Interphase. I was in charge of it, to lay out the whole program and the curriculum and so on. And so I did that. Story_ID: 29439 Speaker 1: And then in my third year in grad school, I started getting involved with doing research for my thesis but still taking courses, taking advanced courses and quantum field theory and other things and going to seminars at MIT, at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], at Brandeis [University, Waltham, Massachusetts] and schools around the area. And then the summer of my third year in grad school, I went to a special theoretical physics summer school at the University of Colorado at Boulder. And everything happens for a reason and I'll tell you why in a second. And so I went to Boulder [Colorado] and, you know, taking advances subjects and theoretical physics seminar type things. But I met two physicists who actually figured in my life later. One was a gentleman by the name of Harry Morrison. He's an African American who was a professor of physics at Berkley, University of California, Berkley, who really became one of my best friends in physics, and he and his wife were my great friends through the years. He's since passed away, but, you know, I actually saw Harriet Morrison just last year down in Charleston [South Carolina]. And so we've stayed in touch through the years, not as much as we used to, but we do tend to stay in touch. The other was a gentleman by the name of John Klauder who was a theoretical physicists who was at Bell Labs [Murray Hill, New Jersey], Bell Telephone Labs, later AT&T Bell Labs. So that was the summer of '71 [1971], and then after that I just worked primarily on my thesis research, maybe taking a course here or there in advanced subjects. And then my last summer, I went to a-- see, theoretical physics summer schools, they're like summer seminars. And it's a thing that people do. People go off in the summers to major conferences, summer-long seminars or summer schools. And so I did this through the years. And so there was one in high energy physics. It was called the Ecole Mayerana [ph.]. It was a theoretical physics summer school that occurred, that took place in Sicily [Italy] in a place called Trapani, and I, it was considered a big honor to be accepted. And so I went the summer I was finishing my Ph.D. And so I spent about a month in Sicily. And there weren't very many women at this conference, so they, at this, in the summer school. So they put the women up in a convent. And so I was very interesting to the women because, the nuns, because I had little curly hair. You know, at that, by that time, I had an afro, and so they thought I was so very interesting. And I actually had had that experience before as I jump back to 1968. The summer after I got my bachelor's degree, I went to Europe with two friends from MIT. And I think I told you a little bit about that, and when I was traveling in Poland, I had the same experience of people thinking I was so very interesting. Story_ID: 29440 Speaker 1: --Roman Jakeef (ph). Speaker 2: Jakeef, okay. You said that he was responsible for you going to, is it Fermi Labs? Speaker 1: Fermi Lab. Well, I went to talk with him about, you know, potential jobs. And he indicated that there might be this post-doc at Fermi Lab, Fermi National Accelerator Lab [Illinois] and put me in touch with the person who was head of theory group there. And in the end I, you know, interviewed and got the job. So, you know, that's the long and short of it. Speaker 2: And you then, Fermi Lab is in Illinois. Speaker 1: Illinois, in Batavia which is about thirty-five miles west of Chicago. Speaker 2: Right. And you talked about before also the fact that this, you know, it was in Lisle [Illinois] and you couldn't find housing in Lisle. Speaker 1: Well, it was, Lisle was one of the towns between Chicago [Illinois] and Batavia [Illinois], but there are many towns between Chicago and Batavia. And I looked in many towns between Chicago and Batavia. There was a black community in Aurora [Illinois]. But I didn't feel that I should be constrained to live in this black community in Aurora. I've always been one who felt I should be able to live where I wanted to live. And, but in those days, it was very difficult. So after having been rejected or people being strange or whatever, I actually ended up living in Chicago, which net, net was probably the best thing that happened. Speaker 2: And how long was the post-doc program at Fermi Labs? Speaker 1: It was a two-year post-doc, but I got a fellowship to go to Europe from the Ford Foundation. And so I spent a year at CERN, the European Center for Nuclear Research [Geneva, Switzerland] between my two years of post-doc at Fermi Lab. And then when I got-- Speaker 2: You mean that summer? Speaker 1: No, no, it was a year. Speaker 2: It was a year. Speaker 1: Yeah, I spent, I went a year to Fermi Lab. Then I spent a year at CERN, and then I went back to Fermi Lab for about a year. Speaker 2: Okay, so you were, okay, that's right. Speaker 1: Seventy-three [1973], '74 [1974]-- Speaker 2: Seventy-four [1974], okay. Speaker 1: --I was at Fermi Lab. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Seventy four [1974], '75 [1975], I was at CERN. Seventy-five [1975], '76 [1976], I was back at Fermi Lab, except I left early in '76 [1976] to spend the summer at Aspen [Colorado], at the Aspen Center for Physics. And then I went to Bell Labs in the fall of '76 [1976]. Speaker 2: Okay, let's talk about what, when you're graduating, I mean what would have been, wasn't there an issue that you couldn't find a particle theory job? Was that or did come into place after your post-doc? Speaker 1: That was more after the post-doc. Speaker 2: Post-doc, okay. But let me understand what would have been, were you following what would have been a traditional path and even going to Fermi Lab, was that a traditional path? Speaker 1: Yeah, it was a traditional path, um-hum. Speaker 2: Okay. And tell me, now, let's talk about also who was heading up Fermi Lab at the time, and you know, what type of work was actually being done at Fermi Lab? Speaker 1: Can we stop the camera for a minute because I have to remember. It's later in the morning. Speaker 2: So I was asking who was--? Speaker 1: Robert Wilson was the head of Fermi Lab at that time. I went as a post-doc, and Benjamin Lee was the head of the theory group, and that's where I went. I was in the theory group. Speaker 2: Can you tell me though, because, you know, there's Argonne Labs, there's Fermi, I mean (unclear) but anyway, what are the main like labs and where does Fermi Lab fit in the whole? Speaker 1: Well, at the time Fermi Lab was the newest. It was one of the newest high-energy physics labs. And so it was the latest and the greatest. It had not long opened when I went as a post-doc. In fact, when I went, the theory group was in a cluster of houses that were on the lab property but were about three or four miles from the main building. The property was that large. In fact, there was herd of buffalo on the property. So they had built this main central tower that act--looked like one of the poles, looks like part of a quadrupole magnet and that was deliberate because quadrupole magnets are used to steer a particle beam in an accelerator. But the offices weren't ready when I first went as a post-doc. But my second year I was there which was after my year in Europe, we were in that building. Story_ID: 29441 Speaker 1: Now, why Illinois? I mean I'm just thinking, but first of all, just for context for me, how many labs like this were there located around the world or even--? Speaker 2: Well, you know, there're a number of them. I mean there's the Stanford Linear Accelerator Center [later called SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory]. There's the European Center for Nuclear Research [Geneva, Switzerland]. There's Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory [Illinois]. There's Argonne National Lab [Illinois]. There's Brookhaven National Lab [Upton, New York]. There are labs in Europe, in Russia, etc. But there were certain labs that were the super big, high energy physics labs. And Fermi Lab was one of them, CERN was one of them and SLAC was one of them. But they, they accelerate different kinds of particles. So SLAC accelerates electrons. It's a linear accelerator. And the reason it's linear is that when you bend a charge particle with the magnets and they go in a circle, that kind of acceleration causes them to give off radiation called Cherenkov radiation which actually robs them of energy. And the lighter the particle, the more energy relative to its mass it loses. So you tend to accelerate electrons in a line. The bigger, the heavier particles, like the protons, you accelerate in a circle. And that's what CERN would accelerate. That's what Fermi Lab accelerated, the huge circles underground. And so one would go because that was a great place to be. This is where people from all over the country and all over the world would come to do experiments. And they had a robust theory group and a lot of interesting physics going on. And so it was a unique opportunity really. And then to go from there to CERN which was a world-class, as well, lab but now drew people, particularly from all over Europe, but again from all over the world. Those were two seminal places to be. Speaker 1: And in that, can you talk about, now [Robert] "Bob" Wilson, he did have this policy about, you know, everyone, you know, no discrimination. Was that apparent when you--? Speaker 2: Well, I don't that it, you know, those sorts of issues didn't come into play per se. But I'll tell you. I mean there're the blatant things and there're the subtle things. I think Bob Wilson did ensure, you know, a lot of fairness. And if you looked at the broad workforce, then he had diversity. I mean there were African Americans who were technicians and so on, and not a lot, but there were some. But there were no African American scientists there, Ph.D.s, until I came. There was one guy who had a master's degree who was working in the experimental area. But I was the first black Ph.D. they hired. Now, having said that, then, you know, in the group people wouldn't always, you know, work with me or they would, the seminars, the colloquium seminars would be over in the main building, the big, tall building even though the offices weren't ready. It was four miles away. I was in a carpool so I didn't drive every day. So people would get up and leave, you know, and then they wouldn't necessarily invite me to ride with them. The secretary of the theory group was a black woman. So she would lend me her car, and then I would drive over to the seminars. But, you know, there are two ways you can always tell a story. One is to go through all of the denigrating experiences and all of the tough things. And I have had my share of those. The other way to tell the story is, what was I trying to do? What did I do? What did I think I accomplished? And how did I overcome and stay the course? And that's always been the side I've tended to be on. But I'm happy to answer anything you want me to answer. Story_ID: 29442 Speaker 1: So now, what did you learn though, there? I mean this is your first real, you know, job. I mean you've been in labs before, but this is, you know, clearly, you're leaving sort of an academic setting--? Speaker 2: No, it was very academic. Speaker 1: It was still academic, okay. Speaker 2: Because there were, we did theoretical physics that was the same as what a professor would do. The only difference was we didn't teach, okay. It was research focused, and in a sense that made it easy to do, to move to Bell Labs [Murray Hill, New Jersey] as well because it was research focused. But we also, the lab had post-docs. The post-docs were not assigned to any given person. In a university, post-docs may tend to come in and work with a given professor, although interestingly enough, in many places they also come to work in a group. But many times they're attached to a professor. At places like a Fermi Lab [Illinois], a CERN [European Center for Nuclear Research, Geneva, Switzerland], a SLAC [Stanford Linear Accelerator Center, California], the post-docs are hired into a group, and in my case, hired into the theory group. And so then one is kind of there essentially on one's own to try to figure out what to work on and, you know, try to work with people and so forth. Speaker 1: Now, the funding though from that, is everyone just generally funded or--? Speaker 2: Yeah, the, a lab like Fermi Lab has funding from the Department of Energy. And so it gets, you know, a major block of funds every year to run the lab. So it's government funded. Speaker 1: Now, you focused on the study--is it Hadron? Speaker 2: Hadrons. Speaker 1: Hadrons, okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Can you discuss that? Speaker 2: Well, they're a particular kind of particle like a proton or neutron and one that had that heavy kind of particle, that had what were called strong interactions. So I did hadron physics. But that's what my thesis was as well. Speaker 1: Okay, and that's based on the Landau--? Speaker 2: On the Landau-Ginsburg theories. Speaker 1: Okay, all these theories, okay. (Laughter). I said, all these theories. Now, I want--? Speaker 2: Actually, not quite. Speaker 1: Not quite? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay, well, correct me. Speaker 2: I mean there're multiple theories that one uses to describe hadron physics. In fact, what I worked on was what were called Reggeon field theories which really was a kind of construct for looking at ways of describing energy and momentum transfers as if there were some theoretical particle that transferred that energy or momentum. And we called them Reggeons, but I mean it really is very, kind of topological and group theoretical, meaning using symmetries and things like that. And so I enjoyed it, but what was happening in those days, and remember the early discussion that the professor had with all of us when we started grad school. I mean there were people who would do two and three and four post-docs before they got an assistant professorship. So, you know, the thought of my looking and applying for a number of jobs to get one or doing a second post-doc or whatever was not unusual. And so while I enjoyed what I was doing, I didn't quite see necessarily staying and trying to do two and three and four post-docs and then doing an assistant professorship. Speaker 1: Now, why didn't you see yourself doing that? Speaker 2: Well, because it, you know, one is already in one's mid to late twenties by the time one gets a Ph.D.. And it seemed a long pathway. But as well, I was always interested in condensed matter physics and solid state. And so in many ways, doing high-energy physics was a default because I stayed at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] for grad school. Had I gone to Penn [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] or Brown [University, Providence, Rhode Island] or Chicago [University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] or Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], I would have done condensed matter physics, solid state physics. But I did what was the strong, one of the strong areas at MIT at the time. And so it was, you know, not such a big leap for me to say, well, let me look again at condensed matter physics, look at solid state physics. And I went back and talked to some people at MIT. And they said, well, you know, did you ever think about looking at working in an industrial research lab like Bell Labs? And so I actually had met John Klauder at the University of Colorado at Boulder, theoretical physics summer school. So I contacted him, and he put me in touch with a gentleman who was the head of the theory department at Bell Labs. Story_ID: 29443 Speaker 1: Okay, and let's talk about that, you going to Bell Labs [Murray Hill, New Jersey]? Can I go back? Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: I just have to ask this one question. And counter to what you told me to ask, but when Mary Kay, is Gall-- Speaker 2: Gaillard. Speaker 1: Gaillard, talked about your difficult beginning, what was she talking about? Was she talking, was she making reference to, you know, you have to take the secretary's car to go and attend--? Speaker 2: Well, I think she's talking about all of it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay, I mean the general isolation and having to overcome that, of being the curiosity, of working alone more than other people. And, you know, all of those kinds of things. You know, who was backing me to get a job and all of those kinds of things, you know. And she and I talked a lot about that because when I went to CERN [European Center for Nuclear Research], I spent a lot of time with her. Speaker 1: Okay. So let's talk about the job for Bell Labs. Now, you know, you met--? Speaker 2: John Klauder. Speaker 1: John Klauder. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And then--? Speaker 2: He introduced me to Morris Rice. And Morris Rice was the head of the theory department at Bell Labs at the time. Speaker 1: And this is 1976 and--? Speaker 2: It might have been late '75 [1975] or early '76 [1976]. Speaker 1: Okay, '76 [1976], okay. And so, but this is also, your preference would have been to get a particle theory job? Speaker 2: No, not necessarily. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: I mean I was on a track that, you know, would lead to an assistant professorship. But, you know, that became increasingly unattractive to me. But I was on a-- Speaker 1: Now, why is that? Speaker 2: Again, I didn't see doing two and three and four post-docs, okay. Speaker 1: Post-docs, okay, got you. Speaker 2: And secondly, I always had this other tug to doing solid state physics. And that was, you know, I wanted to do solid State Theory or condensed matter theory, but I did elementary Particle Theory because theory was what I was particularly interested in. And so I called John Klauder. He introduced me to Morris Rice. Morris Rice invited me to come to an American Physical Society meeting--I think it was in Atlanta [Georgia], to talk with him, and I did go. And I talked with him, you know, for a while, for quite a while. And then he invited me to come and give a physics colloquium at Bell Labs [Murray Hill, New Jersey]. Initially, I think it was just going to be a theoretical physics seminar, but then I was invited to give a colloquium. And he arranged that. And I, you know, I, in fact--and let me back up for a minute because also, there's a gentleman by the name of Earl Shaw. He's a black man who was an experimental physicist, did laser physics at Bell Labs. And Earl had gotten his Ph.D. from Berkley [University of California, Berkeley]. And I actually had spent a summer at SLAC [Stanford Linear Accelerator Center], and I met Earl Shaw that summer. And I'm not exactly sure how, but I met him. And when I first was making a contact, I called Earl. And Earl says, well, don't you know John Klauder. And then he said, you should call him. I called John; John put me in touch with Morris Rice. And then I went to the APS meeting, the American Physical Society meeting and met with Morris Rice. And then I was invited to give the colloquium at Bell Labs. Speaker 1: And when you gave that colloquium, people were very impressed, right? Speaker 2: I guess so. They offered me a job. Speaker 1: They offered you a job (laughter), okay. Speaker 2: I mean I met with all the, you know, members of the senior people in the theory group, including Phil Anderson who later got a Noble Prize and this one and that one. And they made me an offer. Speaker 1: Okay, and you were at Bell Labs a total of, how many years? Speaker 2: Fifteen years. Speaker 1: Fifteen years, so can you talk about the Bell Labs that you entered into and sort of the state of, what do I want to call it? Institutional, did you call it institutional or business research groups? Speaker 2: You mean industrial research labs? Speaker 1: Industrial, right, right, industrial research. Speaker 2: Well, Bell Labs at the time was, actually it was pretty large. I mean it had twenty thousand people working for Bell Labs. And there were different locations around the country, although a lot of them in New Jersey. And at Murray Hill [New Jersey] was where the basic, most of the basic physics occurred. It was called Area Ten, later Area Eleven. And there were a number departments. There was a theoretical physics department and a number of times the post-docs would come through that department or people who were called "limited term members" of the technical staff, which is what I was initially. And then some people would stay in the theoretical physics department, some would end up in other departments. And so I came in through the physics, the theoretical physics department. And then I was offered a permanent position in the solid state and quantum physics department. And then later I moved into what was called the optical physics department because of the work that I was doing. And so, you know, I stayed there. I met my husband at Bell Labs. You know, and we had a son. I did my little thing for fifteen years. Story_ID: 29444 Speaker 1: And then I, you know, I did mainly work on the electronic and optical properties of two-dimensional and quasi-two dimensional systems, layered materials. And my first work that I did, I worked with Morris Rice and another physicist by the name of Patrick Lee. And we did work on charged density waves and layered, what are called transition metal digel chalcogenides and, you know, things like niobium diselenide and so on. And it's an interesting physical system because it occurs, it structures, the structure is like a sandwich where the chalcogens like the selenium are the bread of the sandwich, and the metals like the niobium or would be the bread--the meat of the sandwich. And since current, you know, electrons like to flow more in metals than in more insulating materials and the chalcogens are more insulating materials. The physics tended to be constrained to a layer and so that, you know, it was an interesting system to study because of that constraint and because of the nature of the interactions. The electrons, under certain conditions, could bunch up spatially and these were called charged density waves because they're denser in some places, less dense in others and so you can think of it as kind of a wave. But actually, they had certain topological properties and when I went to Bell Labs, I gave a seminar on neutrino physics based on a problem I had done while I was at CERN [European Center for Nuclear Research]. But I actually was focused and talked to people about applying topological solutions to what are called non-linear field theories, to condensed matter systems. And so it's interesting that the first problem I worked on really ended up having these topological properties. And then we used that topology to study the thermo dynamics of the system and make certain predictions. And so this was the work I did with Morris Rice and Patrick Lee. And then I had talked to IBM [International Business Machines] when I was initially talking to Bell Labs [Murray Hill, New Jersey]. But I got a job from Bell Labs pretty quickly and so I never interviewed with IBM. I suggested that, you know, I'd be happy to talk to them in a year because I had originally gone in as a limited term member of the technical staff, which was a two-year appointment. And so I thought that after a year I'd be looking. So a year to the day, IBM did call me. And I went and interviewed with them and I talked about work I had done at Bell Labs. And they offered me a job. But, you know, when Bell Labs found out that IBM offered me a job, then they made my position a permanent position. And they offered me a permanent position. So I decided to stay at Bell Labs, and it was a great place to be. I mean it was, I mean there were a lot of Nobel Prize winners that had come out of Bell Labs. It was like being in an advanced, you know, basic research lab, particularly being in the research area. And people did their thing. The job, your job was to do research and publish papers and give talks at professional meetings in areas that were interesting in condensed matter physics. Story_ID: 29445 Speaker 1: And then when I got the permanent job and went into the solid state and quantum physics department, then I worked on an interesting system that was also two-dimensional, of electrons on the surface of liquid helium films. And you say, well, why would anybody do that at Bell Labs? Well, many semi-conductor devices and materials occur in two, are governed, their properties are governed essentially in two dimensions. And so what the electrons on the helium films was, we could think of it as a prototypical two-dimensional system whose properties you could tailor by changing the thickness of the film, changing the substrate on which the film was put. And that actually affected the coupling of the electrons, you know, how strongly they interacted with waves on the surface of the helium that you could put into a quantum form, called riplons. And so you, you know, you could quantized capillary gravity waves on the surface of the liquid helium. And so I modeled that interaction using what are called path-integral techniques. Basically, it's a mathematical way of doing statistical averaging of different pathways that a particle can move. And I was able to make predictions about what would happen in terms of the mobility and movement of these particles, based on the thickness. And what I discovered was that, at a certain thickness, the properties all of a sudden changed so that the effective mass changed by ten orders, five orders of magnitude which meant by a factor of a hundred thousand [100,000]. So essentially, it became like it plunked down and just stopped. And so this, is referred to, I mean the whole area came under what's called polerons (ph.). And a poleron is a particle that moves through a system and it distorts the system as it moves through because of its interaction. And so people refer to a poleron sometimes as a particle that digs its own grave because of how it distorts its environment, and then that distorted environment reacts back onto the particle and effects its mobility. And in this case, it just plunked down. And prior to this people studied poleronic effects, and there would be some heaviness, you know, a drag on the particle that would occur. And its mass would get heavier, but it would be like twenty percent heavier. But this five orders of magnitude was a new result. And so I did a series of papers on, you know, this, and later this effect was born out in experiment. And so then I was elected a Fellow of the American Physical Society. Speaker 2: Because of your research? Speaker 1: Because of my research. Speaker 2: Research. And when was that, Dr. Jackson? Speaker 1: I was elected in 1986. Speaker 2: 1986, okay. Now, this, all this theory and research that you're talking about, to those of us in the consuming public, where was that actualized or is it still research that's sort of going on? Speaker 1: Well, you've got to think about things at multiple layers. You know, long before something gets to you, then there's been a lot of work on materials, properties, if you have some electronic device, on what it's made of, you know, what its materials are, what its electronic properties are; how you tailor those properties to get the kind of performance that you want. But if you go all the way back, that depends on basic physics, basic chemistry, etc. And a person like me models that basic physics, the basic physical properties. And so by looking at this prototypical system, one learns how electrons in a two-dimensional system, get affected in their ability to move around by their coupling to each other, by their coupling to disorder in the environment, etc. And when you have a semi-conductor device, that's the basis of the sort of integrated circuits that go into computers and, you know, Blackberry's and so forth, these circuits all operate--they're semi-conductors, not electrons on helium, but they operate based on the physics of how these electrons interact in two dimensions. And that's what my work undergirded. Story_ID: 29446 Speaker 1: People always wanna know, well, so how does what you do relate to my cell phone or my laptop or whatever? Well, your cell phone and your laptop has little, tiny integrated circuits, little transistors and things. And somebody has designed those based on an understanding of how electrons move through certain materials, how they move around in two dimensions, what affects their ability to cross a distance and so forth. When do they move, if you put electrical voltage on a circuit, etc. And then people like me are the ones who are then trying to contribute to that fundamental understanding of how things work at the most elemental level. And then it builds up in layers. And so I never designed a device, but what I did was to help with creating a body of knowledge about how systems behaved in two dimensions, in layers, and what their basic electronic and optical properties are. Then somebody else takes that kind of knowledge to say, well, if something behaves like this in a semi-conductor or some other material, then what kind of device can I make out of it, a transistor or something else, a logic gate for a computer and so on. And then it builds up from there. But long before you get there, to these chips that go into these different electronic devices that we all play around with, somebody's had to figure out the basic physics about how things operate in these chips. And that's what people like me do. Speaker 2: (Laughter) (unclear) statement. But do sometimes, people get lost out there in space and don't wanna deal with regular people? Speaker 1: Well, who are the regular people? Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Are the regular people those who are doing the science or are the regular people those who are not doing the science? So your difficulty we have in this society is that people don't value those who do science and engineering, partly because perhaps we don't understand what people do; partly because perhaps we're afraid of what the power of science or what it could lead to. And so because of that or because we don't understand the personality, how somebody could be so focused to spend days at a time, weeks at a time, months at a time, years, working on things so detailed, whether they're doing some chemical experiment, physical experiment, detailed calculations. And so I think people, because they don't understand it, they tend to put it off to the side, even as they're benefiting from what scientists and engineers do. And so that's the irony of it. All of us are sitting every day on top of what comes out of science and engineering, things we almost take for granted. I mean you'll walk out of here and call your friend or call your agent or what have you, and you're using a device that goes all the way back to the study of semi-conductor materials, packaging materials, architecture of devices. And all of that goes back to somebody having studied the basic chemistry and physics of certain kinds of systems, and that's people like me. And then there're those who do things that are even more mathematical, which is more like what I did early on with my Ph.D. thesis and in the early years after my Ph.D. thesis. And so people enjoy that. People commit their lives to that, and we need to understand and hold up people more who are like that. We give great forbearance to musicians. They're very creative and many of the most creative people are not like the everyday person walking up and down the street. But because we think we can understand it or relate to it more, we give great deference, even, but we're almost afraid of people in science and engineering. So we tend to wanna think that they're weird because what they enjoy seems so different than what the typical person might. I think one other issue has to do with the fact that it is, to be a scientist or engineer, it is a cumulative process. But you really do have to have a strong math and science background. And in order to do it--you can't do physics if you're not really good at mathematics and it's pretty advanced mathematics if you're theoretical physics. In fact, some of it overlaps with what you might call applied mathematics. But you can't do that, you know, unless you can go back. You have to add, subtract, multiply, divide. You have to be able to do algebra, geometry, trigonometry. You have to be able to calculus, differential equations, complex variable theory, group theory, linear algebra and so on and on and on, topology, all of these things. And then you haven't even done the physics yet. But all of that leads to your ability to make that kind of a contribution. Story_ID: 29447 Speaker 1: Now, Dr. Jackson, how would the environment though, are any of these environments, like how did the environment at Bell Labs [Murray Hill, New Jersey], how did it differ from Fermi Lab [Illinois]? And I know that you also developed an affiliation at Rut--you know, you were teaching at Rutgers [University, New Brunswick, New Jersey], during that time, but-- Speaker 2: Not the whole time. Speaker 1: Well, '76 [1976]-- Speaker 2: Well, '76 [1976] to '91 [1991], I was just at Bell Labs. Speaker 1: I see, okay. Speaker 2: I went to Rutgers in 1991. Speaker 1: Okay, sorry. 1991 to 1995. Okay, but how did the environment though at Bell Labs differ? Speaker 2: Well, first of all, there were a lot of scientists across a range of fields. Now, when I was at Fermi Lab, when I was at CERN [European Center for Nuclear Research, Geneva Switzerland], they were all high-energy physicists, all elementary particle physics. At Bell Labs, it was condensed matter physics, but it covered a broad front. But they were chemists, material scientists; they were mathematicians, they were computer scientists. They were economists, they were psychologists, all of these people worked in research, basic research at Bell Labs. And so it was a very rich environment. A second way of difference is there were more African American Ph.D.s than I had ever seen. There were more women, and it was in a suburban environment but not one that was way out, you know, in an isolated kind of an arena. And so all of these things made it quite different. Speaker 1: Now, you married in what year? You met your husband [Morris A. Washington] there, but what year did you marry? Speaker 2: In, I gotta think. I gotta calculate back, 1980, something like that. Speaker 1: So four years after you--? Speaker 2: Yeah, four and a half. Speaker 1: Four and a half years after you joined. You met him, though, how soon after you went--? Speaker 2: I met him in a physics seminar about a month after I started at Bell Labs. Speaker 1: And what was the, why was there chemistry? Speaker 2: Who knows? That's why it's chemistry. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Speaker 2: (Laughter) Touche. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay, but here you are, you are both working in the same--? Speaker 2: Well, he was an experimental physicist. I was a theoretical physicist. Speaker 1: Can you tell me how that differs? Speaker 2: He did things in the lab. He did experiments. I did calculations, mathematical modeling. Speaker 1: Got you. See, I'm learning something. (Laughter) But during this fifteen years, basically, you get married. You're raising a family, your son, Alan, right. And Alan was born in what year? Speaker 2: Eighty one [1981]. Speaker 1: Eighty one [1981], okay. Now, did you, so I'm just trying to understand your life, you know, what is happening? I mean you're working. You know, I'm just trying to understand the life that you're sort of building for yourself? Is it a nine to five work environment? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay, well, just explain, okay, can you explain a little bit because we don't know this world of science for those--? Speaker 2: Well, we worked long hours, but I did theoretical physics. My husband did experimental physics. Now, what that meant in his case was that once he started working in the lab, it was not so easy just to stop. But as the theoretical physicist, it's easier to start and stop, except one does like to have a period to concentrate. And so once we had our son, we worked it out where I would go to work early, really early, but I always went to work early. I would go at 6:00 o'clock in the morning. So I would leave early, and he would, I'd have everything laid out for our son. This is when he was really little, you know, his clothes and the formula and the food and so on. And we found a very nice family, a very nice woman who took care of just about three to five kids. And she lived in the same town we did. And I met her through a friend. And so my husband would take our son to daycare. And then I would pick him up so I would leave early. And then my husband would work late. And so that's how we worked it, and so he could work as late as he needed to work. And then once I picked our son up and took him home, you know, gave him his dinner, read to him, played with him, gave him his bath, sang to him, went to sleep, then I'd go back and work a little more. And so that's kind of the way we did it. Speaker 1: Now, were your friends also scientists themselves? Speaker 2: Some were, some weren't. Speaker 1: Some were, okay, okay. And you were living in what town at that time? Speaker 2: Originally, Piscataway, New Jersey, and then we moved. We built a home, we built a home in Piscataway, and then we built a home in another town which I won't say on the camera. I don't-- Speaker 1: Now, what other things in terms of, your family, your parents [George Hiter Jackson and Beatrice Cosby Jackson], do they understand really what you do at this point? I mean they--? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. My mother [Beatrice Cosby Jackson], my mother is--my father [George Hiter Jackson] is passed away in '98 [1998]. Speaker 1: But your, they--she understands and appreciates what you're--? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. And you always had also, is Mrs. Moore, your mentor high, your (unclear) (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: Mrs. Smith, Marie Smith. Speaker 1: She was, you know, following your career and growth too at this time. But what, I'm trying to understand what other things, you know, are affecting you, that you're growing from or is it more, you know, going to work, raising your family? I'm just trying to understand the--? Speaker 2: Well, you know, there was a period when my son [Alan] was at his, you know, the youngest stage. But that was pretty much the focus. You know, you have to really spend time with a young child in getting him up and going and then to daycare, then in pre-school, and then into grade school. And so that was a lot of my life, plus going to conferences. You know, I'd go to physics conferences and travel and so my husband [Morris A. Washington] would take care of our son when I was traveling, and then I'd take care of him when he was traveling. And so for probably the first eight to ten years of our son's life, that was a key focus. Story_ID: 29448 Speaker 1: But I actually gradually got more and more involved in issues of science technology and public policy, science technology and higher education in the state of New Jersey. Speaker 2: Now, how did that come about? Speaker 1: You know, that's an interesting question to be honest with you in the sense that I was doing my physics. I was active and did my thing in the American Physical Society. I was actually elected to the governing council of the American Physical Society. I was elected a Fellow of the American Physical Society. But for some reason, one day I got a call from a friend who was working at another Bell Labs' location who told me I was gonna get a call from a gentleman who was the CEO of a company in New Jersey, a utility, who wanted to have lunch with me to ask me to join the board of the company. And a few weeks later, I did get a call from this gentleman. And I did have lunch with him. And he did ask me to join the board. And I did join the board. And so then, that's, I would say, when things really began to broaden out. Speaker 2: What gentleman? What company? Speaker 1: Jim Dolan, who was the chairman and CEO of New Jersey Resources. And I joined the board in 1982. So actually my son [Alan] was pretty young then, but, so that was my early kind of foray that was away from just doing the physics and so forth. But he was apparently intrigued by my background and wanted me on his company. And so I actually was on the board of New Jersey Resources from 1982 `til I left in 1995 to go and become chairman of the NRC [Nuclear Regulatory Commission]. And then I did that, and then New Jersey--? Speaker 2: Can you tell me what the company--? Speaker 1: New Jersey Resources is basically an oil and, a gas company. It, you know, is a gas utility. It's main subsidiary was a gas utility in south [New] Jersey, part of--in Ocean County in New Jersey. And, you know, I, so I was on the board. And I learned a lot. Speaker 2: Can you talk about what you learned? Speaker 1: Well, I started learning a lot business, about, you know, finance, business, corporate America in a broader way. Even though I had worked, I was working at Bell Labs [Murray Hill, New Jersey], I was very much in the research side of AT&T. And there was kind of a separation between Bell Labs and the rest of AT&T. And so I, you know, it taught me the beginnings of a lot about the corporate world. And Mr. Dolan was an interesting man. I mean he had been with this company for a number of years, but I think he decided he wanted to diversify his board and he asked me to join that board, which I did. And I enjoyed it. And then in the board meetings, we talked about the fact that, you know, he needed to diversify the officer core. So, in fact, he identified a young woman who was an attorney. And her name is Oleta Harden, and he hired her in as assistant general counsel, and she went on to become the general counsel and corporate secretary for New Jersey Resources. What's interesting about is that my name is Jackson. That is my maiden name, and her maiden name is Jackson. But she grew up in Alabama and had gone to the University of Alabama [Tuscaloosa, Alabama] and gotten a law degree from UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles]. And we're great friends, she and her husband and my husband [Morris A. Washington] and I are really good friends. Speaker 2: So really, this is the early '80s [1980s]? Speaker 1: Yes, um-hum. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 29449 Speaker 1: And just in terms of, you know, perspective, this is, I mean people are just doing these things. This is not something that had, you know, blacks on corporate boards hasn't happened very much, you know, the hiring you say, of her and as a step, those are all new things that are happening in that--? Speaker 2: Fairly new, although AT&T [Bell Laboratories] had a number of people who were more in the staff areas who were moving along as senior managers and officers of the company. But, you know, AT&T had signed a consent decree earlier, relative to settling a discrimination suit that might have been some of the early motivation. But they really went a lot further. They had scholarship programs and fellowship programs that even paid for minorities and then later similar programs for women to get Ph.D.s. And, in fact, I was involved on a committee at Bell Labs [Murray Hill, New Jersey] that selected women who got Fellowships to go to, to work on their Ph.D.s. So, you know, your questions are making me remember things that are in the deep recesses of my memory because I guess I was doing more than just doing my research because I was involved with what was called the Graduate Research Program for Women, which was a program that Bell Labs had that identified talented young women who were undergrads and then gave them fellowships to go all the way through their Ph.D.s. There was also a similar program for African Americans. So I was on the Graduate Research Program for Women committee and in the American Physical Society, I was also on the Committee on the Advancement of Women in Physics as well as being on the overall governing council of the American Physical Society, and then later on the executive committee of the American Institute of Physics. The American Institute of Physics is an umbrella organization of which the American Physical Society, the American Association of Physicians in Medicine, the American Association of Physics Teachers, etc., all are a part of the American Institute of Physics. And so I ended on the executive committee as well of the American Institute of Physics. And so all of that was going on. Then I was involved in these Bell Labs programs. Bell Labs had a number of summer programs as well. And then in the early '80s [1980s], along came this board opportunity. And then 'New Jersey Monthly Magazine,' you know, everybody has a monthly magazine, would publish an issue on rising women in New Jersey and young women below the age of forty. I was once below the age of fory (laughter). And so they featured me in that magazine. And I don't remember the exact year, but it was around that time. In fact, I think--and then I got an award from the Executive Women of New Jersey as kind of a rising, outstanding young women, woman of New Jersey, twice. And then, and all of these things were kind of coming around the same time. And then in, as well, around this time Governor Tom Kean really was pushing to bring universities, industry and the state government together to leverage strength to create even more strength in areas that were viewed to be important to New Jersey's economy, science and technology areas. And so there was legislation passed to create what was called the New Jersey Commission on Science and Technology. And it was structured where there were four politicians on it, namely, one senator from each party and one person from the assembly from each party. And then there were four or five public members, but really private citizens who were nominated by the governor and confirmed by the state senate to be members of the New Jersey Commission on Science and Technology and two ex-officio members who were the presidents of two of the universities, usually, one public and one private. And it focused on four universities in New Jersey, Rutgers [University, New Brunswick, New Jersey], New Jersey Institute of Technology [Newark, New Jersey], Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey] and Stevens Institute of Technology [Hoboken, New Jersey]. Those were the two privates. Rutgers and NJIT were the two publics. And, but so, one public, one private president on ex-officio. So I was nominated by Governor Kean and approved by the Senate. And so I was a founding member of the New Jersey Commission on Science and Technology. And then I was, kept being reappointed and so I essentially ended staying on it again until I went off to Washington [D.C.] 1995. And on that, I was on the budget committee. So again, I learned a lot more about both government finance, you know, finance over all, and I was vice chair of the Scientific Fields Committee which was actually chaired by Dr. Bill Baker, a former president of Bell Labs. But he had retired as president by the time I came to Bell Labs. But he was basically an icon. And I, in fact, was vice chair with him. And this committee was the committee that determined the areas that the commission would invest in. And so what, the idea was that there were bond issues passed too while I was on the commission, one for a hundred million dollars and another for eighty to ninety million dollars to build centers in areas that were important to New Jersey's economy, but built around fields that the Scientific Fields Committee said the commission should invest in. So it was a big opportunity for me, and I learned a lot across a broad front. And so there were centers established like a Center for Photonics Research at, I think it was at Princeton. There's a biology, micro-biology lab, a center for ceramic materials and a center for advanced biotechnology in medicine at Rutgers. And, so all of this came out of the commission's work. At the same time, the state as well poured money into, particularly the state universities, to give them money to hire high-end faculty. And so this really transformed Rutgers University. But Princeton benefited. It was, it had the microbiology lab. It was part of the Photonics Research Center, but Rutgers got a lot of money from the commission. And so I got be known. Story_ID: 29450 Speaker 1: And there was a president of Stevens Institute of Technology [Hobeken, New Jersey] who was on the board of Public Service Enterprise group, which is the parent company of PSE&G, Public Service Electric and Gas which is the biggest utility in New Jersey. And he, one day--he was also, because he was president of Stevens, he was an ex-officio member, non-voting member of the commission [New Jersey Commission on Science and Technology]. And so one day he asked me if I might be interested in joining the board of Public Service. And he told me I'd get a call from this headhunter, which I did. And I went into New York and interviewed with him. And then after I interviewed, he called me the next day and asked me would I willing to meet with the CEO of Public Service [Enterprise Group], which I did. And so I chatted with him, had lunch and later that afternoon, I got a call asking me, well, how did it go? Did you like, you know, was it a good discussion? Did you like the CEO? And I said, oh, yeah. So then a day or two later, a couple of days later, I got a call from the CEO asking me to join the board of Public Service. And this was a big deal because it was the big utility in the state. And so, and they operated nuclear power plants. They had three reactors, and they owned parts of two others. And so I joined the board, and because of my background, my original background in high-energy physics, I think, I was asked--oh, and by this time, this, the gentleman who was the president of Stevens had been on the board of Public Service. And [Enterprise Group] he was a physicist. But he left to become a commissioner of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission. And so I came onto the board-- Speaker 2: What was his name? Speaker 1: Ken Rogers. Speaker 2: Okay, Ken Rogers. Speaker 1: And I came onto the board, and then I was asked to go onto what was called the Nuclear Oversight Committee. And then after a couple of years, I was asked to chair the Nuclear Oversight Committee, which I did. And it was an interesting committee because it had outside members who were not board members, one of whom was Dennis Wilkinson who was a commander of the first nuclear submarine, the Nautilus and a gentleman by the name of Sol Levy who was called the father of the boiling water reactor because he ran the GE [General Electric] program that developed the first boiling water reactor, and a professor at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], and you know, a guy who ran the, I think it was, but later became the Nuclear Energy Institute and so forth. But I was the chair and the board liaison. So I did that from about 1990 or so till I left the board to go to the Nuclear Regulatory Commission. And then after that I got asked to join some other boards. I was asked to join the board of New Jersey National Bank and then its parent company, Core States. And then the board of Sealed Air Corporation after I left, that was after I left Bell Labs [Murray Hill, New Jersey] to go to Rutgers [University, New Brunswick, New Jersey]. So I was actually on five corporate boards, really four, plus the New Jersey subsidiary of Core States, before I went to the NRC. Story_ID: 29451 Speaker 1: Okay, so the question I was asking was just the dynamics. I mean you, this is really, I mean your life was following more or less a traditional path, you know-- Speaker 2: Yes, right. Speaker 1: --until you got appointed, right? Or asked to join the New Jersey--? Speaker 2: Commission on Science and Technology. Well, I would not say that. I'd say that it was probably following a traditional path more or less until I was asked to the join the first corporate board because the unusual thing was for someone at my age and stage to be asked to join a corporate board. I was a working, theoretical physicist, a member of the technical staff at Bell Labs [Murray Hill, New Jersey] when I was asked to join the first board. And I was in my thirties. Speaker 1: This is unheard of. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: I'm just, because the people, just for perspective, I mean the people who are on boards, I mean you have the Vernon Jordan's, I mean, you know,-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --you had Jewel Lafontant Mankarious. You had a Dr. Wharton, you know-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Dr. Clifton Wharton. I'm just trying to get some perspective on, you know, on things. But definitely, people weren't in their thirties, I don't think. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Right, right. So that gives you a leg. I mean still even today, as we speak, there is a movement, you know, I mean people are, you know, how do you get there? How do you make it happen strategies, you know? And obviously--sorry, talking too much. Okay, the first, but see, when you, how many people were on that board and what was the composition of the board? Speaker 2: You mean the first board, The New Jersey Resources? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: There probably were about nine directors and I think when I joined, they were all white males. But not long after that, a white female was asked to join. Speaker 1: Do you remember her name? Speaker 2: Dorothy Light. Speaker 1: Okay, and what was her--? Speaker 2: She was an executive at Prudential, the insurance company. Speaker 1: And can you just talk a little bit about what you learned there? Speaker 2: Well, I mean I learned about--? Speaker 1: You're seeing things from the top down. Speaker 2: Well, that's right. You know, one learns about how things operate in the executive suite. One learns things about corporate governance. I actually chaired the audit committee for New Jersey Resources for about eight years, you know, eight of the years I was on the board. And so that was unusual as well. And so I learned a lot about things that people are grappling with today in the post-Sarbanes-Oxley [Sarbanes-Oxley Act 2002] period. And, you know, we worked our way through different issues. I was considered to be, you know, quite a good audit committee chair and tough. And I would meet once a quarter at least with the head of internal audit. I would meet with the external audit firms and lay out, you know, the agendas for meetings to review results of internal audits. So one learns a lot about the company and how it's organized and so on. But I also spent time to learn about the gas operations and how all that worked. And all of that was with New Jersey Resources. Then the second board was Public Service and was much larger. And it had gas and electric. And so it has gas plants. It has, you know, so many miles of gas piping. It had coal-fired stations, gas-fired electrical stations and a nuclear station. And then I was asked to chair the Nuclear Oversight Committee. And by that time, I was in my early forties, but I was a lot younger than all of the other people on this Nuclear Oversight Committee. So-- Speaker 1: No, it's just, it's somewhat amazing. I mean first of all people can serve on, I've heard of, you know, blacks serving on corporate boards and never even beginning to see the audit committee. I mean they (laughter) because the audit committee is usually the most, you know, it gives you stature within the board structure. Speaker 2: It does today. I think in the early days, it was viewed as a way to learn about the company. But it was certainly an important committee. It wasn't like being the chair of the compensation committee, but I am the chair of a compensation committee today. So it's an interesting process. And then I think that being chair of the Nuclear Oversight Committee put me into the eyeballs of a lot of people, more broadly and on more of a national front than I probably realized. But as an outcome actually of being chair of the NOC, as we called it, the Nuclear Oversight Committee, I was asked to join the Advisory Council for INPO. That's the Institute of Nuclear Power Operations. INPO was an industry-formed group that was formed in the aftermath of the Three Mile Island accident to improve the operational performance of the nuclear industry. And it has had a big impact. Now, the board of it was made up of the CEO's of nuclear utilities. But then there were these Advisory Committee members who were usually corporate people, executives and other people from other walks of life too, who gave advice to this board. So I was on the Advisory Committee of INPO probably for about four years or so before I went to the NRC [Nuclear Regulatory Commission]. Story_ID: 29452 Speaker 1: So, let me just go back. You get first asked to join New Jersey Regulatory Commission in 1980--? Speaker 2: No, I'll give you the chronology. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I was asked to join the board of New Jersey Resources Corporation-- Speaker 1: Resources, that's right. Speaker 2: --in 1982. Okay, then a little after that I was asked to be a member of the New Jersey Commission on Science and Technology. Then a little bit after that I was asked to join the board of Public Service Enterprise Group, the parent of Public Service Electric and Gas. Speaker 1: So you were serving simultaneously? Speaker 2: I was because they had separate franchises. That was before the days of deregulation and so forth. Then I was asked to join the board of New Jersey, Core States New Jersey National Bank. And, oh, by the way, I chaired the audit committee of Core States New Jersey National Bank. Then I was asked, became known to the CEO of Core States which was headquartered in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. And so I was asked to join the board of Core States and asked to chair the audit committee of Core States Financial Corp., its major regional bank. And then I was asked to join the board of Sealed Air Corporation. Sealed Air is the company that makes the bubble wrap. They do a lot of packaging materials. Now, it was interesting because I used to fly around in this helicopter, this Public Service helicopter a lot. And the reason was that, once a quarter as chair, I would go down to the nuclear plants which were way down in Salem County, New Jersey on the Delaware River. So Public Service [Enterprise Group] would fly me down there on their helicopter. And then I would also go down for the actual Nuclear Oversight Committee meetings. But they also would fly me from Philadelphia to Newark [New Jersey] because the Core States board meetings and the Public Service board meetings were on the same day, except one was in the morning, the Core States, and one was in the afternoon, Public Service. So Public Service would send the helicopter for me. So I used to fly off of this helipad, interesting enough, of another utility company called PECO, the Philadelphia Electric Company, the original Philadelphia Electric Company. So I'd be doing this. So I was, you know, had a robust portfolio. But then, you know, during that time, I decided-- Speaker 1: What time period are we in now? Speaker 2: The, sort of early '90s [1990s]. And then I-- Speaker 1: And this is where you've left Bell Labs [Murray Hill, New Jersey] and you're at Rutgers [University, New Brunswick, New Jersey]? Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, because really you could not have continued this schedule. You couldn't have done that and worked at Bell Labs? Speaker 2: Well, Rutgers gave me more flexibility, but I actually was still working for Bell Labs. I worked one day a week for Bell Labs and typically, on a Friday. And I was actually an employee for the first couple of years, but then I decided I didn't want to be forced to be fixed to go one day a week. So I switched to being a consultant, but I still went one day a week. Speaker 1: But what was the nature of your work at this--? Speaker 2: I still was doing theoretical physics, you know, semi-conductor theory. And it, and it was the same research essentially that I was doing at Rutgers as a professor. And Bell Labs hired people as, you know, consultants in different fields. And that's what I was. And basically, they were holding onto me a little bit, but I taught physics and had a little research group at Rutgers, and, but it gave me more flexibility with my time, particularly with our son as he got older. And so I was doing all of these things. Speaker 1: So you're serving on basically three corporate boards? Speaker 2: Four. Speaker 1: Four. Okay, PECO, was it--? Speaker 2: New Jersey Resources, Public Service Enterprise Group, Core States Financial and Sealed Air, by the end. Speaker 1: Okay-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --okay. Because a lot of times, when people serve on boards like that, they, the boards become predominant because you have your board meetings and you have your committee meetings. Speaker 2: They worked hard to accommodate my schedule. And people always ask me that question today because I'm on a number of corporate boards today. But if you look at what I do, there're linkages through the boards in terms of subject matter. And let's remember, I've always liked to and always have done a lot of different things at a time. I was the president of the Delta [Sigma Theta] Chapter for two years, reorganized it, doing volunteer work at the Roxbury Y [YMCA], doing my work at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], and later, forming the Black Student Union and being co-chair of the Black Student Union. And some of this stuff overlapped and so on and so on. And I tend to get bored if I'm just doing one thing anyway. So I've been blessed with the ability to do a lot of things. And my father [George Hiter Jackson] always worked two jobs. So why shouldn't I? But mine is in a different arena and a different sense. And so hard work is not alien and I like doing these things. And so I'm willing to spend time doing them than other people may spend doing something else. And I get enjoyment out of them that other people may get out of doing their recreational activities. And so you just have to understand that I am who I am. And other people are who they are. Story_ID: 29453 Speaker 1: Let me ask you, any, just in terms of understanding the, you know, the board environment and even this question even can go to sort of institutions, but what is the, like each of those, what was the longest--you served on the New Jersey--? Speaker 2: New Jersey Resources Board-- Speaker 1: The longest. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And that was? Speaker 2: 1982 to 1995. Speaker 1: Okay, to '95 [1995]. Is there, like, were there synergies between those? You said, you know, I choose--you know, those things were chosen specifically? Speaker 2: Well, sure, because I mean the Public Service [Enterprise Group] was an oil and gas-- Speaker 1: Gas. Speaker 2: --and electricity company. Its biggest subsidiary was a utility. You're dealing with issues with the board of public utilities, gas cases, you know, electric, you know rate, they call them rate cases. New Jersey Resources, it's a gas company, gas distribution, utility, regulated by the same board of public utilities, rate cases. The issues of supply. The issues of distribution. They all are the same. They're just on a different scale. But then, as a business, you know, there're certain fundamental principles. Then there are issues having to do with accounting and accounting principles that audit committees get into. Those things are not different. You know, there're some subtleties depending upon the industry, but the fundamental accounting principles are the same. And so, you know, if you learn things and you learn how to do it in one instance, then it carries over. The number zeroes may be greater. The number of, you know, the spread of the operations may be different, but the fundamentals are not different. And then, you know, the bank was different, you know, the financial services industry. But you learn about things having to do with risk management and so on, but a lot of those things were using--they're even more today than then, techniques, Monte Carlo modeling and these are things that physicists do. Okay, Monte Carlo calculations, people do all the time. And so these things are not hard, particularly if you're a physicist. And so it goes. And then it's a question of does the schedule work and do you have support for the other things you do. And are you willing to put in the time? Speaker 1: Now, were you still going to scientific conferences all during this time? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, oh, sure. Speaker 1: Okay. And let me, so how are you changing though as a person, that's what I'm wondering during this whole thing? Speaker 2: I'm the same person. Speaker 1: You're the same person. Speaker 2: I mean but I've always been interested in a broad range of things, right. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Story_ID: 29454 Speaker 1: Then let me ask this question. What is the state in this like thirteen-year period in the energy industry? It also is going through changes. You know, we had Three Mile Island [accident] happened in nineteen seventy-- Speaker 2: Nine [1979] Speaker 1: --nine [1979], okay. And out of that-- Speaker 2: Chernobyl [disaster] happened in 1986. Speaker 1: Okay. So there's a lot of, you know, sort of public fear. You have environmental groups that are, you know, protesting, you know, and--? Speaker 2: I know, but as a board member, one is pretty much insulated from that. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: Okay, I got more directly into that-- Speaker 1: With the Nuclear--? Speaker 2: --as the chairman of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission. Speaker 1: Okay. So why don't we talk about that, you know, the appointment and how that appointment happened. And did it catch you by surprise? Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: Even the consideration--? Speaker 2: --that's an interesting question to ask me in the following sense. The answer, the simple answer is probably yes, but I actually had a feeling, a kind of premonition that I might be asked to do something. Speaker 1: So why, why--? Speaker 2: I don't know why I had that feeling. I just did. And I actually don't know how my name actually came forward because I had not worked, nor have I ever worked in any political campaign. Speaker 1: That is what I was gonna, okay. That was gonna be my next question. Speaker 2: But what I suspect is the case is that I became generally known in the energy industry, but in the nuclear industry in particular, because of being on the board of Public Service [Enterprise Group], chairing the Nuclear Oversight Committee, being on the advisory council for INPO, the Institute of Nuclear Power Operations. So I had great exposure to corporate CEO's of nuclear utilities. And remember members of the committee, the commander of the first nuclear sub, the head of what later became the Nuclear Energy Institute, the father of the boiling water reactor [Sol Levy], a gentleman who ran Admiral Rickover's research program, professor of Nuclear Engineering at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. So I think my name was out there, and I don't know all of the exact thinking in the [William] Clinton White House as to how my name came up, but I'm sure all of these things played into it, and then I'd had three gubernatorial appointments in New Jersey. See I was not just appointed by Tom Kean to the New Jersey Commission on Science and Technology. I was appointed by Governor Jim Florio to the Rutgers Board of Governors. This was before I became a professor. And I was appointed by Governor Christie Whitman to the Governors Economic Master Plan Commission. So people knew that I had had public policy appointments. People knew that I at least knew how to chair and run committees, collegial things by virtue of being on the governing council of the American Physical Society, the Executive Committee. By the way, I chaired the audit committee for the American Physical Society. So these things all play off of each other. It's, non-profit is a little different than the for-profit, but there are overlaps. I actually was on the committee that--and chaired it for a while, that made recommendations for Fulbright Fellows in physics. And I was on an advisory committee for 'NOVA,' you know, the program that puts on the science programs for public television. So I've done a lot of that kind of thing. So I think I had exposure in a lot of different arenas and people had seen me work and particularly, when I chaired the various committees. And I think people were impressed and liked what I did. Story_ID: 29455 Speaker 1: Now, who was your predecessor? Who was head of the Nuclear--? Speaker 2: Ivan Sellon. Ivan had been the Under Secretary of State for management and then he became chair of the NRC [Nuclear Regulatory Commission]. He was a business person. Speaker 1: Now, under who, when was the NRC created? Speaker 2: Well, it was actually created as the NRC in 1975. What happened is, the, it was the Atomic Energy Commission. And, you know, then its basic mandate comes from the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 and subsequent energy policy acts and environmental policy acts and related legislation. But then in the, when the decision was made to begin to exploit nuclear energy for peaceful purposes, for nuclear power, the decision was that we shouldn't have the nuclear weapons and the nuclear power activities in the same agency. So in 1974, the Atomic Energy Commission was abolished. And in its stead were created the Nuclear Regulatory Commission for nuclear power but some aspect of nuclear safeguards and then environmental protection and ERDA, the Energy Research and Development Administration, which evolved in 1977 into the U.S. Department of Energy. So there're two separate entities. So depending upon your point of view, the Nuclear Regulatory Commission goes all the way back to the original Atomic Energy Commission. In fact, the commission format is exactly the same as for the Atomic Energy Commission. Or you could say it started in the mid-'70s [1970s] with the Energy Policy Act of 1974 roughly. Speaker 1: So while, okay, so Three Mile Island happened after the NRC came into existence? Speaker 2: That's correct. Speaker 1: Okay. Now-- Speaker 2: And, in fact, it changed the NRC structure a bit because it put more authority, particularly in emergencies, all authority in the hands of the chairman. And it also more strongly structured things to have the chairman be the principal executive officer of the agency, the principal spokesperson, the person through whom most of the staff reported and who oversaw the programs of the commission, of the staff, and ensured that the commission policy, that the commission as a whole developed, was implemented by the staff. Speaker 1: Now, how large is the commission? How many commissioners? Speaker 2: There are five presidential appointees, each nominated by the President and confirmed by the Senate. No more than three from any given political party, and so usually the majority party has three, the minority, two, although sometimes there're vacancies. And then all of the commissioners are at the level of an undersecretary. The chairman is one level above. The chairman is at the level of a deputy secretary. Speaker 1: So who were your commissioners? Speaker 2: Well, they changed over time. Speaker 1: They changed. Okay, okay. Story_ID: 29456 Speaker 1: Now, so tell me the NRC [Nuclear Regulatory Commission] that you came into? What were the pressing issues of the day that you were presented with? Speaker 2: Well, there were, you know, a number of different things. One, the, there was what was called GPRA, the Government Results and Performance Act. It required agencies to develop strategic plans and improve their performance. A second big issue on the nuclear side on the global, in the global sense, was that the, you know, the Soviet Union had dissolved. And there was a lot of concern about nuclear programs in the former states, the former Soviet states, both in terms of securing material and the safety of the nuclear operations and the attempts to shut down certain types of reactors, so called RBMK's which are the type, is the type of reactor that blew up in the, that had, it was a steam explosion in Chernobyl [Chernobyl disaster, 1986]. And then there were issues domestically related to nuclear waste, you know, what, how would one deal with spent nuclear fuel. There were issues related to the possible license extension, called license renewal of existing nuclear power plants. There were issues of design certification, final design approval and design certification of new reactor designs. And then I, there was some problems in a particular plant in Connecticut called Millstone [Nuclear Power Plant, Waterford, Connecticut], having to do with some safety issues with respect to offloading fuel when they went to refuel the reactor. And it unveiled a number of problems across the board, and there were some issues of harassment and intimidation of employees. So I ended up actually having the plant, we had the plant shut down for two, two and a half years. But then that opened up a whole Pandora's box about what was called the design basis documentation, meaning, you know, the plant is designed. There is documentation of that design, but then if there are ever changes made to the plant, you know, physical changes, things redesigned or new parts put in, one had to think about what that did to the overall design and safety envelope of the plant and it needed to be well documented. And so there were some questions that arose as a consequence of the Millstone situation, that, where I then pushed to have the whole industry focus on the whole design basis documentation issue. It was not happily received in the nuclear industry. Speaker 1: Now, why is that? Speaker 2: Because it was a lot of work, and it was very expensive to reconstruct and do all of this and many people felt it was not something that was necessary. But in the end, it was important because to do license renewal, to extend the license of an existing plant, one needed to have that design basis documentation in order to be able to verify the safety envelope of critical, protocol structures, systems and components in the nuclear plant. Speaker 1: So the first renewal application came under your tenure? Speaker 2: It came in under my tenure. I put the license renewal process and (unclear) (simultaneous) in place. Speaker 1: And that was which plant? Speaker 2: It was the, it's a plant that's run by Constellation Energy, I'll remember--Calvert Cliffs [Nuclear Power Plant, Maryland], Calvert Cliffs. Speaker 1: And that, and how long does the renewal, I mean how long--? Speaker 2: The original time was, it was designed to be a twenty-four month period. Now, licensing of nuclear facilities and (unclear) and so on were historically ones that took years and years and years. And it gave the NRC a bad name. It made the industry nervous about coming in. It's very expensive and so on. And so people were initially nervous. So we put out by an adjudicatory order, laid out a time line and organized the staff to, you know, do reviews, very structured, so that it could be as expedited as possible, but ensured that they looked that they looked at the right things. And so we laid it out so it would theoretically occur in twenty-four months. And it still would allow intervention by, you know, by, you know, interveners to come in and so on. And the first plant went through in twenty-three months. Now, I was there for the first twelve months of those twenty-three. It came, but then it got its license renewal after I left, but it came in based on confidence about the process that we had put into place. Speaker 1: But how long does a plant have to be around before its license is renewed? That's what I'm missing. Speaker 2: Well, it has to come in something like five years before the end of its license term. And a plant is originally licensed for forty years. License renewal gives it twenty extra years, but many plants come in earlier than that to ensure that they have the time to go through. And since that time, over thirty plants have had their licenses extended. Story_ID: 29457 Speaker 1: In many ways, you brought your business expertise that you had gotten from corporate boards and the things you had done in the past thirteen years to the NRC [Nuclear Regulatory Commission] which was more, if I may be wrong, scientists running amuck? Speaker 2: It is not a scientist running amuck. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Okay, I'm sorry. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Wait, I mean, excuse me. You are revealing a deep bias. Speaker 1: (Laughter) I'm sorry. That's right. I stepped out of my role (laughter). Speaker 2: You are revealing a very deep bias. Speaker 1: No, but I mean you put structure. Well, I'm just saying--? Speaker 2: No, it was not scientists running amuck. Don't, let's be real clear on this. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: Okay, the government entities exist within a very defined structure, okay, very defined. And the scientists, engineers and other professionals at the Nuclear Regulatory Commission are very high-end, very focused and very professional. Now, many people have ideas about what they think government employees are like. But the NRC folks, they're extremely well educated. They're very dedicated. They work very hard. And when I went as chairman, many political appointees bring other political appointees, so people from the outside to work for them. I didn't. I built my staff as chairman, and I had a staff of seventeen, I built my staff as chairman from agency employees. Now, many of them wanted the chance to work with a commissioner or work with the chairman. But the real thing is to gain their minds and hearts to be able to have them really work hard for you. And I did that. But I also, along the way, ensured that they grew and many of them, that they were well placed when I left. And so in terms of the permanent employee base, many of them are the leaders of the agency today, you know, just below the level of the political appointees. Nuclear, though, is a very unforgiving enterprise. It's unforgiving because you really do have to operate the nuclear facilities, particularly, the nuclear power plants in a very well executed way. That's why the industry itself formed INPO [Institute of Nuclear Power Operations], but that is why you have the Nuclear Regulatory Commission oversight. You have to do it because of the histories in the nuclear industry because the fact that it comes out of a weapons framework, and so the public tends to worry about it a lot because we have had Three Mile Island [accident, Pennsylvania]. We have had Chernobyl [disaster, Russia] even though those are very different, differently designed plants, and the consequences for the public were much different for Chernobyl than for Three Mile Island. There was really essentially little or no public health consequence from Three Mile Island. There was big consequence from Chernobyl. And, and we could get into a separate discussion about the why's and wherefore's. Nonetheless, the public is always on edge in some ways about nuclear issues because the same knowledge and technologies that give you nuclear power for energy production, electricity generation, gives you weapons. And so there's always that. But that is why the NRC was formed, to oversee the civilian uses, the peaceful purposes. And I should stop for a minute. The NRC actually does more than oversee nuclear power plants. It's nuclear power reactors. It's research test and training reactors, which tend to be at lower power. It oversees fuel-cycle facilities, some aspects of uranium mining, uranium enrichment and fuel fabrication. It oversees the transportation, disposal, storage and disposal of nuclear wastes, meaning it oversees it in the sense of regulatory oversight. It delegates a lot of the oversight of low-level radioactive wastes to the states, but all of the high-activity, high-level radioactive wastes, including spent nuclear fuel, is directly overseen by the NRC. And it is the licensing agency, the licensing and export control agency for the U.S. government for the export of nuclear materials and nuclear technology for peaceful purposes. So it has a broad scope. And imbedded within it as well, it is governed by the energy, the environmental, you know, the various environmental policy acts. So it has the responsibility to protect public health and safety and the environment in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Included in that is the safeguarding of nuclear materials that are used in civilian activities. Safeguarding means physical protection of the material, controlling it and accounting for it. And there's a very elaborate system that is both fundamentally a system put into place by our government through the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, but as well, it is consistent with requirements of the IAEA, the International Atomic Energy Agency. The NRC worked very strong with the IAEA, the International Atomic Energy Agency on issues related to peaceful purpose, uses of nuclear energy and agriculture as well as nuclear power. It also works together with the department, the U.S. Department of Energy, with the IAEA on safe guarding of nuclear materials. So it has a very big job, and, you know, so that was the agency that I had the privilege to lead. Story_ID: 29458 Speaker 1: Now, how many nuclear power plants are there in the United States? Speaker 2: There are 103 operating reactors in the United States, spread over sixty-some sites or sixty plus sites. Speaker 1: And how much, to the average person, consumer, you know, what does that effect? Like even, you had to close down one plant. How would you divert, you know, the needs coming out of that plant, they could be picked up by--? Speaker 2: Well, it means that people have to import electricity from some other part of the country may have excess capacity. It means that they may have to put on back-up generators that may be oil-fired or gas-fired plants, and that kind of thing. And it's a big deal. And the ability to import electricity from some other part of the country or some other state is a function of how well interconnected the state electrical distribution system is to the national grid. And that's a problem. And it was somewhat of an issue for Connecticut at the time. Speaker 1: Okay, and what do you mean by that? Speaker 2: Well, that it was not so easy to import electricity, particularly at times of high demand, peak demand, which is typically in the heat of the summer. So they had to use back-up generators and things like that. Speaker 1: Now, you also chaired the first international nuclear regulatory commission under your tenure, right? Speaker 2: Well, actually-- Speaker 1: Created? (simultaneous) Speaker 2: --formed it, or pushed to form it, the International Nuclear Regulators Association, the INRA. And yes, I pushed to form that. Speaker 1: Now, why did you do that? Speaker 2: Well, again, as I said, in the aftermath of Chernobyl [disaster, Russia, 1986], a lot of countries, Western Europe in particular, and the United States were working with the former Soviet Republics, in some cases to get them to shut down their nuclear reactors; in other cases, to help them upgrade the safety performance. In the, with physical upgrades, we worked with the Department of Energy because they would help them actually get the capability to upgrade components and so forth. But we worked with them on doing risk assessment, probabilistic risk assessment, to understand where their vulnerabilities were in design and operations, etc. and to systematically use PRA, as it's called, to understand that and to improve the safety performance. We worked with them on securing the nuclear materials, on the safeguards system. We trained the regulators from a number of the former Soviet Republics, as well as, by the way, regulators in South Africa in the, when the ANC [African National Congress] government came into power. And so we were doing all of these things, both on a bilateral basis as the U.S. [United States] providing support and training to regulators. And we would have them come to the NRC [Nuclear Regulatory Commission] for three months, six months to understand how to do, how we did the regulatory oversight. We would help, in some cases, help them write basic nuclear legislation or nuclear regulatory legislation. We helped them create their own regulatory frameworks. See, because when they were all part of the Soviet Union, everything emanated out of what is now Russia. So the Soviet Republics did not have so much independent capability to do all these things, to run these reactors they inherited. But they needed them for electricity generation and so on. So there was a lot of work done. And then so there were meetings of regulators that were set up and held under the egis of the IAEA [International Atomic Energy Agency] and of the, or under the egis of the OECD, nuclear energy agency, the OECD-NEA [ Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development-Nuclear Energy Agency]. And so they would call the regulators together. But these folks were not regulators. So, you know, I felt and my colleagues that we needed to have a regulator-run regulatory group. And so we actually, you know, I had my international programs director who was an international lawyer, work up terms of reference and I called a couple of meetings. And we, over the course of several meetings, hammered this out. We started talking about it in meetings. And so then we got the most eight advanced nuclear countries at that point to sign on, Canada, France, Germany, Japan, Spain, Sweden, the United Kingdom and the United States. And because I was the one who had pushed to form this group--and there were some sensitivities around in the other organi-, entities that had been pulling the regulators together. Because I was the one who had pushed to form this group, I was elected as the group's first chairman. And so I was the chairman for two years. We formed the group in 1997, and so I served as the chair for the last two years that I was chairman of the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission. Speaker 1: Were these referred to as the G8 leaders? Are these the--? Speaker 2: They weren't all the G8 countries. But they were ones that had the largest and most advanced, but it was a heavy overlap with the G8, okay. Italy, for instance, is part of the G8, but it was not part of the INRA because Italy does not really operate a nuclear power program. Story_ID: 29459 Speaker 1: Dr. Jackson, how many nuclear power plants are there, worldwide? Speaker 2: About 412 or something, four hundred plus. Okay, so really the United States still has the predominant--? Speaker 1: Yeah, we probably have it. But we have the predominant, the largest number of plants. But we don't have the largest percentage of electrical generation by a nuclear power. That's France. France is about seventy-eight percent electrical generation from nuclear power. In the United States, it's about twenty percent. Speaker 2: But just for people to understand, that, nuclear energy is really sort of the new energy of, you know, it's the, one of the latest types of energy. It's not fossil fuel. Speaker 1: Well, it's non-fossil fuel, I mean, but there are multiple sources. There's fossil fuel, you know, namely the oil and gas-fired plants, there's coal, there're coal-fired plants. There're solar, solar energy. There's wind energy. There's hydropower. And there's nuclear. Speaker 2: Okay, now, what other things did you think were significant about your time at the NRC [Nuclear Regulatory Commision] that you would like to talk about? Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: I mean that you, I know it's hard because we all-- Speaker 1: I mean I think putting the license renewal process into play. Speaker 2: But that's why I was referring to scientists run amuck. I mean you at least put some structure there. Speaker 1: No, it was, it was structure for new things, okay. So I think it really is wrong and it is very important because you're taping this-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --that you, that you understand that there was no scientists running amuck. That is really wrong. Speaker 2: Okay, I won't say it ever again. Speaker 1: Don't say that again. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Okay. There are issues that can come up at any given time. I reorganized the NRC in the aftermath of the Millstone [Nuclear Power Plant, Waterford, Connecticut] situation because I had a perspective, but it came as much out of the government's performance and results act in terms of how to organize the agency in a way that was consistent with our strategic plan. And any new CEO or chief executive or principal executive officer will have his or her own idea about the optimal organization for the time. And so I reorganized accordingly. But I also introduced the concept of risk informed performance-based regulation. Now, probabilistic risk assessment had really been around since the 1970s. In fact, it was really developed by a professor at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. And people had been doing little bits of things with it, but had never really embraced it wholeheartedly at the NRC. And so I elevated it, and we defined it because people were worried about using mathematical calculations to make specific regulatory decisions. So the idea was then you didn't wanna use risk-based, you know, mathematically risk-based pure decisions. So the idea was to make risk-informed decisions, meaning that you could, you would do these calculations. They could teach you things about relative risk and less about absolute risk, but a lot about relative risk. But the way you do the calculations, that as you gain more operational experience, you can update. It's a kind of a probability approach using so-called Abasian statistics, that allows you to update your probabilities as you gain more operational data. And so you can improve the confidence interval, the sort of confidence you have in the calculation. But risk-informed because you wouldn't use it alone, that you would still bring in engineering judgment and other things. And it wouldn't completely replace specific types of requirements in certain areas. But it was risk informed, so you would more consistently and robustly use probabilistic risk assessment. Performance based because it would say that the oversight of a plant should be based both on a risk assessment, engineering judgment, etc. and how the plant performed, that if it performed in a way that kept its operational parameters and safety envelope and safety conscious work environment within a certain range, then it would not necessarily get the heaviness of oversight of a plant that performed more poorly. So that's the performance base, both operational and safety performance. So risk-informed and performance-based regulation. So I defined it and promulgated it and through it got probabilistic risk assessment used more widely and more robustly at the NRC. Story_ID: 29460 Speaker 1: And it continues today, risk-informed regulation. Also influenced other countries' approaches where they would use risk informed regulation. And so I think that was a big legacy at the NRC [Nuclear Regulatory Commission], that and the formation of the International Nuclear Regulators Association. And those are two things that I think people very heavily associate with me, but as well, putting into place this review process and this schedule for doing license renewal. But then along the way, one is going to deal with an do a number of other things, such as, you know, getting the situation turned around at the Millstone nuclear power plants, the NUI--that was the name of the company's plant; such as working with the regulators of the former Soviet Union to train them to help them write, create a regulatory framework and write regulations, help them write nuclear laws; such as working with the South Africans, with developing a regulatory framework because those who came to power in the post-Apartheid period, some were exiles, many oppressed, some jailed. So they didn't have the inherent nuclear capabilities. The nuclear industry had been run by the Afrikaners. And at one point South Africa actually had a nuclear weapons program, but it stopped. And I feel, I'm as proud of those things as I am of anything else because it had an effect relative to global nuclear safety. And I had the privilege to be part of two commissions. One was called the Gore-Chernomyrdin Commission. It was a commission that was headed by the Vice President [Al Gore] on our side and the Prime Minister on the Russian side who was Victor Chernomyrdin at the time. That's why it was called the Gore-Chernomyrdin Commission. It did its work through committees and subcommittees. And so the committees were headed by a minister on their side, a cabinet secretary, sometimes an agency head on our side. And so I was vice chair of the Nuclear Committee and chair of the Nuclear Safety Subcommittee. And then I had a similar role with what's called the Gore-Mbeki Commission, where we worked with South Africa, and at the time, Thabo Mbeki was the deputy president. He was like the prime minister. And so he worked, you know, with Gore. And so we would actually meet in the summer in Russia and in the winter in Washington, D.C. at the State Department and similar, every six months the full commission met in one place or in South Africa or in Washington [D.C.]. But then it did its work through the committees in the meantime and worked on issues about cooperation and nuclear safety and nuclear safeguards and so on. And the INRA [International Nuclear Regulator's Association] by the way was created to then both have the members try to look at ways they could harmonize their approaches to things and have common definitions of key things in the nuclear arena, but also to think of more efficient and effective ways to assist other countries with nuclear safety. And so these were some of the things that I did at the NRC. Speaker 2: Well, this is critical even as we look forward, and (unclear)--? Speaker 1: I think so. Speaker 2: I mean with so much, I mean it was interesting to see all the stats, the growth of, you know, India and China and all the-- Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: --unlimited resources. Speaker 1: And I traveled to twenty-eight countries in the four years I was chairman of the NRC, you know, on nuclear, nuclear safety issues, places in Asia, Australia and Africa and Europe, Western and Eastern Europe, Canada, Mexico, etc. Speaker 2: What did you learn from that experience though, I mean overall? And you've talked about what you, you know, what you gave and what structure you put into--? Speaker 1: Well, I think one learns, you know, all the time things about public policy, about how government works, the nature of multi-lateral and multi-national organizations, how to negotiate in the international arena, how things that happen internationally can effect domestic policy and vice versa; you know, much broader knowledge about nuclear issues, both in the technological sense and in the geo-political sense. And so there are many things I learned. Story_ID: 29461 Speaker 1: So now, how did the appointment to become president of this university [Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, New York], how did it come into play and how much time was left? You left the NRC [Nuclear Regulatory Commission], what year, in 19-- Speaker 2: 1999. Speaker 1: Right. You came here in 19-. You didn't have a break? Speaker 2: I left Washington [D.C.] at 9:15 [p.m.] on June 30th of 1999 and started at Rensselaer at 8:00 a.m. on July 1st of 1999. So I did not have a break. But you didn't go back, and by the way, I wanna make one-- Speaker 1: Yes, yeah. Speaker 2: --I wanna make a point about my appointment to the NRC. Speaker 1: Oh, no, I was gonna. I wanted to make it a point. I was gonna ask you the difference between your appointment there and here because I know I had missed that. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Well, I was, you know, I got a call from the White House one day in 1994. And I was asked by the then head of presidential personnel if I was interested in an appointment, presidential appointment. And initially, I wasn't told for what, but they wanted my resume. And I said, I needed to know what it was for. And so then they said, well, we'll call you back. And I got a call back to say that it was appointment to the Nuclear Regulatory Commission. And I did send them my resume. But then I started talking to my friends in science and technology as to whether I should do it. And they said, well, you should, but you should be the chairman. And, but then, you know, so initially they offered me an appointment to the commission. I had to fill out pages and pages of background information to go through, of course, an FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigations] background investigation because to be chairman of the, or to be a commissioner of the NRC, one has to have a very high level security clearance. So that takes months. And so, you know, agents are all over every place I ever lived and ever was, talking to people about me, every company I was on the board of, every place I ever worked, every place I ever lived and where I grew up. And so all of that took some months. And so then in the fall of '94 [1994], I didn't want them to really announce my, the President's [William Clinton] intention to nominate me until I had already gone through the full background investigation. And they asked me which way I wanted it, cause you go through a White House review, and through the White House counsel's office first. But I wanted to get through the whole thing. So then my nomination was sent to the Senate, to the Environment and Public Works Committee. That's the committee of oversight for the NRC just before the election in '94 [1994]. And then one goes, after the nomination is sent to the Hill [Capitol Hill, Washington, D.C.], there're forms that one has to fill out for the Senate. And then one starts courtesy visits to the senators on the committee and, but starting with one's home senators. So I called to get appointments with my various senators, with Senator Frank Lautenberg and Senator Bill Bradley. And the interesting thing is that when I called Senator Bradley's office, they suggested I call his New Jersey office to try to maybe get an appointment with him in New Jersey. When I did that, they said, well, the Senate--they said, well, we'll get back to you. And they called me back and said, the Senator says he'll come to your office. So on election day in 1994, Senator Bill Bradley came to my office at Rutgers University [New Brunswick, New Jersey]. And so here's tall Bill Bradley, very nice man, very brilliant, very bright guy. And here are all these physicists and here's Bill Bradley. Their mouths are dropping open, so, because I took him to a seminar room so we'd have more room. And he stayed about, almost forty, forty, forty-five minutes. And this was on election day, talking to me. I was so impressed with that. And, and then later I actually saw Frank Lautenberg on the Hill. And then after the review of everything by the Senate, my, you know, confirmation hearing was set in February. Well, it really, it would originally have been in '94 [1994], but remember the Congress changed in '94 [1994] and the Democrats lost the control of the Congress. And then after that, we had the lame duck Congress. So my nomination was essentially resubmitted to the new Congress in January of '95 [1995]. And then I had a hearing scheduled and started all over again and visited the key people on the committee. And then I had a hearing in February. And my mother [Beatrice Cosby Jackson] and father [George Hiter Jackson] were there, my two sisters [Barbara Jackson Avery and Gloria Jackson Joseph], my husband [Morris A. Washington] and son [Alan] were all there at my confirmation hearing. But there was another person whose nomination was joined to mine. And this is something that happens sometimes. People bundle nominations. And the majority didn't want this other person, but people thought that I could, you know, it would go through because I would go through. And so my part of the hearing was very pleasant and his part was less. And then-- Speaker 1: Who was that person? Speaker 2: I don't remember. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: I actually do remember, but I don't think it's appropriate to get into here. Story_ID: 29462 Speaker 1: I was voted out of committee. The other appointment was just left. And then it went to the full [U.S.] Senate. And after a discussion with Senator Joe Biden [Joseph Biden, Jr.], there was unanimous consent. Speaker 2: So how did that day feel? Speaker 1: (Laughter) Well, that was not the day, I mean it was exciting that day, you know, to get one's--and that's my commission appointment (pointing), signed by [William] "Bill" Clinton. And it was exciting. It was a big deal, a big honor. But what really affected me was the first day I went to the NRC [Nuclear Regulatory Commission], you know, when I went up and there's this big, these buildings. And I said, gee, this is the agency that I head. So that for me was, and the meaning of it, and--because I'd been doing all this research and study and understanding what the NRC was all about and left my family in New Jersey and so this was a big deal. And I was nervous because it was a big responsibility. But I was excited because it was a big opportunity. Speaker 2: So you commuted back and forth the--? Speaker 1: I did. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I stayed in Washington [D.C.] during the week, and on the weekends if I had meetings and things I had to do. And then otherwise, I would come back on the weekends. So my husband [Morris A. Washington] did everything. Speaker 2: So you didn't really get involved then in Washington, Washington, all the drama, the, you know, that-- Speaker 1: What drama? Speaker 2: Well, I mean you didn't come, that going back-- Speaker 1: I mean I would go to agency, the different functions. I'd go to embassy receptions and parties and so I did things. And that's when I might stay in on the weekends sometimes. And then I would stay if there was some kind of a crisis or issue with the nuc- something in the nuclear arena. And then I traveled a lot and I was gone for sometimes weeks at a time. So, but I, but the NRC is actually in Rockville, Maryland. And so it's actually outside the beltway, (air quotes) quote, unquote. And because it's an independent regulatory agency, it, it really is interesting, it's an interesting creature because it creates regulation. It has the force of law. It adjudicates when it goes through licensing procedures. So it's like a court. And then it, it actually has an executive function because of its regulatory programs. So it has all three of these things embedded in one agency. And so it's kind of exciting. And the commission meetings, I loved chairing the commission meetings because they would be public meetings. And so one had a whole array of people coming to testify and one would be questioning them, and then having the commissioners question them, trying to pull it all together at the end. But I, I loved it. I just really loved it. And it was an interesting mixture again, because of my background in high-energy physics, then the nuclear physics, the nuclear science and engineering, I understood. And it was helpful to know that, to understand the physics, to understand what kinds of questions and how to get to the heart of the issue. But the marriage of that with regulation and public policy and so on, I thought was important. And I think I really learned how to operate in the international arena even more than when I used to travel abroad for physics meetings. And so it was a, you know, a fun time. Story_ID: 29463 Speaker 1: So really essentially, government politics, you were really sort of sequestered from that--? Speaker 2: No, I mean I got caught up because, you know, we had hearings where, you know, members of the Congress weren't so happy with the NRC [Nuclear Regulatory Commission]. Those on the Republ- the Democratic side thinking we didn't regulate more stringently enough and those on the Republican side that we were too hard on the industry. So we had some very tough, I had some tough hearings. I could show you some videotapes. But because we stayed the course and we put into place our plan, and we worked our plan--I had what was called the chairman's tracking system. And, and folks had to report every week on progress against tasks that were in our operational plans, that were linked to the strategic plan. And this actually is relevant to Rensselaer [Polytechnic Institute, Troy, New York] actually. We developed our agency strategic plan over two years by reviewing every activity the institute, the agency did, every single activity. There were over four thousand of those and asked questions about why we were doing them, how did they relate to a statute, a statute, you know, a legal requirement, a regulatory requirement, a policy decision, a presidential directive or was there some other reason? And then one had to say, well, what were some of the issues that were coming down the pike that would affect these. And what did the Government Performance and Results Act [GPRA] require of us and to use that to surface key issues that we would need to address in our strategic plan. And there were a whole, lots of them gazillions as my son [Alan] used to say when he was little. But then I got, we had a steering committee of people who were not the most senior managers, you know, of the permanent staff, but the next layer down, and got them to bundle those issues into what we called DSI's, direction setting issues. That's what I called them. And the DSI's were such that if you addressed them, they would give you answers and approaches to dealing with the issues that were bundled into them. So we ended up distilling them down to twenty-four DSI's. And then I had people, the steering committee would have task groups to write white papers on each of these DSI's with options for how the commission could deal with them. And then they came to the commission. And the commission made an initial set of decisions. And we had to work it through all the commission offices to get consensus on each of the DSI's. And then we put it out on the web for about three months for people, for the public to comment. And then I, the comments came back. We had some questions we wanted them to answer about them, but they could give us anything. And when they came back, then I had the steering committee revise the recommendations and send things back to the commission. The commission made its final decisions and then I had the group write the agency strategic plan. It took two years, by the way. But then we started doing operational plans that were linked to the strategic plan, every year. But it was a way of organizing and rank ordering our tasks, and we had certain metrics we used to rank order. So when we had these tough, these nasty hearings, particularly about our being too hard on the industry and things that Congress wanted us to do, then it turns out we were covering most of them anyway because of how detailed these plans were. And they wanted us to report every month to the Congress, but that was easy because I had the chairman's tracking list which was every week. So I had the staff bundle the weekly report over a month and with some prefacing, and we'd send it and just pull out the things they wanted to hear about. And we sent it to them. So six months after the first hearing, we had another which was very nice, sweetness and light because we had accomplished what they wanted, but we were doing it anyway. But they were upset with us because they thought, because of all the things we had done with Millstone [Nuclear Power Plant, Waterford, Connecticut] and blah, blah, blah. So, it was an interesting time. So, yeah, I mean I went through all of that. I even had a thing, a situation where in the Appropriations Subcommittee our budget was cut. And we were told a riff, a hundred nuclear reactor regulators, you know, regulatory staff people. So then I called the senators for the employees who were the constituents, and I had a press conference, said we couldn't protect public health and safety with this. So then we were able to have a budget hearing. And then we got the cuts restored and so on. So, yes, I went through my version of all of that. Story_ID: 29464 Speaker 1: Now, how did the appointments, so you, you're talking maybe--were you thinking you wanted to go to something immediately? Were you--? Speaker 2: You mean relative to Rensselaer [Polytechnic Institute, Troy, New York]? Speaker 1: Yeah, Rensselaer. Speaker 2: No. What had happened was, I was coming, you know, one serves a fixed term as a member of the commission [Nuclear Regulatory Commission]. But one serves as chairman at the pleasure of the President. So I was coming to the end of my term on the commission. But I was actually asked to serve an additional term and to continue as chairman. And so I was moving to do that. I had to go through another FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigations] background investigation because it has to be updated. And I did that. You know, I filled out all the paperwork, and they did all that. And then they finished it. And that fall of '98 [1998], you know, they were gonna, they were coming to the end of it. You know, and it was still going on, some of the last, you know, background stuff. But I was contacted by a headhunter about Rensselaer. And I asked the White House, went to the general counsel to see if I could talk to them. And I was told I could, and then, so I interviewed at the same time that this background investigation was going forward. And the same week that my nomination, you know, to continue, to be reappointed went to the Senate, I was offered the presidency of Rensselaer. I mean I had gone through the whole interview process with various committees and so on and then finally with the board of trustees. And then I had to decide. Did I wanna continue doing what I had been doing at the NRC? Or did I wanna take on a different challenge? And I was never a Washington [D.C.] groupie, per se. I felt it was a great honor to have been the NRC chairman, but I had done substantially what I had come to do and thought I wanted to do and could do. And so I--and my family had sacrificed a lot. So I decided to take this position and Rensselaer was intriguing because my bachelor's and Ph.D. are from MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], another technological university. And here was Rensselaer structured in much the same way. But I had the opportunity to really shape the institute for the future and to move it on to a new path. And I was brought in to be a change agent and to craft a vision for the institute for the future, to make it happen. Speaker 1: So the people who recruited you, what were they saying was needed or were they telling you, was there any sense of direction or--? Speaker 2: Well, the university had had five or six different presidents or acting presidents in a fifteen-year period. There had been a president that was very iconic. His name was George Lowe. He had died in office in 1984. He had been deputy administrator of NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration]. He was a Rensselaer alum. And then after that, there were a series of, you know, aborted presidencies, and there were acting presidents. And so they'd had five between '84 [1984] and '99 [1999], '98 [1998], '99 [1999], '98 [1998]. And so they wanted someone in here and the university had suffered as a consequence, and it had some financial difficulties as well. And so, but they wanted someone who could kind of stabilize it, put it on a forward trajectory, restore it to, you know, its historical place in the universe. I mean at one point it was considered to be the equivalent of MIT, to stabilize it financially, raise money and to move it in new directions. And so that's what I was asked to do. Story_ID: 29465 Speaker 1: So when you got here [Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, New York], what did you find, because it's the third, it's in the hierarchy of research institutions like this. There's MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], there's Stanford, no--? Speaker 2: No, there's MIT. There's Carnegie [Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]. We're in the top tier. Speaker 1: Top tier, yes. But you were the oldest of these types of institutions? Speaker 2: The oldest, right. Speaker 1: And the history, how had this institution even developed. It's 180--? Speaker 2: It was founded, established in 1890, in 1824, 1824, by this Stephen Van Rensselaer, a Dutch patron. He was a landowner in this area. He was a U.S. Congressman, a businessman, etc. And he gave the land and had the idea with a gentleman by the name of Amos Eden to establish a school to educate the sons and daughters of farmers and mechanics who would apply science to the common purposes of life. So being founded in 1824 was very interesting because it was founded to educate men and women, although women didn't show up on the scene until much later. But in its original charter, there it was. And so it was founded as an institution that would take science and make a difference in people's lives. And that's why it's had such a strong engineering focus and it's been known very heavily as an engineering school for many, many years. And it has turned out stellar alums. I mean as I said, one of my predecessors as president was a deputy administrator of NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration]. And he ran the Apollo program that put man on the moon. The first suspension bridge was designed and built by a Rensselaer alum, the Brooklyn Bridge and then other suspension bridges. The, a Rensselaer alum developed the internet protocol for email that allows you to use the ampersand, you know, so and so at such and such. One of the first real working micro, semi-conductor, micro processors was designed by a Rensselaer alum. You know, I could go on. The current CEO of Motorola [Edward J. Zander] is a Rensselaer alum. But Rensselaer alums particularly built this country in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, had a very big role in the industrial revolution, industrial processes, the Bessemer process for steelmaking, the railroads, the development of the first television, etc., etc. So these are, I mean it has a great history, but it had just gone through this turbulent period. And so along I came. Story_ID: 29466 Speaker 1: And then what did you do when you came here [Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, New York]? Speaker 2: Well, first I spent the six months, I didn't start right away. I was offered the job and accepted it in December of 1998. But I had promised the President [William Clinton] that I would finish my term at the NRC [Nuclear Regulatory Commission], which went to July 1 of `99 [1999] and I promised my family that I wouldn't disrupt their lives again until our son [Alan] graduated from high school. And he graduated in June of `99 [1999] from high school. So I stayed put, but I spent, I would come once a month on my own nickel to spend time with people here, to walk the campus to see what was going on, to meet with vice presidents and deans and faculty and students. And then I did a lot of reading about the school, and then I'd have people come and see me and talk about what they thought the issues and challenges were. And so by the time I came, I knew that there were a couple of things that I wanted to focus on. One was to ensure that there was excellence across the board, that while we strengthened engineering further, that we would have excellence in all the schools of Rensselaer because engineering had always dominated. But to be a truly great technological university meant excellence across the board. Secondly, that we needed to broaden the curriculum generally, a little more to have our students be, you know, not just technology proficient, but have a broader view. Third, that we had to strengthen research, that research and teaching went hand-in-hand in a great technological university. And then I offered specific challenges relative to moving into bio-technology and the life sciences. And so what I did was start right away, right after, a week after my inaugural, my inauguration in September of '99 [1999]. I had a planning retreat in the summer of '99 [1999], right after I came where we developed a guiding document. We called it the Initiating Document for developing the Rensselaer Plan, and I posed five questions, well we, the ideas about the Initiating Document came out of this leadership retreat, but in my inaugural address, I posed five questions that I wanted everybody to answer. And the first was, in everything we do, what is the intellectual core? Is it important and why? And why is not just because we happen to be doing it. The second is assuming you, we've answered the first, are we in a leadership position? Do we have, make, have impact? You know, are we known in the arena? The third is, if we're not in a leadership position, do we have the underlying strengths and capabilities, such that with the right focus and investment, we can move into a leadership position in a fairly short time? The fourth, is irrespective of the answers to the first three, are there some things that were so vital and so important that we must do them, even if we don't have a presence in them now? And one that I was positing was biotechnology. And the fifth was, what are we willing to give up and walk away from or transform to create a platform for change? And that was the basis of doing the strategic plan, the process; formed a steering committee, made, waited till primarily faculty had some staff on it, had them have twenty public sessions, public sessions, structured around these five questions. But for each portfolio, each academic school, each vice presidential division, etc., not run by the given vice president or dean, but run by a subcommittee of the steering committee to answer the five questions. But then I asked each vice president and each dean to answer the questions for their own portfolios. And then we had some outside advisors come in and look at our research and academics and what we did and how well we did things on an administrative and managerial basis. And then I had all of this brought together and had the steering committee, particularly from the public sessions, say what they thought the key issues were, somewhat similar, you know, echoes of how I did things at the NRC. Then I would have meetings with the cabinet, meaning all of my vice presidents and provosts. And we would meet for hours at a time, days and days, to go through the issues and to distill out what we thought the important themes and commitments were we needed to make, to move the university ahead, drawing from all of these sources. And then I divided the cabinet into the writers and the readers. And the writers were the provost and the vice president for student life because we're here to teach the students and the faculty are the academic heart of the university. And the readers were everyone else because they had to support what went on in those portfolios, whether they were in finance, administration, the CIO [Chief Information Officer], etc. They were the enablers. And so after we fleshed out all of these issues and what our key commitments were, I delegated the actual writing to the vice president for student life and the provost. And then we had a draft. And then we spent days, hours and days and weeks going over the draft. And then, and I did it all in the cabinet. I would lead the discussion. And we did it. And then once we did it, we sent it out to all of the alums that we had addresses for. We sent it to all the faculty, all the students. We put it out to the staff. We put it on the web. We sent it to key executives who worked with the university, some politicians, and we sent it to the board of trustees. And I asked the board to respond as individuals, not as a board. And all the time, I had been talking in board meetings with the board about the issues that were coming forward so that they had a running sense of what happened. Then we got all this commentary, and I asked the steering committee again to distill into suggested changes for the plan. It was very strongly focused on research and excessively so in the first version. But that was deliberate because Rensselaer had always had a focus on undergraduate education. But I wanted to provoke people to really respond. And they did. Story_ID: 29467 Speaker 1: Then when we did the final version [of the Rensselaer Plan], of course, it was more balanced, and we had six institute-wide goals that focused on resident undergrad education, research and graduate education, education for working professionals because we have a campus that's strictly devoted to graduate education of working professionals; scientific and technological entrepreneurship are enabling activities and the communities we touch and are part of, including the local regional, then national and global communities. And so that, obviously, would include our alumni and alumnae. But it includes the city of Troy [New York] and the capital region. And so then once we got the response, we wrote a second draft plan. And then I had structured reviews where I met with groups of faculty and with the faculty senate, with chaired professors, with the pillars of Rensselaer [Polytechnic Institute, Troy, New York]. These are staff people who got awards for their service and excellence in their work, met with the key executives, etc., etc. And we would have what we call structured reviews. I would sit in for sessions and get their verbal feedback. I'd have the provost and the vice president for student life in. They would take notes. I would respond to commentary, tell people what wasn't likely to change, listen in terms of how we might refine. We took that in, made our final refinements, sent the plan to the board of trustees in April of my first year, coming to the end of the academic year. And it was approved by the board in May of 2000. Then we immediately started into what we call performance planning. Remember the operational plans at the Nuclear Regulatory Commission [NRC]. We do these performance plans, very detailed plans every year. Column A, Column B. Column A are institute-wide goals that the leadership team has agreed upon and we have retreats and we have talked about those. Column B are specific priorities for the portfolios and that's how people build their plans in these two ways, rank ordered. And then rank order is really done when they're given the budget number because we call that the plan, the budget. And then we execute the plan. And I have people report out as well, not every week like at the NRC, but every two weeks to a month. Speaker 2: So you brought a very, basically what I hear you say is that you brought a very business-like approach both to the NRC and to Rensselaer? Speaker 1: I did, but it's a business-like approach that is a combination of a scientist approach to how you, you know, extract what is fundamental from a complex situation. Speaker 2: I see. Speaker 1: --coupled with an orderliness that comes from that, married with the business approach that came out of my board experiences and then honed at the NRC. And that's what I say I brought here. Speaker 2: Now, you raised some significant money in that first year though too? Speaker 1: Well, it was the, actually, it was the second year. Speaker 2: It was the second. Speaker 1: Once the plan was out and we started executing the plan, and there were some early things we did with the first-year experience for undergraduate students. But we really started out of the gate very fast because we had these integrated plans because the way these plans are built, they're cross reviewed, you know, in cabinet meetings and the provost takes the academic portfolios and does reviews with them first. And then they're brought to the cabinet, but then everybody's plan is reviewed and critiqued and we look at linkages and so on. And because of that we moved fast, and we found a donor who I solicited who was so taken with the plan, with our early steps and with what the donor felt the potential of the plan was, that we garnered a 360 million dollar unrestricted gift commitment. Speaker 2: Which is huge. Speaker 1: It's huge. And that really helped to jump start the plan and move us along our way. And then since then, you know, we've raised over 700 million dollars in cash and cash commitments primarily, some gifts in kind and then a huge half billion dollar gift-in-kind of design software and technology. Speaker 2: What did the plan call for? What were the key elements of the plan that are the Rensselaer Plan and the change, you know, changes? What were, I know it was integrated, but what were the key elements? Speaker 1: Well, it called for a much greater emphasis on research. We, the six-institute-wide goals were probably the defining things. And we had what we call university positioning goals and process and management goals. And the university positioning goals were to stake our claim in biotechnology in two ways, by building a research platform, a center for biotechnology and interdisciplinary studies which we've now built, it's a 218,000 square foot research facility and to create critical mass groupings of faculty in key areas in the life sciences and biotechnology, centered around what we call focal areas in biocatalysis and metabolic engineering, in tissue engineering and regenerative medicine, in systems biology and in bio-computation and computational biology. And then to flesh that out with hiring to build up our strength in fundamental biology, biochemistry, chemical and biological engineering and biomedical engineering. And we've done all that. Story_ID: 29468 Speaker 1: Information Technology has to do with devises, new materials and with communications, with computation. Biotechnology has to do with the marriage of the life sciences with engineering, the physical and computational sciences to understand fundamental biological processes, disease, imaging, functional imaging of living systems, to develop new drugs and new treatment modalities, etc. And nanotechnology has to do with the ability to image, manipulate and understand phenomena in both physical and living systems on a nano scale. And that's where part of nano crosses into biotechnology. Information technology comes into play if you wanna do imaging, if you wanna model protein dynamics and how it might relate to disease states, things like that. So these things exist in and of themselves, but they play off of each other as well. And so we've been doing many of our research thrusts, our institute-wide thrusts in those areas, okay. And so we built the new center. We created the constellations around four centers of excellence in biotechnology that I just mentioned. We've hired, begun to hire faculty into them. We've hired other faculty in key areas that relate in fundamental physics, I mean not fundamental physics, bio physics, fundamental biology and chemistry, chemical and biological engineering and biomedical engineering. And we've done all that. We've grown our research base. We started at total NIH funding, the National Institutes of Health funding of 400,000 dollars four or five years ago. We have over 30 million [dollars] in the funding today. But the more important mark is the nature of the research that our faculty do. And they are coming up with new ways to image living systems with, you know, potential drugs for disease treatment with understanding and being able to model, you know, protein structure and dynamics and so on, very high-end work. Likewise, we have a nanotechnology center, one of only six National Science Foundation [NSF] nanotechnology centers in the country. It's called the Directed Center for Nano Structures--for the Assembly, Directed Assembly of Nano Structures, Nano Structure Materials. And we've had that center now for about six years. But it has leveraged into work in the bio center where you marry nano structured materials with studies of living systems. And then we have a thrust in information technology. And we've created one of three that we plan to form, constellations in one of them, the one we formed, is in what's called future chips. It relates to new materials and new device technologies for things that range anywhere from communications to smart lighting, you know, for energy efficiency. But we'll also have one focused in multi-scale computation and one that has to do with wireless systems and wireless networks. So we're covering a comprehensive front in the areas that are key enabling areas. And as we've gone, that has migrated into five signature thrusts for the university, one in the life sciences and biotechnology, one in computation and information technology, one in nano technology, one in energy and the environment and one which is very unique, in media and the arts. And we're building an over two hundred thousand square foot electronic media, well, actually, we call it now the Experimental Media and Performing Arts Center. And it will sit at the nexus of technology and the arts. It will be both a high-end performance and creative platform in the performing arts and a research platform to allow studies in animation, visualization, simulation and acoustics, among other things, but also have these things play off of each other, push each other and support each other and change the whole cultural aspect of the campus and the capital region. And that will open in May of 2008. Story_ID: 29469 Speaker 1: How have you done this? With you having to bring in new staff and everything to bring, you know, to bring the, to actualize the plan in many ways? Speaker 2: Well, I mean largely, I mean we've hired, certainly hired a lot of people. We've hired over 170 new faculty since I've been here. And we've created in the process nearly seventy-five net new faculty positions. Now, that has the concomitant effect of bringing the student faculty ratio down and by a significant amount. And we still are hiring. We've also, because we've hired over 170, we've obviously renewed the faculty as people have retired or left, etc. And we very much focused on our undergraduate program. In fact, we have a plan within the plan called "The Undergraduate Plan" that is focused on living, learning communities, having all of our students have an international experience, having all of our students or as many as possible, do research, strengthening our athletics. So we're building a new, what we call the East Campus Athletic Village that we'll start next May. And it'll, you know, the first phase of it'll be done about a year and a half to two years later because we have thousands of our students who participate in some form of athletics, varsity, you know, intramural club and recreational sports. And so, but it's an important part of the whole person. So we have the media and the arts. We have the athletics. We have high-end research. We have excellent teaching. We have scientific and technological entrepreneurship. We have an endowed center in our Lally School of Management and Technology, the Severino Center for Technological Entrepreneurship that focuses on entrepreneurship. Obviously, there's an aspect that's very strongly focused on business creation, new venture wealth creation through the exploitation of the intellectual property that comes out of scientific and engineering pursuits out of media and the arts. But it also focuses on the idea of taking risks, the idea of creating new activity to do something unique. And so we have a graduate of Rensselaer [Polytechnic Institute, Troy, New York] who has endowed a fund called "The Change the World Challenge" which is structured to have our students think of ways to develop and use their inventiveness, their engineering and scientific skills to design things that can have an impact in a positive way on national and global and societal problems. And so our students are very creative, and they've come up with any number of things. Then we have hired, we've created the position and hired a vice provost for entrepreneurship to infuse this across the curriculum, across all aspect of Rensselaer. It is hard to talk about how much we've done, and while we've done all this, we've had a hand in revitalizing Troy [New York] itself. It was a grand old city in the industrial period. It had gotten, fallen into some decline. But it is a great city. As they say, it's great bones. And we've had economic impact with the hiring we've done, with the construction jobs, with direct investment, with homeowner initiatives where we've helped people to buy homes. We've helped people to fix up their homes. And all of this because we are inextricably interwoven with the city in which we sit. So this has been a big deal. It's been about institutional change and civic change. And all of this plays into things that I've done on the national arena. Now, I was president of the AAAS. That's the American Association for the Advancement of Science in 2000. And then I, as chair of the board of the AAAS in 2005, and as president and as chair, I used that as a platform to talk about two kinds of issues. The first and the main one was what I call the "quiet crisis," okay. And it has to do with the fact that we have a whole generation of scientists and engineers who came of age in the post-Sputnik era and in the space race era who are now beginning to retire. And those retirements will accelerate. We don't have enough people in the pipeline coming along behind them to replace them. We've depended a lot on talent from abroad, but that flow has diminished, particularly, in the post-911 [September 11, 2001] environment with visa restrictions and with the fact that many of them were coming from developing countries where now there's more opportunity or they were coming from Eastern Europe where there're more opportunities now where they came from, and where they can create businesses. They can be educated and get advanced degrees. And so they're staying home or they're going to other places. So they don't come here with the same, in the same numbers as in the past. But that trend had already existed for a decade before 911, but it just hit the, you know, it became exacerbated in the in the post-911 period. And then you play that against the backdrop that the largest group are women and so-called underrepresented minorities. I call that the underrepresented majority. That is the majority in this country and will become more so as we go on. But that's a pool that we're not tapping. Women are still under represented in the sciences and engineering. You know, they don't, they aren't represented on faculties. They aren't represented in the leadership positions. They just generally aren't, particularly in the physical sciences and engineering. And then minorities, even worse. And so the message is that it is a quiet crisis. It's quiet because you don't see the directionalities right away, that these things happen initially slowly and then they accelerate over time. So it's quiet. It comes in on cat's paws. It's quiet because, you don't see it because it takes years to develop a professional scientist and engineer, but it's a crisis because, as I was talking about earlier, everything we depend upon essentially, and things that relate to our national security, energy security, consumer products, health, comes out of innovation that rests on having a strong science and engineering foundation. And other countries see this. They understand our model, how well it has worked, and that's why you have countries like China, so massively invested in developing the next generation of scientists and engineers. So in a certain sense, just as you asked me questions earlier about, well, how does all of this relate, how do you do all of this? All of these things are joined. You know, the American Association for the Advancement of Science is the world's largest general scientific society. So I had the privilege of being the president. It was an important platform for developing and carrying this message about the "Quiet Crisis". And I lead a technological university where inherently, we're educating some of that next generation. There aren't enough across the board, but we're doing a high-end job here. Story_ID: 29470 Speaker 1: The other issue that is the pregnant issue of the day is energy. People talk about energy independence, but there's no such thing. We're interconnected in a global market and a global competition for energy. Energy security is the real message which has to do with redundancy of supply and diversity of source. We talked about electrical generation and different sources, but, you know, as countries develop and as the population of the world grows, people think it could get to be eight to ten billion people in the fifty years, maybe sooner, that the energy demands are gonna grow concomitantly. But if we wanna be able to meet that demand and help other countries develop and have global stability, we have to have energy security and that requires itself, innovation, to innovate with existing sources, fossil sources and so on in a more environmentally sustainable way, to find new sources and to develop alternative sources as well as environmental innovation. But all of that rests, again, on having a cadre of high-end science, scientists and engineers and a more scientifically and technologically literate general population. And so that's where energy security and the quiet crisis come together. And so everything I do plays off of everything else, being president of Rensselaer, my speaking on the quiet crisis and on energy security, my being on corporate boards. You could say, well, how corporate boards? Well, first of all, we educate our students to go into the world. That's where many of them will find employment, many of them will create their own business enterprises. It's important to understand that world and how it impacts what we do here as well as to project the university and enhance its reputation by having a greater presence there. But it is also the way that we do get pharmaceuticals out, that we get new technologies out to the public. It's the basis of global commerce. So it's important to have the linkage. But then to be president of the triple A-S [AAAS, American Academy for the Advancement of Science] to lead a large group of professional scientists to be able to speak for that community, and then I'm involved with the Council on Competitiveness, made up of corporate CEOs, labor leaders, university presidents. I'm on the executive committee, and I was one of the leaders of the National Innovation Initiative that the council carried out about a year and a half, two years ago, that I was part of a national academy's study, the National Academy of Sciences, National Academy of Engineering Institute of Medicine on, called 'Rising Above the Gathering Storm,' you know, empowering and employing America for a brighter future. And it had to do, again, with maintaining our ability to innovate, to have the cadre of scientists and engineers and the support for basic research that we need to ensure that we have the next new innovations. So all of these things are important, all of them play off of each other. Everything I've done informs everything else, and I think it's important, I enjoy it. I can't help but think, you know, in hearing you talk now, about what, you know, influenced you as a young girl, and that was the space race. And then, you're basically saying we're at the next nexus that, you know, science and its emphasis is changing? Speaker 2: Well, I think energy security should be the focus because it is a critical one that has importance both for our own economic and national security and our way of life, but it is important to address the needs and desires of growing populations around the world. And it is necessary to focus on if we wanna have global stability. Redundancy of supply and diversity of source. There are other, obviously, there's law, there's diplomacy, there's geopolitics, but that's rooted in people scrambling and needing to have access to sources. So innovation is important. And so that is the space race of this millennium. And we are in a race. It's a race against time, just as the space race was a race against time. People may think the time lines are longer, but as the world's population grows and there's more pressure to race. We're in the midst of geopolitics and global competition, just as we were then. It plays out differently now, but it is there. And so I'm not saying that science and technology alone will solve energy security, but they comprise the lynchpin in my mind. Speaker 1: Dr. Jackson, describe or define energy security because--? Speaker 2: It is the fact that one has an ability to satisfy national and global needs for energy, but also being able to control some of the demand side in terms of how much energy consumption there is for a given type of activity through innovative technological approaches that are rooted in science and engineering, but that get played out through trade, through global trade, through business enterprises, through the political process, through diplomacy. That is what, so it's, energy security is the ability to meet energy needs for rising economies and stable economies, to do it in a way that meets need but that can help mitigate the need through cleverness in the energy efficiency of technologies that are employed even as we develop new and additional sources of energy. That's what I mean [by energy security]. Story_ID: 29471 Speaker 1: Has there been any study about what amount of energy it would take to, because you have to have energy to have an advanced society, right? Speaker 2: That's exactly the point. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But the real question, I mean there's--of course, people talk about, you know, whether you need to have the degree of consumption that you typically had in existing developed countries, and the answer is, with innovation, you can diminish that. I think something like twenty-two percent of our electricity use of from lighting alone. But you can cut that in half or more through the use of smart lighting, semi-conductor based lighting, etc. You can also further reduce it through clever use of technologies that we're already starting to employ, that just shut lights off when we don't need them, that, you know, better design of buildings so that their energy demands are less. So that's what I mean by demand-side management as well as supply-side management. So there's innovation on both sides. There's innovation in, you know, finding, you know, extracting, using, transporting, etc. existing sources and developing new sources. So that's on the supply side. The demand side has to do with energy efficiencies and so on. And then there's a whole environmental piece in terms of being able to do these things in an as environmentally benign way as possible. And so all of these things come into play. Speaker 1: Now, when you talk about the quiet crisis, and you know, we know, let's say India and China, I think, you know, represents forty percent of the world's population and they are just pumping out, you know, scientists. What, has there been any assessment on, you know, on the whatever developed country, or even the United States side, of what our numbers would need to look like in terms of people being, you know, whoever it is, minority population or the majority, being pumped into the pipeline to even be competitive? Speaker 2: Well, you know, it's hard. I mean people talk about the Chinese producing factors of three or four engineers a year than we are, just at the bachelor's level. But I think the real thing is obviously, you know, their population is three or four times, is four times ours. But the real point is, are we just producing enough to fill the needs we know are there, to replace those who are retiring and who will generally, you know, drive this economy? And the answer is no. Most people don't appreciate that nearly forty percent of the Ph.D.s in the current workforce in the United States in science and engineering were born somewhere else and thirty percent of the master's degrees. And so we have not been as aware of how dependent we are on talent from abroad. And my basic message is you don't know where the next big idea is coming from, and therefore, can you afford to overlook fifty percent to two thirds of your population and expect then to have the best talent or to have the best possibility of creating the next big ideas? And the answer is, no. Speaker 1: So, Dr. Jackson, how do you think that's gonna be possible though because it plays into so many issues of racism, sexism, preconceived notions? Speaker 2: Well, I think in many ways, many parts of the business community already are understanding what they have to do because they have the need for the talent. Secondly, you know, in terms of affirmative steps people can take, we need to value those who do science and engineering, value those who have ability and interests in science and math. I think good, early, basic education is important and early success because people have good basic education. You have to excite them and invite them, right? You have to hold them up and then you have to sustain them by creating the programs that will support their education all the way through advanced education. But you gotta begin at the beginning, which has to do with affirmatively holding up those who do it, not as icons, but respecting what people do. People have to learn the basics. You know, you can't do calculus if you can't do algebra, trigonometry and geometry. You cannot do those if you can't add, subtract, multiple and divide, read and write. Those are the basics. And that's one where I would start, coupled with exposing children early. I think we need a cadre of discipline-based teachers, teachers who actually have degrees in science and math and engineering to teach science and math in high schools and middle schools. I think we need programs to link young people with technologically based enterprises so they get that early exposure and so on. So these are some of the things that we have to do. A lot of them are embedded in the national academies and the report and the Council on Competitiveness Report. Story_ID: 29472 Speaker 1: What makes you tick, Dr. Jackson? I mean what makes you get up every day to sort of be charged to go out and, I mean I would call you a change agent, but I mean what makes you--? Speaker 2: I've been called that. Well, I like what I do. It's interesting and I like to make a difference. And it goes back to what my parents [George Hiter Jackson and Beatrice Cosby Jackson] taught me that if I am talented, if I am well educated, and if I hold an important position, it's not enough just for me to succeed, but to try to do something for someone else. But that makes a difference to my son [Alan], his generation, what kind of world his generation will be asked to lead in. It makes a difference to those who come after him, whether we have a world at all. And that's very important as a parent. And, you know, I have the privilege of being a university president, of leading an organization that educates the next generations of students. And I think that's important. Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be? Speaker 2: Well, that I did my best, that I changed institutions and put them on a trajectory to address the issues of the twenty-first century, that I made a difference in small ways and big ways in individual people's lives and that I leave the next generation and my son with hope for, you know, the ability to resolve some of these issues and have a better world. That's a big thing to say as one's legacy. But it plays out with the job I do here, with what I hope I've done at the NRC [Nuclear Regulatory Commission] and that I've opened doors for those who may not have felt or may not feel today that they could have a life or career like mine. Remember, I started on a little street in Washington, D.C., in segregated public schools. Here I am, but I had great parents and a confluence of events, the Brown [Brown vs. Board of Education, 1954] decision, the Sputnik launch [1957], and I was willing to step through the door when it opened. So I could step through the door of what I call my window in time. And that's what I've tried to do...