 Story_ID: 571921 Speaker 1: This interview is with Miss Malvern [sic.] whose (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Malvyn. Speaker 1: Malvyn? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Known as Mal. Speaker 1: Malvyn, known as Mal, Hooser Johnson. And I'm [HistoryMaker] Paul Brock and the videographer is Scott Stearns. There are no observers on this, this interview. I'm going to start by asking you to give us your full name and to spell it out for us. Speaker 2: All right, my full name is [HistoryMaker] Malvyn Johnson. I guess I'm referred to as Malvyn Hooser Johnson. First name M-A-L-V-Y-N, middle name Hooser, H-O-O-S-E-R which is really my maiden name, and Johnson, J-O-H-N-S-O-N. Speaker 1: Okay and can you tell us where is this interview taking place? Speaker 2: This interview is taking place in my home in Alexandria, Virginia just outside Washington, D.C. Speaker 1: Okay and today's date? Speaker 2: Today is September 20th, 19- 2005. Story_ID: 571922 Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask you five very simple questions, they only require a short answer, but we are asked to relax both the interviewer and the interviewee. First of all, what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: Fish. Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I like fish. Speaker 1: What is your favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue. Speaker 1: What is your favorite season or time of year? Speaker 2: Early fall and all of spring. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your favorite vacation site or spot? Speaker 2: Well I have several. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: One is Hawaii, one is--I like to go to London [England] and places like that. And here in the states, I guess down in my summer home in Solomons Island [Solomons, Maryland]. Speaker 1: Okay, and finally, what is your favorite expression or phrase? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well I don't know what. I can't say what my real expression is (laughter) when I'm angry. Speaker 1: You can if you-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) No I can't. Speaker 1: Well okay (laughter). Speaker 2: But I don't really have a favorite expression. Story_ID: 571923 Speaker 1: Now we're going to get into the very, very serious part of the interview and I'm going to ask you your place of birth and your date of birth. Speaker 2: Well my place of birth is Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. My day of birth is July 4th [1924], and I refuse to tell you the year. Speaker 1: Okay. But you were born on July the 4th. Speaker 2: Independence Day (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Independence Day. Okay. Now, and that, that was Philadelphia, Pen- Pennsylvania? Speaker 2: Pennsylvania. Speaker 1: Okay. How early can you go back in your memory or depending on what your mother or father have told you, we're gonna get into seeing how far back you can go on your mother's side, the maternal side, her father, grandfather and so forth. Let's start there. First of all-- Speaker 2: I never met my grandfathers, either my father's father or my mother's father. Although I heard about them. Speaker 1: Let's, let's start with your mother's name, full name? Speaker 2: My mother's name was Johnnie [Johnnie Reeves Arnold (ph.)], she was named after her father. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I think they wanted a boy and since it wasn't a boy they kept the name anyway. Speaker 1: Okay. And that Johnnie was spelled? Speaker 2: J-O-H-N-N-I-E. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But on her birth certificate is John. Speaker 1: Okay. And then her maiden name? Or, or was it (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Reeves, R-E-E-V-E-S. Speaker 1: Was there a middle name? Speaker 2: I don't remember a middle name. Speaker 1: Okay. Then do you remember her place of birth and her date of birth? Speaker 2: Yes, she was born in Louisville, Kentucky. And her date of birth was October 2nd, 1905. Speaker 1: Okay, good enough. And you said that you did remember on your maternal, mother's side-- Speaker 2: Yes my grandmother. Speaker 1: Is your grandmother? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And what was your grandmother's name? Speaker 2: Mary Reeves. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Mary Gordon [ph.] Reeves. Speaker 1: Okay. Mary Gordon Reeves, okay. And what do you remember about--is that as far back as you can go with your mother's side (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's as far, I can go back to my grandfather's name, but I--he died before I was born. Speaker 1: Okay. What-- Speaker 2: And his name was John Reeves. Speaker 1: John Reeves, okay. And let's talk about your grandmother, Mary Gordon Reeves. Where was she born? Speaker 2: Guthrie, Kentucky. Speaker 1: Guthrie. Speaker 2: G-E-T-H-R-I-E [sic.]. Speaker 1: Okay. And do you know the date? Speaker 2: No I don't. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. And what, what do you remember about your grandmother? Speaker 2: My grandmother was a very nice lady and I always remember taking long walks with her in Philadelphia. And we used to go past Temple University [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and she would say to me, "I hope someday you go to this school." Sure enough it happened, many years later. But--and I just remember her as being a short, stout, very fair lady with real long hair and you'll see her picture behind me really. Speaker 1: Oh, okay, okay. And how about your--is there anything else, first of all, that you remember about your grandmother? Speaker 2: My grandmother always lived with us until she died. And she died when I must've been about ten years old. Speaker 1: Okay, good enough. And about your grandfather, is there any-- Speaker 2: I know very little about him except that he was a coal miner. And that--and they had moved from Kentucky to Pennsylvania and that's where my mother grew up. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you know what year they moved--migrated from Kentucky to Pennsylvania? Speaker 2: My mother was about five years old. So if she's born in fo- '05 [1905] then it must've been '09 [1909]. Speaker 1: Right. Let's see, so, so your mother was about five years old at that time, right? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: They lived in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania]. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. They moved from Kentucky to Pittsburgh? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. And is there any reco- recollection of when they moved from Pittsburgh to, to Philadelphia? Speaker 2: Yes there is. They had to have moved to Philadelphia about 1924 because my father worked in the steel mills. And when the steel mills began to close, he moved to Philadelphia to find work and she followed thereafter. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So-- Speaker 2: So that would make it--and she, she married my father when she was eighteen. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I don't know exactly, but if she married my father at eighteen and if she was eighteen, they moved--they must've moved around 1923. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Twenty- '22 [1922] or '23 [1923] to Philadelphia. Story_ID: 571924 Speaker 1: And when your father first came to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], what, wha- where did your father work at that time? Speaker 2: Pennsylvania Railroad. Speaker 1: Pennsylvania Railroad. And your mother [Johnnie Reeves Arnold (ph.)], was she a housewife? Speaker 2: She was a housewife. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, how did it happen that your [maternal] grandmother [Mary Reeves] lived with your mother and your father (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She came with her from Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania]. Speaker 1: From Pittsburgh. Speaker 2: By that time her husband [John Reeves] had died, my grandfather. He died in Pittsburgh and then she just came with him--with her. Speaker 1: Okay, good, good enough. Speaker 2: And by that time my mother's sister, older sister, was already in Philadelphia. She came directly to Philadelphia from Kentucky. Speaker 1: All right, okay. Do you remember the older sister's name and I wanted to get into the siblings, your mother's siblings? Speaker 2: My mother's sister was called Mattie Reeves. And then she became Mattie Reeves Peters [ph.]. And-- Speaker 1: Okay, she came directly from Kentucky to Philadelphia? Speaker 2: Yes. And her brother, she only had the one brother and one sister. Her brother was called James Reeves [ph.] and he came from Pittsburgh with them to Philadelphia. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Good, good enough. So this--and did your mother live with Mattie Reeves? Speaker 2: Yes, we all lived in the same house. It was one of those big three or four-story houses in Philadelphia. Speaker 1: Okay, that sounds like. And your father worked at--on the railroad. Do you remember whether Mattie Reeves worked or later when she got married? Speaker 2: I don't really wanna tell you what they did. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well if you insist-- Speaker 1: I would insist. (Laughter) No, it's up to you. Speaker 2: It was during Prohibition time and they delivered whiskey. Speaker 1: That's honorable. Speaker 2: No, they made a lot of money. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Exactly, that's why it's honorable, if they made money from it. Okay. And James Reeves, did he work with Mattie Reeves and (unclear) her husband (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He worked on construction work as far as I remember. They all lived to be very, very old. Speaker 1: Oh, okay, so-- Speaker 2: In their nineties. Speaker 1: Great. So we'll have a lot of history. Story_ID: 571925 Speaker 1: Let's go over to your father. I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I know very little about him because he disappeared when I was about seven or eight. Speaker 1: Seven or eight years old. Okay. John Reeves [sic.], okay. Speaker 2: And years later my mother [Johnnie Reeves Arnold (ph.)] married again and I grew up with a stepfather [Taft Arnold (ph.)]. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Tell me about, about--well how old were you when the stepfather was introduced into your life? Speaker 2: I had to be in my teens, like fourteen. Speaker 1: Okay, let's then go, go back to your being born in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. Speaker 2: Philadelphia. Speaker 1: The family has moved now to, to Philadelphia and you are born and I know you have siblings, so-- Speaker 2: Oh yes, um-hm. Speaker 1: Give us, give us (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My oldest sister was called Alice [Alice Hooser]. Speaker 1: Alice, okay. Speaker 2: And then the next brother was called Artie [Artie Hooser], A-R-T-I-E. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And the next brother was called Harvey [Harvey Hooser]. Speaker 1: Okay. Now do you--Alice's middle name? Speaker 2: Yes, she, she had a middle name, name Marris, M-A-R-R-I-S. Speaker 1: Okay, and Artie, middle name? Speaker 2: Artie Bishop [ph.], named after his father. Speaker 1: Okay. And Harvey? Speaker 2: Harvey Carl, C-A-R-L. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, good. And now and of the--of the four children, you were the first, second, third or fourth? Speaker 2: I was the second. Speaker 1: Second. Okay. Speaker 2: Alice was the oldest. She died very young. Speaker 1: Okay, good enough. Speaker 2: And oh you need to add my last sister, is Norma [Norma Hooser]. But Norma was the child of the stepfather [sic.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Was, did she have a middle name? Speaker 2: Yvonne [ph.]. Speaker 1: Yvonne. Okay. And the last name for Norma was? Speaker 2: S- Arnold [ph.]. Speaker 1: Arnold, okay. Story_ID: 571926 Speaker 1: Now as the second oldest child after Alice [Alice Hooser], what are your earliest memories as a, as a young child? Speaker 2: I can remember all the way back to when I first started in kindergarten. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: I went to, I went to kindergarten at four years old because my mother [Johnnie Reeves Arnold (ph.)] went out to work and in those days you could ask the kindergarten teacher if the child could come early. And I went early so I got left down in kindergarten, I failed kindergarten and I had to do two terms in kindergarten. Speaker 1: Oh okay, failed. Speaker 2: So I always say I failed sandbox. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay. And what was the name of the school that you went to there? Speaker 2: That I don't remember. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And how long were you in--in that school, kindergarten through what grade? Speaker 2: Must've been through second or third grade because we then moved to another house and I went to a school called John Hancock [John Hancock Elementary School; John Hancock Demonstration Elementary School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. I remember that very well 'cause I was in a play. Story_ID: 571927 Speaker 1: Let me ask you something, I'm surprised, someone was asking me this question and I could answer it, do, do you remember the address of where you and your family were living when you were between say one, two years old up through kindergarten? Speaker 2: Yes, 850 Hutchinson Street. Speaker 1: Okay, you did the same thing I was able to do (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now don't ask me why I remember that. Speaker 1: I couldn't answer it either. And then, you switched to another school-- Speaker 2: Another school and then-- Speaker 1: At the third grade-- Speaker 2: And then we lived at 938 12th Street. Speaker 1: If I remember Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], 938 12th Street was downtown? Speaker 2: Yeah, 12th and Ogden [sic.]. Speaker 1: Ogden, okay. Okay. Now did the whole family move or just you and your mother [Johnnie Reeves Arnold (ph.)] and your stepfather [Taft Arnold (ph.)] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Just my mother, my [maternal] grandmother [Mary Reeves]. No by that time I didn't have a stepfather. Speaker 1: Right, that's right. Speaker 2: My mother, my grandmother and all the children. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And my aunt stayed in that original house on Hutchinson Street. Speaker 1: Okay and that--that was your Aunt Mattie [Mattie Reeves Peters (ph.)]? Speaker 2: Yeah and she had her husband and one boy. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Did your brother--I mean your uncle, James Reeves [ph.], did he stay in that house or did he move with you? Speaker 2: No he moved with us. He stayed close to my mother until he died. So I knew him well. Speaker 1: Right, right. And did your mother ever have to go, go out to work during this period? Speaker 2: Yes, my mother became a very accomplished seamstress and worked from--until she retired, and did very fine sewing, and made quite a living at it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And she could design dresses. Speaker 1: Oh, she designed also? Speaker 2: Um-hm (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Wonderful. Story_ID: 571928 Speaker 1: I know you had that family support there at home. Speaker 2: Oh, yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) With your [maternal] grandmother [Mary Reeves] and so forth. Did your grandmother ever tell you stories of your mother [Johnnie Reeves Arnold (ph.)] growing up or any of your (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She would tell some stories, like for instance, she told the story all the time of my mother riding a white horse to school and things like that. Speaker 1: Was that in, in Kentucky or was it-- Speaker 2: That must've been in Kentucky. And we always asked if she wore hoop skirts 'cause we'd been to the movies. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now you--your saying she loved to go to the movies, your mother did? Speaker 2: We all did. But she used us as a--used it as a babysitter. She'd take us all to the movies and sit us in a row and tell the manager we were there and leave. And she'd go do whatever she had to do on weekends and we'd see the movie four or five times by the time she came back. Speaker 1: Yep, she, she was ready to take all of you home (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And, and the manager would tell if we didn't behave ourselves. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Do you remember the name of the movie house? Speaker 2: Yes, the New Jewel [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. It's been dead and gone for years. Speaker 1: Okay. Any other wonderful memories like that? Speaker 2: Yeah. We use to go--we did a lot of things together when we were children. We learned to baseball and my, my stepfather [Taft Arnold (ph.)] who was a Barnum and Bailey Circus [Ringling Bros. and Barnum and Bailey Circus] always took us after he left the circus, we would all go--always go to the circus and we'd get in free because everybody knew him. Speaker 1: Oh okay. Now did he work for the circus? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. He worked for Barnum and Bailey? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. That must've been wonderful? Speaker 2: It was because we walked right into the circus. Speaker 1: And the-- Speaker 2: And his, his password which was really funny, "Do you recognize a carny man?" And, and everybody would remember him and we would go right in the circus. So we saw the circus every year. Speaker 1: Wow, that's, that's wonderful. That's wonderful. Now the circus was a traveling circus, did he-- Speaker 2: Yeah but it only came to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] once a year. Speaker 1: Right, so that was the time--only time that he worked with? Speaker 2: No, he traveled with them before I even knew him and then he retired from the circus and went to work for--do you remember Horn and Hardart restaurants? Speaker 1: Absolutely. Speaker 2: And he worked for them until he retired from there. But he always went back to the circus once a year. He said that he ran away from home when he was nine years old and the circus took him in when he was living in Greenwood, South Carolina. Speaker 1: Okay. We want to get that history. Let me just--Horn and Hardarts were the cafeteria like where you put the nickel in-- Speaker 2: Put your money in the thing and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and open the door and you took-- Speaker 2: And then when they put up, they put up one at the Smithsonian [National Museum of American History, Washington, D.C.], I brought him down to see it. Speaker 1: Oh wonderful. I know he must've enjoyed that (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) By then I was living in Washington [D.C.]. Story_ID: 571929 Speaker 1: Give us your stepfather's full name. Speaker 2: Taft [Taft Arnold (ph.)], T-A-F-T, Arnold, he didn't have a middle name. Speaker 1: Okay. And he was born in Greenwood, Mississi- Mis- Greenwood, South Carolina (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, South Carolina. Speaker 1: And do you happen to know the date of, his date of birth? Speaker 2: No I don't, but he died in 1998 and he was by that time eighty-five years old. Speaker 1: Okay so that's easy, born in 1913? Speaker 2: No wait, something is wrong because he was--he was a year older than my mother [Johnnie Reeves Arnold (ph.)]. I remember that. So I guess it was 1906. Speaker 1: Nineteen o'six [1906], right. Speaker 2: And I'm not sure that's accurate, but I think that's close to it. Speaker 1: Right, okay. Okay. Did you ever hear of any stories from your stepfather on growing up in Greenwood, South Carolina? Speaker 2: Yes. His mother was married to a Chinese man. That was her second husband. It's cloudy to me what her--what his father was, because they all looked like they were white people. So we had some southern situations there. But Mr. Joe [ph.] was--owned the laundry and he was Chinese. A nice man. Speaker 1: Now Mr. Joe was your stepfather's father? Speaker 2: Yeah [sic. stepfather]. Speaker 1: Right, okay. Okay Mr. Joe. Speaker 2: I don't know--I don't remember his last name. Speaker 1: Right and-- Speaker 2: He was his mother's second husband. Speaker 1: And Mr. Joe and your stepfather they lived in Greenwood (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Greenwood, South Carolina. Speaker 1: That's amazing in itself, you know. Speaker 2: Yeah and besides that, th- there were three brothers and they all lived in Greenwood and one of the brothers owned the restaurant there. They were a pretty prominent family in there. Speaker 1: Okay. And did you ever get to meet Mr. Joe? Speaker 2: That's how I know about him. I--I went down to--they took me down when I was about fifteen. And, and Mr. Joe was so nice to, to us and we stayed down there two or three weeks. That was the first time I'd ever been down south. Speaker 1: Right, right. And what was your impression other than with your relatives, what was your impression of Greenwood, South Carolina at that time? Speaker 2: Well I was old enough to be quite disgusted with the situation there, although they had been there all their lives so it was all right with them. But when you tell me that we're driving down and you--and my father because he looked like he was a white man could go in and get food, but we had to stay in the car and wait 'til he brought the food out. That offended me greatly. Didn't bother him too much. Speaker 1: Right, right, he'd gotten used to it because he had been raised dow- down there. And so did this make any discernable difference in growing up in, in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] that your stepfather could pass for a white man. Were there an instances of-- Speaker 2: Yeah, it made, it made a difference to me because I felt like I've got to dedicate myself to some changes here because there--I realized even that young that there was something wrong with this situation. I probably couldn't identify it fully, but I was a (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You mean about the racial situation? Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm. But I was, but I was able to realize that it, that it existed and that it was more serious that I would have known living in Philadelphia. I lived in a mixed neighborhood although and it--I, I saw it change to all black. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But it was a mixed neighborhood when I was like in elementary school [James Elverson, Jr. School; Philadelphia Military Academy, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. Story_ID: 571930 Speaker 1: Let's go back to those days and talk about what it was like, wh- the mixture there in your neighborhood at that time (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The mixture there was, you know, the corner grocery is always owned by some Jew and they were--I remember them, Harry Moyer [ph.]. They were--the son was in my class and they owned the butcher shop and all the grocery-- Speaker 1: When you say in your class, in your elementary school class? Speaker 2: Um-hm. And down the street lived this girl called Florence [ph.] who was Greek and was my best friend. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And as we grew older she moved away too. And my teachers were all white, I never had a black teacher. Speaker 1: Oh okay, even though that was a mixed neighborhood. I wanted to go back and make sure I do have the name-- Speaker 2: Elverson School [James Elverson, Jr. School; Philadelphia Military Academy, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. Speaker 1: Okay. Spell, spell that? Speaker 2: E-L-V-E-R-S-O-N. Speaker 1: E-L-- Speaker 2: E-L-V-E-R-S-O-N. Speaker 1: Elverson elementary, okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. And it was there--to tell you the truth I got the best training. Because in the end out of my entire class, they sent me to an all-white private school. Speaker 1: Now-- Speaker 2: I grew up in an all-white high school [Philadelphia High School for Girls, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. Speaker 1: Now the city sent you or your family sent you? Speaker 2: No the teachers there arranged it. Speaker 1: Wow, okay. Now in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] do they just have elementary and high school or is there junior high school? Speaker 2: There's junior high school now. In my time I went directly from the eighth grade to high school. But there's junior high now and has been for many years. Speaker 1: Okay. And let's, let's get into that and we'll gradually work our way up to that. As a child growing up there at Elverson elementary, what were your teachers like and when did they first start to notice you (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well I had teachers that seemed to care. And I don't know whether they noticed me because I, I was a good child, I was not a child that you had to discipline at all. And perhaps they began to notice me from that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Maybe because of that-- Speaker 2: I don't remember. But I do remember starting that school in about the fourth grade and went through the eighth grade there. Story_ID: 571931 Speaker 1: You were just about to tell us about your years there at, at Elverson elementary school [James Elverson, Jr. School; Philadelphia Military Academy, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], but you also mentioned your mother [Johnnie Reeves Arnold (ph.)] only going as far as the fourth grade, but still having to take care of the household. Tell us what made her drop out of school in the fourth grade? Speaker 2: I don't really know what made her drop out of school. She often said that she didn't care about school, but I have a feeling she dropped out because they probably didn't have the money to get her educated. But her older sister, Mattie [Mattie Reeves Peters (ph.)], taught her to read and write. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She talked about that all the time and she could read and she could write you know, and she understood things as well as anybody. And she was able to teach herself how to make patterns for dresses and things like that. And then she, she made her own living that way. She also worked in, in those factories where they made clothes. Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] was famous for the garment, garment industry. And she could make a hundred skirts in one day. Speaker 1: So she was very productive? Speaker 2: Yeah, and the more you made those things the more money you made. And then on weekends, I had to come and take a job cutting the, the threads off. You call 'em trimmers and you just cut the threads off. Speaker 1: Oh in one of the factories where your mother worked? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. How old were you when you took that job? Speaker 2: About fifteen. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Was that your first job or? Speaker 2: Yeah, it's the first job, I made thirteen dollars a we- a week. Speaker 1: All right. That was a lot of money (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) It's in the summer time, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That was a lot of money for me. Story_ID: 571932 Speaker 1: Let's go back to now your elementary school days. Are there any anecdotes that, other anecdotes that you can recall from your elementary (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I remember being really excited about plays. I wanted to be an actress for some reason. I have no idea why. So my first play was 'Hansel and Gretel' [Jacob Grimm and Wilhelm Grimm] and I played the mother (laughter) in 'Hansel and Gretel.' But I remember that so distinctly. Speaker 1: This was in elementary school? Speaker 2: This was in elementary school. And there was, there was, I never forget the teacher trying to show me how to--get me to say hysterics instead of (pronouncing) historics. (Laughter) But that was a pleasant experience for me. And I did well in school. Yeah, I was an A student in, in elementary school and that lead--I'll tell you an incident that really stuck in my mind. The SPCA--ASPCA [American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals] I think it was called made an offer to all the children in the Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] schools to write an essay on why I like animals. And so the teacher said that we could- Speaker 1: This was the Association for the Soci- Association of Society of Cruelty to Animals (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Pennsylvania Society--the Pennsylvania Society for Cruelty Against--Prevention for Cruelty Against Animals [Pennsylvania Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals]. Speaker 1: Right. Okay. Speaker 2: And it's called the ASPCA. And, and we were allowed to write an essay. And out of the entire Philadelphia school system I won. The thing is-- Speaker 1: Oh, okay. City-wide essay contest? Speaker 2: Yes, but the thing about it is the person who was in charge of this had never met me in person, so he came and said this, this is the winner and this Elverson School [James Elverson, Jr. School; Philadelphia Military Academy, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] is where she goes to school. So they came in great entourage to, to present the award. And this man made his speech about animals and everything and then called my name to come up to the stage, seeing me for the first time. The man was so shocked until he wouldn't give me the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Shocked over your color? Speaker 2: He said, "No lady--no little girl, I'm calling [HistoryMaker] Malvyn Johnson," Mallie Hooser my name was. And my teacher marched up there and said, "This is Malvyn Hooser." And he had to give me the award, but he refused to have it engraved, it never got engraved. Speaker 1: Now give us a time line on this, how old were you-- Speaker 2: Well however old (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) If you can just tell me the year? Speaker 2: I was in sixth grade, so whatever that was. Speaker 1: Okay, you were about eleven, twelve? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. How did that experience leave you, I mean what did you recognize? Speaker 2: It made me--yes, I realized what the problem was right away and my teacher did. Of cou- my teacher was a white lady, but she, she recognized the problem obviously because she marched up on the stage immediately. And I, I backed back because I wasn't sure what this man meant at first and then I realized what it was all about. And I think she understood immediately. But any-- Speaker 1: So they had to give you the award? Speaker 2: He had to give me the award, he had no choice. And then he had already said that they would engrave the person's name on it and the year, before he even presented the award, but he never did. Speaker 1: So that--that was, was that your introduction to racism in the North in Philadelphia? Speaker 2: Yes to, to--yes to straight out racism, yes it was. And I felt really bad about it and I went home and told my mother [Johnnie Reeves Arnold (ph.)]. And of course my mother said, "Well don't let that bother you." But it bothered me. And my teacher was very kind and she knew what was wrong. She didn't sa- voice it, but she knew what was wrong (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right. Right. Story_ID: 571933 Speaker 1: Were there any other similar experiences that you ran into during that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not that I remember except when another teacher arranged for me to go to this particular high school and when I went down to the high school they seemed rather shocked that I was there. And of course nobody in those days would, would voice this, you'd just feel it and you know the way they behave and things like that. Speaker 1: Not in the city of brotherly love, right? But this--this was when you were going to this private school? Speaker 2: This school--this school was, was an outstanding model school. It's the Philadelphia School for Girls. It's still in existence today. Philadelphia High School for Girls [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], that's what it was called. And that school was to have led you straight on into teachers college directly, but by the time it was time for me to graduate, the, the teachers college was closed and it was, it was a school funded by the state. Speaker 1: It was funded by, by the state? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay, so it was a private school funded-- Speaker 2: It was a private school and, and it was all academic, no other, other kind of courses. It was all academic. You had to have Latin, you had to have Spanish. You had to have all kinds of civics and things like that, and then part of your time was also spent learning how to behave. How to greet people, how to sit, how to talk, which was, which has held me in good all these years. I notice as the years go by there--I found two graduates, black graduates, after I left who ended up being diplomats at the state department [U.S. Department of State]. Speaker 1: Two, wow. Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm. Speaker 1: Now what was it like in terms of racial between blacks and white at the school? I, I would gather not too many blacks gained admission to the school (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No when I went, the year that I went, I was the only black. The next year came two girls and that was all the four years that I was there. Speaker 1: Oh boy. So this was--how many, how many students were at this school approximately? Speaker 2: Oh I would assume there were about a thousand people there. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, okay. Now were there any other incidents that you ran into--we're in your high school now, this new high school, the Philadelphia School for Girls? Speaker 2: Yeah, some of the kids were quite nasty, others were very nice. For instance, the girl that sat next to me was, her father owned the Klein candy bars [Klein Chocolate Company]. I'll never forget Klein candy bars, I refuse to have anything to do with them. She would say things to me like, "Our maid is asking for the evening off and she says she's going to a dance, where is she going?" How would I know who her maid was? That kind of thing. Speaker 1: Those were the--some of the racist things that were that were happening to you (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Those were some of the racist kind of things that, that happened. Speaker 1: And how about the teachers, were they? Speaker 2: The teachers were, were very good, especially since they knew that I was a bright child and they, and they encouraged me and gave me great assistance. For instance, there was one teacher there who would keep me after school and give me a little box and it always had lovely clothes. So I wore beautiful clothes to school. Anglora [angora] sweaters and lovely, and she never said a word to anybody about it. Speaker 1: And how about some of the kids that you were in high school with who were, went out of their way to be extra nice and to welcome you? Were there many of those? Speaker 2: Yes there were. There was one girl whose father owned Zavelle Bookstore at Temple University [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. She was very nice to me. Speaker 1: Okay. What is the name of that bookstore? Speaker 2: Z-A-V-E-L-L-E. I guess it's still there. Speaker 1: Okay, at Temple? Speaker 2: Um-hm. And then-- Speaker 1: She, she was extra nice? Speaker 2: She was extra nice, always very friendly and very nice to me. I didn't make close buddy kind of friends to tell you the truth. But I knew people who were nice to me and through the years people kept in touch with me, and I think they were very pleased to hear that I responded from overseas and various other places and things like that. But I enjoyed that school. But then I was a serious child, I was not one who was very frivolous and of course the, there was a school down the street called the Central High [Central High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], which also had boys who were outstanding students. And, and they would have them come once a year so that we could learn how to dance with a boy. But the teacher went between us with a six-inch ruler, you mustn't get closer than six inches. They would be happy today because they don't have to touch each other to dance (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) Exactly. Story_ID: 571934 Speaker 1: You made it through the Philadelphia School for Girls [Philadelphia High School for Girls, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] with good marks. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And then, but the high school for te- teachers high school-- Speaker 2: It closed (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It closed. Speaker 2: So then I had to think, rethink the whole thing. We didn't have enough money to actually to send me to Temple [Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], but we finally got the first year and then I kept working at night and things and going to school at night 'til I got finished. Speaker 1: Oh okay. So your mother [Johnnie Reeves Arnold (ph.)] did not--did have the tuition to get you into that first year at Temple (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, um-hm. Speaker 1: And you studied, but you had to work in addition? Speaker 2: Yeah. And in those days Temple was a state university so it only cost about two hundred dollars a year for, for students then. I don't know what it costs now, but it's no longer a state school. It's a accredited university. It was accredited then. But what do you call a university that is not the state? Speaker 1: It's not state, it's-- Speaker 2: I think it's a private university. Speaker 1: Private, yeah, right, okay. What was it like at Temple, even though you were working I'm sure you didn't have a lot of time to, to, take part in a lot of activities (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I didn't have time for, yeah the only thing--anything that had to do with race didn't really come up except when it came to sororities. And the two sororities that I thought about, one didn't take girls who were dark skinned. Speaker 1: Okay. Which one was that? Speaker 2: AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority]. Speaker 1: AKA. Speaker 2: It has changed, but AKA was pretty much into that. And so I didn't really pledge. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. What was some of the jobs that you worked to get yourself through college? Speaker 2: I went down to Navy Yard [Philadelphia Naval Shipyard, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and helped to rivet airplanes. Speaker 1: Oh okay. You were Rosie the-- Speaker 2: Rosie the Riveter. Speaker 1: Mal [HistoryMaker Malvyn Johnson] the Riveter, (laughter) okay, okay. And-- Speaker 2: And then I did, I worked in a jewelry store as a clerk. I worked at Sears Roebucks [Sears, Roebuck and Co.] and created such a scene they threw me out. And that again, that again (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Do you want--do you want to get into details on that? Speaker 2: --was a racial thing because-- Speaker 1: Tell us about it. Speaker 2: Sears and Roebuck is, was the catalogue house where they, where you ordered things. And my job was to fill the orders when the orders came in either by telephone or by mail. I would get this slip that had what they wanted and then you, you got the order off the shelf and gave it to whoever shipped it. And when I discovered this whole row of white girls answering the telephone and taking the orders I said to my boss, "Why can't I have one of those jobs?" And this man was furious with me. Speaker 1: Just because you asked that question? Speaker 2: It's 'cause I asked the question. How dare I ask the question? And I continued to ask it and said--and he said, "You know, if you want this job don't ask that question then again." I asked it again. He fired me. And that was okay. I found another job. Speaker 1: Good, good. Did--are there any other jobs that you can remember that you took to get yourself through (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I was the receptionist there and then I later during my second or third school year, university year, I became head of the program at YWCA. And many years go by and the lady who was head, Molly Yard, who was head of all the YWCAs in the country came to us one day for some event and she told me that she was giving it up and going to China. That was in 1947 or something, and I never saw her again until one day in Washington [D.C.] I was at a meeting for the Feminist Majority [Feminist Majority Foundation] and she was head of it. And all those years had gone by. And she said she'd never got to China after all. Speaker 1: So--well, our plans do change. Story_ID: 571935 Speaker 1: Now you had won an essay contest so that meant you really had an aptitude for writing-- Speaker 2: For writing. Speaker 1: And that was going to come in handy later, but we, we will get to that. Now, now we, you're going through Temple [Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and how, how are your grades, your struggles, your disappointments? Speaker 2: No, my grades were good and I didn't have too many disappointments. I had to struggle because I was working and going to school, but that worked out very well for me. And basically I had a pretty good growing up life. I, I didn't have any real problems with that. Our neighborhoods were beginning to change. And we, we lived in a, in a neighborhood in North Philadelphia [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] which was changing rapidly. And that's what it was like. I, I didn't have a whole lot of problems with school. Speaker 1: And by this time your mother [Johnnie Reeves Arnold (ph.)] had met Mr. Arnold [Taft Arnold (ph.)]? Speaker 2: Oh yes and she had married him and he was very nice to all of us 'cause she had--along with four children. And-- Speaker 1: And he brought another child into-- Speaker 2: No he didn't bring another child, my mother had the child [Norma Hooser]. She is the child of my mother (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, okay. And-- Speaker 2: And he had never been married. Speaker 1: Okay. What, what were your first impressions of, of that-- Speaker 2: Who is this man (laughter)? Why is he interfering in our lives (laughter)? Speaker 1: (Laughter) I didn't have to say the question did I. (Unclear) stepfather. The--okay back to Temple University, and are there any problems over your getting to your senior year and graduating and so forth? Speaker 2: No not really. I never went to any of the social events. I never had the time. I didn't even go to my high school [Philadelphia High School for Girls, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] prom. Well that was because my mother said I had to go with my brother. Speaker 1: Okay, and you didn't want to go with your brother? Speaker 2: I wasn't going with my brother (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay and, and so now you are in, you're a senior at Temple about to graduate, what are some of the obstacles you feel you may be facing or lack of obstacles? Speaker 2: Well I guess I was worried about getting a job, where am I going to work. Basically it was all I was worried about then. Speaker 1: Right, what year was it then? I mean was it, this was during the war [World War II, WWII] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This was, yeah this was--no this was 1949. Story_ID: 571936 Speaker 1: So we're through the war [World War II, WWII] and you're about to graduate from college. And actually boom times were starting to come about (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right, but I went back to YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association]. Full time. Speaker 1: Okay, so you went back to--upon graduation from Temple [Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] you went back to the YWCA, and what job did you hold there? Speaker 2: Program director. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. And you worked there as the program director. What were some of your experiences there, and is this--are we coming up to the time of your meeting your husband or were there some other experiences that you had (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well my husband I knew since I was twelve years old, he lived around the corner. Speaker 1: Oh, okay, tell us about, about that, you're twelve? Speaker 2: My husband was called Frank. Frank Benjamin Johnson [Frank Johnson (ph.)] was his name. And he was the only boy of a family of five girls. And he was a friend of my brothers [Artie Hooser and Harvey Hooser] and we all played together as young kids. And then he and my brother both went off to war and we corresponded and everything. And he remained in the service after the war was over and of course would come back and forth. And then finally we decided to marry. Speaker 1: Okay, let's--before we go too, too far, you are out of college. Speaker 2: Working (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You're at the YWCA and you are beginning to see Frank Benjamin Johnson, how'd that happen? Speaker 2: But, you know, by then, by then I went to work for, I forgot I worked at the VA [Veterans Administration; U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs] for a while. But YWCA was my main job. Speaker 1: Okay, did you work at both of them or--together or after? Speaker 2: Between college and YWCA I worked at the VA for three or four months and then on to--back on to YWCA. Speaker 1: Okay, now there came a time when you saw Frank Benjamin Johnson-- Speaker 2: And looked at him different then I would look at my brother's friend (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay, and when was that? You were at YWCA-- Speaker 2: By then, yeah. Speaker 1: --as program director and how did that happen, just give us a few details? Speaker 2: Well we all used to go out together. We didn't usually go out in couples, we went out in groups. And we used to go skating together and go down to play basketball together and things like that and you know. And so--it just in a group, you know. And we did enjoy doing those things and we could go dancing if, if we went in a group and we did. And so that's how it all got started. And then he went off to war and he returned, but he didn't get out of the service. He was in the states then--by then. He was, he was at the Battle of the Bulge and all of those pla- and got very many decorations. Speaker 1: Okay. And I'm going to ask you about his war service also, but there did come a time when he came back to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], was he stationed in Philadelphia? Speaker 2: No, he was stationed in, in Hampton, Virginia. There was a (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Hampton Roads [Langley Field; Langley Air Force Base, Virginia]. Speaker 2: Yeah, I forgot the name of that base, but he was stationed in Hampton so he was able to come home pretty regularly. Story_ID: 571937 Speaker 1: Let's talk about Frank Benjamin Johnson's [Frank Johnson (ph.)] service because I know it was very distinguished. Speaker 2: Well he went to, he went to, Central High [Central High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] was his school. And then he went to Temple [Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] for a couple of years and then we--and then he got drafted. Speaker 1: Okay and he went into the [U.S.] Army, he was drafted into the Army? Speaker 2: In the Ar- it was called the Army Air Force [sic. U.S. Army Air Corps] in those days (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, the Army Air Force. Speaker 2: And then when they separated it was the [U.S.] Air Force he went in. Speaker 1: And what were some of the--his battles? Speaker 2: He was in France, he was in England, and he was in Germany near the end of the war, and he was at that famous Battle of the Bulge because he got decorated for it by the French government, the Croix de guerre, Croix de gras [sic.], he got that, that decoration. Speaker 1: War cross. Okay. And was he wounded or anything or was he lucky enough? Speaker 2: No he wasn't, he wasn't wounded, but he did come away from Vietnam with some pretty bad--and it wasn't wounded, it was high blood pressure is what killed him. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Now after World War II [WWII] he came back to the states? Speaker 2: To the states and then I left the YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association] and moved to California with him 'til the Korean War came along. And then I came back home and he went to Korea. Speaker 1: Okay. And what was service like for him over there (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well it got better because in Korea, if you recall, that was when Truman [President Harry S. Truman] made them integrate the services [U.S. Armed Forces]. Speaker 1: Right, 1948. Speaker 2: Yeah, and then he came back and was stationed at, at, in San Rafael [California] at that base [Hamilton Air Force Base, California] and I went back to California. And then we went overseas. Speaker 1: Okay, now as a war bride and you came back from California when he went to Korea, did you come back and live with your parents [Johnnie Reeves Arnold (ph.) and Johnson's stepfather, Taft Arnold (ph.)] or did you live-- Speaker 2: Lived with my parents and worked again. And this time, I went back to YWCA. Speaker 1: Oh, okay, all right. And at the end of the Korean War, Frank was stationed in San Rafael and you went back out to California? Speaker 2: Went back to California, this time to Travis Air Force Base which was down at, in Napa Valley, Fairfield, California. Speaker 1: What was, I've been to San Rafael. When the Ku Klux Klan [KKK] decided to march (laughter) outside my hotel, I decided they didn't need me. Speaker 2: But in San--in San Rafael I have a different kind of story. Speaker 1: Okay, let's hear it. Speaker 2: We were having a pretty hard time because it was quite expensive to live in San Rafael. So I said to Frank here's what I'll do, I'll find a job. And one day he came home and said that he had overheard his commanding officer talking about this lady who was looking for a housekeeper. And so I said, "Frank, I don't know anything about housekeeping," and he said, "But the job pays with a house and, and a car," and I said, "I'll take the job." So we go out to live in San Rafael in this beautiful home on a high hill. Now I don't know the first thing about cooking, because my mother was queen in the kitchen and not me. And so I went and took our last money and bought a cookbook and hid the cookbook in the kitchen, and whatever she asked for I'd go pretend I had to go to bathroom. She thought that I had a bladder problem. And I would go in there and read the book and put, copy on a little piece of paper, put it in my apron pocket and go back and cook that sucker. (Laughter) Well, it finally backfired on me. One day she came in and flung this bag on the table and in it were these green things that I'd never seen in my life. So I call up Frank and describe 'em to him and he goes to the library on the base, looks up this vegetable and turns out to be a, what do you call 'em, oh I know it just as well. Speaker 1: Not kale or turnip greens (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No it was, it was, you know, it's shaped just like that (gesture). Speaker 1: Artichokes. Speaker 2: Artichoke. It was an artichoke. So I looked it up in the book and it said you're supposed to broil it and put the butter and, and they dipped it in butter, so I did that and she thought I did a wonderful job on this. But that almost stumped me, these artichokes (laughter). A poor girl from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] never saw any artichokes (laughter) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Unclear). Story_ID: 571938 Speaker 1: Now the artichokes that you prepared through this recipe that Frank [Frank Johnson (ph.)], your husband, had, had found (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well see he had told me what it was, what kind of vegetable it was after I described it. Then I could look it up in my cookbook. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: See, after I knew the name of this thing, but I was in trouble because she just sort of flung 'em on the table and said, "Let's have these for dinner." And these meant nothing to me. Speaker 1: (Laughter) A kid from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] where artichokes never got into that neighborhood. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Never got into my neighborhood. Speaker 1: The, the, after you cooked the artichokes now and served them, did she respond with a compliment? Speaker 2: Oh yes, always, and her guests would come back in the kitchen and say nice things to me. And then meanwhile Frank was being the bartender. Speaker 1: And let's hear about that, how did he do as a bartender? Speaker 2: He knew nothing about tending a bar. Speaker 1: Did he drink? Speaker 2: Well it was in the back of my book, how to mix. For instance if you wanted to mix a cocktail it said. I got a good book, you know, it was all the money we had left. When we moved up there the first day I said, "We've got to get this book." So he would look in the--in the book too. I guess she thought both of us had bladder problems. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: And, and then he would mix the drinks and he would take 'em out on a tray and serve them. But when he mixed them, he would test 'em, not that he knew what it was supposed to taste like, I'm sure or if somebody said they wanted a vodka and tonic or they wanted a martini. And then he would sip on it to see if it was right and then serve it. Well by the time he got going on that he would be drunker than a fool trying to taste these drinks. And so that's the way we, we did that. Speaker 1: And Frank was a nondrinker you say? Speaker 2: He's a nondrinker. I was a--I was a housekeeper and he was the butler. Speaker 1: That's wonderful, that's wonderful and they loved your services? Speaker 2: Loved them so 'til the commanding general of the [U.S.] Air Force base wanted-- Speaker 1: Travis Air Force Base [California]? Speaker 2: No this wasn't Travis, it was in San Rafael [California]. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: This since before we ever got to Travis, this was San Rafael. And I'm trying to think of the name, Hamilton Air Force Base [California], Hamilton Air Force Base is what it was. And we stayed there for a number of years. Speaker 1: Okay. Now there was an incident about a birthday cake also? Speaker 2: Oh the birthday cake. One of the flyers, he was the ace flyer from, from Korea [Korean War] I guess, Korea. And he had--when yo- when you down five enemy planes you became the ace, and this man was the ace. And he had a birthday and she was giving him the birthday party. And so she asked me to make a cake and I thought I've never made a cake in my whole life. So I got out the cookbook, the good old cookbook and it told me what to do, but the cake, well when it came down to icing the cake I didn't realize you had to leave the cake get cold before you put the icing on it. And I started icing it and broke off an end of the cake. Well out of sheer desperation I didn't know what to do, so I got some scotch tape and taped it together and covered it with icing. So, when I delivered the birthday cake with the candles and everything on it, I stayed in the room at the table and cut it myself and every time they--anybody else tried to touch it I would move it around and so they never got to do--and now I took it away when I thought everybody had one piece, that's all they got 'cause-- Speaker 1: You took it back to the kitchen so they couldn't explore it more? Speaker 2: Yeah 'cause the rest of it was scotch tape. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Did you get compliments on the cake? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, of course. Listen, I was cooking my head off. Speaker 1: And the ace enjoyed his birthday (laughter)? Speaker 2: (Laughter) The ace enjoyed his birthday. Story_ID: 571939 Speaker 1: You told us about your having met a number of very famous celebrities while you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Because she loved to entertain. And, and this woman was extremely wealthy, Mrs. Travis [ph.] was her name. And she-- Speaker 1: She was from that Shell Oil [Shell Oil Company] family, it that it? Speaker 2: She was the Shell Oil daughter. They had--she and one son who took his airplane and flew it into the side of the mountain by mistake. And so she was the only child left to that family. And she didn't have children. She finally adopted a little girl, but she didn't have any children. And, and she entertained a lot. She had this beautiful home up on top of a high hill in, in San Rafael [California]. And she entertained a lot, and she'd go out to various nightclubs and things and bring the entertainment home with her (laughter). And so she had Louis Armstrong for dinner and a couple of his people. And that's how I first met him and he was so nice. He came back in the kitchen and talked to me and asked me my name and everything. Speaker 1: And how did he enjoy your meals? He didn't come back in the kitchen and discover anything did he (laughter)? Speaker 2: No he didn't disc- nobody discovered. I didn't let anybody get into that. But yeah, he enjoyed it and everything and thanked me for it and everything. Speaker 1: And how about Della Reese [HistoryMaker Della Reese-Lett], how did you meet her? Speaker 2: Well, she was one of the people that, that she invited up there and this--for dinner. And, and she always kept inviting people for dinner and they would come and everybody would have a good time. And then there was a drummer, it wasn't Hugh Masekela, it was another drummer. And then her friends-- Speaker 1: Max Roach? Speaker 2: --would get out the drums, another set of drums and bang on 'em half the night. So I took the drums and hid 'em. They never knew what happened to the drums. Speaker 1: (Laughter) They lost their drums. Speaker 2: The drums went on and on all night long 'til broad daylight. And I thought now is the time to get rid of those drums. Speaker 1: And so that, that's what you-- Speaker 2: And she kept saying, "I wonder what happened to the drums?" And I didn't have the faintest idea. Speaker 1: And, and what was Della Reese like when, when you met her? Was she (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She was very nice. But the years go by and I meet her again, and this time she was married to this man who was a wife beater. And that was under another circumstance after Frank [Frank Johnson (ph.)] had died and I had another boyfriend who was a musician. Speaker 1: Okay, we will work our way up to that on, on there. So, continuing, in all of these affairs, these dinners, would Frank serve as bartender, at most of them? Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 571940 Speaker 1: Are there any more details that I'm missing on your-- Speaker 2: Well finally Frank [Frank Johnson (ph.)] got reassigned to England and so we had to move. Speaker 1: Okay, what part of England did you move to? Speaker 2: We moved to Greenham Common Air Force Base [Royal Air Force Greenham Common] which is in Reading, England right outside or thirty miles out of London [England]. Speaker 1: Um-hm, okay. And what was life like there? Speaker 2: I taught school there-- Speaker 1: Ah, okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) on the base. And we had a house in Reading and he was stationed at the [U.S.] Air Force base, but they needed a elementary school teacher. So I taught school right there on the base. Speaker 1: What year are we talking about you were there? Speaker 2: Oh I think it was '59 [1959]. Might have been, might have been '54 [1954] to '59 [1959]. We stayed there four years. Speaker 1: Okay. And what was life like for you there? Did you run into any incidents, racial incidents there or were the people generally (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No it was great there and what amazed me though was that, you know, all the civil rights things were begi- beginning to build up. And people would say to me, "Aren't you glad you're in England 'cause you could go to school anywhere, why don't you move here." And I couldn't make them understand that I could go to school anywhere in Pennsylvania in, in the North. They didn't--they never understood that. Speaker 1: They thought the entire U.S. was Mississippi? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And there was this, this, what was that woman's name who wanted to go to Alabama State [sic. University of Alabama, Tuscaloosa, Alabama]. Speaker 1: Alabama State? Speaker 2: Lorene, Lorraine [sic. Vivian Malone Jones] or something like that. It was very much played up in Europe. But I enjoyed my stay in, in England because we got a chance to see the rest of Europe while we were there. On holidays we would do that, and I really enjoyed that. Speaker 1: Okay. And the Civil Rights Movement was beginning in the U.S.? Speaker 2: It was--it was beginning then. Speaker 1: Did any of that carry over to incidents there in Europe or in England? Speaker 2: No, most people in Europe were just sort of observing it and shaking their heads and claiming that they were all that liberal and everything. But as the years g- went by, I heard other stories that the French weren't all that great with black people. And there were some problems in Birmingham [England], that's where most of the people who came from Africa settle. Speaker 1: Birmingham? Speaker 2: In northern, northern England. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: The--so England was beginning to have problems at that time also (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, from, from people who were coming from the islands and, and people were look--seeking their independence like Jamaica and places like that. And people who were coming from, you know, England was--had more colonialism than any other country in the world and a lot of it was in places like Kenya and Nigeria, places like that. Story_ID: 571941 Speaker 1: At the end of this--Frank's [Frank Johnson (ph.)] tour there in England, whe- what, what brought you back to the states? Speaker 2: Well the end of his tour we went back and this time to California, but this time to Travis Air Force Base [California]. And then from there, we went to Loring Air Force Base in Maine. From there we went to Sandia Air Force Base [Kirtland Air Force Base] in Albuquerque [New Mexico]. And then went to Wyoming, Cheyenne, Wyoming. I forgot the name of the base [Francis E. Warren Air Force Base]. But--and from there we went to Westover Air Force Base [Westover Air Reserve Base, Massachusetts], that's where he died. Speaker 1: Oh, in Westover in Massachusetts? Speaker 2: And--but between that, he went back overseas to Vietnam and then came back and that's when he died. I went home in between those times. Speaker 1: Okay, did you go back and you stayed with your mother [Johnnie Reeves Arnold (ph.)]? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Where else (laughter)? Speaker 1: That was a great--that was a great and of course you still have ties to the house there. Tell us what happened there in Westover, you said that was how he died? Speaker 2: Westover Air Force Base, you know, he was in--by then in the Air Police [U.S. Air Force Security Forces]. But he began to, to have headaches and things like that, and when they checked up on medical they found that his pressure was extra high. And it just got, went from bad to worse and then he just keeled over into a coma and, and died there. And they sent a whole contention of officers to escort me home with the body. And we had a military funeral in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. And he was buried in the military cemetery [Beverly National Cemetery] in Beverly, New Jersey. Speaker 1: That was right. That must've been a very traumatic-- Speaker 2: That was a very traumatic time for me. Um-hm. Speaker 1: And what was--what were your first feelings of when? Speaker 2: Well I, I didn't know exactly what to do, because he was a man who took care of me. In other words, I didn't know how to drive a car. I didn't have to go grocery shopping. I didn't have to do anything, but he would transport me to school, I was teaching by then and come back and get me. Get off from his job and come and get me since he was in charge. So that left me very destitute, I didn't know what to do. And I was in, living in Massachusetts 'cause Westover Air Force Base is in Massachusetts and, and working. And so I--I'd decided to stay on and, but (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Teaching school? Speaker 2: Yeah but it began to get harder and harder. Story_ID: 571942 Speaker 1: And then the business with the car, I just got the book out and went out in--set my clock for three o'clock in the morning and went out and taught myself to drive up and down the streets since there was nobody on the street. And then finally I went down and got the learner's book. You didn't have to have a permit in Massachusetts, you're just supposed to have a licensed driver with you. I had no licensed driver. So I drove in the middle--from three o'clock in the morning 'til about five, and then I would figure this whole car business out. Went down to take my test and immediately the, the tester said, "Where is your experienced driver." And I said, "Oh you know he's around the corner. He's my neighbor and he's around the corner, but he'll be back." And he sort of sat there and I said, "Why don't we just go 'cause I know you're busy." So we went out and took the test and I passed the test. And again he asked me about my licensed driver and I said, "I'll go get him, I know you're busy," and I thanked the man, got in my car and went home. That Saturday I decided to go to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] to visit the family and I couldn't find my way out of the city. So I never got out of the city that day (laughter) to visit the family. Speaker 2: How long did you drive around (laughter)? Speaker 1: Around for hours trying just to of-- Speaker 2: On base or off base [Westover Air Reserve Base, Massachusetts]? Speaker 1: No, I'm now out in the city trying to get out of the city to go home to Philadelphia thinking that I could drive to Philadelphia. Couldn't do that. But finally I worked it out, in the next couple of weeks I worked it out. Speaker 2: Did you ever learn to drive through Boston [Massachusetts] to get down to Philadelphia? Speaker 1: The hardest part was getting through the Holland Tunnel on--in New York [New York]. That frightened me. Other than that I did all right. And I took my neighbor with me one weekend and when we got to the Holland--the first time I went, we were driving through and she said, "Oh you're doing that very well." I said, "Yes this is the first time I ever did it (laughter)." Scared her to death, but it worked out. Speaker 2: Jump out of the car. Were there--any other things that, because it was a great transition here (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh it was a great transition. Speaker 2: So you had to learn not only to drive, but to do a number of other things? Speaker 1: But to take care of myself, yes I did. So while I wa- I remained in Massachusetts and while I was there I went to a nightclub with a friend one time. This was weeks after my husband [Frank Johnson (ph.)] had died, months after I guess, and there playing on the stage was my neighbor from Philadelphia whom I knew was a, an entertainer, but I hadn't seen him since we were teenagers. And-- Speaker 2: Okay, do you remember the name? Speaker 1: Oh yeah, Buddy Hawkins and Do Re Mi Trio. And so we became friends and he, he really befriended me, was very nice to me and we remained friends until he died. And by that time, I had moved back to Philadelphia and through that friendship I finally ended up in Washington [D.C.]. And I used to see him in my travels through Chicago [Illinois] or California or wherever I was traveling for my job. Story_ID: 571943 Speaker 1: 'Cause this is a very important point in your life. You're teaching school up at Westover [Westover Air Reserve Base, Massachusetts] and now you feel that the best thing to do is to come back to-- Speaker 2: To Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) to Philadelphia. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And there in Philadelphia something happened and I know what it is, but I won't give-- Speaker 2: Yeah, that's when I started my career in-- Speaker 1: In journalism, right? Speaker 2: Well, dur- before that time I went, I got this job before I got back to Philadelphia. I came down on a weekend or something, or a holiday or something and got this job at The Philadelphia Inquirer. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. So you were living in Westover when you got the job at The Philadelphia Inquirer? Speaker 2: Yeah, I had already made plans to move, but I wanted to come down and find a job before I moved back. I didn't wanna be without a job. And so I, I got this job at The Inquirer. Speaker 1: And what were you doing? Speaker 2: I was gonna be assistant to, to an editor. I had to write things, which was all right with me and I think it was because I had majored in English that they, that they took me on. And so I moved back to Philadelphia and went back home again (laughter). Speaker 1: What was your job, assistant to the editor, you did proof, proofreading? Speaker 2: Proofreading and did some writing and things like that. And then meanwhile, I was totally involved with the Civil Rights Movement. And I had joined a group that was assisting Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and he would come up and we would do things in the, in the movement. And so I was totally involved in that. I left The Inquirer to head up a program called North City Congress in Philadelphia that worked directly on civil rights. And I stayed there a year. Speaker 1: Let's not skip over the Martin Luther King era too fast. Speaker 2: Well this was Martin Luther King era when I was working at the North City Congress. Speaker 1: Okay, so you, as assistant to the editor, you did not do any civil rights work, it was only when you left? Speaker 2: Not in the paper I didn't. And a matter of fact, the paper was unhappy when I came down to the march [March on Washington]. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: But in any case, I worked in the--in the Civil Rights Movement for a long time. Speaker 1: Okay, when you say you came down to the march, which march are you--the one in Washington [D.C.]? Speaker 2: The one in Washington. Speaker 1: Okay, tell us how, how that happened. I mean you, you are now assistant to the editor (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now in, in--when I'm not, when I'm not on my job I'm busy in some committee or other with civil rights and things, and working with various groups and things like that. I even put together a play on Emmett Till. And I played the--we did that in some churches to make some money and I played the mother in the, in the Emmett Till thing, you know. Speaker 1: Ms. Till [Mamie Till], okay. And--but you're still at The Philadelphia Inquirer? Speaker 2: Yeah and I'm still working on the side doing my civil rights (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The Civil Rights Movement is building. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And they're beginning to plan for the March on Washington. Okay. There are a number of notable figures that probably come through there. I don't know if they came through Philadelphia (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, Philadelphia was one of the main gathering places and I was totally involved in all of that. And the Ford Foundation [New York, New York] paid my salary that first year and then I had to raise my salary for the second year. And I got the Ringling Brothers and Barnum and Bailey Circus [Ringling Bros. and Barnum and Bailey Circus] to come to Philadelphia. Story_ID: 571944 Speaker 1: Now you had left The Inquirer [The Philadelphia Inquirer], okay. But the March on Washington, because I wasn't in this country at that time, I wanted to get a timeline on there. The march on--first March on Washington led by Reverend Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and Bayard Rustin and a number of--the real person who really put that together was--did--was there any interaction between your group or yourself with, with that group or Bayard Rustin or-- Speaker 2: Oh yes. How I met Bayard Rustin and, and Martin Luther King was through Bob McGlotten [Robert M. McGlotten] who headed AFL-CIO [American Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial Organizations] in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. And we were good friends and it is he who encouraged me to leave The Inquirer and go work for the Civil Rights Movement. And that's how I got there, and Ford Foundation [New York, New York] provided (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And Bob was the culprit at that time. Speaker 2: Yeah. And the, the Ford Foundation paid that first year's salary. And I had to raise the second year salary and I wasn't too sure how I was gonna do that until I realized that I did have a connection with Barnum and Bailey Circus [Ringling Bros. and Barnum and Bailey Circus]. Speaker 1: Okay and your stepfather [Taft Arnold (ph.)] is the connection for you also. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah. Speaker 1: So when you left The Philadelphia Inquirer and the name of the group was the North-- Speaker 2: North City Congress. Speaker 1: North City Congress. Speaker 2: People like Delores Tucker was there and all those kind of people. Speaker 1: All right, this is what the early days with C. Delores Tucker and, and others? Speaker 2: And then I was busy helping her. You know that I managed her campaign to become secretary of state [secretary of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania], you knew that. Speaker 1: Oh no, I didn't. I did not know. But I wanted to get your preparation that you were doing to get people down to the March on Washington. Let's go now to the-- Speaker 2: That North City Congress was a gathering place for various organizations, civil rights organizations, hundreds of 'em that were in Philadelphia, made up of various people. People who were interested in housing and, you know, violence, and child care and all those kind of things. It was an umbrella organization. Speaker 1: I'm gonna bring up several names, Cecil Moore [Cecil B. Moore]-- Speaker 2: I was-- Speaker 1: Go ahead. Speaker 2: Delores and I were co-chairs of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] chapter there and Cecil Moore took it away from us. Speaker 1: Okay. There were other civil rights, Philadelphia civil rights heroes and you were preparing for that March on Washington? Speaker 2: Preparing for that march and was very much connected with Sam Evans [Samuel L. Evans] and people like that. Speaker 1: Okay. Now let's--your best recollections of going down to Washington [D.C.] for that historic march (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well there was buses, we went on buses and I don't remember who organized the buses. I guess I worked in that too. And, and we all went on these buses down, and the buses left at a certain time that evening and we came back the same day. We didn't try for hotels or anything, we didn't have that kind of money. Speaker 1: Right. Okay. And obviously the march was a huge success. Speaker 2: The most successful thing you ever saw (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And shook America. Speaker 2: And shook America. And--but the organization that went on around the country was unbelievable and people were organizing and working on it with no money and whatever resources they could get their hands on. And Martin Luther King would come up and encourage us, and you know, and have these little meetings that we would be at and trying to help us get everything going. Speaker 1: Are there any memorable meetings with Martin Luther King that you can remember or Roy Wilkins or any of the luminaries of, of the day? Speaker 2: Well yeah, they would keep us up half the night for one thing. And we all were young and enthusiastic and glad to be doing all of this you know. And trying to figure out ways to raise money and everything, and then--then before the evening was over, somebody would go out and get beer and Martin would say, "Don't give Mal [HistoryMaker Malvyn Johnson] any beer 'cause she does--she thinks that's a peasant drink." Speaker 1: (Laughter). Story_ID: 571945 Speaker 1: How long were, were you at the North City Congress? Speaker 2: Two years. Speaker 1: Two, two years, okay. Speaker 2: 'Cause I raised, Ford [Ford Foundation, New York, New York] gave me the money for the first year and the second year I raised the money from--and, but then I got this offer from the TV station so that's what started my TV life (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Okay, now you received an offer from what station? Speaker 2: I didn't receive the offer, I was thinking about not staying on at North City Congress because of the money. I needed to, to continue with a salary. And somebody told me that they were looking for somebody who had community experience. I left out the part that I went back to school in a, in a--over at Westover [Westover Air Reserve Base, Massachusetts] and got a degree in intergroup relations and community dynamics. Speaker 1: Ah, okay, okay, great, great. So when you came down you had that degree and now they're looking for somebody? Speaker 2: In comm- somebody that could deal with community. Well that's what all I was dealing with at North City Congress was people in the community. And so I went down for the interview and this man almost fell off his chair. Speaker 1: What station was it? Speaker 2: WKBS [WKBS-TV, Burlington, New Jersey]. Kaiser Broadcasting [Kaiser Broadcasting Corporation]. And, and he was very frank with me. He interviewed me and he said, "You have wonderful credentials, but I can't hire you." And so I said thank you and went home. Well by the time I got home the phone was ringing and this man begged me, literally begged me to come back. He told me that the boss, the general manager of the station told him that if he didn't get me back there he was fired. How dare he think that he couldn't hire a black person. So I was the only black person in that station until [HistoryMaker] Jim Vance came. Speaker 1: Oh, okay, okay. And, and the year now that we are talking about is, was that 1964? Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-four [1964]. Speaker 1: Okay and what was your job there at WKBS? Speaker 2: Director of community affairs at first and that was a very interesting job because I was called the cash for trash girl. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Cash for trash. Okay. Speaker 2: Here's what that meant. That meant that I had to organize women's organizations, mostly women's organizations but they would take any kind who would be willing to buy a product, turn the labels into me and I'd give them money. They could buy things like draperies for their synagogues or wheelchairs for some sick person or whatever they wanted to do with the money. But I got hundreds, eight hundred organizations to participate and in those days you--they advertised cigarettes over the TV so they could save the cigarette pack. They could take the label off a can of coffee, they could take the label off a can of cream or milk or something and turn them into me, and for all the labels. And so they'd get their whole chapters or committees to do nothing but that work. And there was one woman I always will remember her, she brought this great huge bundle of, of labels and she called me later and asked me if I thought her husband's pants were in there. 'Cause she had been repairing the pants and the pants disappeared. I didn't want her to know that I didn't count that stuff, I got that stuff out of the station as fast as I could. Mayflower, Mayflower vans [Aero Mayflower Transit Company] took it away and--for in exchange for advertising, free advertising on TV. And then at the end of the period, we would have a big party and present this money, these checks to these people, they loved it. Speaker 1: And that was a popular program. Speaker 2: (Laughter) That was a popular program. And so that's what I did. And then I began to do--they wanted me to do a show and it was called 'Let's Talk About It.' So I did a show on, on all kinds of issues, not necessarily women's issues, but any kind of issue that came up. And that's how I met Arlen Specter and people like that. I interviewed those kind of people. Speaker 1: The, there came a time, I guess, when people like Jim Vance came, got out of college (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well they were looking for--they were, now they were big in the news and they were looking for somebody to anchor the news. And it wasn't I who found him, somebody else found him. He was teaching and he was a teacher. Speaker 1: Oh, a teacher in the Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] school system? Speaker 2: Yes, he went to Cheyney [Cheyney State College; Cheyney University of Pennsylvania, Cheyney, Pennsylvania], was his school (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right. Right. Speaker 2: And we became, we're still friends to this day. Story_ID: 571946 Speaker 1: There are a number of things Mal Johnson [HistoryMaker Malvyn Johnson] that I want to talk to you about, one of the things is, when you were hired at WKBS Television [WKBS-TV] in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] you were hired as sort of a co-host of a television show. There was another person who was hired with you of a different persuasion. Tell us about it (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was--it was very easy for me to recognize what they were doing. When he called me back to the station obviously it was time when various stations were trying to be sure they had somebody of color on the staff. And that was why the general manager made this man call me back. He was the program manager. And when he called me back, he offered me the job and offered me the salary, and then he said, "By the way we're gonna have somebody work with you." He was trying to make it sound like this was just an ordinary thing to do. And it wasn't long, no more than two or three days after I started that I recognized what the problem was. Speaker 1: What was the problem (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And the problem was he was a little bit nervous of having a black person in charge of something. And so he brought this, this woman in whom I didn't know before and it, it only took me a few days to realize that she was not planning to do any work, that I was to be the workhorse and she was to be the showgirl. That was not ever going to sit well with me. So I did put up with it for a while and then I began to realize that I needed to do something about solving this situation. And I spoke with Bob McGlotten [Robert M. McGlotten] about it 'cause I was concerned. I liked the job and everything and liked the idea of working for television. And so he said go in and, and tell your boss about this and, and don't back down. And I did. And the minute I told the story, before I could even get most of the story out about what she did, he said, "I was wondering how long you were gonna put up with that." And he fired her on the spot as she walked in the door. She walked in the door about ten minutes after I had this conversation. And she just went off like a fishwife. She just scr- and he said to her, "You either leave quietly or I will blackball you in--on any television in this country. You'll never get another job." And she left, I never saw her again to this day. Speaker 1: So you were satisfied with, with that. Speaker 2: I was perfectly satisfied with it. I remember she--Pearl Buck [Pearl S. Buck] had invited me out to her home, and she knew about this and she arrived uninvited. And Pearl Buck and I were very good friends, and, 'cause I had known her a long time. You remember the author, Pearl Buck. Speaker 1: Absolutely, I wanna find out about that relationship and how that developed. But go ahead, you where gonna tell the story. Speaker 2: And so from then on I did the job myself and was head of my department and did the program myself and wrote a column on the side. Speaker 1: Okay you wrote a column on the side for The Philadelphia Tribune? Speaker 2: The Philadelphia Tribune. Speaker 1: How did you happen to get that-- Speaker 2: Somebody invited me to do it. I don't remember who the editor was, but somebody invited me to do this and it went on for a long, long time. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 571947 Speaker 1: And Pearl Buck [Pearl S. Buck], you said was a personal friend (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The author, Pearl Buck. Speaker 1: How did that relationship begin and develop? Speaker 2: She was doing a project if I recall and somebody took me to meet her and her assistant. She always had two or three very young men around. Speaker 1: What year are we talking about now (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And then--she did, she worked on children. It was around 1964, '63 [1963]. I met her before I went to the station [WKBS-TV, Burlington, New Jersey] and she was very kind to me. And she would (background noise) invite me out to her house for Christmas and Thanksgiving, and everything. And she always had wonderful stories to tell. But she had a, a house in the city [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], as well as out in Bucks County [Pennsylvania], is where she had her estate. And I would go out there and take my young nephews and nieces to meet this lady 'cause she was a grand woman, and she loved children. And she had an adoption service that I used to try to advertise and do something with her on television about it. And that's how we first became really good friends. And I have several of her books that she's autographed for me. And I knew her for a long time until she died. Speaker 1: Okay, remember what year she died? Speaker 2: She came to see me in Washington [D.C.] after I was living at the Watergate [Watergate Complex; Watergate Hotel, Washington, D.C.] because her Rolls-Royce broke down and she didn't want anybody to know it, a Rolls-Royce breaking down. And did you know that company sends a closed-in truck to pick up their cars. They don't let people see them. Speaker 1: Them broke- broken down. That's very (unclear). Let's-- Speaker 2: But she visited me two or three times at the Watergate. Story_ID: 571948 Speaker 1: There came a time when [HistoryMaker] Jim Vance, who was the anchor with the NBC affiliate here in Washington, D.C., left Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] to come to Washington? Speaker 2: Well he was working as the anchor at WKBS [WKBS-TV, Burlington, New Jersey] by then. And he got a--obviously somebody had, had saw him on TV and they invited him to go to work there. Well Jim didn't really want to leave his family, his mother, with whom he was living. So he came in my office to talk to me about this. And I said to him, "You know, I don't count any fools among my friends, you must take this job." So he did. And then three months later I got an offer and I called him up and said, "What do you think?" And he said, "I don't count any fools among my friends (laughter)." So we both ended up in Washington. Speaker 1: And tell us about the offer that you received? Speaker 2: I was--the, the first person that hired me turned out to be a good friend. He was the man who was, who had originally been on the soap operas and he turned out to be a good friend to me and he said that I should join the American Women in Radio and Television [Alliance for Women in Media], an organization I had never heard of. And he paid my, my membership for it and I joined it and got totally involved in it and ended up being the president of that chapter in Philadelphia and then ended up being on the national board of directors. And one weekend we were to have the board meeting in Washington. So I traveled down to Washington to the board meeting and when I arrived, there sat this only man on the board. I didn't know the board had a man. It turned out to be the president and CEO of Cox Broadcasting [Cox Broadcasting Corporation; Cox Communications, Inc.] headquartered in Atlanta [Georgia]. And we talked and discussed things and finally he invited me to lunch. And this dummy said, "Well I have these other ladies I'm going to lunch with." He said, "Well I'll take them too." So we all went to lunch and I sat near him and he said to me, you ought to come to Atlanta sometime and I very politely said that I had been there one or two times, but I didn't know Atlanta at all and that maybe I would sometime. Well the next day back in Philadelphia, in my office that Monday, I get this telephone call from him and he said he'd like me to come and visit. So I said, "Well maybe I will." And he said, "Let me send you a ticket and if you really decide not to go then you can just send the ticket back." So when I got the ticket I went into the office of the same general manager and told him and he says, "Let me tell you who this man is." And so he said that he not only taught Truman [President Harry S. Truman] to speak, he was the man who put together the fireside chats for Roosevelt [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt]. And he set all of that up and then he became Mr. Democrat [sic.] because he was running the democratic conventions [Democratic National Convention] and everything (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) His name was? Speaker 2: J. Leonard Reinsch. And, and everybody knew him in the broadcasting industry and that I should go 'cause he wants to hire you. So I made the arrangements and went, and that was, was my story. Speaker 1: Okay, and that year was 19-? Speaker 2: Sixty-nine [1969]. Speaker 1: And they hired you at Cox? Speaker 2: No, they tried to hire me and I said that I didn't particularly want to move to Atlanta, didn't know a thing about Atlanta anyway, except that I knew Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and that was only one or two trips. And so I went back to, to Philadelphia and they kept after me for a couple of weeks and finally they asked me what salary would I take. Well I haven't the faintest idea. So I called up Barbara Walters and asked her what I ought to do. And she said, "You ask for twice the amount you're--two and a half times the amount that you are making now and you accept two times that much. And don't--and make 'em put it in writing before you accept." And so I did that and they sent me a telegram with it in write. Speaker 1: Now let's--and so you were hired? Speaker 2: I was hired, but then I said I didn't want to move to Atlanta and they said, "Don't worry, we have an office in Washington." So I guess there comes another story because I went--they had setup the appointment and I went to Washington and met the bureau chief who looked at me as if I were crazy and didn't even consider it. So I came back home and called Atlanta and said those people don't wanna be bothered with me in, in, in Washington. And he said I want you to go back next week. When I went back next week, everybody was falling on their knees to get me (laughter). And that's how it started. And they trained me to be a White House correspondent. Speaker 1: And the date we are looking at, do you remember? Speaker 2: Yes, March the 3rd, 1969. Story_ID: 571949 Speaker 1: Apparently you were developing a host of very influential national friends. Tell us about Barbara Walters, you had not mentioned that before? Speaker 2: Well I became a head of, of AWRT Foundation [American Women in Radio and Television Foundation]. Speaker 1: And the American Women-- Speaker 2: In Radio and Television [American Women in Radio and Television; Alliance for Women in Media]. And of course Barbara Walters was always a member long before I was and I got to know her that way. And, and I, you know, and I was asking her for her advice. She knew me quite well and she gave me that advice. And she said that I should not turn that job down [with Cox Broadcasting Corporation; Cox Communications, Inc.], but I should be careful about what my salary would be. And of course by that time, wasn't she after the million dollars? Yeah, and so she knew what she was talking about, it worked. All I did was, it was quoted that two and a half times the salary I was getting and then they made a counteroffer of two times and that's what I was after. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, I don't know whether we got the full name of your organization. I know (unclear), but-- Speaker 2: Which one (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) would you just give us the name of your organization, you were the president of the Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] chapter? Speaker 2: Of American Women in Radio and Television. Speaker 1: And we may have gotten it, but I just wanted to be sure that I had that on tape. Story_ID: 571950 Speaker 1: So in March of 1969, you moved to Washington, D.C. (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Moved to Washington. And there's where it started. And then that's when I killed a senator. Speaker 1: Okay, let's (laughter) talk about that? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, after I got to Washington I needed to be trained because I had never been a reporter. So they took me up to Capitol Hill [Washington, D.C.] and assigned a--I was the only woman reporter there and of course, you know, the only black reporter in, in that office and remained so until the time I left twenty-seven years later. That says something in itself. Speaker 1: Ab- absolutely. Speaker 2: Absolutely. So this reporter took me up to the Hill to introduce me to the senators and congressmen that I would be covering. I would be covering only those from the states where, where Cox [Cox Broadcasting Corporation; Cox Communications, Inc.] was located and that was in Los Angeles [California]; San Francisco [California]; Chicago [Illinois]; Ohio, Dayton--Dayton, Ohio; Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania; Charlotte, North Carolina; and Atlanta [Georgia] and Florida, Orlando [Florida]. And so I had to meet each one of them and let them know that I would be working for them. It went fairly well until I arrived at Senator Richard Russell's [Richard B. Russell, Jr.] office who was, you know, the great segregationist of our times. And first thing out of his mouth was, "There's no women's news up here." This what he said to me right away, the minute they introduced me. And I said, "I'm here to report women's news, I'm here to report whatever news there is, particularly out of your office." And he said, "Well I swear." So then I left the office to go to the next appointment and he fell over with a heart attack. And they took him up to Walter Reed [Walter Reed Army Medical Center; Walter Reed National Military Medical Center, Washington, D.C.], to the hospital where he remained two or three weeks. And then my bureau chief said I must go up to the hospital and find out how the senator is doing and have him bring greetings to the people in, in Atlanta. So I go up to, to Walter Reed and he says to me, "Oh are you still working here?" And I said, "Yes I am." And he did the interview and he told the people that he would be back in his office in another week and that he would be coming to Georgia very soon. And so I left there and before I could get back with the tape, he fell over dead. Killed the man. Speaker 1: Yeah, you did it, (laughter) you did it. Speaker 2: And so my job was to cover his funeral. So I had the whole bit. Speaker 1: Right you had the interview, and now you gonna have the tape to accompany his funeral (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That I accompany--I accompanied him to Georgia. I did first the laying-- Speaker 1: You had a scoop. Speaker 2: --the laying out in the--yes because Cox meanwhile had made arrangements with his family that they would have the, all the rights and then they sold those rights to the rest of the, ABC, and they were NBC then, they sold the rights to ABC and CBS. Speaker 1: That's a great story. I, I don't think I've ever heard, heard that story. The lady who killed Richard Russell, Senator Richard Russell. Story_ID: 571951 Speaker 1: Any more stories like that? In twenty-seven years I know there are a lot of them. But all of this was-- Speaker 2: Yes, I was in Russia with Richard Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] and got arrested. Speaker 1: Tell us about that. Speaker 2: Well Mrs., Mrs. Nixon [Pat Nixon] wanted to try out the subway so I was gonna cover that and a camera crew and I went along with them. You know how we follow everybody like that. And we go to get on the subway and everybody gets on but two huge men grab me by the arm and drag me off. And I'm screaming about let me go or stuff, and my camera crew is trying to unhinge me and get me out of this, when Bob Pierpoint [Robert Pierpoint] said to these, this, "This woman is with us." And, and they finally let me go and we went on and did the train ride and, and covered all of that. And then finally went back to our press hotel where we had the press room. And then the, then the aide to the ambassador, I guess from--that was to the U.S., came to me. I knew him well. Speaker 1: This is the Russian--the aide to the Russian embassy? Speaker 2: Embassy here. And, and of course any time a president goes to another country, the embassy that is here in Washington [D.C.] sends their ambassador too. He never goes to any country without the ambassador being there. And he came to me and said, "What happened on the train?" And I told him what--he had already heard it. I told him what happened. And he says, "Well let me go and see if I can find out what the story is." Several hours later he came back to me and said, that the KGB who was with us on this trip said that no black person would be covering an American president and I must be an African from the Lumumba University [Patrice Lumumba University; People's Friendship University of Russia, Moscow, Russia] and that he probably thought I was trying to invade the party--the group. Speaker 1: A terrorist? Speaker 2: The terrorist. So they asked me to forgive them and then they gave a huge party for me, a beautiful party in a castle. And they laid out the red carpet for me and did all beautiful things and everything. But as I was going to this I had already gotten in this car with these men when I realized I hadn't told anybody I was going and I became frightened. But they really treated me well. And then when I got ready to go, everybody was surrounding Nixon and everything, but my little party of Russians were giving me all kinds of gifts, so I came home with a whole handful of lovely gifts. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Wonderful, that's a great story. And I had heard it before-- Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous) but I'm glad to share it with, with the, The HistoryMakers. Story_ID: 571952 Speaker 1: You went on a number of trips with presidents and other famous people, any other that you'd care to share with us that are particularly interesting (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well that--that was, that was the only one that there was an incident. Other than that, the others worked out very well. But I enjoyed every minute of it. I could not have had a better life than that. And I did notice though, nowadays I see that there're many black journalists, minority journalists who travel with the president, but in those days there were none. And once in a while somebody from Ebony like remember [HistoryMaker] Robert Johnson, would show up at some of the places, but mostly they did not. Speaker 1: Other than that none, right. You and Ethel Payne [Ethel L. Payne], the very famous columnist and journalist (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We're very close friends, very dear friends. Speaker 1: And you two--tell us how, how you met? Was that after you came to Washington [D.C.] working for Cox [Cox Broadcasting Corporation; Cox Communications, Inc.]? Speaker 2: No, we met after, after I came to Washington, but I don't remember how we met, but we became colleagues very soon. And we went places together like, we went to conferences in Tennessee and we went to conferences in Atlanta [Georgia] together. Then she went back to Chicago [Illinois] and you might remember that I used to visit her in Chicago a lot. And then she returned again to Washington. And we continued our friendship until she died. We were going--interestingly enough, Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] who lived down the hall from her had invited us to some event he was having and she called me up to wonder whether or not I was going, and I said, "No I'm tired of hearing Jesse's story, let's go to the movies." And we went to see 'Red October' ['The Hunt for Red October'], movie (laughter). The next day I called her back and got no an answer, so several days go by and got no answer. Found out that she had died in her apartment. It was such a sad time. But everybody knew her and she's a wonderful woman. Story_ID: 571953 Speaker 1: Now you made several trips to Africa? Speaker 2: Yeah, I made quite a few trips to Africa. One of the times I went, the state department [U.S. Department of State], I went under the sponsorship of the state department who had asked me to go and work on training people for, for media. And so I taught in varied places. I lectured at the University of Nairobi [Nairobi, Kenya], Nigeria, Lesotho, Botswana, Ethiopia, Tanzania, couple other places. I said Nigeria didn't I? Tanzania, and there were two or three other countries that I went to. Speaker 1: Any particular incident remain in (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, in Johannesburg [South Africa]. I had an incident there at the airport. They confiscated my passport and I got into such a fight with them until the arrested me. And the state department person was there to pick me up. The embassy person was there to pick me up and when he found out that I was arrested, it took him a whole day to get me out. I'd spent the night in this lockup. Speaker 1: Do you remember what the incident was about, why they felt they had to arrest you? Speaker 2: They had to arrest me--there was a, a boy in the, standing in front of me in line with a magazine, some kind of magazine with naked ladies in it, in his pocket. And I made a remark when they took it away from him and they heard me or something, I don't remember that. But then the Avon [Avon Products Inc.] man, the Avon people were there with a plane and he came over to me and said, "I'll take you outta here in our plane if you wanna go." And I said, "No I'm not gonna go in this plane." So they arrested me and I--they locked me up. This woman locked me up in this room with my luggage and everything. So I stayed in there overnight and then the next morning they brought me out. By that time they had my passport and, and they wanted me to apologize and I just refused. I called the man a pretty bad name. And the state department man begged me not to say another thing. And then, they led me out, gave me my passport and gave me a paper that said I was an honorary white person which made me mad and I tore the paper up, stomped on the ground and the man put me back. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Typical Mal Johnson [HistoryMaker Malvyn Johnson] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was not gonna be an honorary white person. So I ended up with somebody at that state department--I mean at the embassy took me out and had me stay at their home with them. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 571954 Speaker 1: Now you got into a little trouble on a trip to China, can you give us a few details on, on that, when Mrs. Bush [Barbara Bush] had you (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um, let's see. Oh that was one time I went to Beijing [China]. That was not on a presidential trip. What I was doing there, is I had put up a workshop and, and an art display in Beijing during the, a women's conference, the United Nations conference on women, World Conference on Women [Fourth World Conference on Women]. And I had arranged before then, I was working with the Museum of Women in the Arts [National Museum of Women in the Arts, Washington, D.C.] and we had gotten women from around the world to do some art work, some paintings and things, displaying issues that concern women. And I had eight hundred of them. So the state department [U.S. Department of State] helped us take them there and we took them there and hung them in a gallery there during this conference. And the Chinese-- Speaker 1: What year was this? Speaker 2: Nineteen ninety-five [1995]. Speaker 1: Nineteen ninety-five [1995]. Go ahead. Speaker 2: And the Chinese people, after we got it hung on the wall, this guard or officer or something stood there and watched us put all these painting up, took all day to do it and then made us take it down. And I was furious. And so I called the U.S. embassy to see what kind of help I could get and they were very slow in responding to this. And I'm standing down in the hotel lobby trying to figure out shall I do next when up comes Joyce Kravitz and Mrs. Bush. She obviously was there with her husband. And Joyce greets me, your friend. Speaker 1: And former secretary. Speaker 2: And, yeah and I tell her this story while Mrs. Bush is standing there listening. And she said, "Get this girl some help right now." Well things then worked out very well. The embassy called me back and, "What in the world is the matter?" Well I had already told 'em. So they did arrange it and I got all those pictures put back up. And they made somebody else come and put 'em up. And so that, that worked out pretty well. But Mrs. Bush did instigate this help. Speaker 1: And [President] George Herbert Walker Bush was president at that time? Speaker 2: No, he had just finished his presidency. Speaker 1: Just finished his presidency. That's right, Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] was the next president. That's absolutely right. The--I just want to, because you've been in, you've caused trouble (laughter) where ever you've gone-- Speaker 2: Well I try not to (laughter). Speaker 1: The, and we're gonna get into a lot of that I think in our second session. Story_ID: 571955 Speaker 1: Hi, this is the second part of a two-parter interview and it is continuing. I'm going to, I'm sitting here with Miss Malyvn Johnson [HistoryMaker Malvyn Johnson], that's who we're interviewing. I'm the interviewer, [HistoryMaker] Paul Brock. The videographer is Scott Stearns. And we do have an observer, Miss Ann Williams [ph.]. Mal, I'm going to start this second portion, chapter if you will in your life and I'm going to start by asking you to give us your name again and the spelling? Speaker 2: All right. My name is Malvyn Johnson; however, I'm called Mal Johnson. M-A-L-V-Y-N is my given name. Speaker 1: Um-hm, okay, and I'm going to ask you today's date? Speaker 2: Today is January 20- January 31st, 2006. Speaker 1: Okay and where are we today? Speaker 2: We're in Alexandria, Virginia and we're in my home. Story_ID: 571956 Speaker 1: You gave us quite a bit last time, but in your very hallowed life, you, you, we, we got up to the '70s [1970s], beginning of the '70s [1970s] and you had been hired by Cox [Cox Broadcasting Corporation; Cox Communications, Inc.] as vice president representing Cox here in Washington, D.C. and you did your work as a journalist, as well as kept in touch with all of the notables and senators and congress people from the various states where Cox Broadcasting had their stations. Tell us about what your responsibilities were in addition to covering some of the major stories in the nation's capital for Cox Broadcasting. Speaker 2: Well I must say that when I first arrived in Washington I didn't know a great deal about being a journalist. But I'd been told by the president of the company that I would be taught how to become a journalist and that's exactly what happened. My responsibilities were first of all to get to know the congressmen and senators with whom I would be interacting. I also had a responsibility to the federal agencies as well. Being the only woman in the, in the bureau I had some additional responsibilities for covering some of the life stories of people and some of the other kinds of stories. At first I was not expected to be a White House correspondent, but shortly after that, maybe about six months or so then I began to get assignments at the White House [Washington, D.C.]. And finally, I began to do that pretty much all the time. But meanwhile, my job was to cover the senators who represented the states in which Cox had, had stations and they were all the major network affiliates. Speaker 1: Okay. We're going to cover some of those areas and some of the key people that you covered there. For instance, I know in North Carolina was Senator Sam Ervin of Watergate fame-- Speaker 2: No (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) later of Watergate fame. Speaker 2: No, Sam Ervin was from Texas [sic.]. That was a special opportunity that I had to cover him. He was not from, from North Carolina, he was from Texas. Known as Mr. Sam [sic.]. Speaker 1: Right, right. Okay, maybe I'm, I'm wrong. I was thinking for some reason North, North Carolina. Then let's go--go on from there. Let's go to Pennsylvania. There you had two senators-- Speaker 2: Richard Schweiker. Speaker 1: Richard Sw-- Speaker 2: Schweiker and Scott, what was his first name, Hugh Scott. Speaker 1: Hugh Scott. Speaker 2: Hugh Scott. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Both senators from Pennsylvania. Speaker 1: Any memorable stories that you have for us in covering either one of these (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well Senator Schweiker was very kind to me and I often covered him, practically all the time. Hugh Scott was not quite as friendly, but he did know that we were both from the same district from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. So I think that gave me a little bit of an entree with him. Nothing particularly outstanding that I can think of right, right now, but they were both, they worked with me very well and I was pleased about that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In, in each case a journalist has to establish some kind of relationship to be able to even cover those congressmen and senators. Speaker 1: Right, right. And, and your relationship, I gather, with Senator Schweiker was, that relationship was a little bit closer? Speaker 2: A little closer and a little warmer, and he was just a friendlier kind of man. And I felt that. I felt quite comfortable with him. Speaker 1: Right, right. Okay and those were the two senators from Pennsylvania. Story_ID: 571957 Speaker 1: How about some of the congress people from, from Pennsylvania? I mean Congressman Nix [Robert N.C. Nix, Sr.] was coming up at that time? Speaker 2: Congressman Nix was coming up that time and I didn't do very much with him. He was not very much interested in being in front of cameras as far as I can recall. And he was sort of on the downgrade by then, by the time I got there. And I can't think of the name of the other representatives at this time who were, were there. And of course there were congress people from the Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] area. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Oh, John Heinz [H. John Heinz III]. Speaker 1: John Heinz, later became a senator? Speaker 2: Yes he did and he was very much interested in what was coming to be known as the space, space work at that time. And he was a very friendly man, very nice and people grieved a lot when he died. But I did know him well and I did know his wife [Teresa Heinz]. And she was very much interested in, in children and issues concerning children when, when I knew them. Speaker 1: He, he was killed, of course, in a, an airplane accident. Speaker 2: Yes that's true. At a--a young man (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) His widow is now married to Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts. Speaker 2: Senator Kerry, yes. Speaker 1: There was another person who never became a congressional person, but the statue was just as high as any of the congressional people and that was C. Delores Tucker. Speaker 2: C. Delores Tucker and I grew up together in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and she was a good friend of mine, and we both were very much interested in the Civil Rights Movement. We both worked with Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] during the civil rights time. And we were co-chairs of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] chapter in Philadelphia for quite a while. Delores was also interested in the housing problem among the poor. But what she is more known for is the fact that she became the first black woman to be a state senator for Pennsylvania. And I had the pleasure of being her, her, to be in charge of her campaign. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. And the--later, of course being such good friends, C. Delores Tucker spent a lot of time with her various pursuits in Washington [D.C.]? Speaker 2: Yes she did, but that was in later times that she came to Washington. She was first mostly interested in the Philadelphia area. She was always interested in--she came from a large family and her father [Whitfield Nottage] was a, was a minister and she was very much interested in the social problems that faced us in Philadelphia. And together we worked a lot on the Civil Rights Movement. Speaker 1: Okay. She also rose and was appointed as secretary of state of the State of Pennsylvania [secretary of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania]? Speaker 2: Absolutely, yes which was a (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That became a big story. Speaker 2: --big story and it was very exciting to see that at last, a woman had become secretary of state. First woman and then the first black woman. Speaker 1: Um-hm, at the same time. Story_ID: 571958 Speaker 1: Now you also had a very good relationship with several congressional people from the State of Ohio, John Man- Mansfield [sic.]. Speaker 2: Mansfield, Mike Mansfield, he's called (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Mike Mansfield, I'm sorry. Speaker 2: Yes, I did know a lot of people in Ohio at that time. Our station--you see the owner of our company, Cox Broadcasting [Cox Broadcasting Corporation; Cox Communications, Inc.], James Cox [James M. Cox] was the owner and he was from Dayton, Ohio. So Dayton, Ohio at first was our first station, a radio station and then it became radio and TV. But they moved the headquarters to Atlanta [Georgia], where you would know it because they also owned Atlanta Journal [Atlanta Journal-Constitution] and Atlanta Constitution [Atlanta Journal-Constitution], which they still do today. But the Miami Herald and Dayton Daily News and papers like that all belong to, to Cox. They had, during my time, fifty-eight newspapers around the country. Speaker 1: So that was quite a, a journalistic empire. Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely. Speaker 1: That carried the Cox name. Speaker 2: And they had the first radio station in Atlanta as well. And WSB means welcome south, brother. Speaker 1: Oh, okay, (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter) That was the expression that was often used. Speaker 1: And the person who hired you origin- originally hired you to be a employee there, a journalist for Cox, that was J. Leonard Reinsch? Speaker 2: It was like a fairytale story. I was at a meeting and met him at a meeting, and, and he introduced himself to me and said he'd like me to come to Atlanta. And I had no thoughts of going to Atlanta. And he invited me to do that, and sure enough I came, sent me a ticket and I went to Atlanta. And there was WSB, which was the White Columns [Atlanta, Georgia] on Peachtree [Street], and it was called and it was the house in which 'Gone with the Wind' was filmed [sic.]. Speaker 1: (Laughter) That's a lot of history, a lot of good history. Speaker 2: Yes, and so in the end I came to work for them. But his name was J. Leonard Reinsch, known throughout the world as Mr. Democrat [sic.]. He was the person who devised the fireside chats for Roosevelt [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt] and taught Truman [President Harry S. Truman] to speak. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Speaker 2: And put the first radio at Capitol Hill [Washington, D.C.] for the State of the Union address. Speaker 1: Let me-- Speaker 2: But he was my mentor. Speaker 1: He was your mentor. Story_ID: 571959 Speaker 1: Let me ask you about, there were a number of people, congressional people from the State of California who you also made friends with during this period, Don Edwards, Congressman Don Edwards was one of them? Speaker 2: Yvonne Brathwaite. Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Yvonne Brathwaite Burke who came to [U.S.] Congress I believe it was '70 [1970], '72 [1972], '74 [sic. 1973]. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: One of those years. And the Burtons brothers [Phillip Burton and John L. Burton] who were all powerful in, in New York [sic. California]. Were there any particular stories that came out of some of the things? Speaker 2: Well I was really excited about Yvonne Brathwaite Burke coming to, to the Congress. She was the--no she was the second black woman because-- Speaker 1: Shirley-- Speaker 2: No, she's still there. Speaker 1: Okay. I'm tryin- trying to think when you said the second one. Seems to me that Shirley Chisholm was the first-- Speaker 2: No Chisholm was from New York. Speaker 1: Oh, oh you meant the second from California, okay. [HistoryMaker] Maxine Waters. Speaker 2: Maxine Waters. Speaker 1: Came before and later [HistoryMaker] Barbara Lee. Speaker 2: Came before, yes. But it was exciting that Brathwaite was there and she was very young and very excited and very energetic. And most people liked her very much. And she was not married when she first came, and by the time she was finished, she became Brathwaite Burke. Speaker 1: Right, right, married to Bill Burke [William Burke]. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And al- also, Congressional Black Caucus members began to pop up in various places and some, many of them in, in your district? Speaker 2: At first there were only fourteen and it was rather disorganized. And of course other members of Congress didn't want it to happen because they made such excuses as, we don't have an Italian caucus or any of the other caucus'. But, but the, the Congressional Black Caucus insisted and they, and they grew and grew until now they're about forty or so now. But I remember when it was very small and when they had their first, their first conference, which they have every year and it's still in September as well. But it was wonderful to see that they had organized themselves so that they could try to push legislation and it was not very easy for them. And we did, we did cover them a lot. Speaker 1: Including someone who came to Congress during that period, [HistoryMaker] Andrew Young? Speaker 2: Andrew Young came to Congress and I was delighted to report him because I knew him from the Civil Rights Movement. So it, it was a pleasure to see him there, and he did very well. Also, he was very kind to me. When we were trying to start the National Association of Black Journalists [NABJ], he was our first speaker so that we could make some money to begin it, if you will recall that. But--and then when Jimmy Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] came to office, he named him to be the UN [United Nations] representative. And he couldn't find him. Well it turned out that I knew exactly where he was. He was in Botswana in the same hotel that I had stayed in in Africa. So we had an exclusive interview with him because I called him on the telephone and we did the interview, the first interview as he became the UN ambassador on the telephone. I was really proud of that. Speaker 1: Right. And of course, he had been a confidant of, of the president (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: --Jimmy Carter during that period. So you had someone who was very, very close to, to him. Story_ID: 571960 Speaker 1: You mentioned a few moments ago the founding of the National Association of Black Journalists [NABJ]. There was an organization that preceded the national association called the Washington Association of Black Journalists [WABJ], and you were instrumental in getting that off the ground. Tell us a little bit about that? Speaker 2: Well, there were a small group of, of people in Washington [D.C.], journalists in Washington, who really had no access to mentors and people that would support them and they were struggling along. Some in newspapers and very few or practically none in the broadcasting area. And they were interested in sort of coordinating themselves and so I was very pleased to help them do that, but you must remember I did not report Washington. But I had a special interest in Washington since I lived there and since I was a journalist. But my, my connections were not with the radio and television stations in the Washington area, although I knew the broadcasters there and I knew the people in the newspapers. So that, that turned out very well and it was a precurse [precursor] to, to the national association. Speaker 1: Right, right. Then I believe in December of 1975 with the Washington Association of Black Journalists going, you also were instrumental on the, what is I guess to be known as the founding day, December the 12th, 1975. Tell us what that day was, was like? Speaker 2: First of all, I had been working with you, [HistoryMaker] Paul Brock, trying to get journalists organized and particularly since we knew that the Washington people were interested then we felt that there were people around the country who had the same kind of interest and the same needs as we did. So we knew, we thought about that and we knew that most journalists would not be assigned just to, just to come to a meeting. So we knew that there was to be--[HistoryMaker] Eddie Williams was to have the Joint Center [Joint Center for Political Studies; Joint Center for Political and Economic Studies, Washington, D.C.] meeting, which he had annually and that gave an excuse to come to Washington to cover it because that organization looked at the state of affairs throughout the country, both economically, politically and socially. So that it was an excellent opportunity to hear what black people thought about what was going on and the condition of the United States. So with that in mind, a number of journalists did arrive at the hotel, at the same hotel where this conference was taking place. And meanwhile, word had gone out and you had sent out letters and telephone calls to people and invited them. And word went out and we had a meeting right there in the, in the hotel and it was very successful, and people were eager to join. I must say though that there were a number of journalists who showed up and who were actually afraid to sign in because their companies would probably not accept them and that has all changed in all these years. And it's, it's wonderful to know that they are now known as a very responsible, professional organization. Speaker 1: I would like to just dwell on there was a lady [Claudia Polley] who was elected on that day as treasurer of the National Association of Black Journalists, and then getting back home that Monday being faced with a choice of--she was at a CBS [sic. NBC] affiliate, being faced with a choice of either being fired or resigning from her treasurer's post. I'm getting to where how you became a treasurer (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right. Speaker 1: Can you just recount that for us? Speaker 2: Well, yes she let us know almost immediately that she had to resign. And of course we understood because why would she want to lose her job just to be treasurer of N- of NABJ when we were just beginning and there weren't very many members. I guess we were less than forty members at that time. So then I agreed. I don't remember whether or not I agreed to do this or somebody elected me or how I got to be it, but then I took over the treasurer's responsibility. Speaker 1: And remained treasurer for a number of years, correct. Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And remained treasurer for years (laughter), yes. Speaker 1: That sort of--we should add in that, just that organization has just recently celebrated thirty years. Speaker 2: Thirty years and now it has nearly four thousand members and we started out with just the four of us who talked about this and all of a sudden it began to grow and now it's up to four thousand members. Speaker 1: Right. Right. Speaker 2: And I, I take great pride in that. Story_ID: 571961 Speaker 1: I want to go and as we go through these various stages, I want to keep up with the chronology there. And so I'm talking '74 [1974], '75 [1975] now, and you used to hold a number of meetings among many members of [U.S.] Congress and movers and shakers in Washington [D.C.]. When I say movers and shakers, I'm talking about worldwide movers and shakers. And you would invite a number of powerful women from the various organizations, but there was one person who presently has assumed a great deal of power. And of course I'm talking about Rumsfeld, Donald Rumsfeld. Could you relate some of the stories of inviting him, not to the meetings, but-- Speaker 2: Social, social occasions. Speaker 1: To the social occasions and what it was like at some of these? Speaker 2: Well truth is, Washington is a very political city, there's no getting around it, more so than any city in this country. And in, in that atmosphere, one needs to make as many friends as they, as they can because you need the support of, of people. And in my position, I was encouraged by my company [Cox Broadcasting Corporation; Cox Communications, Inc.] to be as social as I could and usually a social meeting is not just social. It's really people who are trying to contact each other and who make friends for business reasons, for political reasons and other reasons like that. So living in the Watergate [Watergate Complex; Watergate Hotel, Washington, D.C.], which was quite luxurious, I often invited people in, in either small parties or very large parties at my home. And my company encouraged it and usually there was always somebody there from my company. And I did such things as there was a delegation from Russia who had met us when I went there with President Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon], and they came to Washington on other matters and I gave their party, there--it was, it was the only party they had in Washington and I gave it there. And people like Rumsfeld and, and Greener, Bill Greener [William I. Greener, Jr.] and people like that would come. I'd invite people from the White House [Washington, D.C.] and people from Capitol Hill [Washington, D.C.] who would come. And it was a good time, a fun time for me as well. I remember inviting Bob Johnson [HistoryMaker Robert Johnson] who finally became a billionaire and he and his wife [Rose Johnson] would come to my parties. So it was, it was a fun time then. Speaker 1: And whose wife is also a billionaire in her own right these days (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely, absolutely. Speaker 1: Tell, tell us about, sometimes you would give Donald Rumsfeld some unusual assignments? Speaker 2: Wash the dishes, (laughter) clean up the kitchen. And it was very funny, both he and Bill Greener would always say, "There's something wrong with this--this picture. You're sitting there entertaining people while we're doing all the work." Bill Greener liked to make chili, he was a chili expert. And you'll remember Br- Bra- Jim Brady [James Brady], Jim Brady liked to make chili. He used to come very often. And this was all before he had that horrible shooting. Speaker 1: And just give us a, a little detail on Jim--who Jim Brady is? Speaker 2: Jim Brady was the secre- was the secretary, not secretary, but the press secretary at the White House. Speaker 1: For Ronald Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan]? Speaker 2: For Ronald Reagan. And when Ronald Reagan was shot, he took the bullet for him. And to this day, he's still in, in a wheelchair and the bullet went to his brain. And he's still alive, but he's still paralyzed. He was a dear friend, a good friend of mine and he often came to my parties and I often went to his house to his parties. So we were quite good friends. Speaker 1: Right, but back in the day, when Rumsfeld and Bill Greener would come and to some extent I would come, he would, he always--he liked working in the kitchen because he loved to make his chili for the guests. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah he loved to make his chili. And then when all of this was over and Rumsfeld moved to Illinois, Pfizer [sic. G.D. Searle and Company], to head Pfizer a pharmaceutical company, Bill Greener went with him and therefore, taking my secretary, Charlotte [sic. Charlene McPheeters Greener], his wife with him. So I would go and visit them quite often. And when they, they both had summer places in Kiawah Island, which is right off of Charlotte--of Charleston, South Carolina and I'd go visit them there. And quite often when I'd bring nephews with me and we needed more space, we'd use Rumsfeld house next door. Story_ID: 571962 Speaker 1: Some of the journalists during that day were quite prominent also that you would, sort of your posse, Helen Thomas being one? Speaker 2: Helen Thomas was a dear friend to me. She is the person who was my first friend at the White House [Washington, D.C.]. You know, the White House is sort of a closed society and when I went there to work being the only black woman there, nobody talked to me but Helen Thomas. And they have the White House association and it's not all that exclusive, it's just that you have to join it if you want to be a part of it, but you have to have two sponsors, and she was my sponsor. She and Sarah McClendon. Speaker 1: Okay and that's someone else that we need to touch, briefly touch on (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah they were both good friends and they were very dear friends to me. Speaker 1: Okay and so they sort of looked out after you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, they looked out after me. Speaker 1: --became a part of your posse. You also had joined the American Women in Radio and Television [Alliance for Women in Media]. Speaker 2: Yes I-- Speaker 1: We're going to talk about that in just a few moments, as soon as we change tapes. Story_ID: 571963 Speaker 1: Okay where we left off, you were saying that Helen Thomas and S- Sarah McClendon were your two closest friends. And we talked a little about Helen Thomas, let's talk about Sarah McClendon? Speaker 2: Well Sarah McClendon was very sincere about what she did, although she worked for a number of small newspapers in Texas. But she was very knowledgeable, particularly about matters that had to do with [U.S.] military. And, and she was very adamant about the kinds of questions that she asked at the, at the press conferences. And it was very interesting to watch her. I thought she was a fine woman. There were a lot of people who did not like her, but this woman knew what she was doing. She was very good at it. Speaker 1: Okay and you do work very, very close with them (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes and I consider both of them to be my mentors. They were very good, both, in their jobs. And although they were written press and I was-- Speaker 1: Broadcast. Speaker 2: --electronics, they still were really good people who had a lot to tell you and show you what to do. Story_ID: 571964 Speaker 1: And speaking of your being a broadcast journalist, you were also rising at this time in an organ- national organization called the American Women in Radio and Television [Alliance for Women in Media]? Speaker 2: Yes, now with them, I started with them back in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] when I had my first job in broadcasting. My boss suggested that I join this organization that I knew nothing about. I finally ended up becoming president of that chapter in Philadelphia and when I moved down to Washington [D.C.], by then I was on the national board. I also headed the American Women in Radio and Television Foundation at one point, as a matter of fact, for two terms. And then finally in the '80s [1980s] I became president of the Washington chapter which is the largest chapter in that organization. Story_ID: 571965 Speaker 1: I wanna just go back a few years and people that you interacted with in a very historical way, I think. Let's begin with Richard Nixon's [President Richard Milhous Nixon] vice president, Spiro Agnew. When did you first start covering? Speaker 2: I was assigned to travel with him on his campaign. And I traveled on the bus with, with them on his campaign. And I remember, the thing that I remember most about him is that we went to Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania and we were to stay in the Hilton Hotel [Hilton Pittsburgh; Wyndham Grand Pittsburgh Downtown, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]. And there was a riot. I didn't realize that, that there were that many people against this man. And they, they turned the bus over. We got out of the bus. Speaker 1: Let's, let's set the scene on this. This was during a period when he was running with Richard Nixon. Richard Nixon was running for president and he was running as Richard Nixon's vice president. Speaker 2: This was the second term I believe. Speaker 1: Oh the second term, okay. Speaker 2: And he--and they were campaigning. And my job was to go with, with him. And we got to, to Pittsburgh and there was this crowd of people. What I don't remember is why they were against him at that time. I don't think they had come out with his problems with the money and the funds and, and all of that. But he was not a very kind man, and he was so upset and so he made the manager of the hotel put all the guests out. So I always said that I should write a book called, 'I Slept with Spiro Agnew,' simply because he was on one end of the floor and I was on the other end and we, we're in this hotel. Speaker 1: Right. You were doing your job of covering him, okay. Speaker 2: (Laugher) Yeah. But he--people were terribly opposed to this man. And he was not a very nice man. So that, that was the only story that I could remember about him that we, that we covered. But it was in Pittsburgh. Speaker 1: And of course the Nixon team did, did win that election. Speaker 2: Yes they did win that election. Speaker 1: A few years later, of course, Richard Nixon is in the White House [Washington, D.C.] and he gets into trouble. And many people are calling for his impeachment and he is fighting to survive this. And you covered that? Speaker 2: Not only did I cover it, I'm living next door to the Mitchells who was his-- Speaker 1: John Mitchell. Speaker 2: John Mitchell. Speaker 1: And his wife Martha [Martha Beall Mitchell]. Speaker 2: Yeah, and he was justice department [U.S. Department of Justice], secretary of justice department [sic. attorney general of the United States]. Speaker 1: He was, yes, um-hm, yes. Speaker 2: And Martha I knew quite well and of course she--we'd meet in the hallway and she'd rant and rave about all kinds of things. And then she had a secretary named Judy [ph.]. And I thought perhaps I could get this story out of Judy since I'm living in the Watergate [Watergate Complex; Watergate Hotel, Washington, D.C.] and I missed the whole thing of the, of the door being left open and all of that, and I knew how secure that building was. And, and I thought if I invite her over to cocktails maybe I'll get this story. Well, she killed off a half a bottle of scotch and I never got the story. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: So I had to cover--I was assigned to cover--well we all were assigned in the bureau because we had to take, take turns, it was just so much coverage of this affair. And it went on and on forever if you, if you'll remember that. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And but the day that he resigned I was covering a, a story in Belgium, the actual day that, that he left when he waved goodbye and all of that and got on the helicopter and left. I was not in the United States, I was in Belgium. Speaker 1: In Belgium, okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. And I was covering NATO [North Atlantic Treaty Organization] at that time. Story_ID: 571966 Speaker 1: There was another historical incident to took place and that is Martha Mitchell [sic. Michele Clark] was on a plane to Chicago [Illinois], along with a African American congressman, Collins [George Collins]. Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: And the, that plane crashed. Killing--there were a lot of children from a very prominent family here and so forth. And the congressman's place was taken by his wife just-- Speaker 2: Cardiss, [HistoryMaker] Cardiss Collins (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Cardiss Collins just recently retired. Did you ever cover another woman coming to [U.S.] Congress like Cardiss Collins or? Speaker 2: I did a little bit of coverage of Cardiss Collins, but she was not one of my main, main people that I, that I covered. Speaker 1: Right, 'cause Cox [Cox Broadcasting Corporation; Cox Communications, Inc.] did not have any media? Speaker 2: They had a radio station in, in Chicago, but it was an AM music, it was music. It was the top forty or top whatever they call the top forty or something music. So they didn't do--but they did news reports and I was, at that time, doing a show, a special show called 'This Week in Washington' [ph.]. And that would give them a half hour's report once a week from there and I just gave them summaries of what was going on in the Washington [D.C.] area that affected the country. And I did that show for Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] as well, Philadelphia and for Dayton, Ohio. And I did it once a week and it was called 'This Week in Washington.' Story_ID: 571967 Speaker 1: Before, both you and I were getting some names mixed up, Cox [Cox Broadcasting Corporation; Cox Communications, Inc.] did have a newspaper in North Carolina. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: And at Charlotte, in Charlotte, North Carolina. Speaker 1: In Charlotte, North Carolina. And there was a senator, the head of the Watergate investigation whose name was Sam Ervin and then the co- cong- the senator from Texas was Sam Rayburn. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: What I wanted-- Speaker 2: I had that mixed up before, yes. Speaker 1: And, and I, I was going along with you on that. What I wanted to ask about that is did you do a lot of coverage of Sam Ervin? Speaker 2: Oh yes, a lot of coverage of Sam Ervin. And he headed the investigation, the-- Speaker 1: Watergate investigation (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) the Watergate hearings. Speaker 1: Hearings, right, right, he did. Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 571968 Speaker 1: Here we are, you were in Belgium of course when Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] rode off into the dusk. Speaker 2: Yeah I was covering somebody called Admiral Zumwalt [Elmo Zumwalt]. Speaker 1: Oh, yes. Okay. Speaker 2: At NATO [North Atlantic Treaty Organization]. Speaker 1: Right. Now how, how much in depth did you cov-- Speaker 2: And then I knew Haig from, what was his name, Haig. I knew him. Speaker 1: Alexander Haig. Speaker 2: Alexander Haig. And he was at NATO at that time. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, did you cover either one's, Zumwalt or-- Speaker 2: Yes, both of them. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Any memorable incidents with either one? Speaker 2: Nothing special except that the Belgium television people were wonderful people and I had great parties with them. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay, that's--so it wasn't all a loss. Exactly. Gerald Ford [President Gerald Rudolph Ford, Jr.] has now come into office following Nixon riding off into the dusk. And even though Cox [Cox Broadcasting Corporation; Cox Communications, Inc.] does not have any of his newspaper or broadcast facilities in Michigan, how much coverage did you do and what was your relationship with the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I did a lot of coverage, my coverage with the Fords was basically with Mrs. Ford [Betty Ford]. I did a lot of coverage with her, particularly of her, she had special issue interests. She was interested in children, in the drug problem and all those other problems that concern women. And I did a lot of coverage with her. And of course my stations accepted that 'cause she was the first lady. Speaker 1: Right, right, okay. We are moving past the Ford era and now you have a gentleman from Atlanta [Georgia], or from Georgia, but who spent a lot of time in Atlanta and I'm sure Cox was very interested in him running? Speaker 2: I covered him as a governor as well. Speaker 1: Okay. What, what were your impressions of him when he was governor? Speaker 2: At first not very good, because I accused him of being a racist then. I have since learned better. I have to add that to it. But at the time I was most unhappy with Jimmy Carter [James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.]. And I expressed my hap- my unhappiness so much so that the president of Cox called Jimmy Carter to tell him. Jimmy Carter's people telephoned me to Washington [D.C.] and said get down here. Meaning the pres- the governor wants to talk with you. So I went down and when I arrived at the airport there was a state trooper, several state troopers who picked me up off that plane and took me straight to the governor's mansion (laughter). And when I got there, Miss Lillian [Lillian Gordy Carter] met us and I didn't realize that they were calling all the black reporters in the area there as well who are in, in the State of Georgia. So there I was with about, about ten or fifteen reporters, all black and they took us in the governor's mansion and gave us dinner. Now I'm really upset because when dinner was over, Jimmy Carter says, "Oh we're having a great time now, all we need to have is some entertainment, can any of you sing or dance?" And that absolutely was more than--it was stony silence. Jody, who was the press secretary, immediately got a backache and left. Speaker 1: Jody Powell. Speaker 2: Jody Powell had this backache and he left. And Mrs. Carter [Rosalynn Carter] said, "No Jimmy it's getting late and let's have the meeting so these people can go home." And he said, "Okay." I, I think he didn't realize what he said, and he just didn't understand that that was offensive to us. So we talked about it and one of the things that we talked about, there was a young man there who said that he had been covering the governor for two or three years, and this--wherever they had their press conferences he says, and he said, "The walls are white and when I raise my hand you are bound to see it and I have never been called on." And he brought that meeting right together then and Jimmy Carter says, "Well I guess we should have one portion of the thing for just--for minority reporters," which was another mistake. And finally when we got finished with him, he finally understood. Jody Powell couldn't handle it at all, it was just more than he could take. But in the end we came to some understanding, that they was, that he was to answer anybody's hand that went up to be, to be called upon. After he became president, I got to know them much better and I, I did end up liking Jimmy Carter and Mrs. Carter very much (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 2: And I did a lot with them. Story_ID: 571969 Speaker 1: And Miss Lillian [Lillian Gordy Carter], there was a group of people in, in Georgia, in Winder, Georgia who were trying to start a shirt factory where they were sewing things. And they needed to build this building. And they knew that I had some interest in, in all kinds of community affairs and people knew that I had been part of the Civil Rights Movement and all that stuff. So somebody, whose name I have now forgotten, called me up and asked could I find out where they could get some money for lumber or some lumber. And I thought well, I'll mention this to Miss Lillian. By now Miss Lillian is in the White House [Washington, D.C.]. So I said, told her this story and I thought she said, "Don't worry I'll take care of it." And I thought that she was going to send them some money or something. She got hold of two mules and a wagon, filled it up with lumber and took it there herself. And here she's going down the middle of the road with this, with this lumber. And it became a national story, it was a wonderful story. Speaker 2: She was a special lady I guess. Speaker 1: She was a special lady and she was very dear to me. She--we were good friends. Speaker 2: Of course Hamilton (pronunciation) Jordan [Hamilton Jordan], Jordon-- Speaker 1: Jordan. Speaker 2: --was part of that whole group. Any incidents with Hamilton? Speaker 1: Not really, nothing special with him. My, my dealings was always with Jody Powell and it was a constant fight. We were at the, the president was giving a speech at the Hilton hotel and I was standing with the rest of the press and he called me over and said, "I, I need you to do me a favor." "What is it?" I said. "I want you to watch," what was the daughter's name? Amy [Amy Carter]. Speaker 2: Amy. Speaker 1: "I want you to watch Amy for me." And that was a true insult to me that he wanted me to be a babysitter while everybody else was being the press. But that was Jody Powell, he never understood black people and never tried to understand them. Speaker 2: Right. Right. The, the, we're getting along now in Jimmy Carter's [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] career, he has people like Bunny Mitchell [Martha "Bunny" Mitchell] there in the White House [Washington, D.C.] and the senator there from Georgia, that worked with Andy Young [HistoryMaker Andrew Young] so closely to really line up all of black America behind Jimmy Carter (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's right. Speaker 2: Then, I can't think of his name right now, but all of tho- all of those people I don't know. Speaker 1: They call, they were called the Peanut Brigade. Speaker 2: The Peanut Brigade, right, right. And he was able to line up the black sororities-- Speaker 1: Yeah, sororities. Speaker 2: --and fraternities and everything. We're coming toward, toward the close of the Carter years there in the White House. You are still in the Watergate [Watergate Complex; Watergate Hotel, Washington, D.C.] giving your great parties there, I say lobbying parties. And the--but Carter, Carter makes a drastic mistake. Americans are taken hostage in Iran and the country's faith in Jimmy Carter goes down the drain because of the hell in Iran. Speaker 1: It was too bad because he really did what he, what he tried to do, very much so. And the--I still believe that the republicans were working behind the scenes, because why was it that they were released just when Carter was going out of office and when the new president was coming in. As a matter of fact, wasn't it a day just before the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, absolutely. Speaker 1: --before the State of the Union address? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Yes, because I remember having to cover that. Story_ID: 571970 Speaker 1: Okay and Ronald Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] is now in office and he's bringing in a whole new crowd. But your job with Cox [Cox Broadcasting Corporation; Cox Communications, Inc.] as a vice president for Cox is to work with this group? Speaker 2: Yes, see, what, what you have to understand is that any journalist who works at the White House [Washington, D.C.] can be assigned to cover any president, no matter what, what his political feeling is. So if I went from one Democrat to a Republican, it didn't make any difference. My job was simply to cover what they, what their activities were and what they tried to do. Speaker 1: Right, right. So with the Reagan team coming in and you've already indicated that you were very close to the press secretary [James Brady], Reagan's first press, press secretary, who remains paralyzed to this day. But were there any other people there in the Reagan administration that you re- interacted with that might be memorable? Speaker 2: My first interaction, the first thing I ever did was to cover Mrs. Reagan [Nancy Reagan] who called us all together for a press conference and we thought she was going to talk about her activities in, in Washington [D.C.] and what she would be doing in the White House and things like that. And instead they locked the doors and they made us look at a, a videotape of a press core--of a Peace Corps. And some of the activities the Peace Corps was doing and we couldn't get her to respond although she was in the room. And people were trying to leave, the press didn't have time to sit around and look at a Peace Corps tape. So she didn't, didn't have much to say and we were not very impressed with her. She did talk a little bit about who her designer was. But other than that-- Speaker 1: Clothes designer? Speaker 2: Yeah, other than that we got very little out of her on, on that first meeting. She got a little better as the years went by. But to begin with, she was not very friendly and she didn't try to really make friends with the press. Story_ID: 571971 Speaker 1: Ronald Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] was reelected and then his years started coming to a close there at the White House [Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 2: Let me, let me tell you what--meanwhile the women's movement was growing, getting, moving up very fast. And we were all getting ready to go to--well let me go back to Jimmy Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.]. There had been a--the very first meeting of worldwide women [First World Conference on Women] in Mexico City [Mexico]. After that, each country was to go back and have a meeting in their own countries and deal with the issues that concerned them in their own countries. And finally, we were to have a meeting in the United States, but had no money. Bella Abzug undertook this, this start and she worked with [U.S.] Congress for months and months to get money, and Congress appropriated $5 million, it's never been done since nor before, to women for this women's conference [1977 National Women's Conference]. And we put, and we put that conference together and of course I chaired the media committee. And we put that conference together in Houston [Texas] and to this day, it's still a famous conference. Five presidents' wives attended. Speaker 1: Okay, can you name those wives? Speaker 2: Yes, Mrs. Carter [Rosalynn Carter], Mrs. Ford [Betty Ford], Mrs. Johnson [Lady Bird Johnson], Mrs. Ford, Carter, Reagan [Nancy Reagan]. That's five, is that five? Speaker 1: Four, one. Speaker 2: Did I say Nixon [Pat Nixon]? Speaker 1: No, Mrs. Nixon. Speaker 2: Wasn't Reagan, it was Nixon. Speaker 1: Okay, so Nancy Reagan did not attend. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Then, let's see, we still have Bush [Barbara Bush]? Speaker 2: That was November 1977. Speaker 1: Oh '77 [1977], okay. Okay, Reagan was, was president, no I'm sorry, Jimmy Carter was president (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Jimmy Carter was president. Speaker 1: Right, okay. Carter, Ford, Johnson. Speaker 2: Well let me tell you this, that organization, after, after we had that conference, out of it came the National Plan of Action. It was telling what we should be doing in the future. That National Plan of Action still stands and Jimmy Carter made that an executive order. And through the years, and now I'm president of that. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. So you are president of the National Plan of Action. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Can you just tell us a wee bit about what that national plan is? Speaker 2: Well we spend, we spend a lot of time looking at the problems that face women and see where the changes are. There have been a great many changes since then. There've been some, some laws about drugs. There've been some laws about children, harassment, sexual harassment. There've been laws about abortion, anti-abortion and pro-choice. There have been, a number of things have happened, although we, as a group of women, we still don't believe that we have reached pure equality, and we still are working toward, toward that. But that organization which is now called the National Women's Conference has a conference every other year at which time we have an assessment to see where we stand and what else do we have to do and what are the new issues. As time goes by, issues change. Speaker 1: Right, right. Okay, the--and you are still of course active in this (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Very much active in the women's movement. I've always been active in the women's movement. Story_ID: 571972 Speaker 1: The Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] era is coming to a close and Reagan has now chosen George Walker Bush [sic. President George Herbert Walker Bush] to be his vice president. It is time to see whether that Reagan magic can be passed on to him. And he runs a campaign, a very successful campaign and becomes the president succeeding Reagan on there. You, of course, are still active during this period and who were some of the members of this new administration coming to Washington [D.C.] that you were interacting with (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Let's see. Well I'm trying to think who, I don't remember. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Nobody comes-- Speaker 1: How about Mrs. Bush [Barbara Bush]? Speaker 2: Mrs. Bush was very interesting and we spent a lot of time covering her. And she, you know, she always had a lot to say and obviously she was very important to the president because she, she had a lot of influence over, over whatever it was he, he was trying to do. Mrs. Bush was, was well liked. And I liked her, and course my contact with her after they left the office was very interesting. I was in China fighting with somebody over some artwork I had put up during the Beijing conference on women [Fourth World Conference on Women]. And the artwork was on the walls and the Chinese made us take 'em, take 'em down. I had brought eight hundred pieces of artwork for that conference. What they were, was that artists around the world had, had made artworks predicting what the issues were among women and they had some wonderful pieces. Sculptures, as well as portraits and all kinds of art forms. And we had put them on the walls ready for display in this place that we were displaying them and then the Chinese watched us put them up and then made us take 'em down. And I went immediately berserk (laughter). Couldn't get them to put it up. I had called the st- the embassy, the U.S. embassy and they did nothing. I was standing in the hotel fuming, trying to figure out what to do next when up walks Mrs. Bush and, and her aide was your friend-- Speaker 1: Joyce. Speaker 2: Joyce Kravitz. And together, they--well Joyce was working for USA- USIA [United States Information Agency] and was escorting Mrs. Bush. And they greeted me and I told them what my problem was standing there and Mrs. Bush says, "Go and call somebody and get that girl's stuff back up on the wall." And sure enough within an hour or so I get a call from the embassy who says, "What is your problem (laughter), what do you want me to do about it?" So I said and within a day we had that artwork back up on the walls and I was grateful to Mrs. Bush for that. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Story_ID: 571973 Speaker 1: Okay, Mal [HistoryMaker Malvyn Johnson] we're at the Beijing women's conference [Fourth World Conference on Women], everybody is there including Mrs. Clinton [Hillary Rodham Clinton] I remember and a number of other key representatives, the former secretary of state and so forth. And Mrs. Bush [Barbara Bush] has just had Joyce Kravitz get (laughter) someone there to put the, put all of those, that artwork back up on the wall. Were there any other incidents there that are memorable for you, especially with any of the key women officials (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, there were, there were several. I put on a, a seminar on media. And the participants were Betty Friedan and Helen Hunt [ph.] of the Hunt tomato ketchup [Hunt's] people and several other people, Noeleen Heyzer from UNIFEM [United Nations Development Fund for Women] and a woman from Germany. And we did, we did a seminar that was standing room only on media and how women fair in the media in various places around the world. Speaker 1: What--and I don't remember it, although I remember the number of the incidents, what year was that Beijing women's-- Speaker 2: Nineteen eighty-five [sic. 1995]. Speaker 1: Nineteen eighty-five. Okay. And you were in charge of the media committee? Speaker 2: Yes, I was there representing the International Association of Women in Radio and Television. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And my responsibility was to put together some kind of workshop or seminar that had to do with media. And then besides that, I had some responsibilities with the UN [United Nations] as well. Speaker 1: Okay, good enough. Any other memorable incidents that we should-- Speaker 2: Well I thought that the, the conference went very well and a lot came out of it. The document that came out of it was called, the 'Platform for Action' ['Beijing Platform for Action']. And in that document it talked about the kinds of action that needed to happen to get women on equal status throughout the world. And people are still working on that today. As a matter of fact, in March [2006] we'll go and look at an assessment of what has happened since then. Story_ID: 571974 Speaker 1: You have been active before and after that time working on different women's issues, putting on a number of international and national conferences, both here and abroad and so forth. Could you just briefly outline a couple of them as to what they were? Speaker 2: Well I became an activist after my husband [Frank Johnson (ph.)] died. As a matter of fact I became a feminist after my husband died and got myself totally involved in trying to raise the condition of women throughout the world, particularly through the United States at first and then I worked toward international projects as well. And I've been involved in a number of them and have gone to every one of the, of the women's conferences that have been held through the years. And they were mostly every five years. And this last one was in 2000 and we did not have one in 2005. But in any case, women have not reached equal status in various areas, like for instance in, in pay equity, in various other issues that, that concern women. Women are not admitted in all-men's clubs and things like that. Women still don't have complete control of their own bodies in terms of abortions or pro-choice, things like that. So there is still lots to do and there are a lot of people that do it. What--we have some great concern is about those in my era know what is was to go through the struggles that we went through, but we have not trained our children about it and they don't know from whence they come. We need to give them more history of the struggle. They think that it was all there all the time, and it wasn't all there all the time. So those are some of the things that, that concern us in the, in the women's movement. Speaker 1: And you are still active with the American Women in Radio and Television [Alliance for Women in Media] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm still very much active with International Association of Women in Radio and Television [IAWRT] headquartered in India, and with American Women in Radio and Television and it's, of course, right here in the United States. So--and with the IAWRT, I do travel a lot to various countries around the world. Speaker 1: Okay. And you are still doing a program with the UN [United Nations] and women? Speaker 2: I'm still very much involved at the UN. I am the United Nations representative for International Association of Women in Radio and Television. And I still attend their meetings and participate in that and sometimes do workshops on media for them. And I am on their media committee as a matter of fact. Story_ID: 571975 Speaker 1: We are, are coming up now to the Bush [President George Herbert Walker Bush] administration and closing out, I should say, the Bush administration and coming into the Clinton era, Bill [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] and Hillary Clinton [Hillary Rodham Clinton]. What were some of the things that you were doing during that period, '92 [1992], I guess, to 2000 (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) During that period there was an organization which really sprang out of the Beijing conference [Fourth World Conference on Women] but was supported by the Clinton administration. The intergovernmental association, it worked toward improving conditions of women. And I was very much involved in that and it was a wonderful organization of--there was a member in this organization who represented every agency of the federal government, at least one member, and all women, of course. And, and they looked at conditions, work conditions in the federal government, as well as in, in the rest of the country in the corporate world as well. And that organization flourished very much and they did a great many things to support women's issues, which does not happen today. What--there were meetings at the state department [U.S. Department of State], meetings at the White House [Washington, D.C.], and it was there that, that Ted Turner during that time gave his $10 million to the United Nations [UN] and it's being handled by people who were in the Clinton administration. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. The--I, I do want to bring you up to 2000 and now we are, are thinking in terms of the Bush [President George Walker Bush] administration, 2000 up to the present. And what have you been doing dur- during that period? Speaker 2: Spending most of our time lamenting that women--the movement, the women's movement is practically nothing anymore and we're working hard toward improving those conditions. The Bush administration is really not the friend of women. And there are a lot of things that have changed since this administration came into being. We spend a lot of time trying to work with them and to work with members of [U.S.] Congress on, on various issues to try to improve situations to, to watch things such as social security, and now people are worried about pay equity. And of course, everybody seems to be worried about Roe ver- versus Wade [Roe v. Wade, 1973]. And so we spend a lot of time doing that and we, we work on issues where we can. And we try to do the best we can. Women's organizations are--there are hundreds and hundreds of women's organizations, some local and some national, and many international ones. And I am very much involved in the National Council of Women's Organizations, which is an umbrella organizations of nearly three hundred women's organizations in it. And they recommend something around 9 million women in this country. And you might have known one of the things that we did last year was try to get women membership in, in the golf club in Georgia [Augusta National Golf Club, Augusta, Georgia]. Speaker 1: Georgia, right, the maste- where the Masters [Masters Golf Tournament] is held. Speaker 2: Yeah. And we weren't successful, but we certainly made ourselves known. And now we're continuing on to work on corporations that spend a lot of money on their male employees to join their club and other clubs like it, but not on the women employees as well. So there's a lot going on there. Story_ID: 571976 Speaker 1: I wanted to ask you what kind of relationship did you have with the last two first ladies? First of all Hillary Clinton [Hillary Rodham Clinton], Bill Clinton's [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] wife, and Laura Bush, George W's [President George Walker Bush] wife? Speaker 2: Well I had a very good relationship with Hillary Clinton and she understood the needs of women. She was willing to work with us on various issues and we could always depend upon her to, to do that. I frankly have had no relationship with, with Laura Bush and neither has our movement to tell you the truth. And we, we haven't had anything that would make us believe that she is very much interested in the women's movement as it is. I do know that she has some interest in children and in, in elementary education, but I'm not su- we don't hear much from her in the women's issues. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. And I do know you are working with CCMC [Communications Consortium Media Center, Washington, D.C.]? Speaker 2: I'm on the board of directors. Speaker 1: Okay, and tell us about that organization, that's Communication Consortium? Speaker 2: Media center. Speaker 1: Media center. Speaker 2: Media center. Speaker 1: And that's run by Kathy [Kathleen L. Bonk] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And they're very much involved in, in the current issues that concern not only women, but for, for everybody. They will get involved in things like education and health and voting, and various issues like that. They not only help people prepare to present themselves on television on the, on the talk shows, but they also help to identify the issue and explain it to the, to general publics. They work very closely with people on Capitol Hill [Washington, D.C.], as well as people in nonprofit organizations. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, good enough. Is there any area that you think we may have missed in covering your life up to date? Speaker 2: Well I can't really think of anything. I guess you know that I'm very much involved in media issues as well. And I spend a lot of time work- working toward improving conditions for women and for minorities in the media in getting job opportunities and things like that. I think we've practically covered almost everything. Story_ID: 571977 Speaker 1: Let me ask you this question. How would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: I don't particularly know how I'd like to be remembered. I'd like, I would like (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I know that caught you off surpri- or guard. Speaker 2: Yes it I'd, but I would like people to remember that I tried. I tried to make a better life for myself. I tried to make a better like for those less fortune. I worked very hard towards the civil rights of people and when I think in terms of civil rights, I think in terms of civil rights for everybody, no matter what, what color they are or what, what their religion is and their beliefs are. But that's basically all that I hope to be remembered by. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. And I'm sure you all--will also be remembered for how emphatic you were and passionate you were in working to help other folks (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I tried to be. Thank you. Speaker 1: And, I, I don't think they will forget you as treasurer of the NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists] either. Okay, just wanted to be sure I asked you everything. And, you know, I wanna thank you for your time. And-- Speaker 2: You're quite welcome. Story_ID: 571978 Speaker 1: What are your hopes and concerns for you--for the world, for your race, for your gender? Speaker 2: Well first of all, I, I think that, I really believe that if more women held elective offices, not only in the United States but around the world, that we wouldn't be in war conditions so often. That peace could be made around the table and that if more women were invited in the dialogue, that that could happen in many countries, including this country as well. And I think we all want peace, but we don't seem to know how to go about and obtaining peace. And that, that bothers me a great deal. I would hope that minority children would have a better opportunity to, to become educated. In some countries, the university is free. In our country, it's an outrageous prices that all children cannot look forward to going to, to the university or to colleges for any higher education, and that bothers me a great deal. Having spent some years as a teacher, I understand those things and I'm very much worried about, about that. I would, I would--those are the kinds of things that I would change in this life. And then to think, that there are so many people in the United States who are hungry and who are poor and who have no way out of that situation. I'm wondering why our government or our society can't do better by those people. And that wo- that concerns me a great deal. So what I'm, what I'm really talking about here is all kinds of things that would make life easier and would change the lifestyle of many people. I've been fortunate, but there are others who have not had the fortune that I've had in my lifetime. Speaker 1: Okay. Well we wish as you continue your crusades that something you can help make some of these things come, come true. Thank you very, very much. Speaker 2: You're welcome. Story_ID: 571979 Speaker 1: At this point, I was the pub- director of public affairs for WKBS-TV in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. And in my job, I, I worked with public service people. The man on the left-hand side was head of an organization that took care of children. And the man on the right-hand side was from the Salvation Army. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): And what year approximately? Speaker 1: Yes, that's, it's around 1965. Speaker 2: This was the 'Dialing for Dollars' movie in which I was the hostess of that movie for a couple of years. And that movie, I gave away money to people whose names we had picked out of the telephone directory. And in between giving away the money, we showed a movie. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: 'Dialing for Dollars' was a national show-- Speaker 1: National show? Speaker 2: Was a national show and was all over the country and I was the first-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: This is a reception at the state department [U.S. Department of State] in the diplomatic rooms meeting Henry Kissinger who was hosting us in a, in a reception. Speaker 1: There I am interviewing this gentleman who is there to talk about his nonprofit organization. And there again, I'm doing that as the hostess of the 'Dialing for Dollars' movie and head of public affairs department. This is in Philadelphia, WKBS-TV, Channel 48. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: That was in my young days. That was before I went to Washington [D.C.] and got all my gray hair. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Approximate age? Speaker 1: (Laughter) I, approximate age, I don't know maybe about thirty I guess. Speaker 2: Here again as public service director I invited young people to the studio and I gave them an opportunity to see how television worked and provided them with money and gifts. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: There I am in Ohio giving a speech and I believe, (background noise) I believe I was telling the story of one of my adventures some place in one of the other countries. And the people at that table were people in the broadcasting industry in Ohio, Dayton, Ohio. Speaker 1: There I am giving out a check. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: I was doing a program called-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Here I am with the ambassador to the--from the United States to Nigeria. And the lady on the right is a Nigerian woman and we're at a reception. Speaker 2: I did a program called Community Club Awards in which I had people saving wrappers from products that we sold on, on television and we gave them money for their projects. And here I am extending money to this group of people so that they can move ahead with their projects. Story_ID: 571980 Speaker 1: Here I am giving again, giving out a certificate to a group of people who worked in public affairs and who are nonprofit people and who have done something special for the community. Speaker 2: I have just completed, I've just completed an interview with Spiro Agnew who was then vice president of the United States. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Year? Approximate. Speaker 2: Around 1970. Speaker 1: This again would be 1970 or sev-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: This would be 1970 or 1971, and I'm making a report on Capitol Hill [Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 2: This is in 1980 in Copenhagen, Denmark where we were having a mid-decade conference of women, a world conference of women. And I was hosting a television show that went to five countries of the world and we were getting here, we were preparing to go on air. On the far right-hand side is Dr. Dorothy Height [HistoryMaker Dorothy Height] the National Council of Negro Women. The other people sitting at the table are people from various other countries. Speaker 1: I'm interviewing-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: I'm interviewing Senator Richard Schweiker from Pennsylvania and that had to be around 1971 at--on Capitol Hill. Speaker 2: I was raising funds for a children's project in which we were providing closed circuit television, before cable was known, for children sick in the hospital. And Marlo Thomas, the actress, shared that with me and she provided a lot of the money and a lot of the programs, particularly the whole Charlie Brown series [Peanuts]. Speaker 1: Again, this is we're about to go-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: I did a lot of speeches around the country and this is at one, one someplace and I don't remember where it was, it might have been in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania]. Speaker 2: This is a program that I did once a week, an overseas program where we interviewed people who were from other countries or who were ambassadors assigned to other countries. I did this at the Pentagon [Washington, D.C.] once a week. Speaker 1: Here I am at the White House [Washington, D.C.] with Rosalynn Carter who is hosting my organization which was called the National Council of Community Affairs [National Broadcast Association Community Affairs group] and these were people who worked in public affairs. And I arranged with Rosalynn Carter to host them for an event. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: This is a picture of me in Belgium at the NATO [North Atlantic Treaty Organization] summit with Don Rumsfeld [Donald Rumsfeld] at that time. This must've been around 1980. Speaker 2: This is a picture of me with three of the leaders of the women's movement. On the far right is Dr. Dorothy Height, National Council of Negro Women, Eleanor Smeal, president of the Feminist Majority [Feminist Majority Foundation], and Martha Burk, president of the National Council of Women's Organizations. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): About what year? Speaker 2: What year? Oh this is around 2004. Story_ID: 571981 Speaker 1: This is a picture of Rosalynn Carter and me at the White House [Washington, D.C.] and there are several people joining us who are members of the National Broadcast Association for Community Affairs of which I was president. On the right-hand side are the two people from our Los Angeles [California] station and on the left is a, a young woman from the station in Boston [Massachusetts]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: This is--I am here talking with Anne Cox Chambers who is the daughter of the founder [James M. Cox] of Cox Broadcasting [Cox Broadcasting Corporation; Cox Communications, Inc.] and with the then-ambassador from Nigeria to the United States [sic.] who is currently the president of Nigeria, Obasanjo [Olusegun Obasanjo]. Speaker 2: Here I am greeting President Ford [President Gerald Rudolph Ford, Jr.] at a reception and we are in Atlanta [Georgia]. Speaker 1: This is a family picture of my sister and her four sons. One of them is about to be married and they are getting ready to go to the church. Speaker 2: This is a picture of my mother [Johnnie Reeves Arnold (ph.)], my [maternal] grandmother [Mary Reeves] and my father and it was taken right after the war [World War I, WWI] in 1917...