 Story_ID: 578291 Speaker 1: Major funding for the following program was provided by McDonald's. Additional funding was provided by XM Satellite Radio, J.E. Robert Companies, Verizon, The Coca-Cola Company, Dennis & Phyllis Washington Foundation, FedEx, Urban Trust Bank and other funders. Story_ID: 578292 Speaker 1: Born in the City of Chicago [Illinois], he rose to become one of the most respected musical icons of our time. He has left a footprint on the scene of American culture. Music, television, film. The HistoryMakers, the nation's largest African American video oral history archive is proud to present, 'An Evening with Quincy Jones.' And now to our host, veteran PBS-TV journalist, [HistoryMaker] Ms. Gwen Ifill. Story_ID: 578293 Speaker 1: I couldn't be more thrilled or excited to be here tonight with the chance to interview [HistoryMaker] Quincy Jones. Think about it. This man has done it all. Without further ado, please welcome Mr. Quincy Jones. Speaker 2: (Applause). Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Don't you wish you were me? Where to begin (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Guys, you guys know how to mess somebody up, don't you? Speaker 2: (Laughter) So many years. Speaker 1: It's unbelievable. Backstage, I didn't know they allowed terrorists in here. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: I saw [HistoryMaker] Bebe [Winans], [HistoryMaker] James [Ingram], [HistoryMaker] Herbie [Hancock] and Dallas [Austin], Jesus. Speaker 2: They let everybody in. Speaker 1: (Unclear). (Laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter) After all these decades, six decades almost of doing this. Speaker 1: It's pitiful. Speaker 2: It is--it's not pitiful. It's fabulous. Speaker 1: But Herbie and I have one thing though, we say, "We don't play that Mr. Hancock, Mr. Jones stuff." Speaker 2: Can I call you Q? Speaker 1: Yeah, thank you. Speaker 2: Thank you. Story_ID: 578294 Speaker 1: So tell me Q [HistoryMaker Quincy Jones], what drives you? Speaker 2: Life. Life and love. Speaker 1: In which order? Speaker 2: (Audience laughter). Speaker 1: Well, love, naturally (laughter). Speaker 2: But there was nothing in your childhood to suggest that you would be doing what you're doing today. In fact, there were so many things in your childhood which argued against this. Speaker 1: Absolutely. We wanted to be the great gangsters, 'cause that's what Chicago [Illinois] was best at. Chicago, they groomed the best gangsters, black, white, green or blue, whatever. They all--(unclear), [Al] Capone. And my father [Quincy Jones, Sr.] ironically was a master carpenter. And he worked for the Jones Boys. You talking about the OGs ['Original Gangstas'], these were the triple OGs. (Audience laughter) Smart, beautiful, organized, structured, elegant guys, and I remember the biggest whipping I ever had was when--was at a birthday party when I was seven. And Eddie Jones [Edward P. Jones], the boss of the gangsters, his daughter, Harriet, was five years old. She asked me to cut her hair a little bit. And I cut all of it off (laughter). Speaker 2: But you spent most of your time, your real growing up time in Seattle [Washington], which people do not think of naturally, as being a wellspring of American jazz. Speaker 1: It was about half and half. I spent ten years in Chicago. We left right after the Jones Boys were politely asked to (laughter) go to Mexico. My daddy came by the barbershop and picked my brother [Lloyd Jones] and I up, and said, "No, you don't have time to go home and get your toys. We're getting straight on the Trailways bus." And we went to the Northwest (laughter) 'cause he was a Jones, but he wasn't a gangster. But that's all we saw, and that's all we wanted--all we knew. And that's what we wanted to be. My stepbrother [Waymond Jones] was, whew, pitiful. He was a serious gangster. But--and then we went to this unclaimed territory in Bremerton, Washington, the Bremerton shipyards. I said, "Man, we gonna waste this place," 'cause, you know, we're eleven years old or ten years old. And we had seen all these professional gangsters working all this time. I said, "We could tear this place up 'cause they don't know what's going on." (Audience laughter) I remember the first, our first big job, you wanna call it. [HistoryMaker] Clarence Avant and I used to call 'em businessmen, was we stole a carton of honey, bottles of honey (laughter) and went out in the woods and drank all that honey. And I never touched honey again for twenty years. Speaker 2: (Audience laughter). Story_ID: 578295 Speaker 1: Tell me about lemon meringue pie and juke joints. Speaker 2: Right across the street from our house was the [U.S.] Army camp [sic. Naval Station Bremerton and Naval Submarine Base Bangor; Naval Base Kitsap, Washington] with the barbed wire, fifty-caliber machine guns and there was a big armory next door that was our recreation hall for all of the whole community. And we had inside tracks on everything. You know, I'm telling you, we had our stuff together. And we heard that there was some lemon meringue pie was being shipped in on Monday (audience laughter) and some chocolate and vanilla ice cream. So we were ready on arrival. And we broke in there and ate as much as we could, and then we had pie fights. And I went and broke open the superintendent's office and saw a little spinet piano over in the corner and was getting ready to close the door 'cause it didn't look valuable to me. You know, I didn't know people played them. And somebody said, "Fool, go back," God's whisper, said go back in that room now (laughter). And I went back in there, and I slowly went over to that piano and touched it with my fingers. And every cell in my body said, this is what you'll do the rest of your life. And that, and that one move, it changed everything in my whole life, you know. Speaker 1: Music for you was an escape. It was your form of rebellion. Speaker 2: But music was more than an escape. It was a mother. I started out in Seattle [Washington] when you had to play a white tennis club dinner, with white cardigan jackets, and play dance music and so forth. Then we changed our uniforms and go to the black clubs, The Rocking Chair [Seattle, Washington] and the Washington Educational Social Club [sic. Washington Social and Educational Club, Seattle, Washington]. What a joke (laughter). And the proprietor was Reverend Silas Groves, please. Bring your own bottles-- Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: --play for strippers. We'd do comedy acts. Man, we'd do the works, steal--all the comics who'd come through there, we'd steal all their material, and (unclear), do all these nasty jokes. And we--wasn't supposed to be in clubs. I was thirteen, you know. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So we pretended like we're smoking and everything so we could get in the clubs and it was just lucky that the teachers didn't--I had one teacher, Parker Cook, that saved my life, 'cause he said, "You're doing what you're supposed to be doing," 'cause I didn't get finished playing till 5:30 in the morning. And I couldn't--[James A.] Garfield High School [Seattle, Washington] was right across the street, you know. That's where Jimi Hendrix went to. And I couldn't get there till eleven sometimes, you know, but he supported me though (laughter). In fact, I saw, I thought I saw him up there in one of those joints a couple of times (laughter). Story_ID: 578296 Speaker 1: Did it ever occur to you that you were in the middle of something revolutionary? Speaker 2: No way. We were just--Ray Charles came to town. I was fourteen. I was, I couldn't believe him, you know. He came in, and he was sixteen or seventeen, but he was like a hundred years older than me because I was still staying at home with eight kids, you know, and two parents [Quincy Jones, Sr. and Sarah Wells Jones], and this raggedy stepmother [Elvera Jones]. And he had two suits, his own record player, two girlfriends, everything. I mean I couldn't believe it, and I was around him. I didn't do it like (unclear) did. I wasn't like that at all. And I wrote the dialogue for that, but I wasn't like that at all. In movies, they have to make up stuff, you know. This little cat was loud and cocky and talked. I never talked at all when I was little. I shut up and listened, 'cause I was around guys who knew what they were talking about, like [Count] Basie and Clark Terry. And there's one thing that Ray and I used to say every day to keep from being affected by the climate in this country at that time, and that, "Not one drop of my self-worth depends on your acceptance of me," 'cause we never wanted to--(applause), we never wanted an external force to decide what your identity was about. And we were really, really, really, really cognizant of that. And we stuck to it 'cause Ray was strong, boy. He says, "I'm gonna have three of my own planes in twenty years." In 1968, he had three planes, and Ray went, he'd land--he knew how to deal with money, everything because in the beginning, we didn't think about money or fame. We didn't--like today, the bling bling, forget that. Speaker 1: There was no money. Speaker 2: There was no bling bling (laughter). The biggest joke on Broadway when we were out there starving to death was in front of the Brill Building [New York, New York] was you'd see somebody being held by their ankles out of the thirty-three-story window, and the overcoat hanging all over his head. And they'd say, "What's that going on up there?" They said, "That's Jackie Wilson renegotiating his contract (laughter)." Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: All of the booking agencies, the nightclubs, record companies, everything--were all owned by the gangsters, everything, the Copacabana [New York, New York], the Chez Paree [Chicago, Illinois], (unclear) and Fish [ph.] and stuff and boy, between them, Chicago [Illinois] and [Frank] Sinatra, I met all of 'em. Speaker 1: Tell us the story of the first time you met Charlie ["Bird"] Parker. Speaker 2: Oh, I almost had a heart attack, but you know, we're so--Bird was never aware that anybody was around 'cause he was, unfortunately, what happened, he came from Jay McShann's band. Dizzy [Gillespie] came from Cab Calloway's band, and they had this new idea, but they did not wanna be entertainers anymore. They didn't wanna have to roll their eyes or dance or entertain and dance for anybody anymore. Louis [Armstrong] had to do it, and I'll defend Louis to death 'cause Louis did what he had to do, and if it wasn't for Louis, we wouldn't be here. (Applause) Everybody did what they did and it's a sociological music. That's what I try to tell my brothers all the time. Man, you can't say to throw jazz and blues away just for hip hop because it's all part of a--made millions of people's sociological experience, a terrible one. And for the '50s [1950s] and '60s [1960s] black artists got wasted. I'm telling you. You cannot believe what I've--I'd record with LaVern Baker, they'd send the arrangement over to the other side of town. Georgia Gibbs would copy it. Fats Domino would do his tune. Pat Boone would take it on the other side and it was split--the markets were split in the black and white markets, you know. So, now, please, yeah what would Jay-Z make now? Story_ID: 578297 Speaker 1: I want to mention just a couple of names to you, just first names, and give me brief responses of them, 'cause you knew all these people. Sarah [Vaughan]. Speaker 2: Sassy. Speaker 1: Sassy. Speaker 2: That's my baby. So she did her last record with me, which was 'Setembro,' and then soon she went in the hospital. But I worked with her forever. We did the first record on 'Misty,' I wrote her to give me a copy of the sleeve, she thought I was on my way to Paris [France]. And Johnny Burke had just written a lyric on it and started it, and I was just in the pocket, and did the album, 'Vaughan with Violins' [sic. 'Vaughan and Violins']. And we did the first record of 'Misty.' Speaker 1: Dinah [Washington]? Speaker 2: Oh, that's my baby. She did, she got me in the record business, you know. Dinah was, Dinah could handle the rappers today, but Dinah was tough, boy. She was really tough. She threatened me one time. The Dells were working with her, and she was dating one of the Dells. And so she got, she was gonna go with Morris Levy, but she was still with Mercury [Records], so she got mad at the new deal and says, I'm gonna record all of the songs I recorded before 'cause you have to wait five years before you do it again. And so she said, "[HistoryMaker] Quincy [Jones], I want you to rearrange all these songs, and we're gonna record all of them so Morris Levy can't do it." Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: And so I finished this for French horns and strings and everything, and she said, "I don't see any vocal parts on there." I said, "What vocal parts?" She said, "The Dells." I said, "You didn't say anything about the Dells," you know. So I had to go back in and write vocal parts, I mean on sixty songs, you know. We start the session up about four months later, and The Coasters sort of were hanging around there then, and I had some of The Coasters doing like some of the vocals for--until she got there, 'cause she was late, always late. And she came in, and she said, "Did you write those parts for the Dells?" I said, "Yeah." (Laughter) She said, "Take it out." "I just put all his clothes and shoes in the bathtub and set 'em on fire." Speaker 1: I got another name for you, I got another name for you 'cause I know this is another great story. Frank [Sinatra]. Speaker 2: Sinatra? Oh, my God. Speaker 1: Who else? Speaker 2: Well, there is nobody like him. You know, let's go back to Louis [Armstrong] for a minute. What people today don't realize in the music business period, is that back in the day, The Beatles, the [Rolling] Stones and U2 were Tommy Dorsey and [Count] Basie and Harry James and Duke [Ellington] and [Jimmie] Lunceford and so forth. Over here in these church chairs is Jo Stafford and The Pied Pipers and Sinatra waiting for a chance--when the musicians get tired of playing 'cause the people weren't into singers then. They were just into musicians. And they all had this amazing big band experience. When we played [Las] Vegas [Nevada] with Frank when he was with the Rat Pack, they'd start drinking Jack Daniels, man, at 5:30 at the steam room. They're messed up at nine, you know, no discipline. But Jack Entratter, who was the manager said, "What do you guys do to Frank to make him--he's so, he's so well behaved when he comes here," 'cause he is basically a big band singer. And the power of all those singers, Frank and Ella [Fitzgerald], Sarah and Peggy Lee is they--started with Louis Armstrong. They had to sing like the jazz musicians played. And that's why they lasted so long. Story_ID: 578298 Speaker 1: You know, you made something of a career of discovering smart, young talent that people didn't--may have otherwise overlooked. You know, you took a job on the business side for Mercury as the first black vice president at Mercury Records. And it was there that you came across this young girl who had a tune in her. Let's take a listen. Speaker 2: Hello, young lovers. And the biggest hit of her career-- Speaker 1: (Lesley Gore performs 'It's My Party'). Speaker 2: (Applause). Speaker 1: How about that? Speaker 2: Boy, you sure know how to blow somebody's mind. Speaker 1: (Audience laughter). Speaker 2: How about that? Story_ID: 578299 Speaker 1: I took that job at Mercury [Records] 'cause we got stranded in Europe after the show closed in '59 [1959]. And I'm twenty-six years old. I was a business idiot which I still am. And I said, we got a big, good band. I'm staying. We're--Thursday, said, we're gonna send you home. You're guaranteed transportation on Saturday. Said, no, we're staying. I just had a job in Paris [France] and Sweden, and, man, we were stranded for ten months over there. Speaker 2: (Audience laughter). Speaker 1: I mean I hocked everything, borrowed everything I had. And it took, I had to take that job for seven years to pay off everything. But then they put--made me vice president. But what happened is I was recording Nina Simone, Sarah [Vaughan], Dinah [Washington], Damita Jo [DeBlanc], all these people. And they said, you guys are budget busters. I was the only--two of the musicians on the staff. They said, "Why don't you guys add something to the bottom line and make some records that sell, you know." And I was cocky. I said, "Ain't no big deal," you know (audience laughter). And you have to remember at this time, we followed Bill Haley and Elvis Presley, so Lesley [Gore] was like Miles Davis next to the rest of the rock and rollers back then. She heard the chord changes in that ['It's My Party'], and she had a great voice and everything. And we were in Chicago [Illinois], and they threw this tape down--some of the guys were listening to it, and I caught it on the way back. And we went in the studio on a Saturday and cut two sides. Story_ID: 578300 Speaker 1: You know, there are no greater purists in music than jazz purists. So there must have been some pushback when you moved into pop? Speaker 2: Honey, you know, you think I care? Speaker 1: (Audience laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter) When we were kids, thirteen years old in Seattle, Washington, you had to play schottisches, bar mitzvahs, strip music, rhythm and blues, you had to play everything. Ray Charles, everybody had to play it. So they acting like I changed up for a sing--you can't--rock and roll came out of black music. It was the music they played in the black neighborhoods. That's not new, please. Speaker 1: (Audience laughter). Speaker 2: We were playing 'Good Rocking Tonight' and all that stuff, listening to Pee Wee Trahan [Johnny Rebel] and T-Bone Walker, man, when I was twelve years old. Give me a break. Selling out (laughter). Speaker 1: Well-- Speaker 2: You know, the main thing is-- Speaker 1: Go ahead. Speaker 2: --though, if some of these cats that are talking about that knew how to make a record to sell fifty million albums, they'd be there in a New York minute. Speaker 1: (Applause). Speaker 2: Trust me. And not compromise your soul, 'cause I've never compromised my musicality, never. Story_ID: 578301 Speaker 1: I don't think you did, but, you know, you moved that into films. Is that something you always wanted to do, 'The Pawnbroker,' 'In the Heat of the Night.' Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: You did amazing--'In Cold Blood,' you did amazing film work. Speaker 2: Thank you. Speaker 1: How did you make that transition? Speaker 2: I've wanted, no, I wanted to do that since I was fifteen years old. I used to play hooky and go see all of these movies, and I could tell Alfred Newman's sound from 20th Century Fox, or Victor Young and Paramount [Pictures]--I don't know how, or Stanley Wilson from RKO [Pictures]. I could just tell when I'd see Benny Carter's name on one song in the 'Snows of Kilimanjaro' or Calvin Jackson in a number or Thatcher Henderson's brother, one tune, but never a full screen credit, you know. And I said, I know I don't have a chance, but it is my passion to do films, 'cause they were all Eastern European names, you know. They didn't do that. And fifteen years later, thank God, Lena Horne played it for Sidney Lumet who was dating her daughter [Gail Buckley] and finally married her, and she played a record I did for [Count] Basie, and he called me to do 'The Pawnbroker.' And I was the happiest dude on the planet. Speaker 1: Television scoring is different from film scoring. You did 'Ironside' which, I would sing it for you all, but it would date me. But I do remember how it goes, and 'Sanford and Son'. People don't know that you wrote that. Speaker 2: And all of [Bill] Cosby's bombs. Speaker 1: And all of Cosby-- Speaker 2: Chester Kincaid, when he was a gym teacher [on 'The Bill Cosby Show'] and his variety show ['The New Bill Cosby Show'] and all that stuff, all of that stuff. I did a lot of TV shows. But that's how you learn the craft, you know. That--you don't have an entitlement being in the record business to say I can make films and TV too. You better go learn how. It's a lifetime craft, you know. Speaker 1: How long did it take you to write 'Sanford and Son'? Speaker 2: Twenty minutes. Bud Yorkin came to me, and he said, "I'd like you to go see the film on it." I said, "Who's in it?" He said, "Redd Foxx." I said, "You can't put Redd Foxx on national TV, man." Speaker 1: (Audience laughter). Speaker 2: "Are you crazy?" 'Cause we worked together with Billy Eckstine and [Charles] Coles and [Cholly] Atkins at the Apollo [Theater, New York, New York] with--I used to write all of Foxx's entrances. And, that man Cole--he was the dirtiest comic on the--Moms Mabley trained him and Slappy White. Are you kidding? I said, "You got him on national television?" And he said, "Yeah." I said, "I don't need to see it." I wrote it in twenty minutes. We recorded it in twenty minutes, and it was a big--it was fantastic. "Ah, I got the big one." (Imitating Fred Sanford's heart attack gestures). Speaker 1: (Audience laughter). Story_ID: 578302 Speaker 1: You know, I got to know you in the mid-'70s [1970s]. Your album 'Body Heat' was the soundtrack to our lives. Speaker 2: Thank you. Speaker 1: Am I right? Speaker 2: (Applause). Speaker 1: Did--let me ask you a question. Did you get in a little trouble on that? Speaker 2: I would tell you, but then I'd have to shoot you. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: Everybody got in trouble behind that. Speaker 1: I hope so-- Speaker 2: Are you kidding me? Speaker 1: I did too (laughter). Speaker 2: There was a wonderful, uplifting anthem that was at the heart of that album, and it was called "Everything Must Change." Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: And tonight, we have, ladies and gentlemen, [HistoryMaker] Mr. Bebe Winans. Speaker 1: Oh, my God. Speaker 2: (Bebe Winans performs "Everything Must Change"). Speaker 1: (Applause). Speaker 2: That's two we gotta record Bebe. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: We talked last week about doing another song. We gotta do that again. He is ridiculous. Speaker 1: He is ridiculous. Speaker 2: Unbelievable. Speaker 1: You're ridiculous. Speaker 2: Oh, God, whole family. I mean they're pitiful. They were on my label, Marvin [Winans] and all of 'em on the label--we were all together the other night. They make me cry. They really do. So beautiful. That's real. Speaker 1: You're tearing up a little. Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah. Story_ID: 578303 Speaker 1: --Here's something interesting, the song, 'Everything Must Change,' everything was changing for you. You had all the projects you could handle. You were as popular, as in demand as possible, beautiful women everywhere, and then you got sick. Speaker 2: Yeah, I had an aneurysm which is a congenital weakness of the main artery to the brain. I'd never even heard anything like that. And it's like sixteen strokes, right after that record ['Body Heat'], in fact. And on my--when my daughter, Kidada [Jones] was about six months old, and it's a scary situation. And after the operation, they came--'cause when it erupts, you know, one out of a hundred are the only chances you have. And the doctor came in and said, the good news is, you lived. The bad news is you got another one. We gotta go back in, in two months. And I'm--they didn't have all of that modern stuff then. They put a drill here, they'd saw this out. They put a drill here, saw this out and open it up like an oyster. And it's, it is no joke. So I made it two times, and so I figured God didn't wanna be bothered with me right now. I'm serious, because it's a scary operation. Speaker 1: How much did that experience change your direction, your life, how-- Speaker 2: Tremendously, tremendously. The doctor said, just say what you feel, so express everything you feel, the anger, happiness, joy, everything you feel. And it did change my life. It's made it better, 'cause you don't take it for granted because I think of what would have happened if I hadn't made it, you know. That was 1974. Jesus, I'm seventy-four years old now (laughter). I think back what have happened, all the things I would have missed, all kinds of things, you know what I'm saying (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, let's keep it clean here. Story_ID: 578304 Speaker 1: I have another first name for you. Miles [Davis]. Speaker 2: Oh, Lord, have mercy. I keep thinking up there of how heaven has changed with [Count] Basie (laughter), Miles, Dizzy [Gillespie], Ray Charles and Frank Sinatra. Boy, they had to rearrange everything with those cats up there. I'm telling you. Miles was my idol since I could pick up my horn. And I was at the Blue Note [Chicago, Illinois] one night listening to [HistoryMaker] Billy Taylor and [Charles] Mingus. And I heard that voice that I'd never--I was so happy to get to New York [New York] from Seattle [Washington], you know. And I heard a voice say, "I heard some little sucker trying to play like me on a record with Lionel Hampton," and I almost heard a heart attack. He was behind me, you know, but he wanted me to hear him, you know. And we finally became friends until, all the way to the very end. I did--conducted his last, one of his last performances in Montreal [Canada]. In his book, I almost cried when I saw he considered me one of his five best friends and all. We were very lucky though. We had the people that really cared about the pride of craftsmanship, the pride of craftsmanship. That was first, you know. It was learn how to do your job right, you know, and get your core skill and learn everything you can about it. My teacher said, there's only twelve notes. Learn what everybody did, [Arnold] Schoenberg, [Igor] Stravinsky, Duke Ellington, everybody. And it's the best advice I've had. Story_ID: 578305 Speaker 1: (Applause). Speaker 2: I don't wanna skip over another moment 'cause I have this on my iPod, so point of personal privilege, 'Razzamatazz,' remember 'Razzamatazz.' Speaker 1: Absolutely, Rod Temperton. Speaker 2: Yeah, great collaborations (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And Patti Austin, Rod was no joke. Speaker 2: Well, here's another great person who was on that album, who we've all come to love as well, [HistoryMaker] Mr. James Ingram. Speaker 1: Oh, Lord, have mercy. Speaker 2: (James Ingram performs 'Just Once'). Speaker 1: (Applause). Speaker 2: Okay. Whew. Speaker 1: You know, you guys really know how to mess with somebody's heart, don't you. Speaker 2: Okay, I'm fine now. Speaker 1: You know, it's--maybe it's the first time in my life where I've seen all of 'em together. I mean it's just mind-boggling. Speaker 2: It's wonderful, isn't it? Speaker 1: And be blessed enough to have God send all these beautiful people to you, you know, 'cause they don't play. All of 'em, they don't play. Story_ID: 578306 Speaker 1: Funny you should mention Bobby [McFerrin] and [HistoryMaker] Herbie [Hancock] because this night wouldn't be a correct night without hearing a little bit of Michael Jackson music. And guess who we have to perform it? Speaker 2: Who? Speaker 1: Bobby McFerrin and Herbie Hancock. Speaker 2: You're kidding. (Laughter) These are the baddest cats in the world. They're the baddest, the baddest in the world, they are. Speaker 1: We're about to see that. Speaker 2: (Bobby McFerrin and Herbie Hancock perform a medley of Michael Jackson hits). Speaker 1: (Applause). Speaker 2: Love you, man, Jesus. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You're blowing me away. Story_ID: 578307 Speaker 1: Now, you had to really love that 'cause this is the kind of thing you did. You took something, and you would turn it inside out and make it something completely different. Speaker 2: It's just passion, you know. And the rest of it just follows. Speaker 1: The most amazing thing about your career is how some people hit it big and then they fade when the music fades or the genre fades. You, somehow, survived R&B, jazz, big band, and then hip hop. You founded Vibe magazine. How did you know? Speaker 2: You don't. You believe. You try--everybody has a different talent. I can't even drive a car. You know, I really can't, I've never driven in my life, you know. But everybody has a different talent. And you have--I've--Michael [Jackson] used to say all the time, "I don't know. [HistoryMaker] Quincy [Jones] doesn't do anything. He just sits there and just holds his head, you know." And for everything, I do nothing, we can sell a lot of records, you know. But it's true though, 'cause, see, if you haven't done it, it's hard to understand, you know, because when you study orchestration, the first thing I had to do, Nadia Boulanger, she said take [Maurice] Ravel's 'Daphnis et Chloe' and reduce the entire symphony orchestra to six lines. That's what it all boils down to. Said great. I wanted to talk about orchestration 'cause [Igor] Stravinsky was, she was his mentor too. And she says now, take all twenty-five of those, those twenty-five bars and transpose 'em up, half step each. And said, when you get to that, you'll know what I'm talking about. And I did. I saw that French horns can sustain. They can't attack. All of that nonsense, you know. I don't wanna get technical about it, but you learn what the details are about and what orchestration is, you know. And that, you learn a chorus scale, then it's easy to be applicable to make it a television show or a movie or a magazine or whatever it is 'cause you--you know, it's simple as that. If you take a step of defeat, you retreat. And you're cautious and reticent and careful about the next time, 'cause you don't wanna make another mistake. You gotta cherish your mistakes, you know. They say you cannot get an A if you're afraid of getting an F. That's what it's about. Story_ID: 578308 Speaker 1: There's another musical surprise in store from [HistoryMaker] Mr. Herbie Hancock. Come on up. Speaker 2: Oh my gosh. These are surprises. I mean I can't believe this. Speaker 1: You can't take it (laughter). Speaker 2: How did you do this? Speaker 1: (Herbie Hancock performs). Speaker 2: (Applause). Speaker 1: There's nobody better in the world, on the planet. Story_ID: 578309 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, we already know you're not good at keeping count, but how many Grammys [Grammy Awards] do you have in total--and don't say you don't remember. Speaker 2: Oh, I think twenty-seven. Speaker 1: Oh, you think twenty-seven. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: That's not too many. Which is your favorite one? Speaker 2: I don't think about it. Speaker 1: Really? Speaker 2: I think about those fifty-two I lost (laughter). Speaker 1: Are you done yet? Speaker 2: With what? Speaker 1: With all this? Are you tired? You wanna stop? Speaker 2: I'm just starting, honey. Are you kidding? It's fascinating what's happening in the world today. It really is. There's [Charles] Dickens, the worst and best of times [sic.]. I traveled with Johan Aleman Shribedu [ph.] four and five hundred thousand miles in the Middle East, everywhere, Abu Dhabi [United Arab Emirates], Dubai [United Arab Emirates], Baghdad [Iraq]. I was in Baghdad fifty years ago with Dizzy [Gillespie], and you see what's going on, you know, 'cause we depend on two privately-owned news cable channels and an eighth grade newspaper. They don't know what's going on. They don't know what happening, I'm telling you. It comes from not traveling. Only 11 percent of Americans have passports and only six percent use 'em. Twenty-five percent of the house, only half of them use it. And the kids have gotta get nosey and go over there and see what's going on and see what's happening, see all the different--walk into their culture. Don't try to drag your culture into them. You know-- Speaker 1: (Audience applause). Speaker 2: --learn a few words of languages. Speaker 1: (Audience applause). Speaker 2: And it's exciting. Speaker 1: It's very exciting. Speaker 2: And Herbie's [HistoryMaker Herbie Hancock] on the road, he's on the road and Bobby [McFerrin] and [HistoryMaker] Bebe [Winans]. I see Bebe everywhere I go, man. I mean, it's ridiculous. Speaker 1: You are so-- Speaker 2: And [HistoryMaker] James [Ingram], all over Asia. That's the way you learn. Story_ID: 578310 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You clearly have no lack of curiosity and readiness and ability to keep discovering and keep bringing us new music. That's what we're depending on you for. Now, before we go, I wanna thank Lesley Gore and Bobby McFerrin-- Speaker 2: Amen. Speaker 1: --and [HistoryMaker] Herbie Hancock-- Speaker 2: Amen. Speaker 1: And [HistoryMaker] Bebe Winans-- Speaker 2: Amen. Speaker 1: --[HistoryMaker] James Ingram. Speaker 2: Amen. Speaker 1: I'm trying to be cool here, and Dallas Austin. Speaker 2: Amen. Speaker 1: (Applause). Speaker 2: And I wanna bring them all back to the stage for one final group number. Speaker 1: (Group performance of 'I'll Be Good To You')...