 Story_ID: 303467 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns, observing is Janelle Jennings. Ma'am, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: I'm Valerie Josephine Richardson Jackson, V-A-L-E-R-I-E, Josephine, J-O-S-E-P-H-I-N-E, Richardson, R-I-C-H-A-R-D-S-O-N, Jackson [HistoryMaker Valerie Richardson Jackson]. Speaker 1: All right, and what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: April 3rd, 1949 in Richmond, Virginia. Speaker 1: All right, and ma'am, what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm a broadcaster at the moment. I host a literary show on the NPR station here, WABE [WABE Radio, Atlanta, Georgia] entitled, 'Between the Lines' where I interview, usually bestselling authors, sometimes new authors, diverse authors on fiction, nonfiction, history, biography. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is--and you're the former first lady of the City of Atlanta [Georgia], right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date, I knew it was because of what the date was. Today's date is June 23rd, 2005. Speaker 1: All right, and where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: Right now we're in my home in Atlanta, Georgia. Story_ID: 303468 Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we ask as sort of a warm-up and they only require a short answer. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And the first one is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: (Laughter) You shouldn't ask an Aries any kind of question like that, probably lobster, maybe. Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: My favorite color would be variations of green, that's because I love nature, trees, anything green. Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: The favorite time of year is the springtime where the beautiful greens starts to pop up and it's also my birthday time. Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: My favorite vacation destination, I'm not telling because I don't want anybody else to go there because then it'll be popular and it won't be what it is now which is an uninhabited small island off of Beaufort, South Carolina. Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have--the last question is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: My children would probably say that it's, do second level thinking, which means, think beyond just the obvious, think for one more, couple more seconds beyond the obvious to what might lie beneath it; and I call it second level thinking. Story_ID: 303469 Speaker 1: Now I'm going to ask about your family history. I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Charles Richardson] side, but we'll start with your mother's side. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: My mother's name is Cora, C-O-R-A, Ruth Feggins, F as in Frank, E-G-G-I-N-S, Richardson. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: She was born March 15th and twenty years before me, so that would make it--. Speaker 1: Nineteen twenty-nine [1929]? Speaker 2: Like I'm thinking, yeah, I guess so, right 1920--she was born in 1929, March 15th, in Bracey, Virginia, which is near the North Carolina border in Mecklenburg County [Virginia]. But shortly afterwards, the family moved to Richmond [Virginia]. Speaker 1: Okay, now what do you know about your mother's side of the family in terms of the ancestors? How far back can you trace the ancestors on that side? Speaker 2: We can probably trace my mother's ancestry back, at least, four genera--well, five generations because actually I have a photograph of five generations of girls, me being the youngest. At the time I was four years old, sitting on the lap of my grandmother [Josephine Feggins], who was sitting next to her mother who was standing in front of her mother and my mother was also there. So that was five generations. And originally, on my mother's side, the culmination of the families were the Boyds and the Feggins. The Boyds down in Bracey, Virginia were quite an interesting family. My grandmother had fifteen children and my grandfather was a carpenter and a farmer. As a matter of fact, he designed his own family crest and where they grew up, there was only one school for the black children, which was about twenty-five miles from anybody, from where any black children lived. And so my grandfather bought an old beat up bus that he used to go around and pick up the black children to take them to school. So I guess that was the first public transportation for blacks for education in that side of Virginia, but he was a very strong man. And, and, obviously, his wife had to be a very strong woman to raise fifteen children, and those children all had large families, the average about eight, I'm one of eight. My aunt had thirteen. All of my other aunts and uncles had at least six. So we come from big, big families and I love that, I really love that. So coming up, that was the Boyds. The Feggins side of the family was from, rumor has it, that my great-great-grandfather was part Scotch Irish and part Indian [Native American]. Now I know if you look in just about every black family, you'll find some Native American Indian, as is in mine, and it was Cherokee and Blackfoot. So, Grandpa Feggins produced, with his wife--I think Grandmama had twelve in her family and she married--I mean my grandfather was a Mason, not only was he a mason in terms of concrete but he was a Mason in terms of the Prince Hall of Masons [Prince Hall Freemasonry]. So, a Presbyterian and a Mason and so from that side of the family, we got a very strong civic kind of commitment that probably filtered down into my mother because she insisted that, that her children not be bused twenty miles past our home to get to a black school [Virginia Randolph High School; The Academy at Virginia Randolph, Glen Allen, Virginia] when there was a brand new white high school [Henrico High School, Richmond, Virginia] less than two miles from our house. So, as much as it was civil rights, she was also acting on common sense which was a big trait in my family. Everybody talked about common sense, common sense. Story_ID: 303470 Speaker 1: Her [Jackson's mother, Cora Feggins Richardson] common sense was, why should I send my children past a perfectly good school that's less than two miles from me. So she gathered up my two brothers and I and, we certainly didn't want to integrate that high school [Henrico High School, Richmond, Virginia] and we were happy where we were and had black friends and black schools and--but my mother insisted that we go over and that we sign up and integrate, well not to integrate but to sign up to go to that school. As it turns out, we were integrating it which was not very happy, a happy situation for, for the three of us, my two brothers and I, because our lockers were constantly burned out and trashed and the boys would follow behind me and call me Sapphire and Ruby Lips and, you know, "Why don't you all go back to where you came from." When we, the year was 1963 and I'll never forget because that was the year that Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was assassinated and we had just integrated the high school that September and he was assassinated the following November. And as my two brothers and I got on the bus to go home, the day that he was assassinated, there were a lot of kids on the bus who were laughing and celebrating his death, which I couldn't even comprehend that they would be celebrating the death of anyone but they were laughing and talking and saying, "Ah, ha ha ha, what are you going to do now, your boy's gone." And it was--I'll never forget that moment when I realized, truly, how cruel some people could be. And I could get over the name calling and the burning of the lockers but I could not get over them disrespecting a human being, especially the president of the United States, that way, but--. Speaker 2: So they, it does kind of illustrate that they saw him as a, as a friend, a black friend-- Speaker 1: Absolutely. Speaker 2: --I guess, in a way. Speaker 1: Oh, absolutely. They saw JFK [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] as a friend of the black people, right, but they say that, what goes, well, it turns out that each of my brothers and I made a very significant impact on the school before we left and our names are, as you would say, encoded in the history of the school. My oldest brother was a great football player. The younger brother was a great artist who sculptured a bust or the head of an Indian [Native American] because the name of the school, the nickname was the Warriors and so he sculptured a head of an Indian warrior that was so excellent that the principal had it shipped off to somewhere in Indiana and set in bronze and it stood outside of the school for twenty years until vandals destroyed it and tore it down, but that was his mark. And then my mark was that I became the, they started, for the first time, having homecoming queens, or the, what would be considered the similar of the, what would be considered the same thing as a homecoming queen. It was a contest called, The Miss Warrior Contest and a friend of mine urged me to, to get in. I said, "Oh, I would never win, you know, I'm black." And she says, she says, "I think, you know, they might see beyond that if they knew what you were really about." And so there was a talent show and there was a question, it was based on like the Miss America contest and I sang and danced to 'The Shadow of Your Smile' and I won the talent competition and I won the logic competition. They asked me what did I think was the most significant contribution in the last two hundred years in this country, or the most significant event to occur in the past two hundred years? And I said that I thought it was the Industrial Revolution and I guess they liked that answer. I went on to expand but, anyway, when the voting was all done, not only had I won the Miss Warrior contest but I had also won the Miss Congeniality trophy and it, from the other girls. So that, to me, kind of said that you can overcome stereotypes in terms of presenting an image to people who don't know you if you continue to show what you're about. Story_ID: 303471 Speaker 1: I wanted to go back and ask you if you, are there any stories about your mother's [Cora Feggins Richardson] side of the family-- Speaker 2: Right, right, we were talking-- Speaker 1: --any stories about the, you know, we go back five generations, are there any stories about slavery or, or about the Civil War or-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --or even beyond that, that's a long way to go? Speaker 2: Well, yes it is. When my great-grandmother Boyd--my great-grandfather John Boyd and my great-grandmother Hattie Boyd, Hattie Boyd was a very, very fair woman and when they were traveling, they were going to travel from Bracey, Virginia to Baltimore, Maryland to get married but on the trains they were, you know, the cars were segregated, and so when my mother, when my great-grandmother and my great-grandfather got on the train to head to Baltimore, they refused to allow my mother, or rather my great-grandfather--let me back up, they refused to allow my great-grandfather to be, to sit in the same coach with my great-grandmother because they thought that she was white. And so she tried to insist that she was not white and that this was her husband-to-be and they still refused to allow them to sit together. So, they didn't let them on the train. So they waited another day and the next day they went to the train station and my great-great-great mother, great-great-grandmother, bought her ticket and then she said, "I also have to buy one for my helper." And so, he passed as her coachman to be able to ride the train with her to Baltimore, Maryland. Speaker 1: So is this in the 1890s or so or, what do you think? Speaker 2: Probably about 18--late 1890s. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes, early 1900s. I don't know the exact date on it. That was one instance of just ways that we would try to circumvent the system and in a big, big, big family like that, oftentimes I remember we, when we traveled as little children to Long Island [New York] to see our grandparents, my father [Charles Richardson] would send the fairest of us into the grocery store to get the food or whatever and bring it back out to us to the car because that would be the only way we could get it, so--. Speaker 1: Now in your family, sometimes in black families that have like white ancestors there, there's actually a cordial relationship between the ancestors and the, the white society and the, and the, of course the African side-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --on some level and is, was that true on your family or did you or was it-- Speaker 2: On the Feggins side of the family, we were aware of what would be considered white relatives and as in, and you wonder how it gets to be that way but most often it's because the slave master had a white family and a black family and once I was at a family reunion many years ago and I was talking to some other Feggins and I said to them, "I wonder." No I don't think I want to put this on there, never mind, scratch that. Speaker 1: Well, that's a, you mean, you took us right to the edge (laughter). Well, it's--. Speaker 2: Well, this is about black history. Speaker 1: Well, it is, yeah, I mean, that's what you could tell, yeah. Speaker 2: Well, okay I'll say it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: At a family reunion many years ago, I was talking to another Feggins and I was thinking about the very question of white Feggins and black Feggins and I asked her, I said, "I've often been curious about where the white side of the Feggins are and who they might be." And she looked at me and she said, "You are." Not (laughter). Speaker 1: What did she mean by that? I mean, I can't think that--. Speaker 2: That's what I thought. I was like, "What do you mean by that?" And I guess because my great-great-great grandfather was considered maybe, because he had no black blood, just Indian [Native American], and, and Scotch Irish, maybe that's why but, I don't want to, I don't want to claim that, you know, because I, I've never ever considered myself white nor ever wanted to be. I'm very proud of what I am. I'm not ashamed of the white blood in me but I'm definitely, I'm among my people. Speaker 1: Okay, well that's, that's interesting. That's American history. I mean, there's some, these kind of-- Speaker 2: We're all so mixed up (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) relationships, yeah. Story_ID: 303472 Speaker 1: Point, if I can just digress for a moment? I was interviewing an author, Pat Williams, Patricia Williams [Patricia J. Williams], a great black female scholar and we were talking about ancestors who had passed in her history who had passed as white. And so I said, "Do you have any numbers about how many blacks may have passed or for that matter, how many whites, you know, passed over into the black race and became a part of that race when they were no longer accepted by the white race?" And she said, "Well, you know, the numbers are, you know, huge on, we don't have any definitive numbers on how many blacks may have passed because it's no way to even begin to imagine how to count that." She says, "But what we do know, is that if you're white and that your family has been in this country for more than two generations, there's a three-fifths probability that you have black blood in you." So, there you go. Speaker 2: That's interesting. Speaker 1: We're all colored (laughter). Story_ID: 303473 Speaker 1: Now did your mother [Cora Feggins Richardson] talk about growing up? Did she have any good stories about growing up and did she grow up in--? Speaker 2: My mother grew up in, mostly in Richmond, Virginia. Typical childhood. Went to Armstrong High School [Richmond, Virginia] and had, relatively, a normal black childhood. I do think that there were instances where she downplayed, not downplayed, but didn't bother to indicate that she was, as they said back then, colored. It's like what, don't ask, don't tell because for many years she was a bookkeeper in a white bank in Richmond, Virginia and I never really thought about it 'til I got older, how did she get to work in a bank back in those days, back in the '60s [1960s] and, you know, the late '50s [1950s] because they weren't hiring blacks? And so I asked her, I said, "Mom," I said, "did they know that you were black?" She said, "No, they never asked me, I never told 'em." But they--you have to do what you have to do to survive and to get, and to work and I daresay that many instances that occurred among fair people. Story_ID: 303474 Speaker 1: So, did your mother [Cora Feggins Richardson] get a chance to go to college and--. Speaker 2: No, I'm the first college graduate in my family. My mother went as far as high school [Armstrong High School, Richmond, Virginia] and my father [Charles Richardson] went to the eleventh grade; did not graduate because he had to start working. His father died when he was about twelve or thirteen, and so he had to stop high school to help support his family after his father passed. He was the only son. Story_ID: 303475 Speaker 1: Can you give us his full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Charles Hoover, H-O-O-V-E-R, Richardson, and he was born on the night that Herbert Hoover [President Herbert Clark Hoover] was elected president, i.e., the Hoover in the name. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And his father, like I said, died when he was a very young teenager. And it's interesting because his father was the last Richardson, or rather my father was the last male Richardson in the family because my grandfather had no brothers and if my father had died without any sons, that would have, the Richardson name would have been eliminated. However, my father had five sons to make up for it and each of them has had at least one son so the Richardson name is strong and very much alive. Speaker 1: Okay, now, what do you know about the ancestors on your father's side. How far back can you trace them? Speaker 2: I can't trace them back very far because all I know is that my grandfather was a jackleg preacher and traveled around. He was also a chauffeur, a very well respected chauffeur in the white community for a very prestigious white family but aside from that, there's very little known about him, other than that he was supposed to have had a little bit of part Irish and Blackfoot Indian [Native American], one of those very interesting families where the colors range from, you know, very dark to very fair in the same, you know, among the siblings. So, but unfortunately, I've tried to research the Richardsons and because most of his siblings are deceased, I haven't been very helpful, or have, very successful in doing that. Speaker 1: Now, did there, are there any good stories from his side of the family that you can tell? Speaker 2: No, unfortunately, for like I said, there's very little known about his side of the family. I just know that he was a hardworking man. He always had at least two jobs, my father did, always. I can't ever remember him working less than two jobs but then, again, he had a bunch of kids that he had to feed, too, so, the work ethic was very, very strong in our household and we all were expected to carry our load and to get a job as soon as we turned fourteen in the summer and do something to help, so--. Speaker 1: Now he was raised in Richmond [Virginia], too, or, or--. Speaker 2: He was raised in Richmond, yes. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Did, did he have any stories about growing up that he told? Speaker 2: Well, the house that I was born in he grew up in, and his mother and father built, which meant that we had no indoor plumbing. As a matter of fact, the first house that I had indoor plumbing in, I was like about fourteen years old, but I remember him digging the, the outhouses, the holes for the outhouses and we used to have animals, pigs and chickens and stuff so we had a little farm on the house and my father was, like I said, always working at something and he was a very generous man with his time and helped with neighbors. When he passed, the stories that I heard from people about him going out of his way to help others was, was extraordinary. He'd give them their last dollar or he'd come over and work on their house and fix their shingles and not charge them anything. So, he was a generous man. Story_ID: 303476 Speaker 1: Now, is there a story that's been passed down about how your parents [Cora Feggins Richardson and Charles Richardson] met? Speaker 2: Yes, depending on who you listen to, my mother or my father, but the bottom line was that he was driving down Creighton Road, which is a road in Richmond, Virginia where my mother lived, in his, in his hot new car. I think it was a Pontiac and she was sitting on the porch, she said, and she saw him drive by with, with his cousin in the car and supposedly my dad had looked up and saw her sitting on the, on the porch and I guess it must have been just a, you know, an immediate attraction because my dad has said he kept going at first but then he slowed down and turned around and came back and started talking to my mother. And it's--I guess that was all it took because they were married for fifty-six years, until he passed away. Story_ID: 303477 Speaker 1: Who do you think you take after the most, your mother [Cora Feggins Richardson] or your father [Charles Richardson]? Speaker 2: I think I have characteristics of both. Physically, I think I look more like my father but I think I have more of the spirit of my mother. My father was a quiet man, didn't do a whole lot of talking, one of those kind of fathers where, when he said something, you knew you were in trouble. So he was kind of a quiet man and my mother was very gregarious, very outgoing, very warm, and it was a good balance. It was a good balance between the two of them. Story_ID: 303478 Speaker 1: Now, how many brothers and sisters do you have? Speaker 2: I have seven, I have seven siblings, five brothers and two sisters, and boy that was tough growing up with five brothers which I guess makes me the way I am now in terms of being quite comfortable around men and holding my own, so to speak, because growing up with a bunch of boys, you learned that they're just like anybody else. And so, I was never intimidated in terms of meeting men or dealing with men because, because I had that experience with my brothers. Speaker 1: Okay, now where do you fall in the--. Speaker 2: I'm the third oldest of the eight children and the first girl, which meant that I was the mother, the second mother in the house. My remembrances of childhood would be washing diapers and frying chicken. Those are the two most significant memories because when my brothers and sisters were born, they didn't have disposable diapers so you really did have to wash the mess out of the diapers (laughter). Story_ID: 303479 Speaker 1: Now do you have an earliest childhood memory, a first memory? Speaker 2: Probably my very earliest childhood memory, I must have been about three or four years old and I followed my two brothers who were, at that time, one and two years older than me. There was a strict rule that we were never to go outside of the yard because we lived in a big area on a couple of acres of land [in Richmond, Virginia], but we were never to go outside of the immediate perimeter of the yard. Well, one day my two brothers did go outside of the yard, up the hill to a little swampy area and I followed them and we all got our feet wet and everything in the swamp and so when we came back my mother [Cora Feggins Richardson] knew that we had been out of the yard. And I'll never forget the fact that they both got a whipping but I didn't get one because I was too young to know what I was doing in terms of following them; but they were blamed because they should have known better. That was my earliest memory was that I didn't get that little, didn't get that switch on my legs like they did. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 303480 Speaker 1: The only story that I have relative to the Confederacy in my family would be the fact that when we were kids and we would be outside playing on the hill in Richmond, Virginia, and we would constantly run across what would have been belt buckles. Once we found, or twice we found, pistols and--but we were kids and we didn't know the importance of it and we just thought it was, a joke, and so we would pick 'em up and look at them and then just throw 'em away again and as I got older and realized what it was that we had found, you know. It was like I could scream when I realized how much history I had in my hand and didn't realize it. So that's, that's sad that so much escapes simply because we're not aware of what is important. Speaker 2: Well, who knows what that stuff is, and we were, what later on or something like that, you know, but it's, you know, it's interesting. I knew that there had to be some--. Speaker 1: Relics all over the place in Richmond, I mean being the capital of the Confederacy, naturally. It's just unfortunate that we weren't more aware of it so that we could have, you know, saved it and perhaps taken it to a museum. Story_ID: 303481 Speaker 1: We're talking about childhood memories and, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? I mean, what did it look like and--. Speaker 2: Actually, I grew up next to a city dump. My house was right next to the Richmond [Virginia] landfill and so what we listened to and looked at all day were big trucks that came in and dumped trash next to, you know--I guess, I guess we might have been maybe a half a football field away from the, from the landfill. So, I don't know how many yards that would make it but it was close enough for us to walk over to and I remember as a child I would walk barefooted across the dump and wonder how I didn't get my feet cut but I guess maybe my feet were just tough but, you know how they say, one man's junk is another man's treasure. You'd be surprised at some of the things that we would find on the dump that turned out to be toys. Once we found, you know, a whole box of girls' dolls, and the clothes that, that went with them and I played with that for many years. And there was, my father [Charles Richardson] knew one of the drivers of the dump trucks, became friends with him and so when they would bring produce that they would have to destroy or dump from the, from the supermarkets, if this guy found a bunch of bananas that weren't totally rot--rotten, you know, that were just at that ripe stage, he'd bring them over and give them to my mother [Cora Feggins Richardson] and she'd make banana pudding out of them because you can't make banana pudding out of bananas unless they're really ripe, I mean good banana pudding. And so, they were healthy, they were safe, you know, they were, but at that time they didn't have, feed the hungry campaigns where grocery stores would take, you know, their excess and take it to some place to be used. So, a lot of times that good food still ended up in, in my house, in my family. But that, the sounds of those dump trucks, the smells, the sounds of the trucks moving the, the garbage back and pushing it back with the bulldozers, all of that was what I grew up next to. Speaker 1: Did that affect the smells of the neighborhood? Speaker 2: What did it matter then? We were only black people. No, it was not that bad I guess because they constantly turned it over and the ground would, you know, it would be organic, it would go back to the earth. They didn't dump things like sewage or anything like that. It was just paper trash, you know, materials, things like that and, and like I said, the produce from grocery stores. But that was a big part of my memory was that dump that we used to live next to, and it was surprising because it was kind of like set in, within what was a middle class black neighborhood. All around us, there were houses that were newly being built, affordable housing for blacks on one side, some housing on the other that were well-to-do blacks that, you know, were building homes on their own, maybe the post office worker, you know, who was able to afford a home but, but we were like an island, separated, from that, you know, we didn't have running water 'cause we weren't hooked up to the city and also because that landfill was sitting right next to us. So, the dump was one major memory and then just being one of so many children and constantly being the side of the family that wore the hand-me-downs because I think I got my really first new dress that nobody had ever worn when I was going, when I was six years old. That's the first dress I ever remember wearing that was brand new, that was just for me but we were poor but we were still happy, you know, because we had a lot of love and fun. And my mother and father were--they didn't always give us what we wanted, but they definitely gave us what we needed. And that's what I, that's what I try to raise my children on. Story_ID: 303482 Speaker 1: Now was music a big part of growing up? Speaker 2: Music for me and for my family, we enjoyed music. My father [Charles Richardson] had a guitar that he plucked a few chords on, but he couldn't really play it. My mother [Cora Feggins Richardson] was an excellent singer and she continues to sing in the church choir today. So music was good in that the children, I sang in the school choir and the church choirs. Many of the children did pursue music. There're two, three musicians in the family in terms of my immediate siblings. So, but I never mastered an instrument and I do regret that, and I'm still thinking about taking piano lessons. Speaker 1: Okay, now the church. Now, what, what church did you attend? Speaker 2: In, in Richmond, Virginia, we belonged to Mount Tabor, T-A-B-O-R, Mount Tabor Baptist Church. Reverend C.S. McCall was our minister and every Sunday we'd, you know, pile into the car and drive out to church, to Sunday school. And sometimes we didn't drive out. Oftentimes we had to walk to church. Story_ID: 303483 Speaker 1: And now I can tell one of those stories like we always hear our mothers and fathers would say, "Well I had to walk three miles to school." Well, guess what? I did have to walk three miles to school [Woodville Elementary School, Richmond, Virginia] and, and to church [Mount Tabor Baptist Church, Richmond, Virginia] and I did it when I was six and seven and eight years old; which was unfortunate, because at eight years old I was molested once when I was coming from school, walking alone. But there was no transportation, you know, to, we had no school buses and the city buses didn't run so the only way you got to school was to walk. Speaker 2: So, I would take it most of the time you'd try to walk with your brothers? Speaker 1: Yes, most of the time I'd walk with my brothers but for some reason that day I wasn't with them and that was unusual and that's--. And the guy that molested me was an older friend of one of my brothers of the family, and as they say, most of the time you're molested by someone you know. And he threatened me if I said anything, he said that he would kill my brothers if I ever mentioned it to anyone. And so for many years I kept the secret and it was only after he was caught doing it to someone else and sent to reform school that I admitted that he had also molested me. Speaker 2: Okay, and that was still while you were in school and you were still school age? Speaker 1: That was when I was eight years old. Speaker 2: Eight, okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: I didn't mean to go that way. Speaker 2: Well that's something, it's a significant event, I mean, that's a, that was--. Good and bad things make an impact on us, so--. Story_ID: 303484 Speaker 1: So in church, did you have a lot of responsibilities in church [Mount Tabor Baptist Church, Richmond, Virginia] or you sing in the choir, you said, and--. Speaker 2: You're really taxing my memory now 'cause church was back then. I think the typical things; I, I served on the junior usher; I always went to Bible vacation, Bible school and did--. Because the church, outside of school, was the major part of our life in terms of being exposed to things; church, school and the Girl Scouts [Girl Scouts of the United States of America] for me because I joined the Brownies when I was seven and was a Girl Scout for ten years. So, that was also an avenue for me that allowed me to be exposed to many things that I otherwise would not have been able to afford to do. Speaker 1: Okay, now you grew up when television was starting to become popular. Was television a big deal around the house or--? Speaker 2: Well, we didn't have a TV for a long time and then when we finally got one, obviously, it was a black and white one and they only had two stations. So we were kind of limited. The only thing I remember watching as a kid was 'Perry Mason', that's--my mom [Cora Feggins Richardson] used to like--watched 'Perry Mason' and we'd watch 'Perry Mason.' And maybe that had something to do with my, you know, the role model that I later looked for in a husband because I kind of married a Perry Mason, a Maynard Jackson, you know, the lawyer, the, you know, the advocate, you know the big man and everything but that's kind of funny. I hadn't thought about that before. Speaker 1: That's interesting, yes. I can see that, yeah, thinking about that, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, but I had a, I didn't have a very expansive childhood in terms of activities and things. We weren't--we couldn't afford to join Jack and Jill [Jack and Jill of America, Inc.] and do all those things that maybe had been there for many other young kids. So my, my escape and my avenue was books. I was an avid reader. Read everything. Was the bookworm. Checked out all the books in the library, you know, and take them back in the same week. But it was that, through books that I discovered the world, that I was able to dream and to know what was out there, to want to be a part of. And today I encourage reading and, obviously, with my show, my literary show ['Between the Lines'], interviewing authors, that has continued--books continue to still be a very, very important part of my life. Speaker 1: What, what were your favorite books? Speaker 2: Oh, when I was growing up, I loved 'Mary Poppins' [P.L. Travers], 'Nancy Drew' [Carolyn Keene], 'Cheaper By The Dozen' [Frank Bunker Gilbreth, Jr. and Ernestine Gilbreth Carey], anything that was, that was out at that time for young people. I, I loved reading. Speaker 1: Now were movies accessible to you in those days? Speaker 2: Well it might have been, but we couldn't afford to go. I don't, I don't ever remember going to a movie as a child or as a young--as a teenager. I can't remember ever going to the movies. Oh, wait, let me back up. We did go to drive-in movies where you could put everybody in the car, you know, you could put seven people in the car and go see the movie. Yes, we did used to do that when I was a teenager or about twelve or thirteen I remember going to the drive-in with my parents [Cora Feggins Richardson and Charles Richardson] but as far as the movie theatre, no, we, we didn't do that. Story_ID: 303485 Speaker 1: My mother [Cora Feggins Richardson] had four children and then she had a six year hiatus and then she had four more children. So that second set was basically mine to help raise and those are the babies that I changed the diapers on. And I dropped my brother down the stairs one time and (laughter), which is--. He survived. But I'm sorry, I forgot the question. I was thinking about my brother rolling down the stairs. Speaker 2: I was asking you what you were like as a little girl. Speaker 1: Oh, as a little girl, okay, as a little girl. I was--my mother says I was frisky and a tattletale. So, whatever that means. I was probably very inquisitive and just liked to be a part of whatever was going on. Speaker 2: Did your brothers pick on you? You know, big brothers always pick on the sisters. Speaker 1: They always picked on me and they broke my toys (laughter) but, but like I said, it made me a stronger person because I learned how to stand up for myself, you know, and, and physically defend myself, you know, when they would try to bop me on the side of the head or whatever. But it really gave me, like I said, the ability to, to take, to stand up for myself and to, and to not be afraid of anyone, you know, including boys or men. Story_ID: 303486 Speaker 1: What was the name of your grade school; what--that you attended? Speaker 2: Well, the very first elementary school that I went to was Woodville, W-O-O-D-V-I-L-L-E, Woodville Elementary School [Richmond, Virginia] which was the predecessor or rather which followed the Woodville Elementary School that my mother [Cora Feggins Richardson] went to when it was all one room. They had the elementary and the high school, everything in one room and that was called Woodville School and then they broke it up and made an elementary school and that's--the elementary school is where I went to school. Speaker 1: Now is that the one that was twenty-five miles away? Speaker 2: That was, not twenty-five-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --but it was three miles away that we had to walk to. So that was the very first school and then as we got older, there was a school built closer to us in the public projects, in the public housing that had been built near us. After they moved the dump out, they put in public housing [Whitcomb Court, Richmond, Virginia]. And so we went to the school that was basically built for the public housing community, which was called Whitcomb Court [Whitcomb Court Elementary School, Richmond, Virginia]. Speaker 1: So the public housing was built over the, what used to be the dump? Speaker 2: Part of it. Speaker 1: Okay, so Whitcomb Court. Now, how do you spell that, W--. Speaker 2: W-H-I-T-C-O-M-B. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So how old were you when you went to Whitcomb Court? Speaker 2: When I went to Whitcomb Court I was probably, let's see, Whitcomb was fifth grade so around the fourth or the fifth grade I went there-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --about, probably about the fourth grade. Speaker 1: Now, are there any memorable teachers in grade school that--. Speaker 2: Oh, yes, I have two teachers in particular that I remember. One was Ms. Clark, Ms. Beatrice Clark. She was a Delta [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority] and I'll never forget when she took us to Virginia Union [Virginia Union University, Richmond, Virginia], Union, Virginia Union University where she had gone to school. Speaker 1: That's right in Petersburg [Virginia], right? Speaker 2: No, Virginia Union is in Richmond [Virginia]. Speaker 1: It's in, it's in Richmond, okay. Speaker 2: It's in Richmond. And she took a group of her little fourth graders over to Virginia Union and I, there was the Delta Sorority was on line at that particular time and so when she walked past, as a, as a graduated Delta, they did this flamboyant bow to her. You know, said, "Ms. Clark, good morning, Ms. Clark," you know, and I was like, "Whoa, that's impressive." She, she commands that kind of attention, you know, being a Delta, but she was very, very strong in my life in terms of a role model, the image of what a lady should be, you know, a single woman, a young professional woman. She introduced me to the Girl Scouts [Girl Scouts of the United States of America] and helped me, you know, in the school and all the extracurricular activities. I liked acting and singing. And so she would always work with me on that. So, Ms. Clark was definitely the woman, the one teacher that left a lasting impression on me. Speaker 1: Okay, now did you have a favorite subject in school? Speaker 2: Reading. My favorite subject was English and reading. I liked that. I liked art too because my mother was an excellent artist although she never developed her potential but she could draw extremely well and it filtered down into her children because at least three of us have that capability and I mentioned earlier my brother that had sculptured the Indian [Native American] head, that was bronzed and sat in front of the high school [Henrico High School, Richmond, Virginia]. So, art and reading, probably, are my two favorite subjects. Speaker 1: Okay, so you could draw pretty well, then? Okay. Speaker 2: Yes, I just, I don't take the time to pursue it though. Maynard [Maynard Jackson] would buy me, he brought me canvases and he bought me paint and he brought me, you know, easels and everything to try to get me back into painting but I just--you have to be in the right frame of mind and I guess I was too busy raising the babies and being first lady [of Atlanta, Georgia] and doing my jobs, you know, it's just not conducive to, to painting, so--. Speaker 1: Okay, so were you, were you called upon to, to do art work in school a lot? Speaker 2: Yes, a lot. I used to have to draw things. Cut out all the letters, you know, paste the bulletin boards. Oh, yeah, I was a big bulletin board person. I loved working on the bulletin boards. So, yeah, I was used. Story_ID: 303487 Speaker 1: Well, you sound like you're pretty--should have been a pretty popular student now, I guess, with all of that going on? Singing, art and liking to read, you know, reading all those books and stuff that will help you. Did--were you a good student in terms of, did you like school a lot? Speaker 2: Oh, I loved school. I was a pretty good student. I think I cried when I got my first C, that was about ninth grade [at Henrico High School, Richmond, Virginia]. I got a C in math but I was a pretty good student overall and liked learning which was, I think, probably, I, I guess, I have what you call a curious mind. I prefer to think of it as a Leonardo da Vinci mind because he always said, "Imagination and curiosity is what will, you know, all the things that enabled you to create and to think and to solve problems." So I was, I've always had a very curious mind. I'm just always willing to learn and know and just, whenever there was an opportunity, which is why I love the work that I do in reading the books and interviewing the authors [on 'Between the Lines'] because in every book, whether its fiction or history or biography, I learn something, something, even if it's just a little, you know, tidbit. I may never use it, but surprisingly enough a lot of it I do get to use during the course of conversations with people about other things. I remember something from a book and I can, I can bring it in and help to expand on the, this conversation. Story_ID: 303488 Speaker 1: What about high school? Now, where did you go to high school? Speaker 2: Well, high school I, my two brothers and I integrated an all-white high school in Richmond, Virginia. Speaker 1: That's the Warriors, the--. Speaker 2: That's the Warriors, right. Speaker 1: And what, what was the name of the school? Speaker 2: The name of the school was Henrico High School [Richmond, Virginia]. Speaker 1: Henrico, okay. Speaker 2: H-E-N-R-I-C-O, Henrico High School. And as I mentioned, my mother [Cora Feggins Richardson] just thought it was absolutely ridiculous to have us bused, you know, nineteen, twenty miles past Henrico High School to go to Virginia Randolph [Virginia Randolph High School; The Academy at Virginia Randolph, Glen Allen, Virginia], which was the colored school, to go to Virginia Randolph to go to school. And so she insisted that we go up and apply and when we, one of the charges, or one of the accusations from the students when we first started going to class was that the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] had hired us to integrate their school. So this was the rumor, that the NAACP had hired us to integrate their school. Speaker 1: It would have been a lot easier had they hired you, right? Speaker 2: It would have been a lot easier had they hired us, but, no, they didn't hire us. This was simply done out of the common sense philosophy of my mother. As far as--I do remember, though, because there were no other blacks in the high school that we were in, where they burned our lockers and, you know, harassed us, oftentimes I would have to hook up with, you know, black friends for whatever social activities we had. Because in the white school, you know, obviously I didn't date anybody, I didn't, you know, they didn't want me in the clubs, so forth and so on. But I would hang out with the few black kids that I did know from when I used to go to a black junior high school, and it was through them that I became involved in the civil rights and I would, I marched a couple of times, you know, for a, for better schools and for us to be able to sit in restaurants. But, but for that little link there from my high--from my junior high school, I would not have--other than integrating, you know--I guess that was a big enough thing by itself though to integrate that white high school; other than integrating that, we really didn't have a real serious role that we played, you know, in the integration movement in Richmond. Speaker 1: Okay, now, you mentioned the junior high school. Did I move too fast to take you to high school? Talk about junior--. Speaker 2: Junior high school was Benjamin E. Mays Junior High School [ph.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Benjamin E. Mays. And I was kind of a popular student there. As a matter of fact, I was running for president of the student council when my mother decided that we weren't going to go there that next year; that we were going to go to this all-white high school. So I was very, very upset because I thought I was going to win. And now I'll never know because I had to drop out since she was transferring us to a different school. Story_ID: 303489 Speaker 1: When you were making this transition, did you receive any instruction from anyone about how to handle what were going to be--. Speaker 2: Absolutely not. We had no idea what to expect. We had no idea how to react to it. Speaker 1: Did you, I mean, you know, in those days the Civil Rights Movement was on television, you would have known what nonviolence is-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and that sort of thing. But as a kid, I mean, people had to be taught to do that kind of stuff, right? I mean, you can't just go into a school [Henrico High School, Richmond, Virginia] and expect--you know, what did you, when they, for instance, they would burn your locker up or insult you. I mean, what was--did you all have any kind of operating philosophy about how to handle that? Speaker 2: My--only my mother's [Cora Feggins Richardson] philosophy which was, "Don't let 'em get you down." You know, she insisted that we go back, you know, and that we show up and, and she would say, "Don't worry about it, that's all right. They might burn your lockers but one day, you know, they're going to respect you." And she said, "And they might tease you about your big lips;" because in my family, I had the big lips, and so, she said, "They might tease you about the big lips but one day they'll appreciate, you know, your look." And sure enough now, all the white women are trying to inject collagen and everything to get these luscious lips (laughter), but that was the kind of, you know, attitude that she had. It was just, go back there, you know, and just keep plugging, you know. And, and that's what we had to do. We certainly didn't have the option of not going, she wouldn't allow that, you know. So, we, we just kind of learned a bit as we, you know, learned as we, by trial and error, as we go along. The next year, there were a couple of other black students to come in which made it a little bit easier but still, for many years, there were just maybe four of us or five of us in the whole school. Speaker 1: Yeah, (unclear), from what I've heard and read, Virginia was a tough place for--. Speaker 2: It was a tough nut to crack. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Tough nut. Speaker 1: They saw themselves as a vanguard of the South in a lot of ways and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --did not want to comply in any way, you know, so it was a really tough--I can appreciate the toughness of this. So, but you said, you all made a mark, your brothers, now, now your brothers, had they already started high school at a, at the--. Speaker 2: Yes, they had started high school. One of them was at Armstrong [Armstrong High School, Richmond, Virginia], which was, you know, the high school that my mother had gone to. And the other one was--let's see, the other one was right, was a year behind him so he probably had, oh yes, he was at Benjamin E. [Benjamin E. Mays Junior High School (ph.), Richmond, Virginia]. He was at the junior high school with me, Benjamin E. Mays. And it was interesting the reaction of, of many of the students because we got one of two reactions. One was, "Well, you can't be all bad because you're so light-skinned." The other one--. Speaker 1: It's called a left-handed compliment. Speaker 2: Yeah, right. The other was, "Well, if you're black, you should be black and stop trying to be or look like us." So, we were in a no-win situation. Half of them didn't like us just because we were too light, the other half didn't like us because we weren't white enough. So, we were in that, that limbo often of--and the funny thing about it was that a few of the white kids who were the most hostile were the ones who looked more black than we did; hello, you know. Talk about three-fifths of black blood and three-fifths of the white families in this country, right. Anyway--. Speaker 1: Um-hm, now this makes you think for a second, you know. Now, were there any students that showed you-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --you know, or what typified the students that showed you the most kindness? Was there a typical--. Speaker 2: The student that showed us the most kindness was usually those students who were also being excluded. The extremely unattractive or the extremely smart or those who were, for some reason, some, had some other kind of negative associated with them, a Pole or a Polack but there were, the other minorities, you know, who would, who would accept us, the minorities within the white race, you know. Speaker 1: Were there any Jewish students? Speaker 2: Yes, I was going to say the Jewish students, you know. So, those who, those were the ones, I guess, because they had a kind of compassion, you know, a similar type of history that they could understand what we were going through. But there were one or two who stood out, who reached out. One was Irene Stanton [ph.], bright redhead, fury, fiery redhead girl who was extremely bright. And the other one was a young girl named Brenda Peckowitz [ph.]; and people often made fun of her because of her last name, Peckowitz and called her Polish this or Polish that, but those were two very supportive people. Story_ID: 303490 Speaker 1: The question is then, how did, how did they counsel you in school [Henrico High School, Richmond, Virginia]? Did you have any guidance on the part of the administration? We talked about allies amongst the students and who they--what the profile of those allies were. Did you have any allies in the school administration that, that tried to help you? Speaker 2: Unfortunately, I can't really remember anyone that really reached out to help me which was very unfortunate because I didn't know anything about college. I didn't know how to apply to college. I didn't know about black colleges [HBCUs] or white colleges or anything and I got absolutely no information. I wasn't told that there might be scholarships for black students in white, all white schools or that black colleges even could afford to give scholarships or financial aid. I knew about nothing of that. There was nobody telling me about any of that and as the first person in my family to go to college, I had no one as a role model to ask or to look up to, to figure out how to do this. But that was a very, very big shortcoming, I think, in my high school which was that the counselors were not prepared to counsel the black students that were there and so basically we had no help, no help. Speaker 1: Now, did your brother now who's a football star, did he get any, any-- Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: --offers for college but--. Speaker 2: No he didn't, no. They just told him he was a great football player but that's it. Speaker 1: Now had you been at Armstrong [Armstrong High School, Richmond, Virginia], a black school--. Speaker 2: Oh, man, we probably, both of us probably would have gotten full paid scholarships to practically any college. I was a very good student. I made the National Honor Society. Speaker 1: That's about as good as you can get. Speaker 2: The National Honor Society and I didn't even get one little tiny $500 scholarship. I had to borrow the money to go to college and I worked as a telephone operator from the age of sixteen. I worked as a telephone operator after school, from six to ten at night to be able to afford to, to buy shoes, 'cause my mother [Cora Feggins Richardson] and father [Charles Richardson] were paying for the other seven kids but--and this is another instance of my mother's determination also and her fighting that fight. The first time I heard that they were hiring blacks at the telephone company, there was, there were two blacks working there, So I said, "Oh, we can--," you know, "I can go." Because I heard a young white girl at high school talk about how she had gone to the telephone company and applied for a job and she got a part-time job. So, I said, "Oh, you know, I can do that too. I need a job." So I went down to the telephone company and I did the interview and they saw my grades and everything and a few days later they called me back and said, "Well, we're so sorry, but we don't have anything available." The day after I went down there, a white girl from school had gone down and interviewed for the job, the day after I did. They called her back and told her that she had a position, that she could come and start working part-time. So when I heard this I said, "Well, how is that they told me that there weren't any spots available and I was interviewed before you were." And I might add, I was smarter than she was too, but anyway. So I went home and I told my mom about this, I said, "So and so at school got a job at the telephone company and they told--." My mother was furious. She got on the phone, she called the woman that I had spoken to at the telephone that had told, at the telephone company that had told me that there were no positions available, and she demanded to know how this young girl could get a job a day after they had declined, you know, to accept me, how this white girl could go in and get a job. And I guess she must have, they didn't give her an act--an answer to satisfy her, the next thing I know, I had a job. They called me back and said, "Oh, well, something did open up and we would be happy if you could--." My mother opened up, that was what opened up. But so we have to, we can't just accept, that's the one thing I have learned that my mother taught me, you just can't accept no. Just don't always believe that no is a no. Sometimes you have to challenge it. Sometimes no means maybe. Sometimes no means not right now but it doesn't always have to mean, no. Speaker 1: Okay, so, you started this job while you were in high school-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and you continued to-- Speaker 2: Sixteen years old. Speaker 1: --so you continued to work after high school? Speaker 2: I continued to work from the, from the time I was sixteen, I worked every night in high school until I graduated. Story_ID: 303491 Speaker 1: What was graduation [from Henrico High School, Richmond, Virginia] like? I have to ask about that all. Speaker 2: Graduation was--. Speaker 1: You already said you had no--. Speaker 2: Yeah, I was--. Speaker 1: Did you go to prom or anything like that? Speaker 2: Did I go to the--did I, yes I did go to the prom but it was, I had a boyfriend who, and he was black and so he went to the prom with me but it was not like we had any fun. You know, the music was not quite the right music, you know, but, but, no, other than the prom, I didn't really participate in any of the social activities, a lot of times because I was working, you know. Right after I got home from work, I, I mean from school, I had to go to work from six to ten, I'd come home and do my homework, I'd work 'til about twelve o'clock at night, and then I'd go bed and then I get up and I'm at an eight o'clock class, you know, the next morning. This also carried through in college [Richmond Professional Institute; Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, Virginia]. I also worked my way through college 'cause that was the only way that I could afford to get through college was to work at night and to apply for some grants and loans. Story_ID: 303492 Speaker 1: Now did you win the contest, I mean, you were in that contest--. Speaker 2: The Miss Warrior Contest [at Henrico High School, Richmond, Virginia]. Speaker 1: --your senior year. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: All right, and-- Speaker 2: That was at, at the high school, right. Speaker 1: Okay, now did you, now you won the talent portion of--. Speaker 2: I won the--well I won the whole thing. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The Miss Warrior which included the talent and the Miss Congeniality, so, which was a shock-- Speaker 1: Okay, well that, now how did that--. Speaker 2: --to everybody. Speaker 1: Okay, now what was it, yeah, I just wondered what the reactions were from people. Speaker 2: Well, I think, I think that they were all, I, I think that they were probably surprised that people had learned to accept us, us meaning my two brothers and I. After they got to know that we weren't any worse or any better than anybody else and that in fact that we were as bright as they were, you know, the wall was slowly chipped down to the--so by the time that I became a senior, which was three years there, see, I had been there for three years before I got to be a senior, it had mellowed a little bit and it was, it was not as bad. Speaker 1: Now did any of the school officials have to crown you or, or that sort of thing or was there--. Speaker 2: Yes, the principal crowned me, yes. I think the girls when I won Miss Congeniality, I think was a little bit of a shock, because some of them might have voted for me because they didn't want anybody else to get it but it backfired. But I prefer to think it was just the, I really was a very congenial woman. Actually, I guess I was the only one that they all spoke to because they were so jealous among each other, you know, but I was the one who could be friends with everybody because they feel that they didn't have to compete or fear me, ha ha, you know. Speaker 1: So who actually voted on, on the winner? Who was it? Speaker 2: Well there were two sections. You had, you had the students to vote but you also had a group from the Future Business Leaders of America [Future Business Leaders of America-Phi Beta Lambda (FBLA-PBL)], which was the sponsor. You had a group of administrators from the school, so they voted and the students voted and they combined, somehow or another, I don't remember how they did the judging but it was kind of a combination of the voting. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, did this happen in the spring of your senior year or was it (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was in the spring, right, of my senior year. Speaker 1: Okay, so this is right before grad--graduation? Speaker 2: Right before graduation. Story_ID: 303493 Speaker 1: So you seem like you graduated [from Henrico High School, Richmond, Virginia] on a high note there, so--. Speaker 2: Yes, I did, I did, except that I didn't know, I didn't have a great college to go to so, but I went to a local university called Richmond Professional Institute [Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, Virginia]. I was one of the first blacks to go to that and the year after I went there, or was it the year that I went there? I think it was the year that I went there. The first year I went there, they changed the name because they merged with Virginia Medical College or rather, scratch, the Medical College of Virginia [Richmond, Virginia] merged with the Richmond Professional Institute to make Virginia Commonwealth University [Richmond, Virginia]. And so I was in that first Virginia Commonwealth University class and there were only about a dozen blacks, if any, if that many, in that class of Virginia Commonwealth University, maybe more like six. Speaker 1: Okay, now what did you, now were you living, well, you were living at home, right? Speaker 2: I'm living at home because I can't afford to stay on campus. I'm living at home, I'm working at night and going to school during the day. And my major was business management which meant that I was also the only women, excuse me, which meant I was the only woman and the only black in most of my classes. And that was interesting because when I graduated in 1971 and I was looking for jobs, I never knew if they weren't hiring me because I was a woman or because I was black because at that time both were negatives. I would come in and sit down, they would have a big company to come to recruit, you know, Johnson and Johnson Products [Johnson and Johnson Services, Inc.] or whatever, and the minute I'd walk in and sit down and start talking with the interviewer, all of a sudden the interviewer would start giving me all the reasons that I would not want that job. Not the reasons that I would want that job and that I would want to come to their company, but they would start telling me the reasons that I wouldn't want that job. Speaker 1: That's sort of the counterintuitive recruiter, isn't it? Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely, but, but I was black and I was a woman and it was probably more because I was black than a woman but they weren't even looking for women in business then because remember you're looking, this is a business major, you know. I got a B.S., a Bachelor of Science in Management, so it was not like they were looking for, you know, women that were usually more into the arts, you know, and the social sciences. Speaker 1: Now, were there any college experiences that are worth telling that you, that you remember? Of any mentors in college or any--. Speaker 2: Not really, I was too busy working. I was not very involved in activities, extracurricular activities because I was working all the time, plus they didn't have black sororities on campus. Story_ID: 303494 Speaker 1: That's one thing, I always ask people about this, especially, you know, since we're in Atlanta [Georgia] here, but now you were in college [Richmond Professional Institute; Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, Virginia] when Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated, right? Speaker 2: In '68 [1968]. Speaker 1: Sixty-eight [1968], yeah. Speaker 2: Sixty--yes, yes I was. Speaker 1: And, can you remember your reaction to that and what you thought about that? Speaker 2: Phew, shock and grief and the unbelief. I mean, you just couldn't believe it. You just could not believe it. I think it fired us up, the black students. Because I graduated from high school [Henrico High School, Richmond, Virginia] in '67 [1967] so, and then I went to college and there were a few black students there. So, we were very, very distraught and very afraid in a way because we were such a minority that we didn't really, we didn't know what to expect from this big, white university in terms of the few sprinklings of blacks that were on campus. But it passed, it was not-- Story_ID: 303495 Speaker 1: The few black students that were there [Richmond Professional Institute; Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, Virginia] were probably galvanized to--I think that's when we started the first black student union, as a matter of fact, the--a place where the black kids could come and we felt safe and protected. And so, that was probably a result of Martin Luther King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] death. Speaker 2: I think that happened like that in a lot of places, yeah. Speaker 1: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 2: So there were no teachers that really stand out as an important--. Speaker 1: Not in high school [Henrico High School, Richmond, Virginia]. Speaker 2: Or college [Richmond Professional Institute; Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, Virginia], I mean--. Speaker 1: Oh, in college? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: In college, college, college. I'm afraid not, unfortunately. Speaker 2: So after, after college, you're trying to, you're going to these recruiters, you're trying to get a job and well what eventually happened to 'em? Speaker 1: Well, what eventually happened was that all the white companies that I applied to said that there was nothing available for someone with my, you know, credentials. Now like I said, that could have either meant because I was a woman or because I was black but I did secure a position at the Urban League, as a matter--well I didn't secure a position at the Urban League, through the Urban League, I found a position with the Neighborhood Youth Corps in Richmond [Virginia] because they were establishing many of these community-based organizations. And so I was hired by the Neighborhood Youth Corps to establish a clerical training program in their secondary school where the kids came to get their GED [General Educational Development]. So I established the first clerical training program for the Neighborhood Youth Corps in Richmond, Virginia and that's how I used that business background. Speaker 2: Okay, so, did you have to actually train the young--. Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, I, I, yes, I, I set up the infrastructure, developed the curriculum, ordered the books that were necessary, ordered the typewriters, and I taught after, not every class, but I would also teach certain courses, so--. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 303496 Speaker 1: I was just saying that before we started the discussion about, when I read about the Neighborhood Youth Corps, I--my mind went back to the days of working for the City of Dayton [Ohio], at CETA [Comprehensive Employment and Training Act], and we'd have like a-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, right, right, RCAP [Rural Communities Advancement Program] and all that. Speaker 1: --a lot of neighborhood, yeah, right, a lot of Neighborhood Youth Corps girls would come in the summertime, especially and all that, answering the phone. It's ironic because here you had been an operator all this time, answering the phone was the crucial hurdle to get over, you know, for the Neighborhood Youth-- Speaker 2: Right, right, Neighborhood Youth. Speaker 1: --girls when they would come in and train 'cause they, you know, they often, you know, sort of say, "He gone," you know and somebody on the phone-- Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: --and I mean, they didn't, didn't know, you know, if they had to get that procedure down-- Speaker 2: Train, right. Speaker 1: --the telephone answering procedure down and how to take a message, that was the lesson for the summer, really. How to do that. Speaker 2: But, but it's an important one, it's important. Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, it is and who better to teach it than someone who's been--worked for the phone company. Speaker 2: Yeah, we covered that too. Phone demeanor, yeah, and people often say, "You have an unusual voice," and maybe it came from because I was a telephone operator and I had to, you know, because there was someone sitting right next to me also talking to someone, so you had to modulate your voice, you had to keep it kind of low and it, you know, maybe that's where I get this voice from. Speaker 1: You have a very smooth sounding voice which is good. So, so you didn't really have a model for this program, you just kind of create--you created this yourself. Speaker 2: No, no, I just used my common sense that my mother [Cora Feggins Richardson] taught me to use. Speaker 1: Now, you hadn't progressed to this secondary level thinking yet or-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: --or consciously anyway, you know, but, but-- Speaker 2: No that, that grew a little bit later, that grew a little bit later-- Story_ID: 303497 Speaker 1: It's interesting that you remember, you know, that your family had a history of, of, you know, slogans about how to think, you know. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Now, it does seem interesting, use your common sense-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and you tell your daughters, you know, "Use your secondary [level of thinking]--," you know. Speaker 2: Right, because I guess for so many years, that's all we did have. We didn't have the college degrees, you know, black people. We didn't have the coll--the fine education that, you know, that, that the finishing schools, you know, like many of the aristocratic whites and so forth. So, we, we had to depend on mother wit. We had to depend on common sense and, especially in those families that, that did not, were not fortunate to have a long line of education. In my husband's [Maynard Jackson] family, his--for generations, they had been going to, to higher education, being college graduates. You know, his father [Maynard Jackson, Sr.], his [maternal] grandfather [John Wesley Dobbs] but on my side, I didn't have that legacy and so you have to fall back on the things, you know, the, like I said, mother wit and common sense. Story_ID: 303498 Speaker 1: Ironically enough, after I had established the infrastructure for the clerical training program at the Neighborhood Youth Corps, about six months after that, I got a phone call out of the blue from the Wharton School at the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. And I'm going to backtrack here and tell for a minute how at, when I was at Virginia Commonwealth University [Richmond Professional Institute; Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, Virginia], a young black man came on as dean of students, Napoleon Peeples, P-E-E-P-L-E-S. And he came to me one day and said, "Valerie [HistoryMaker Valerie Richardson Jackson], what are you going to do after school?" And I said, "Well, I don't know, I'm looking for a job now, I'm interviewing," so forth. He says, "Well, why don't you apply to go to graduate school in business and get your M.B.A.?" And I kind of looked at him like, "I don't know, I just finished four years of statistics and finance and economics, I'm not sure if I really want to go, you know, and do even more of that. Besides, I can't afford to go to school." So he says, "Look, don't let that stop you." He says, "Apply anyway." He says, "You're going to have to take the graduate business exam," you know which is like, you know to get into law school, you have to take a law, or whatever, and to get to med school, you have to take what--well, you have to do that to get into, the business schools too, you have to take a graduate business exam. Says, "You have to take that." And he said, "So why don't you just take it, just in case you change your mind and you decide that you may want to go and get your M.B.A. from somewhere." And so, I'm like, "Well, I don't know." He says, "Look, just, just do it, just as a backup." And one of the things, the other things that my mother [Cora Feggins Richardson] used to always say would be to keep more than one iron in the fire. And so I said, "Well, okay, I'll put, I'll put this iron in the fire just so I'll have more than one in the fire," right, and so I did. I, I, registered to take the graduate business exam just in case and then I took it, made a decent grade on it and evidently this counselor who knew people at Wharton, had mentioned me to them. So, out of the blue, like I said, I got a call one day from Wharton, the best business school in the country, even above Harvard [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts] and they, the recruiter just called me and said--you know, I said, "Valerie Richardson." He said, "Ms. Richardson, this is so and so Johnson from the Wharton School at the University of Pennsylvania. How would you like to come to school next year?" And I was like, "Oh my goodness," I said, "Well," I said, "I might like to if I could afford it." He said, "Well, if we took care of the tuition, do you think you could handle the rest of it?" I said, "I'll find a way to handle the rest of it." And so, I got a scholarship to Wharton, they took care of the tuition, it's a two-year course but I did it in eighteen months because I couldn't afford to pay rent to stay somewhere for longer than eighteen months. I was living with an aunt free at one point but then I had to pay for rooming off-campus and, once again, I'm working my way through school because now I'm working as an undercover security person where I would go into stores, buy things, and to be, and check to be sure that the cashier rang them up properly, put the money in the cash register or did not pocket it or whatever. So, it was kind of an undercover security part-time job that I had and I also worked in the admissions office at Wharton to make money. This is how I got through Wharton, working my way through, and the minor scholarship that they gave me for tuition. But I made it through and I must have been at the right time and the right place in 19--I think it was '73 [1973], 1973, when I came out of Wharton, the average white male was getting three job offers, I got seventeen. So, perseverance, hard work. Story_ID: 303499 Speaker 1: Were there any significant people that helped you at Wharton [Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] that you, you know--. Speaker 2: The young man who called me who made the phone call and said, "How'd you like to come to Wharton?" (Laughter). Speaker 1: The one who started it. Speaker 2: Yeah, the one who started it-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --because he stuck with me closely, you know. You know, he said, "Well do you think you need--." He wanted to know if I needed any remedial courses but bless him that he asked, I didn't need them, but he asked, which was good because he was prepared to help me get them and he helped me find the job in the admissions office. His name was Johnson but other than that, I've pretty much have had to do it on my own. At Wharton, not only was I in the minority, once again being black, but also being a woman. So once again in many classes I was the only black and the only woman at Wharton. And all the white guys at Wharton had their study clubs or their study groups where they would get together and they would divide up the questions and one would answer that question, one would work on that one and then they'd come together, pool their answers and then they all would do their homework together. Well, guess what? Nobody ever invited me to be in their study group. So, I had to go home and do all the questions by myself and answer them all by myself. That was, that was very traumatic for me, that I really had to work by myself to get through Wharton and didn't have that support group that the typical Wharton student had, you know, i.e., the study groups or the, the buddies, you know, the classmates, the, you know, so. But at least I had the pride of knowing that I really did it, you know, that I did it myself. Story_ID: 303500 Speaker 1: Out of those seventeen offers, which one did you take? Speaker 2: I took one with Grey Advertising [Grey Group] in New York City [New York, New York] because I wanted to, to be in marketing; that, that way I was able to still use that artistic and that creativity that I, that I liked to have in my life. So, I was on the account management side, I was on the business side of it, but I worked with the creative groups to generate campaigns for General Foods [General Foods Corporation], that was my client. Kool-Aid soft drink was my brand, Kool-Aid brand soft drink mix. And so I was a part of the account group that created the campaign that's still running today of Kool-Aid man. You know, this Kool-Aid man that burst through the wall? Speaker 1: Yeah, he's the--. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: You created that? Speaker 2: I didn't personally create it but the group, I was on the group that created it. You know, the art director and the art group came to us and brought us the idea but I was part of the group that said, "Yes, that'll work, we'll make it," you know. So that, I can look, now when I look at TV and I see Kool-Aid brand soft drink mix, I say, "Go girl." That was twenty-five years ago but I could still see something that I worked on. Speaker 1: Yeah, for a while those commercials were really interesting. You see this Kool-Aid pitcher come running through a brick wall-- Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: --and he was, he was really wild, he was--. Speaker 2: They've tamed him a lot (laughter). But I enjoyed working in that area. I enjoyed advertising and marketing because, like I said, it did give me the ability to deal with the business side, but also to be still involved in that creative side. Speaker 1: Okay, so how long did you do that? Speaker 2: I did that for about five or six years until I met Maynard [Maynard Jackson]. Story_ID: 303501 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, so how did you meet him [Maynard Jackson]? Yeah. Speaker 2: I met Maynard at Roberta Flack's house in New York City [New York, New York]. Roberta was a mutual friend of ours. A great friend that worked with me in, in the advertising area, he and I were both friends of Roberta, and he called me one day and said, "Hey look, Valerie [HistoryMaker Valerie Richardson Jackson], Roberta's having a brunch for Maynard Jackson and we think you should come." You know, "Why don't you come and meet him." And so I'm like, you know, I knew who Maynard Jackson was, of course, but I was like, "Oh, you know--." He says, "Oh come on, Valerie, come and meet him." I said, "Well, I don't know, I've got to do this, I've got to do that." He says, "Look, I want you to meet Maynard Jackson." He said, "He's the kind of man you need, and you're the kind of woman he needs." And I said, "What are you talking about?" I said, "What are you talking about?" He said, "Well these guys that you're running around with aren't worth your time." And he said, "You're the kind of woman that Maynard Jackson needs." And I said, "Well, what are you talking about? Isn't he married?" And he says, "Oh, no, not anymore." I said, "What?" And he said, "Oh come on Valerie." He said, "[HistoryMaker] Quincy Jones will be there." I said, "Okay," (laughter). So, to this day, Quincy Jones laughs and jokes with us and says, "Well Maynard, if I hadn't been there, she wouldn't even have come to meet you," you know. But I did come and I did meet him and we did hit it off; and I think he was very impressed to meet, you know, a Wharton woman, you know, a black Wharton woman, right. And, of course, I was very impressed with him. And it was almost as if things were in divine order because when I was at Wharton [Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] working on my M.B.A., Maynard was elected for the first time as mayor [of Atlanta, Georgia]--in 1972 he was elected mayor for the first time. So Ebony magazine had done this four or five page spread on Maynard Jackson, "Brilliant young attorney, youngest mayor of any major American city," you know, yada yada yada. So I'm reading the paper, I mean the magazine article, and I'm about halfway through it and I just stop and I l- just look up and I say to myself, "Now that's the kind of man I want to marry." I said, "I want to marry a Maynard Jackson." Story_ID: 303502 Speaker 1: Describe the scene for us as you entered the--Roberta Flack's house. Speaker 2: Well after my friend convinced me to come, when I walked into Roberta's apartment and I, you know, walked into the living room, there was Maynard [Maynard Jackson] sitting, and it was almost as if he was holding court because everybody else was kind of seated around him on the floor and they were all hanging on every word, you know, that he was saying. And so I just kind of took a look at the situation and I said, "Hmm" because I'm kind of, I kind of pride myself on not being a groupie and so I said, "Well I'm not going to go over there and be one of those fawning, you know, people over him." And so I decided to go back into the kitchen. So I went back in the kitchen and started talking with Roberta and helping her fry the chicken and, and [HistoryMaker] Quincy Jones was back there and we got into a very serious discussion about his out of body experience, when he had an aneurism and he described to me how he was hovering outside of his body up in the corner of the room, looking down on the doctors working on him. And so, it was a fascinating conversation and finally somebody came back and said, "Look, have you met Maynard Jackson yet?" So I said, "No, I haven't." He says, "Come on, come on, you know, I want to introduce you to him." And so I went up front and we were introduced and boy I just took one look in those eyes, those pretty green eyes, and I was interested. And so we started talking and he found out that I had gone to Wharton [Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and he was very impressed because his cousin Bill Clement [HistoryMaker William A. Clement, Jr.] had gone to Wharton and got an M.B.A. and very few blacks, you know, had graduated from Wharton. And so I think he was very impressed with that but, you know, we talked for a little bit and he asked me for my telephone number, said that he would like to have, you know, give me a call sometime. So I, I gave him my business card. I figured he'd have to earn the home number, right. So I gave him my business card and sure enough, two days later I come back from lunch and I'm going through my messages and there's a message that says, you know, Mr. Jackson called, please call. And I'm like Jackson, Jackson? I don't know any reps by the name of Jackson because I'm thinking it's a, it's a production rep who's coming to sell me something or other, or wants me to use his production company and I'm like, Jackson, Jackson, I don't know any reps named Jackson. And then I looked down further and noticed the telephone number and the 404 area code and I was like, "Oh, sookie, sookie (laughter). It's Maynard Jackson." So I returned the phone call and that was the beginning of a beautiful relationship (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 2: Beautiful relationship. Story_ID: 303503 Speaker 1: How long did you all go together before you were married? Speaker 2: Well, let's see. We met in August, the end of August. Speaker 1: Was that '78 [1978] or '77 [1977] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Seventy--'76 [1976]. Speaker 1: Seventy-six [1976], okay. Speaker 2: August of '76 [1976]. Actually he had just been recently divorced that year because when I said to my friend, I said, "Well, I thought he was married," and he says, "Oh, no, he's not married anymore." And I, 'cause I didn't realize that he had been divorced. Anyway, we started talking and we, I changed jobs right after that and started working as the marketing supervisor in the Southeastern region for TWA [Trans World Airlines] in corporate headquarters. And so as management, I was able to fly on any airline if there was space available, to anywhere I wanted to, at no cost. So I'd fly down to Atlanta [Georgia] and have dinner with Maynard [Maynard Jackson], you know maybe, and fly back that night and that was the way we were able to see each other because he had, he was too busy to come up to New York [New York] and, and if I had to pay for the flights, I probably wouldn't have been able to afford to fly down to see him but things, you know, like I said, sometimes seemed to be in divine order. At any rate, we started dating and then he asked me to go to a person--Jimmy Carter's [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] inauguration with him, to the White House [Washington, D.C.], and that's when I called my mom [Cora Feggins Richardson] and said, "Mom, he asked me to go to the White House, I think he likes me." Actually, I figured I had to be a little bit stronger than that 'cause you just don't invite anybody to the White House with you but, so I went to the White House with him and then about a month after that he came up to see me in New York and we were on the Staten Island [New York] ferry. We had decided to take a ride on the Manhattan River and so we got on the Staten Island ferry and it was kind of a, little bit of an overcast day but, and there was nobody else on the bow, or the bough of the ship but the two of us. And so the ferry was just slowly crossing the river, or going along the river, Maynard and I were talking to each other and he was telling me how crazy he was about me, was his girl, you know, I'm really crazy about you 'cause neither one of us had said the L word yet, you know. We hadn't said we love you, right, but he was saying I, I'm really crazy about you and all of a sudden we heard this warning whistle like, whoot, like a boat, how a whistle will warn you that a boat is coming. And we looked up and there crossing the path of the ferry that we were on, we're standing on the end of the ferry, directly crossing the path of the ferry, is this huge ship that came out of nowhere because when we first started out there weren't any ships moving on the, on the river. This huge ship started crossing our path, it was gigantic, it was all white, it was absolutely spic-and-span, I could not see one speck of dirt on it. It was like a virgin ship, like the Love Boat or something, and we were just startled because where did this ship come from. Then we looked at the ship closer and guess what the name of the ship was? The name of the ship was the USS Valerie, spelled exactly the way you spell my name. So I looked at Maynard and I said, "I don't know if you believe in signs or not, but if I were you, I'd say that your ship has come in and her name is Valerie." He was like, "Whoa." He looked at me, he looked at the ship, he looked at me, he said, "Did you plan this?" And I'm like, "How could I plan this." He says, you know, "You're in marketing and advertising and you all do that sort of thing," you know. He says, "Did you plan this?" And I just said, I didn't really answer him, I just kept smiling. And he says, and then he said, "Are you a witch" 'cause he (laughter), I guess he wanted to cover all bases. You know, he was only half kidding and I looked at him and smiled and said, "Only my hairdresser knows for sure." 'Cause that was the famous advertising line back then by Clairol, "Only my hairdresser knows for sure." So I just looked at him and smiled and said, "Only my hairdresser knows for sure." But that was, to me, it was a sign to me. It was a sign and sure enough, obviously it was right, 'cause we've had, we had twenty-six years of a very devoted and faithful, loving, strong marriage. I was very, very blessed. Speaker 1: Okay, so, so you all got married shortly thereafter, right? Speaker 2: Yes, we got married in October of '77 [1977], you know. Story_ID: 303504 Speaker 1: Now, how did you feel about entering this situation? Now you were all, you're a high-powered businesswoman, you're out here doing a lot of things and, and all of a sudden you're a first lady, you know, and first lady doesn't necessarily have to be high-powered, she just has to be a first lady. Speaker 2: Right, right, right. Speaker 1: So, I mean, what was, how did you feel about that? Speaker 2: Well, I didn't know what to expect but, in essence, Maynard [Maynard Jackson] had said to me, come to Atlanta [Georgia] and help me market Atlanta instead of you working for General Foods [General Foods Corporation]. And so I had an idea that I would come in and I would just kind of help him, you know, posture the city, you know, in terms of its marketing, whatnot, but I really had no idea how involved I could be and how involved I would be because before me, most of the other first ladies had not been that, what you would say, active. You know, they did the tea or the whatever but they weren't really involved in nuts and bolts and I think I became what you would call the first active first lady. Maybe I shouldn't be saying that about myself but that's what I've heard other people tell me because I did get very involved in--I was a special advisor to the Mayor's Office of Economic Development and so I would, when, when I would travel with him, I would make appointments to talk with people in, in government about their economic development while he was talking to them about other stuff. And I did all of this for one dollar a year and, and then I served on several children's committees. I was very involved in the Girl Scouts [Girl Scouts of the United States of America]. I was very involved in his re-election, you know, the, after, you know, we were married, he ran again, but I represented the city in many areas where he wasn't able to be there. He knew that I was able to go in and stand in for him and know what the situation was. As a matter of fact, we were traveling once in Nigeria; Lagos [Nigeria] is a city sister of Atlanta, and he had been trying to get an appointment with the minister of industries who is like our secretary of state, or excuse me, secretary of commerce. He was trying to get an appointment with the minister of industries which is like our secretary of commerce, but the minister had been, you know, saying, "Well I don't know, I don't know if I have time, I, we'll have to see." So for several days, he had been trying to get this appointment. Finally, the minister's office called back and said, "Well, I can see you for fifteen minutes on Friday at noon," well, and Friday was the next day. Unfortunately the next day at noon, Maynard was being honored at a, at a lunch so he couldn't make the twelve o'clock meeting because he had, you know, this whole lunch in his honor. So he said to me, "Valerie [HistoryMaker Valerie Richardson Jackson], go take this meeting for me." I said, "Are you kidding me, I'll be laughed out of the room." I said, "You know how Africans are about women in business or women, period." At that time, there was still a little bit of chauvinism there. So he said, "Please take this meeting." He says, "Come on, you can do it. You, you know the spiel, you know what I want, you know what we need, you can handle it, please take it for me." So I said, "All right, I'll do it." So I went to the minister's office and they were warning me now, you only have fifteen minutes, you only have fifteen minutes but then when I got there, and they found out that I was a woman, that it wasn't the mayor, but just the mayor's wife, I think the minister was quite upset because they kept me waiting for forty minutes. So finally when they, you know, got ready to bring me into the room to meet the minister, they said, "Now remember, you only have fifteen minutes, you only have fifteen minutes." With me was the ambassador--was the embassy, the U.S. embassy's attache who was accompanying me to this. And I had said to him before we went in I said, "Look now, when we get in there, I need for you to kind of give him my bio so he'll know that I know what we're talking about." Tell him I have an M.B.A. and so forth and so on so he won't think that I'm just this, you know, unknowing wife that he's meeting. Well, the guy never did it. So we come in and we sit down and we start talking and I'm, I'm, you know, waiting for this guy to tell him about me but the guy never says anything so I have to go ahead and just jump in and start doing my thing. Well, we talked for fifteen, we talked for twenty minutes, we talked for twenty-five minutes, I got him to commit to a delegation, to send a trade delegation to Atlanta. I talked to him about direct routes from Lagos to Atlanta. We're talking for thirty minutes, you know. I'm trying to get out of the meeting now because I've got to get back over to another meeting. He won't let me out of the meeting 'cause he's talking, he wants to talk. So finally the embassy attache speaks up and said, well, "Mr. So and So, you know Mrs. Jackson is very qualified to talk about what she's talking about because--." And he looked at him and he says, "I can see that," and turned away and came back to me and I was begging, I was like, "Mr. Minister, I really have to get across town." The bottom line was, a fifteen minute interview turned into a forty minute interview with this minister of industries. Story_ID: 303505 Speaker 1: So, what all is sort of illustrated, I mean, quite a (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, okay, that was quite a, okay, I guess it meant, I guess I was talk--oh, I know, I was talking about being an active first lady. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I was wondering what we were talking about. Speaker 1: And being an asset-- Speaker 2: Okay, okay, so-- Speaker 1: --on more than one level. Speaker 2: --let me, so let me wrap it up with that, okay. The bottom line is, I think that I was able to be very, very helpful to Maynard [Maynard Jackson] and oftentimes he would say that I was his enabler. I enabled him to do a lot of things because I covered a lot of his back for him and his side and his front and everything else but I was glad to be that. Speaker 1: Okay, so is there, is there any other highlights of this, this period of time? This is an exciting period of time. Speaker 2: Hm. Speaker 1: The second campaign now, what was it, did he have a tough, it wasn't a very tough campaign was it? Speaker 2: No, it was his third campaign. Speaker 1: It pretty much--yeah, third, yeah. Speaker 2: It was his third campaign and so it was not that, not that difficult at all. Let me see, what about, what would be, one of the pitfalls as a young woman to politics that many times I was not aware of protocol especially when it came to foreign dignitaries. For instance, when Prince Charles [Charles, Prince of Wales] came to visit us, I did not realize that you were not supposed to touch royalty unless they reached out their hand to touch you, right. Nobody told me this, right. So, we're standing around in the Governor's Mansion [Georgia Governor's Mansion, Atlanta, Georgia] at a reception, talking, and then the prince is, Prince Charles is standing next to me and other people around him, we're talking about something and then somebody said something funny and as you know I come from a family of five boys, a bunch of kids, very physical. So I laughed and hauled off and slapped the prince on his back (laughter). I, wow, boom, smack, you know, and everybody froze and even the prince like, did like this, and then he looked at me and then he just relaxed and laughed, you know. And so, I didn't know later on that I was not supposed to touch him, right. And then I said, no wonder he's so uptight. The probably, the man probably never gets touched, you know, and he just needs a little laying on of hands once in a while but I, that was probably my biggest public faux pas. Speaker 1: That sounds like a fun one anyway. I would have loved to have been there. Speaker 2: I got him, I got him loosened up, you know. When we were looking at, at Gladys Knight perform, he was sitting there very stiff and I was like, oh come on, Prince, come on, (clapping), you know, and I got him to clap and everything. And afterwards one of the security guards told me, he said, "Yeah, I think the prince liked Ms. Jackson [HistoryMaker Valerie Richardson Jackson], he called her a real dish." So, I guess that's English for whatever, anyway. Story_ID: 303506 Speaker 1: Okay, any other stories or-- Speaker 2: Let's see. Well, there's some not so happy stories. Like for instance, when ACT UP [AIDS Coalition to Unleash Power], the gay group called ACT UP was upset about something that Maynard [Maynard Jackson] had done or not done, even though Maynard had been a tremendous supporter of gay rights but one little thing he didn't support them on and some of them got upset and my--Maynard and I had to, we were out of town for something and I had a babysitter here [Atlanta, Georgia] keeping the girls, our two young daughters [Valerie Amanda Dejoie Jackson and Alexandra Josephine Richardson Jackson]. Well, they decided to picket our home, not City Hall [Atlanta City Hall, Atlanta, Georgia] where the business should have taken place, but they came out here to our home and they started picketing our, picketing. And one guy laid down and poured ketchup on him and had a sign hanging, holding up a sign saying, "Maynard, you're killing us." Well my two daughters saw this. They were looking out of the window and they saw this and, and my oldest daughter who was about eight at the time, called me crying on the phone, got me, reached me wherever we were, and she was crying and she was saying, "Mommy, mommy, these people outside saying that daddy, daddy's killing them. Why, why is he doing that? Why are they doing that?" She was very upset. So, of course, Maynard got on the phone and made sure that, that someone came out to the house and removed the demonstrators but that was just one of the examples of the kind of stress that the family was under even long after Maynard, you know, was in the office because we would get--'cause people, some people just never forget and even while in his second term, we would get death threats. We got a threat once saying that there was a bomb outside of the house and if we opened the door, you know, we were gone. So we had to be herded downstairs into the basement until the bomb squad could come over and check out the perimeter and check out the house and everything and when my daughter applied to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], she wrote about that experience, about how she had to be taken down to the bathroom, down in the basement, you know, because of a death threat on her daddy. It's, you think this is the kind of thing that happens fifty, eighty years ago but it was still happening a decade ago, less than a decade ago, you know, in this city, which is supposed to be one of the most progressive ones in the world. It just goes to show that what Maynard says is true, that freedom is twofold, first you have to get free and then you have to stay free. Speaker 1: That makes sense. Story_ID: 303507 Speaker 1: From what I read, you, you played a significant role in the Olympics [1996 Summer Olympics] coming to Atlanta [Georgia]? Speaker 2: Maynard [Maynard Jackson] or me personally or what? Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, that you had a role (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I, well I was, I traveled with Maynard to most of the cities where we were trying to win the bid or win the support for the bid of the Olympics. I traveled a great deal but I was also co-chair of the Children's Olympic Ticket Fund which was an organization where we generated funds, raised money to buy tickets for 20,000, over 20,000 young underprivileged children to be able to attend the Olympic events. I'm very proud of that that we were able to bring the Olympics to the kids who were literally, where the Olympics sometimes were being held right in their backyard and they can just only dream about what's going on over that fence. We wanted to be sure that the Olympics was not just exclusively for those who could afford to buy the thirty-five dollar ticket to that particular event or whatever. So we made sure that some of these children were able to go into these events. The horse, the equestrian, the swimming, the volley, everything, you know, that they were able to enjoy some of these games and that the least of us were also a part of this big effort. Story_ID: 303508 Speaker 1: I assumed the chair of the Maynard Jackson Youth Foundation [Atlanta, Georgia] after Maynard [Maynard Jackson] passed, and that's a leadership academy, or right now the major focus of it is on our leadership academy. The Maynard Jackson Youth Foundation was founded twelve years ago by Maynard to help inner city school kids and what we do is every other Saturday from September to June, we have a class of about twenty eleventh graders that we have culled from around the city based on recommendations from principals and teachers and so forth, children who have had some spark of leadership that was recognizable but they needed to have it nurtured and developed, you know, and fine-tuned. And so, these kids are recommended for our program and they come in and it's kind of like a mini-leadership Atlanta [Georgia] program where they're exposed to every, every Saturday, from nine to two. First of all they have to sign a contract that they'll be there. They come in and we do, we cover a black history question. We cover current events where they're required to bring us something from a periodical and after the first two weeks, I said, "Okay, no more stories on, you know, murders, drug deals and whatever, bring us something that we can learn something from that will benefit our community or your home or your family." So pretty soon we were getting reports about what was going on in the world politics, what was going on in the world of business and so forth. So, then we would have a CEO or an entrepreneur or someone to come in and speak to them about a business or a vocation or a trade. For instance, we had the young man who started a business moving dirt with one truck about five years ago and now he's making $10 million moving the dirt for the fifth runway at the Hartsfield-Jackson International Airport [Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport, Atlanta, Georgia]. So he came to speak to our students and what that said was that you don't always have to be a college graduate. You don't have to be a, a corporate person all the time, you could start with something like moving dirt in a truck and building it into an empire and the kids were very excited about that, to know that, you know, you didn't always have to be the smartest one in the class to succeed, you know, the smartest one, you know, academically but what you do have to have is common sense and, and just, you know, that practical mother wit that I talked about. But anyway, we expose them to CEOs, to just about every aspect of life from the mortician to the investment banker, we let them know what's involved in the, in the businesses and in the, the industries and then we take field trips. Each year we take the class to the New York [New York], scratch, each year we take the class to the Chicago Stock Exchange and show them how the money is, is traded. How the stocks are traded. We take them to Johnson Publishing Company [Chicago, Illinois], show them how we publish magazines and they help--once they helped select the front cover of a particular issue coming out and they were so excited, you know, to look at the different options and say, "Well I think that one will work," and to be a part of that choice. Johnson Publishing Company, to the, and to the museums and to Chicago [Illinois]. So, it's, it's so much combined. Story_ID: 303509 Speaker 1: We [Maynard Jackson Youth Foundation, Atlanta, Georgia] talk to them [students] about public speaking, about public demeanor, about public manners, about things like not chewing gum in public. We have etiquette classes where we'll bring them in and sit them in front of a full table set with six pieces of silverware and all the different glasses and so forth. Teach them how to use the silverware and then we always take them to lunch. We could take them to Paschal's [Paschal's Restaurant, Atlanta, Georgia]. We can take them to The Varsity [Atlanta, Georgia] or we can take them to a five-star hotel and see what they've learned about their etiquette and if they pull out the chair for the ladies, and so forth and open the doors, because we still teach all that. All of that old fashioned stuff, we think, is still crucial to the success of a person and it's the nuances that really make the difference. Chris Tucker came to the house for a surprise, for them, for the Christmas party, the comedian, Chris Tucker of 'Rush Hour' fame. He's a friend of ours and so I asked him to come by and say a few words to the kids. Well, the week before I had talked to the kids about chewing gum and how one should not chew in public and that the origin of chewing gum is really from the indigenous people who would pull gum from a tree, put it in their mouth and chew it to clean their teeth and then discard it. And so I said to them, you wouldn't brush your teeth in public, so why chew chewing gum if you're sitting on a dais or if you're speaking in public or, I said it's okay if you're doing sports and that kind of thing but if you're in a, you know, a public setting, then you really, you know, should not chew chewing gum, at least not where people can tell that you're chewing chewing gum. Okay, so, Chris Tucker comes over and Chris Tucker's chewing chewing gum. I mean, Chris is really chewing his chewing gum, right. At least five kids came up to me and said, "Ms. Jackson [HistoryMaker Valerie Richardson Jackson], you need to talk to Chris Tucker about his chewing gum." So I know they're listening, thank God, right, and that's what it's all about. I used to wonder, for ten years, how does Maynard [Maynard Jackson] get up every Saturday, every other Saturday and go down there after working all week and doing everything, how does he do it? And then when I started doing it, I found out, it's because of the children. They give us the energy. They give us the spirit. They give us the motivation to keep coming, to keep sharing with them because they really are the future. They really are the future. Story_ID: 303510 Speaker 1: I wanted to backtrack a little bit to your first impressions of Atlanta [Georgia], Atlanta during the time when Maynard Jackson became mayor, became sort of a black mecca for people all, college graduates, I know first-hand, were coming directly to Atlanta. It was a land of opportunity and what was your impression of it when you first started coming here and spending time here? Speaker 2: Actually, my first impression of Atlanta was one given to me by my brother who had, one of my older brothers had been, had come to Atlanta and when he came back, he called me and he says, "Valerie [HistoryMaker Valerie Richardson Jackson], Valerie, you've got to go and visit Atlanta, Georgia." He said, "That's your kind of city. The black people down there are running things and they're doing things and they're so and so and so forth and so on." He says, "The mecca of black life." And sure enough that's what I found when I came here. Story_ID: 303511 Speaker 1: We're re-slating the interview. This is--we're continuing what we started in 2005. Ma'am, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Valerie Josephine Richardson Jackson, V-A-L-E-R-I-E, J-O-S-E-P-H-I-N-E, Richardson, R-I-C-H-A-R-D-S-O-N, Jackson, J-A-C-K-S-O-N [HistoryMaker Valerie Richardson Jackson]. Speaker 1: And ma'am, what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: April 3rd, 1949 in Richmond, Virginia. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your occupation and title? Speaker 2: I'm a business owner, a small business owner and a, an on-air--I'm a small business owner and an on-air personality at the local NPR radio station [WABE Radio, Atlanta, Georgia] here. Speaker 1: Okay, and you are the former first lady of the City of Atlanta [Georgia]? Speaker 2: And the former--. Speaker 1: Twice, at least, right? Speaker 2: Yes, former first lady of Atlanta, two terms with my husband, Maynard Jackson. Speaker 1: All right, and what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is December the 16th, 2012. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We are currently on Benton Place in Atlanta, Georgia. Story_ID: 303512 Speaker 1: Now, we're going to pick up where we left off. The last time we left off with you and Mayor Jackson [Maynard Jackson], married, I believe. You'd just been married, it's 1977, I think it is, and this is the first year of his second term. So, how did you feel-- Speaker 2: Actual--. Speaker 1: --well, go ahead, go ahead. Speaker 2: Our wedding was really a very small and private affair. First of all, we were dating while Maynard was running for re-election and he didn't want politics to become any part of our relationship. So we basically kept our relationship very discreet. He didn't, you know, tell a whole lot of people, you know, that he was dating me and vice versa because we wanted to keep the publicity down, not wanting people to say, "Oh, he's just getting married because he's running for mayor, you know, he needs a wife," you know. So we didn't want to have to deal with that kind of misconception. So it was a very unexpected event for the citizens of Atlanta [Georgia] because nobody expected it and it was only planned a few months ahead of the date. We got married in Richmond, Virginia, at my brother's home. Once again, only the very immediate family, siblings, and a few cousins, uncles and so forth were in attendance. So, it was a rather small affair, the wedding, but we had a wonderful honeymoon in Paris [France] and in Toulouse, France. He happened to be going there on business anyways, so we said, "Why not, you know, let's, let's make it a honeymoon too." So, we combined the trip and spent our honeymoon in Paris and in Toulouse, France. Now that's a very interesting part of his family's history because his mother went to the University of Toulouse [Universite de Toulouse, Toulouse, France], Dr. Irene Jackson [Irene Dobbs Jackson], and she graduated there, from the University of Toulouse in 1933. Now, can you imagine how many black women were working on their master's [degree], in a foreign country, in a, you know, French-speaking university? But his mother did. That all goes back to that long John Wesley Dobbs legacy of determination and education. At any rate, his mother and father [Maynard Jackson, Sr.] were married in Toulouse, France. As a matter of fact, his father got a little afraid that she might like Toulouse too much and was afraid she wasn't going to come back home. So he, the story goes, bought a car, drove to New York [New York], got on a ship, sailed to Toulouse, France and asked her to marry him immediately. Now I tell you that story because in 1983, Maynard and I happened to be visiting, excuse me, I think that was '93 [1993], sorry, in 1993, Maynard and I were visiting Toulouse and on the spur of the moment we decided to get married in Toulouse to recommit our vows in the same room that his mother and father had been married by the mayor of Toulouse, exactly sixty years before we were married or had our recommitment of our vows by the mayor of Toulouse in 1993 in the same room that his mother and father made their vows in 19--or however sixty years, '33 [1933], that was. So that was a very special moment. The story goes on though because Maynard's, Maynard and my first-born daughter, Valerie Amanda [Valerie Amanda Dejoie Jackson], became engaged in that same room, in Toulouse, France and then later came back to Atlanta to be married in Atlanta City Hall by former Mayor Andrew Young [HistoryMaker Andrew Young]. So the tradition of the City Hall, the marriage by a mayor, continued for three generations. Speaker 1: Okay, that's, that's something. That's unlikely, you know, in a lot of ways but-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --that they would follow like that but that's, that's really something. Now did you, you don't seem to be upset about not having a large wedding, you know? Speaker 2: Actually that was a little bit of an ongoing debate between Maynard and me as to whether or not we even had a wedding because I consider a wedding something when you buy a gown and you have bridesmaids and you have cake and you have, but we didn't have any of that, we were just, very quietly married by, by my minister from my former church [Mount Tabor Baptist Church, Richmond, Virginia]. Speaker 1: This was your first, what, wedding? Speaker 2: This was my first marriage, correct, my first marriage. And so I didn't have all the frills and frou-frou of the typical wedding but if I had to choose between a fabulous wedding or a wonderful marriage, I'd surely go for the wonderful marriage and the wedding would pale in comparison. Story_ID: 303513 Speaker 1: All right, 1977, this is, Mayor Jackson's [Maynard Jackson] second term and what, now, at the time, was the, had construction begun on the airport [Hartsfield Atlanta International Airport; Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport, Atlanta, Georgia] in '77 [1977]? Speaker 2: Yes, construction had begun on the new terminal that would later become the busiest airport in the world. Speaker 1: That's the international terminal. Speaker 2: That's the international terminal, yes, that opened in 1980 but, of course, they had to start working on it several years before that. Now, the irony is that the plans for a larger terminal had been on the previous mayor's desk for a couple of years and so when Maynard assumed office, he said, "Well, how're we doing on this new terminal?" And so, people said to him, "Well, Mr. Mayor, we've got a problem because where we had planned to build the new terminal, a major highway is running through part of the property," and, which was, Highway 85 [Interstate 85]. And so Maynard looked at them and said, "Well, let's move the highway." Now, of course, everybody thought he was absolutely being ridiculous. How can you move a major highway, you know? Maynard got on the phone to the secretary of commerce, scratch, Maynard got on the phone to the secretary of transportation, the state department of transportation [Georgia Department of Transportation], the governor, anybody that he could talk to, the president, and to make a long story short, within several months Maynard did get permission to move Highway 85 slightly out of the way so that there was enough room to build the entire new terminal. Now, a lot of people used to think Maynard could move mountains. Well I don't know about mountains, but I know he could definitely move highways. Story_ID: 303514 Speaker 1: I take it he had a strong relationship with the Carter administration [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes, yes. He worked very hard to help President Jimmy Carter and I must say, Mr. Carter, President Carter, never, ever forgot that. He has always been most gracious and generous to us. As a matter of fact, President Carter was one of two presidents that spoke at Maynard's [Maynard Jackson] funeral here, the other being President Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton]. So, two former presidents eulogized this great man and it was because he was deserving of it. He helped both of them in many ways. He definitely helped Bill Clinton get elected down here in the South and so that's, but that's the kind of person he was. Speaker 1: Yeah, now the Carter White House, I know the critics of it say they had too many people from Georgia in the White House but it was during this, well, do you have an opinion about that or--. Speaker 2: I, it's hard for me to say so because I really wasn't involved in that very internal circle but one would ask oneself, well who do you hire? Do you hire strangers that you don't know, you know? You have to depend on people that you know and people that they may recommend and it just so happens that maybe a lot of them were from the South. So, but I don't think it was deliberate. I don't think it was a deliberate effort on the part of President Carter to make a southern strategy, so to speak, in the White House. Speaker 1: Okay, now was Mayor Jackson ever offered a role in the Carter White House? Speaker 2: He was asked to serve on several boards but actually he kind of made it known that he wouldn't be considering anything major because he was very committed to Atlanta [Georgia] at that time and having made a commitment to run again for a second term, a lot of people had wanted him to run for the [U.S.] Congress and, but he had just assumed his second term as mayor and when he asked me what I thought, I, my suggestion was he should really seriously consider not doing it mainly because I thought that he was doing so many good things in Atlanta that it didn't, it wouldn't be able to stand the disruption and I know that a lot of things he had worked very hard on may not come to fruition if he, you know, all of a sudden moved to D.C. [Washington, D.C.] or took his energy, you know to D.C. And there's nothing--Maynard used to always say that two toughest jobs in the world is being mayor and being president. Mayor because you are so close to your constituency, you know, that they can find you wherever you are, at two o'clock in the morning, three o'clock in the morning, you know, you've got to be accessible whether you want to be or not and, of course, we know the kind of troubles that the president has to often deal with, the challenges of that--but he, he wanted to finish what he had started in Atlanta. Story_ID: 303515 Speaker 1: This is not just my opinion, I think a lot of black people feel that Atlanta [Georgia] was like the focus of sort of a golden age in the '70s [1970s]. Speaker 2: You mean the mecca? Speaker 1: Yeah, the focus kind of shifted from Chicago [Illinois] and Detroit [Michigan]-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --to Atlanta being the place where new things were--. Speaker 2: Well people started to come back, people started to come back to the South once they saw what was happening in Atlanta because you had many African Americans to move to, to northern cities and where there might have been a majority of, of African Americans but they really didn't have very much power to speak of and they'd come to Atlanta and see this black mayor who was actually using his power for the good and they became excited, you know, about being involved in a situation where black people really did have a voice and it was heard. So, my first exposure, as a matter of fact to Atlanta, was through my brother who called me up--and this was long before I met Maynard [Maynard Jackson]--and he said, "Valerie [HistoryMaker Valerie Richardson Jackson], Valerie, I've just been to this, to Atlanta, Georgia." He said, "Girl, that is your kind of city." He said, "Black people are on the ball, running things and doing this and doing that." He says, "I bet you--." He says, "You're the kind of person that ends up in Atlanta." Well, who knew, right? But, he was absolutely right. The energy was very positive. There was some good leadership on board. A leader that had vision, who had determination and, and who wasn't afraid, you know, to walk the walk and to talk the talk, so to speak, made a lot of, not enemies, but a lot of people, you know, didn't particularly like him for this hard stances that he took. For instance when he became mayor the first time, less than one percent, less than one percent of all city contracts went to minorities and women. That's less than, I have to keep saying that, less than one percent of all municipal contracts went to women and minorities. Speaker 1: In a city that, you know, to put it in perspective is, what percentage is black? Speaker 2: Back in that day it was probably about 50 to 55 percent black. Speaker 1: And probably the same-- Speaker 2: African American. Speaker 1: --with women or more, you know, of women. Speaker 2: Yeah, so that changed though by the time he left in his second term, that was more like 25 to 30 percent of city contracts went to minorities and to women. Speaker 1: I know that he met often with Harold Washington in Chicago-- Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: --with a similar agenda to, to increase the number of minority-- Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: --and women contracts in the City of Chicago. Speaker 2: I would often hear him talking with other mayors about that very issue, Washington and, even Carl Stokes, you know, and others. Speaker 1: Coleman Young and--. Speaker 2: Coleman Young, absolutely, absolutely. So, thank God for men like that. Story_ID: 303516 Speaker 1: To what extent now, I've heard in other interviews people express a certain amount of gratitude for, I guess, the moves of Ivan Allen [Ivan Allen, Jr.] who had been the mayor before, that he kind of softened the racism in Atlanta [Georgia] on some level. Speaker 2: Ivan, Ivan Allen was truly a diplomat and a gentleman, that's the key word, he was a gentleman, as was Maynard [Maynard Jackson], and I think that's why the two of them got along so well too. But as part of his being a gentleman, Ivan Allen, you know, was more than willing to be sure that African Americans might have been able to voice concerns. When Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] died and many in the white structure did not want to have a big honor or ball, a banquet for him, it was Ivan Allen that persuaded them to do that. He was one of the first southern mayors to vote, you know, for the, well basically the law that desegregated schools. So, yes he was, he was a very fair mayor. I liked him personally very much. It's ironic that both he and Maynard would marry women with the maiden name of Richardson. His wife's name was Louise Richardson. Maynard's, of course, Valerie Richardson [HistoryMaker Valerie Richardson Jackson]. So I thought how ironic, two of the greatest mayors in Atlanta both married Richardson where, you know, anyway, so yes, I had a great deal of respect for Ivan Allen. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 303517 Speaker 1: Now, one of the changes that occurred in Atlanta [Georgia], in addition to the airport [Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport], was cable television. Late, mid to late '70s [1970s], it starts, you know, the country starts, you know, being, I guess readied for cable television or, or wired up for cable television. Speaker 2: Well I'm, I'm not sure if the country was ready for it or not but they got it and they got Ted Turner, Ted Turner being, obviously, the communications mogul who started with a cartoon station and, of course, built it into CNN and we have to thank CNN because that's one of the things that really put Atlanta on the map. Maynard [Maynard Jackson] would often go to cities when he was trying to, to win the Olympics and a lot of people didn't really know what or where Atlanta was. And so, he says, "I'm Maynard Jackson, you know, mayor of Atlanta, Georgia," and they would say, "Atlanta, Atlanta, oh Atlantic City [New Jersey]," you know, and they would go all of these, "Atlantis," you know, "the Lost Island," you know, everything but Atlan--and then finally Maynard would say, "CNN," and then they would say, "Oh, Atlanta," you know. So it was the CNN that really kind of hooked Atlanta to the rest of the world. Speaker 1: Yeah, Turner Broadcasting [Turner Broadcasting System, Atlanta, Georgia]. I think that during the time Ted Turner married-- Speaker 2: Jane Fonda. Speaker 1: Jane Fonda, right, right so that kind of, you know it was a lot of stuff in the news about Ted Turner, colorizing movies and on TBS and Turner Classic Movies and-- Speaker 2: That's right, that's right. Speaker 1: --Atlanta Braves, you know, who were starting to win, win baseball. Speaker 2: That's right, after he, right. Well I became a strong Atlanta Braves fanatic for a period there, you know, so it was good. Speaker 1: It seemed like a lot of energy in the city-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --during those days and, you know (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was and leading into and up to our quest for the Olympics. Story_ID: 303518 Speaker 1: There was a lot of, a lot of politicking with the IOC, the International Olympic Committee. You know, everybody wanted to be able to, you know, impress them the right way, do anything that they needed doing to be sure that we were seen as very gracious. Speaker 2: Let me just ask this, when did these negotiations start? How, how far ahead of the Olympics did you have to start? Speaker 1: Oh, okay, the, the quest, or the effort to, to attain the Olympics started anywhere from five to eight years before we even had the Olympics. Speaker 2: Okay, so this is almost at the beginning of Maynard Jackson's third term? Speaker 1: Yes, that's correct because Andy [HistoryMaker Andrew Young] was coming out of office and he had started, you know, really, it was the first mayor to start talking about it and then Maynard became mayor. Once Andy left, Maynard became mayor again for his third term and that's when he started traveling throughout the world and garnering support. Between him and Andy, they just basically locked up all the African nations and a lot of the Latin nations and everything else but it was also because a lot of these countries and a lot of the IOC members had never really seen a city like Atlanta [Georgia] where you had such a strong civil rights effort, where you had such a strong communication, broadcasting history, where you had such an outstanding transportation system, and I'm speaking specifically about the international airport [Hartsfield Atlanta International Airport; Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport, Atlanta, Georgia] here, and then on top of that, Maynard goes to Tokyo [Japan] to give the big final speech and he starts his speech in French. Now people are turning and looking at each other like, "Wow, this is a black man speaking French," you know, because that's the dual language for the Olympics, English and French. And so, that really impressed a lot of people and it helped that his mother [Irene Dobbs Jackson] was a French teacher, and had, you know, gone to Toulouse [Universite de Toulouse, Toulouse, France] and so forth, so, but it also showed the diversity of the city, the talent in the city, the mixture of education and culture. So it was a wonderful experience and Maynard, I think, enjoyed the quest probably more than the actual games [1996 Summer Olympics, Atlanta, Georgia]. Story_ID: 303519 Speaker 1: In general, as first lady [of Atlanta, Georgia], and I guess in specifically in these, in instances like the Olympics, I mean, what was your role, typically, because I know you were a special consultant to the Department of Economic Involvement [Georgia Department of Industry, Trade, and Tourism; Georgia Department of Economic Involvement] during the--. Speaker 2: I helped Maynard [Maynard Jackson] when, when we first became married and I served at the, as a special advisor to the Mayor's Office of Economic Development, all for the grand sum of one dollar a year but--. Speaker 1: But you were more than qualified. Speaker 2: But, well yes-- Speaker 1: You were Wharton School [Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and all that. Speaker 2: --you know, M.B.A. from Wharton, finance, marketing and so forth, so, I was able to, when we, when I would visit other cities whether social or personal, check out City Hall [Atlanta City Hall, Atlanta, Georgia], see what they did to attract business or what they were doing or what they were not doing but also with the Olympics [1996 Summer Olympics, Atlanta, Georgia] I was also co-chair of the Children's Ticket Olympic Fund [sic. Children's Olympic Ticket Fund] which helped us to provide tickets to about 22,000 disadvantaged and dis--I don't want to say disadvantaged but, you know, those who deserved an opportunity to go to the Olympics like those whose backyards were literally being used as venues, you know, for a sports event but yet they were like outside the fence, you know, and had no way to really, you know, be a part of it. We wanted to make sure that some of those kids were able to come inside and, and see the Olympics and see what it was all about. Speaker 1: Okay, so this is, the Olympics occurred in '96 [1996]? Speaker 2: Ninety-six [1996]. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: And so we were doing this-- Speaker 1: --the build up for it and-- Speaker 2: --in '92 [1992] to ninety--I would say '93 [1993], '94 [1994], '95 [1995], well actually, we were awarded the games four years out. You know, you get to know that you, you get four years to do the games, you know, so we, in '96 [1996] we learned in '92 [1992] that we were going to get the games. And so, '92 [1992], '91 [1991], '90 [1990], '89 [1989], from the time Maynard came into office in '88 [1988], you know, through that rest of his term, you know, we were, he was out there working with the Olympics and I traveled frequently with him, which was a wonderful experience, also, 'cause I helped him, you know, in terms of just observation, observing other cultures, how we might involve that in our greeting to the world and so it was a good partnership. Story_ID: 303520 Speaker 1: Now there's one on the downside in the '70s [1970s], you had the Atlanta Child Murders [Atlanta Missing and Murdered Children cases] that were (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: --where it really became stark to everybody because of CNN, I think. CNN let everybody know about it. It was all over the United States and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, it was. Speaker 1: --so this had to be a headache and I, I think I read too that there was, that Mayor Jackson [Maynard Jackson] had a conflict with the head of, what public safety, I think before, there's some kind of scandal with the head of public safety? Speaker 2: Well, there was accu--there were accusations of, of cheating in one of the police exams for officers and whatnot and so, and, unfortunately, the, the police commissioner was a friend of Maynard's and so it was a very tough thing for him to--because he believes a great deal in loyalty. You know, he wanted to be loyal to his friend but also he had to be loyal and right for Atlanta [Georgia] so he was very torn but that paled in comparison to what he was dealing with, with the murdered and missing children. Keep in mind now that he had a son [Maynard Jackson, III] who was approximately the same age as many of these young boys that were going missing and it took a special kind of leader, I think, someone who is able to understand the anger but also be, have the empathy to, to still be compassionate to those who were losing loved ones and so in many ways Maynard kept a cap on what could have been a very explosive situation. Because there were all sorts of rumors going around that it was the KKK [Ku Klux Klan], you know, doing it and then there, it was the Panthers [Black Panther Party] trying to make it look like the KKK and--. Speaker 1: Centers for Disease Control [Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia] everywhere. Speaker 2: Oh, yes, Center for the Dis--at any, any-- Speaker 1: --[HistoryMaker] Dick Gregory had a theory that-- Speaker 2: Any kind of, you know, wild theory that you could come with, come up with that was probably passed along. And so it was very important that Maynard was able to keep a lid on all these insinuations, false rumors, the gossip, but at the same time, he wanted to be absolutely sure that people knew that he was serious about finding the person that was responsible for this to the extent that he was offering a million dollar reward, not personally but the city, to garner any information. So, we do believe that the person who committed the crimes, the right person, was, was captured and is, and was sent to prison, so--. Speaker 1: This is Wayne Williams? Speaker 2: Correct, correct. Speaker 1: Okay, so, so, did he, the mayor really felt that was the right one--? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, he believed that, that the police had done their job, so--. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 303521 Speaker 1: Anything about the second term that we need to talk about before we, I guess, before I ask you what you did during the interim, the second and third term? Speaker 2: The second term, the second term. Most of the airport [Hartsfield Atlanta International Airport; Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport, Atlanta, Georgia] opening that was significant. Well, I suspect, we talked about the opening of the airport it would be remiss if we did not talk about affirmative action and what a big role the City of Atlanta's [Atlanta, Georgia] airport played in the national level, or the national scene, with respect to affirmative action. Now when Maynard [Maynard Jackson] was, started building the airport and said that, or passed the, the rule, or the ordinance that at least twenty to twenty-five percent of the contracts at the airport should go to women and minorities, well, of course, the standing powers to be and all of the major companies who were used to being the recipients of major contracts for this kind of construction were, well they all threw up their hands and said, "Well that's impossible, you can't make us hire people who aren't qualified and who don't know anything about the business," and, you know, the typical storyline. And after two years almost of struggling back and forth with the business community and they were saying your quotas are unfair and unconstitutional and everything, Maynard finally said, "Well, you can have 75 percent of something or you can have 100 percent of nothing because we are not building this airport without joint ventures." They finally got the hint. All of a sudden, they started finding qualified companies that they could pair with and that could help them, you know, meet their contracts at the airport, whether it was literally moving dirt in dump trucks. And I know a young man who literally got his start--he had one dump truck and was moving dirt at the time and got a small little bit of that contract at the airport to move some dirt. So he bought him, got a loan, bought himself a couple more dump trucks and fast forward five years, he's a multimillionaire with his, you know, construction company, started with moving dirt. I love it. I love stories like that. Story_ID: 303522 Speaker 1: This is the last, his last part of, Mayor Jackson's [Maynard Jackson] second term and we're talking about some of the--. Speaker 2: Okay, I think we've pretty much, you know, basically covered that. I mean, we could always talk about--one could always talk about the, the miles and miles of infrastructure that, that he corrected in the city [Atlanta, Georgia] and sidewalks even, so it's, it's, there's always an ongoing struggle especially in the area when the country's in a recession as it was for a couple of his terms. He was still able to, to get the kind of help he needed from D.C. [Washington, D.C.] and from the state [Georgia] in spite of themselves, so-- Speaker 1: Yeah, he started during the oil crisis-- Speaker 2: Which-- Speaker 1: --yeah in '73 [1973] was the oil and gas and oil crisis-- Speaker 2: Oh, oh, right, right. Speaker 1: Yeah, and--. Speaker 2: But one of Maynard's outstanding qualities was that he was a real salesman, a bookman, they would call him because he got his training selling Grolier encyclopedias, door to door, up in Cleveland [Ohio], and the kind of skills that they taught these young men, you know, to do hard calls, so to speak, to go to strangers and knock and ask for, for something, that stood him well later on in his life because he learned how to accept rejection without letting it stop him. So, he had several sharp skills that he picked up in, in selling encyclopedias and we continue to share that even with the leadership class of the Maynard Jackson Youth Foundation [Atlanta, Georgia]. One of the critical components of our curriculum in the Leadership Academy is that of salesmanship skills because we believe if you know how to sell yourself, you'll always have a job and we give them subtle nuances that make the difference beyond the firm handshake and looking someone directly in the eye. There are all sorts of strategies about, where do you place someone in, in terms of seating position if you're trying to impact a certain person. If you're trying to impact a couple versus one person, there's a different approach. Do you put two people together or do you put a husband over this side and a woman on this side and as you're talking to them, your head is basically saying, no to whatever it is that you're trying to tell them about but if you put them both directly in front of you, side by side, then as you talk to them you can continue to nod, yes, this is something that is really important and, you know, you should be considering it. So, those are the kind of little things that only Maynard Jackson, you know, would, would remember to pass on and to instill in his young people. So that's one of my favorite parts about him, is his salesmanship. Story_ID: 303523 Speaker 1: Now let me, there's something I didn't ask about, now I don't think I asked about it last time, and that was about the preservation and the presentation of The King Center [Martin Luther King, Jr. Center for Nonviolent Social Change, Atlanta, Georgia] and the sites around Auburn Avenue [Atlanta, Georgia], you know, the tourist attractions over there. Now what role did the city play in making that a tourist-friendly place, that still maintains a dignity of Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]? Speaker 2: Yeah, well the city has often tried to be supportive of Auburn Avenue but once again you're talking about in a recession area when funds are extremely limited and so it's still a struggle, that's basically the bottom line, it's still a struggle and how do we get more investment into our older neighborhoods like that, that were the starting point for so many businesses, especially black businesses. Auburn Avenue was known as Sweet Auburn Avenue because that's where all the great businesses, all the black businesses prospered. And so it was, it's a very sentimental concept that a lot of us hold about Auburn Avenue but at the same time, if we don't preserve our history, we become invisible. And that's why this project, The HistoryMakers, is so very, very important, I believe. Now one of the other things that Maynard [Maynard Jackson] was very, very adamant about was, you know what, I think we did this already, never mind, sorry about that, you can edit out I know, that's, we had already talked about that. Speaker 1: What was the thing? Speaker 2: I was just going to talk about the, the, his work on affirmative action. Speaker 1: Right, okay, yes, we did. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, we basically covered that. Speaker 1: Yeah, we talked about that, but, but I was, I guess I was focusing on The King Center complex and I know the federal government. You got the Park Service [National Park Service], you know, has, put a lot of money over there and has been, money raised by Coretta Scott King and the King family to do that, but what role did the city play, I guess, in freeing up land? Is it, is the--did it really? Speaker 2: I, that, because the parks department has a great deal to do with that, it's kind of difficult for me to know what the city was able to, to literally do and not do with respect to that financial situation. So, I can't--. Speaker 1: I just wondered if the city played a role because there are so many, you know, houses and buildings that are-- Speaker 2: I know. Speaker 1: --now part of the federal park--the national park (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And they may have, but I'm just not, you know, that acquainted with it and I wouldn't want to speak to it not knowing, you know, what I'm talking about. Story_ID: 303524 Speaker 1: In '81 [1981], you know, that was, that was the end of his second term [as mayor of Atlanta, Georgia], right? Is that true? Eighty [1980] or '81 [1981]? Speaker 2: Seventy-seven [1977] to eighty--yes, yes, okay. Speaker 1: Okay, so, so--. Speaker 2: And then came off of eight years and then went back in in '88 [1988]. Speaker 1: Well I know that he was, I've read that he's, he tried to persuade Andy Young [HistoryMaker Andrew Young] to run. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, and Maynard Jackson was the reason that Andy Young did end up running for mayor because he had swore that he would never do it. But then, again, you never had--I come back to Maynard salesmanship skills, the man, as Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] said, "The man could charm an owl out of a tree." So, Maynard talked to, talked to Andy Young into running for mayor and, which was a good thing, and so he was, Andy was able to continue a lot of the projects that Maynard had started and to build on that, you know, because in a way, you had to have kind of like a bear, you know, or the bull in the china shop, if you will, for the first African American mayor because he was going to have to take so much stuff, you know. So it was, he, that first person really needed to, to have, you know, a strong backbone and sometimes a stubbornness, if you will. Andy is the minister. He's the conciliatory maker, or the conciliatory one. And so, you know, he, after Maynard had basically, you know, broken the china shop, he was the one to come in and say, okay, we can fix this back, you know, we can put this here. Speaker 1: Now--. Speaker 2: So, and it was, it was, he was a kinder, gentler soul, if you will, than what a lot of people saw Maynard as, but I don't know if a kinder, gentle soul could have survived as the first, you know, black mayor. Story_ID: 303525 Speaker 1: Who was the opposition? I didn't ask you about the opposition for the, his [Mayor Maynard Jackson] second term, who was running against him but I take it Atlanta's [Atlanta, Georgia] a Democratic city base, right? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: Is there-- Speaker 2: I, he didn't really have what you would call any major competition. You know, Hosea Williams, but Hosea ran kind of like for a lot of things. Speaker 1: Did he run against Maynard Jackson? Speaker 2: At one point, at one point he was considering, you know, that. It never developed to a full pledge, a full-fledged campaign and just, he, he had such a high favorability rating. We're talking 78 percent, 79 percent favorability rating. It was like who would go up against him? So, I believe Michael Lomax ran against him. Was it the second or the third term? It was probably the third term and one of the, the cart--one of the editorial cartoonist in the paper [Atlanta Journal-Constitution], Luckovich [Mike Luckovich], drew a cartoon and there was Maynard standing in the ring, big and hefty, you know, and his trunks and everything inside there, and there's Lomat--Lomax laying out on the, on the bottom of the, of the ring and, you know, a commentator on the side is saying, "There was no punch; Lomax fainted." So, it was, and that was the kind of, kind of thing that anybody that went up against Maynard Jackson had to kind of deal with. Speaker 1: So, so he had read about it, by the end of the second term, I mean, he was really-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --about the end of the second term (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, and then after we won the Olympics [1996 Summer Olympics, Atlanta, Georgia], so many people wanted him to run for that fourth, yet a fourth term. But what a lot of people don't realize is that mayors don't make a lot of money and we had five kids that we were putting through college or school. Story_ID: 303526 Speaker 1: I was trying to ask you before, in '81 [1981] when his second term ended and he persuaded Andy Young [HistoryMaker Andrew Young] to run, was this kind of a respite in terms of his life (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, that was-- Speaker 1: --and did he slow down a little bit, you know, or-- Speaker 2: After Maynard [Maynard Jackson] came out of office, after the second term, that was when he had to start getting serious about looking out for the welfare of his family, financially. I mean, we had college looking at us for five children, his children from his first marriage and our two daughters [Valerie Amanda Dejoie Jackson and Alexandra Josephine Richardson Jackson], and so it was really, it was very important to him that he take care of his family. He had been taking care of Atlanta [Georgia] for all these years and it was time for him to take care of his family. The irony though is that many of those people who did not appreciate the way Maynard had handled his, his politics and his power, meaning, you know, demanding that there be quotas for minority and female contracts, that old God, that old power structure, was determined that they were going to teach Maynard a lesson and so not one law firm--because Maynard's background is in law, not one major law firm in the city offered Maynard a position. Now, any other mayor, once they come out, you know, every major law firm in the city wants that guy that was mayor because they bring a lot of contacts, a lot of power but they were determined that they were going to teach him a lesson. Little did they know, you know, that, that there were people all outside of Atlanta that respected him, not only his abilities, you know, but his integrity and his, his wisdom who were begging him. As a matter of fact, a major law firm in, in Chicago [Illinois], Chapman and Cutler [Chapman and Cutler LLP], wanted him to come and be one of their partners but Maynard didn't want to leave Atlanta. So, what did they do? They set up an Atlanta office just so they could have Maynard Jackson work for them and work with the company. And so, he, he opened up the Atlanta branch of Chapman and Cutler and did that until he went back into office for his third term but a little, skip ahead a little bit, Maynard's daughter, his older, our older daughter, majored in law, Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] undergrad, Georgetown Law [Georgetown University Law Center, Washington, D.C.], she came back here after Georgetown Law, all of those major firms that refused to consider Maynard, were all begging his daughter to become a part of, King and Spalding [King and Spalding LLP, Atlanta, Georgia], all the major firms, you know, wanted, you know, his daughter. They didn't want him but they were ready for his daughter because they probably saw the error of their ways. Anyway--. Speaker 1: Anyway, so, so, he worked for the Chicago firm-- Speaker 2: Correct, Chapman and Cutler, right, right, as the managing partner in the Atlanta office. Speaker 1: Okay, so that kind of slowed him down a little bit? Was it--. Speaker 2: Well, no it didn't really slow him down because what he then did was to start, you know, organizations like the National Association of Securities Professionals which is an organization for minority people who worked in the investment industry, securities, meaning, you know, bonds, stocks, negotiable instruments. So, the National Association of Securities Professionals, NASP, was an organization that he founded to help mentor young, young people in the investment banking industry, minorities, because as more and more of these major urban cities were becoming important and, and electing black mayors, they needed someone who knew how to handle municipal funds, someone that they could trust. And so a lot of people that Maynard brought up through the ranks and mentored in investment banking, were then able to go out and to work with, you know, major investment companies with the level, with the caliber that was outstanding, you know, for young minorities and it was something that was much needed; because before, you talk about low percentages, you know, less than one percent of all financial work in the country went to minorities at one point. So, it's--Maynard used to always say, "Freedom is twofold; one, you have to get free, and two, you have to stay free." And so if you're not vigilant, if you're not constantly carrying the message forward, then you're not being helpful. One of the things that Maynard talked about often was the scared Negro disease about African Americans who worked their way up maybe in a major corporation, you know, up into the high echelon and, you know, someone helped them with affirmative action or whatever but then when they get to the top, they get scared. They don't want to rock the boat. They don't want to step out too far for a, you know, an African American because someone might think they're showing favoritism and so they become paralyzed with indecision because they're scared to make a decision, scared they might lose some of their own prestige or footing. And so it was, it's not enough to, to rise up to these positions, you know. You can't be scared to use that power, so, that was another one of his legacies, I think (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right that-- Story_ID: 303527 Speaker 1: That's a criticism that, you know, a lot of politicians and business people who are successful have, you know, come under that kind of scrutiny, you know, they seem to be afraid to make a move when they get to a certain point. Speaker 2: And unfortunately, it's not just limited to, to African Americans because I was in a discussion, a panel a couple of weeks ago about women empowering themselves and rising to positions of power and so forth and I asked a couple of the women on the, on the panel, I said, "Well, I mentioned the scared Negro disease," I said, "Is there a scared woman disease also?" And every last one of them said, "Yes, yes." You know, they get there and then they're, you know, they're afraid to do anything. So, we have to be vigilant on both fronts. Speaker 1: Yeah, I think I've heard the story more than once of a black person at a conference and he sees another black person starts towards him and that other person moves away as fast as they can, trying to get--. Speaker 2: Um-hm, 'cause, anyway-- Speaker 1: Right, okay so, Maynard Jackson was not like that and, and criticized on account of his-- Speaker 2: He was not scared. Speaker 1: --behavior, that's right. Story_ID: 303528 Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Andrew Young serves two terms, right? Speaker 2: That's correct. By law, you're not allowed to serve more than eight consecutive years, and so Andy served eight years and then he came out and Maynard [Maynard Jackson] was elected again, landslide, to his third term. Speaker 1: Now, were there any major decisions that Andrew Young made that Maynard Jackson was a part of that he consulted or helped him? Speaker 2: Well, there were several projects that Maynard had started that Andy basically finished, you know, some major infrastructure projects and so forth. So, and in a sense, they worked together in that way and, and Andrew Young was not hesitant to pick up the phone and call Maynard and ask him about something. You know, a lot of people sometimes get very possessive about their power, you know, and they don't want to look like they're asking for help and, but Andy was not like that. If he needed help and he knew Maynard could help him, he'd call Maynard, you know, so--. Speaker 1: Yeah, he's pragmatic in a lot of ways about, you know, and he's a lot tougher than people think he is too, I mean, Andy I guess--. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's for sure. Speaker 1: But, yeah, but I can see like that when Mayor Jackson had to step down after two terms, he was still very young and-- Speaker 2: Yes he was. Speaker 1: --in terms of the politicians we have in this country-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --is very young and still had a lot of energy so I just wondered how, in fact he was younger than Andrew Young? Speaker 2: Well in '88 [1988] actually, Andrew, scratch, in '88 [1988], Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson], there was a period there for a couple of months where Jesse Jackson called Maynard just about every other day wanting Maynard to run for president and he couldn't talk Maynard into it because, once again, you know, I was talking about all these kids that Maynard and I had to put through school, and he knew that it would be very, not only distracting to his personal life, but destructive in a way too. I felt like [HistoryMaker] Alma Powell did when people wanted Colin Powell [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] to run for president. First thing that came to my mind was, they wouldn't let him live to see it, you know. Not now, thank God, Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] was a different story but Obama was in 2008. We're not talking about 1988, you know, because the country was still not ready in '88 [1988] for a black man to be president. So, he did not let Jesse talk him into that, thank goodness and went on to, you know, to do greater things for Atlanta [Georgia]. Speaker 1: Yeah, now, Jesse Jackson himself ran in '84 [1984]-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and then again in '88 [1988]. Speaker 2: After he couldn't talk Maynard, that's when he started seriously running himself. Speaker 1: Okay, now, the second term now, he can run a, is because there was a consecutive, he could run for a third term? Speaker 2: That's correct, after he came back in, after Andy came out and he came back in for another four years, yes, he was eligible to run for yet another four years but by that time, you know, he was considering his, his health both financially and physically because, as you know, Maynard often had to deal with his weight issue and so it was, that was probably the time when he started to finally slow down a little bit and I tried to get him to enjoy, you know, life a little bit more and to relax and have more fun, not that he didn't know how to do that, but he just didn't do it often enough. You know, Maynard was a very funny man, really quite humorous and so we were constantly making each other laugh and he was a very creative man, too. He wrote poetry, we sang to each other and so it was quite an interesting marriage. A lot of good, good mixes in there. Story_ID: 303529 Speaker 1: I take it you enjoyed being the first lady [of Atlanta, Georgia]? Speaker 2: Yes, I did for the most part. It was, having young children also 'cause, my--that first child [Valerie Amanda Dejoie Jackson] was born two years into our marriage, or three years into our marriage. And so, I was dealing with infants and toddlers at that time also but it was, it was demanding in terms of request to, to serve on committees, to, you know, make speeches, to become, you know, part of projects and so forth but I just learned how to pick and choose. I tried to do things that were in my area of interest, meaning, marketing and communications, broadcasting, which makes it not so much work, you know, but there was always the stress of having to make up for the slack of Maynard's [Maynard Jackson] absence often because an emergency might pull him away from the family. Usually we tried to make Sundays sacred where he wouldn't accept any appointments unless he was speaking at a church but it was also standard operating procedure for him to be home at 6:30 to sit down to dinner with us. Now he might have to go back out or he might come in about seven, but he was there most nights to have dinner with us at the table and we would sing the grace since all of us loved music and most of us could sing. Maynard did his tenor and bass and I have a daughter who's alto, another one who's soprano, and I'm soprano, and so we would sing the blessing every night. Oh, that's, that's one of the things I miss probably most of all is that special few seconds of singing that grace at night when we were all holding hands, enjoying each other in harmony and in prayer, ah, we were very blessed. Speaker 1: I've never seen that done but a few actually sing grace-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: --that really sounds special. Speaker 2: Yes, it is. Speaker 1: It sounds like something that's--well, how did it go? Can you, could you give us a little bit of it? Speaker 2: It was the one that we all learned in school when we were kids. (Singing) "God is good and God is great," you know that one. Remember that one? Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (Singing) "And we thank him for this food, by thy heads must all be fed." Am I singing it right now? See, I haven't sung it in so long 'cause I'm an empty nester now. "God is great and God is good, and we thank him for this food. By his hands must all be fed, give us Lord our daily bread. Give us Lord our daily bread. Amen." Oh, when you hear that in different levels, you know, the altos, sopranos, the bass, oh, it's beautiful. Now, you see, you caught me off-guard. I can't sing it cold, you know. Speaker 1: That's, that was, that was-- Speaker 2: But that's, that's what we used to do every night. Story_ID: 303530 Speaker 1: In terms of the third term [as mayor of Atlanta, Georgia], I know the, we talked about the quest for the Olympic Games [1996 Summer Olympics] and trying to convince people, you know, to bring the games to Atlanta [Georgia], now, and all the different tactics, some of the tactics you all used to convince people that they understood where Atlanta--they did know where Atlanta was, they might have forgotten, but, did the legacy of Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] play a role in that at all? Speaker 2: Oh, yes, absolutely, absolutely, because one of the key selling points for the Olympics was the fact that this was the cradle of civil rights and along with, you know, Alabama and some of the other areas, but, because Martin Luther King was from Atlanta, obviously, Atlanta stood out and so a great deal was made about, not only Martin Luther King, but people like Ivan Allen [Ivan Allen, Jr.], too, who came together, and even back in Hartsfield's [William B. Hartsfield] day, Hartsfield worked with the black community but only if he got something out of it, you know. If he got, if he got the black votes, then okay, he'll hire six black policemen if you delivered the black vote. I mean, this man was a serious negotiator. You, you know, you didn't say, well, you didn't just say, well, I'd appreciate your vote, you know, no, no, no, he had, you know, if you got something out of him, you had to deliver your vote, deliver the black vote. So, but later on when we were looking to bring the Olympics here, a great deal was made about the city that was able to overcome the typical civil right disruptions and, you know, the dogs and the water hose and that sort of thing because we, I think, I think a lot of it had to do with the fact that Atlanta was a city full of universities. It was an educated city in terms of, of great many of its citizens, not just black, not just white but blacks also. We had, or we did at one time, we probably have more now but at least twenty-three degree-granting universities right here in the Atlanta area. And so, you have an educated population that brings a different perspective, those who, who want to talk it through, in addition to those, you know, who are like saying, "Black power, black power," you know, there's also the side, yeah, well, that's true but let's talk about this and let's work this out. And so, that's what they saw Atlanta as, as this, as this city that had the ability to overcome through the, the community work of not just the blacks or the whites but both of those groups to overcome, you know, some of the adversity that we were facing in the South. Story_ID: 303531 Speaker 1: Mayor Jackson [Maynard Jackson] had heart surgery in 1992 and-- Speaker 2: That's correct. Speaker 1: --so, so how, and you said that influenced his decision not to run-- Speaker 2: Yes-- Speaker 1: --a fourth term [as mayor of Atlanta, Georgia]? Speaker 2: While we were traveling all over the world trying to track down the Olympics [1996 Summer Olympics], that was when he first started to notice a little bit of discomfort. We had to, we were at some place, and I think it might have been Spain where we had to climb all these stairs to get to the venue and by the time we had gotten to the top of like 70, 80, 100 stairs, he was very much out of breath. So when we got back home, went to the doctor, they did an exam and they found out that he needed to do, needed immediately, he had to have heart surgery and they did six bypasses on him which was an extraordinary number but thank God they caught it and with that and a new focus on his diet and on exercise, you know, he bounced back and so we're, you know, we were happy to have him. So, to still be with us, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 303532 Speaker 1: Now did he [Jackson's husband, Maynard Jackson] play a special role in, in the Olympic Games [1996 Summer Olympics, Atlanta, Georgia] themselves, and that kind of thing? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. He was called the U.S. attache, or one of them, and it was a very, in many ways, it was a ceremonial role but if you know Maynard Jackson, you know that nothing is just ceremonial with him. So, he, you know, really did become a very active part with the Olympic Committee because he had, you know, worked so hard with them years before and he and Bill Campbell worked together. Bill was the mayor at that time and so, of course, Maynard was very helpful to Bill with respect to delivering on the promises that he and Andy [HistoryMaker Andrew Young] and Billy Payne [William Porter Payne] had made to the city, so--. Speaker 1: Okay, is there any particular role that you played during the Olympic Games themselves that--. Speaker 2: Other than to be a spectator and my work, my volunteer work with the Children's Olympic Ticket Fund that I mentioned earlier, but no, I, I, no, I enjoyed being a spectator. That's, that's how I participated, if you will. And it's interesting how sometimes you, you look at things that go on in the Olympics and you wonder how things might have been different whether at all if Atlanta [Georgia] would even have won the Olympics had we had not such a diverse team, you know, that was promoting it and I, there was probably room for a few more to be included in the circle, if you will, but, once again, people, some people get very possessive about power and so there was a slight little, I'd say, not tension but an acute awareness between Billy Payne and, and Andrew, scratch, between Billy Payne, let me just say that again. There was an acute awareness, I believe, I wouldn't say tension but I'd say awareness between Billy Payne and Maynard Jackson because Billy Payne prided himself on being the one who promoted the Olympics in the first place. He's a former athlete and--but the city, but the Olympics is never awarded to an organization, it's always awarded to a city, a municipality. Speaker 1: So his organization lodged the campaign-- Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: --to bring the Olympics to Atlanta? Speaker 2: That is correct. The Atlanta organizing, the Atlanta Olympic Committee [Atlanta Committee for the Olympic Games (ACOG)] composed basically of ten major members, including Andrew Young, who was literally responsible for most of the Olympic work but because the award goes to the city, the municipality, the mayor of that city is, obviously, an extremely important person, as important if not more so than the head of the committee that might have won the event. So, that was that little bit of power struggle there between, you know, who's, who's really running? Is it Billy Payne or is it the City of Atlanta? And so, they managed to work it out, obviously, in the end but it's, it was an interesting observation, you know, that one could make. Speaker 1: Is there a memory from the Olympic that you, that sticks out in your mind the most? Was it, was it, is that the Olympics where Ali [Muhammad Ali] lit the torch or was it--? Speaker 2: Ali lit the torch in Atlanta but the, the thing about the Olympics that stands out to me happened in Barcelona [Spain] when Atlanta was awarded the games and they passed this huge flag to Maynard and he was waving the flag on the Barcelona stage, the Olympic flag. For some reason that's my fondest memory of the Olympics. Story_ID: 303533 Speaker 1: Now you would--had a television show sometime in the beginning-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --of the, was it in the '90s [1990s] or the--? Speaker 2: When I came to Atlanta [Georgia], I didn't, I couldn't really work full-time because as a new bride and as a new first lady there was a lot that I was trying to get used to and to do and so I had also had gone through my own struggles as being the first black in both of the positions that I've had in New York [New York], the first black account executive at Grey Advertising [Grey Group, New York, New York] and the first black marketing supervisor at TWA [Trans World Airlines] in the Southeastern region. And in both of those cases, you know, I had to deal with a great deal of challenges, not just from the white men who weren't used to women or blacks, you know, coming into their territory but I also, once again, had to deal with the, the female issue of the women that found it intimidating that I would come into a management position straight out of grad school [Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] when they had maybe worked for eight years up through the media department and the production department and so forth and rightfully, maybe rightfully so, but that, you know, I didn't create that situation but I was the one that usually took the brunt of it. And so, I learned a few lessons there so I was, I was ready to exhale a little bit when I got to Atlanta and just do some volunteer work and, but immediately almost afterwards, within about two years or so, I was approached by Georgia Public Television [Georgia Public Broadcasting]. I was, I think I was in Leadership Atlanta [Atlanta, Georgia] one year and there was a panel and the members of Leadership Atlanta audience were asked if there were any questions and so I stood and asked a couple of pointed questions to a couple of people in the panel and then afterwards one of the producers from WSB [WSB-TV, Atlanta, Georgia] came up to me and asked me had I ever considered television. And so I said, no, he--I said, no not really, other than to put commercials on it that I produced and he says, well, you know, I, I'd for you to come in and talk to me because I think, you know, I'd like for you to do a current affairs show and this is WSB back in 19--I guess '80 [1980], early '80 [1980], late '70s [1970s]. So, I did a stint with WSB with a co-host, Quentin Bradford, called, 'Dialog' [ph.]. It went for about a year and a half, maybe two years. And then I was approached by Georgia Public Television to do a current affairs program for them which was kind of like a similar program that I was already doing and current affairs meaning that I interviewed local dignitaries or stars or on health issues or police issues or literary issues or the arts so it was a magazine format-type of show but most often dealing with activities that are going on in the city or that were about to be going on. Speaker 1: And that was in the--. Speaker 2: That was in the '80s [1980s], just before we came up to the Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] cuts, where they cut out a lot of public funding and the, it hit NPR [National Public Radio], or public radio and public broadcasting and the--. Speaker 1: That's when he fired like, was it 80 percent of-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --public broadcasting. Speaker 2: And even though I wasn't fired, I didn't lose my job as, as host of 'Prime Time' [ph.] which was the name of the current affairs show that I was hosting, the budget cuts were so severe that they had to double up on, you know, on engineering time and taping time and so it would be like they might want me to come in on a Friday night, at ten o'clock to interview someone and I'm like, I can't come in on a Friday night at ten o'clock or nine o'clock to interview someone because usually on a weekend, especially, I'm at some banquet or at some function with Maynard [Maynard Jackson], you know, a city function, so I said, "You know, thanks, but no thanks, maybe some specials once in a while." Story_ID: 303534 Speaker 1: And then I was approached by PBA, Public Broadcasting Atlanta [Atlanta, Georgia], about doing a possible radio show for them which was great for me because on radio you don't have to worry about makeup and color bleed and a lot of other things, hair. So, I said, "Yes, I'd consider doing something for you." And so he allowed me to develop my own format and I wanted it to be something that was conversational but informative and so I interviewed authors and people of note who had written books and that was for eleven years, loved it, took a lot of time because I did read the books, all the way, but I enjoyed it very much because I met so many fascinating and interesting people through that program. Speaker 2: So this ['Between the Lines'] starts in 2000, right? Speaker 1: That's correct. It started April of 2000 and went to, actually it has continued although I have backed off of the weekly show which I ended this past, what is this, 2012? This is 2012? I ended this year the, the weekly literary program and now I'm doing specials, hour specials every other month. So that was my compromise because it just got to be very, very time-consuming to spend the money and not, excuse me, to spend the time rather, there was no money involved, it was public radio, but I had to take a step back from that because I was assuming more responsibilities and my businesses, my two daughters [Valerie Amanda Dejoie Jackson and Alexandra Josephine Richardson Jackson] who were moving to L.A. [Los Angeles, California] and I needed the flexibility to be able to travel a little bit more to the East Coast, the West Coast rather. So I'm doing a part-time show, 'Valerie Jackson in Conversation' with people of note, not just literary figures but from all walks of life, or genres, literary, the arts, music, news, sports, science, so, I'm still enjoying that. Story_ID: 303535 Speaker 1: Do you have a, I don't want to get you in trouble, but do you have a favorite guest? All these people like Sidney Poitier, Hillary Clinton, and President Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.], Cornel West, Iyanla Vanzant, Deepak Chopra. Speaker 2: Deepak Chopra was my first guest and probably one of my favorite. We became fast friends that day and I was very impressed with him and he told my producer [Rojene Bailey] that I was a very smart woman and he asked me if he could be friends and I said, "Of course, Deepak, we can be friends." And, and he did, he continued to be friends and we're still friends to this day, keep in touch, and so. But other, other interesting and outstanding interviews, Toni Morrison, Hillary Clinton. The interview I did with Hillary Clinton was very well received in the Atlanta [Georgia] area even though this is a Republican state, so to speak; but I got a lot of feedback from many of my listeners because they said that they had heard a side of Hillary that they had never heard before, a softer side, you know, a more human side. And I suspect that it was because she felt comfortable talking to me. She, we were friends, you know, we had met, you know, through Maynard Jackson and Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] being good friends and so we'd often go to the White House [Washington, D.C.] and so she knew that I was not going to try to trip her up or snag her or, you know, get her to say something she didn't want to say. She trusted me and with that level of trust, she was able to relax, you know, and, and the tension was gone and that's what people were hearing. They were hearing a relaxed Hillary Clinton, you know, and they were impressed. Speaker 1: Now so, when did you interview her? Was that when she was, before she ran for president? Or--. Speaker 2: That was before, yes, that was before she ran for president. Speaker 1: Okay, and she was a senator--. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --for New York? Speaker 2: Yes, and she had just written her second book ['Dear Socks, Dear Buddy: Kids' Letters to The First Pets,' Hillary Rodham Clinton] I believe it was. First ['It Takes a Village: And Other Lessons Children Teach Us,' Hillary Rodham Clinton] or--don't ask me 'cause I can't remember now. You know, hundreds and hundreds of books I've read and I can't remember, but it was, it was definitely before she ran for office. She probably could have used a rerun of that during the, during the election. That would have probably helped her. I mean, you know, when she was running in the primaries. Speaker 1: Yeah, she seemed, seemed in those days and not so much now for some reason, but in those days the conservative right really hated her in particular, you know. Speaker 2: You know, it's because she spoke truth to power. A lot of people aren't liked when they do that, so, I admire her. Speaker 1: Okay, anybody else from those, that you still--. Speaker 2: Okay, I'll tell you my funniest interview was with the Reverend Al Green. Yes, the same Al Green that sings those wonderful love songs, we--. Speaker 1: Yeah, favorite in there. Speaker 2: We had such a ball, laughing and talking. I was afraid we weren't even going to be able to use the interview because we were laughing so much and so loud and he would start telling me stuff that had happened and at one point he even said to me, he says, "Valerie [HistoryMaker Valerie Richardson Jackson]," he said, "I'm telling you stuff that I hadn't even put in the book, you know,"--and, about the woman that threw the hot grits on him and all that. Speaker 1: Yeah, the most famous grit scenes in there. Speaker 2: Yeah, he mentioned that, yeah, but he went into more detail with me and strangely enough, many don't know but many do know that he later became a reverend and as we were talking through that interview, he got excited about something that he was talking about and I've never really heard anyone speaking tongues but I could not recognize the words that he was using. I think he was speaking in tongues at one point. And since I didn't understand what he was saying, I just kind of sat there and waited for him to come back, you know, to English, but he was an amazing individual. He really was. And, of course, there were all the heavy, you know, the intellects like Cornel West and many others. So, it's, it has been a wonderful--probably the most rewarding, one of the most rewarding experiences in my life has been this literary show ['Between the Lines']. Story_ID: 303536 Speaker 1: I guess you continued, like there's a Maynard Jackson foundation, right, that--. Speaker 2: Yes, there is a Maynard Jackson, excuse me--twenty years ago, as a matter of fact this year, Maynard and another young man back then in those days, John Holly, actually was a retired colonel in the [U.S.] Army, formed the Maynard Jackson Youth Foundation [Atlanta, Georgia] because Maynard felt that even though there were a lot of mentoring programs about town and successful ones, 100 Black Men, Alphas [Alpha Kappa Alpha Mentoring Program] and so forth, one of the elements that he felt was not always included was the element of leadership. Now, you can teach kids about how to take SATs and, or how to take a test but there are things that come with leadership that aren't always, can't be really taught in one session where you might take a, a group of kids, maybe even like to a ballgame or something, they might learn about community involvement but what does that teach them about leadership? And there's nothing wrong with going to a ballgame but I'm just saying, Maynard felt that some energy needed to be devoted to raising young leaders in our community, young black leaders, meaning for them to lead in their schools, to lead in junior high, to lead in high school, to lead in college, to have the courage to take a stand to say something that's not popular, to say no to a boy as we teach the young girls in the leadership, or the young women in the leadership. How do you say no to a man without offending him? Young men, why are you hassling women, you know? Why, why do you feel that that's proper? And so we get into a lot of things that, that involve critical thinking, courage, because it takes courage to speak up, hard work, because all of that's part of leadership too. I know very few lazy leaders and, and the ability to have vision, to think ahead, to think beyond the obvious as to what your actions might have and the impact that they may have on other people and other people who are watching you. One of the stories that I like to tell in the leadership class is a story of my young daughter who was in the third grade. She came home one day, maybe second grade, she came home one day and she says, "Mom, Mom," she said, "There's a new girl in school named Theresa but all the kids are making fun of her because she has some holes in her shoes." And so I said, "Well, what do you do when they make fun of her?" And she said, "I didn't do anything." I said, "Well the next time they start teasing her, you need to speak up for her. You need to say something in support of her." I said, "Now, what does she do well? Everybody has something that they can do, whether it's sing or dance or write or paint or, whatever it is, everybody's got a little talent that something that they, that they can do." And so she thought and she says, "Well, you know what, she can draw real good." I said, "All right. The next time they start teasing her about her holes in her shoes or, you know, how she might be poor," I said, "I want you to mention to them what an excellent--how she's so good at drawing." And so my daughter said, "Well, okay." A couple of days later she came back home from school again and she says, "Mom, Mom, guess what? They started teasing Theresa again and so I told them that she could really draw well and guess what? Now she's drawing pictures for them and charging twenty-five cents." And so I said, "Do you see what an impact you can have on the life of another person by having the courage to stand up and say something?" And so that's just a small example but it's the kind of example that I mean about standing up, first of all, looking for the good in everybody and then speaking to that good, you know, sharing it with everybody and, and that's, I think, a key element in leadership. Story_ID: 303537 Speaker 1: I think, let's just bounce back on your show ['Between the Lines'; 'Valerie Jackson in Conversation'] for[AB1] a second. It seems as though your show, looking at the list of the people that are on, it's not just anybody that wrote a book, it's a, it reflects a certain philosophy and trend and train of thought. So what is your philosophy in terms of picking guests for your show? Speaker 2: Well, you're right. Everybody that writes a book is not invited to be a part of the show but when looking at the show I, I try to have a diverse approach, diverse meaning male, female voices, young and old voices, black, Asian, brown, yellow, every kind of color voice but I also want it to be in a format or a, a book that would, that would share some information or knowledge about something. It's not just an ego trip for an author. There had to be something in that book that was meaningful that they might be able to apply or someone else might be able to apply their lives. I chose not to do, you know, books that don't have redeeming value, so to speak, not, no blatant sex and, you know, exploiting pimps and all that, no, no. We, we had, that was valuable time on air that needs to be used to focus on positive learning experiences and people and, and projects. And so, I, I was very determined that, that I was very careful in selecting the subject matters and the people that presented them. Story_ID: 303538 Speaker 1: What are some of the other volunteer activities? You know you mentioned the, the Maynard Jackson Youth Foundation [Atlanta, Georgia]. There are other things too, right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The Maynard Ja- over the years I've been on numerous boards, everything from the Girl Scouts of Northwest Georgia Council, which is the state organization, the board of directors for that, coming from a line of, a long line of Girl Scout [Girl Scouts of the United States of America] experience, from a Brownie on, all the way up to a senior, then a Brownie leader, then a Girl Scout leader and then, all the way up to the board of directors. So that's something I've been involved in most of my life is Girl Scouts but other areas, Habitat for Humanity. One of my favorite birthdays was spent helping to build a house for Habitat for Humanity. A lot of work in the arts with the arts community, True Colors Theatre [True Colors Theatre Company], the Alliance Theatre [Atlanta, Georgia]. I often will feature playwrights and others who are involved in the, in the arts. So, unfortunately, I forgot my train of thought. What was I talking about? Speaker 1: You were talking about all the different volunteer--. Speaker 2: That happens when you get fifty. Speaker 1: All the volunteer activities. Speaker 2: Oh, the volunteer, right, right, okay, okay. I've been involved with the YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association] of Atlanta [Georgia], served on their board of directors and was blessed to, or was honored to receive one of their Women of Achievement Awards which is a prestigious award in the city and working with the, any organization that has to do with reading to young children. I'm an avid reader, have been all my life and that's the one thing that I've tried to get children interested in is reading and I tell young parents, I said, even if they're not reading what you want them to read, at first, just give them something that they'll be interested in, whether it's a comic book or whatever, but just something that they're interested in to get them in the habit of wanting to read then you can segue into doing, you know things of note or import. That's what I did with my young girls [Valerie Amanda Dejoie Jackson and Alexandra Josephine Richardson Jackson] on their piano lessons, both of them started taking piano at a young age. The first one at the age of three and asked for them herself and the second one started at the age of four and a lot of people thought that that was too young but for the three year old, I really did have to search quite a while to find someone who would teach her. I finally found someone at Fort McPherson Army Base [East Point, Georgia] who agreed to talk with her. And so I took her over, three years old, to this piano teacher and the piano teacher took her in the back separately and when she came back out, she said, "Mrs. Jackson [HistoryMaker Valerie Richardson Jackson], it would be a pleasure to teach your daughter." She said the misconception I had was that she couldn't read and therefore wouldn't be able to read notes but my daughter could read, at least basic reading level, you know, first grade, almost first grade level. So, that was exciting and she got, you know, into her piano and then the second one followed suit and they took piano for ten years, at least, and it has stood me in good stead. I enjoyed listening to the--well the first couple of years were rough but by the time they got up to Chopin [Frederic Chopin] and Beethoven [Ludwig van Beethoven], it was really wonderful to hear the music coming through the house and, of course, the youngest daughter rebelled and wanted to stop taking classical, and she wanted to take jazz piano. And so I finally gave in and let her take jazz. This is my jazz vocalist so what could I say, anyway, but, working with young people, with music, I've served on Dallas Austin's board, the young musician, you probably know him and in whatever way that, that I can serve. I'm usually willing to help if I'm approached and asked nicely. Speaker 1: Now did you have a role in the, in the establishment of the Black Arts Festival [National Black Arts Festival] here in Atlanta? I think that was, what, early '90s [1990s], '89 [1989], '90 [1990]? Speaker 2: As a matter of fact, Maynard [Maynard Jackson] was the mayor when they started that and so, no, I did not have a direct role in that although I've been very supportive of it, financially and, you know, presence-wise. So it's, there's a lot going on in this city and a lot of people don't realize how much creatively is going on. I just went to a reception, or a recital rather, the other night of a young pianist and it was outstanding. He was a jazz pianist and he was outstanding. From the Ukraine, as a matter of fact, from Armenia. So, it's a, it's a fascinating city. Story_ID: 303539 Speaker 1: Jackmont Hospitality [Jackmont Hospitality, Inc., Atlanta, Georgia] is a business that was started by my late husband, Maynard [Maynard Jackson], his daughter, Brooke [Brooke Jackson Edmond], and a veteran food service young man, Daniel Halpern. They brought together a team of people to create a joint venture with Sodexo, and in that joint venture we provided food service to Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], to Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] and several other institutional organizations. When my husband passed in 2003, I became actively involved in the business and Daniel, Brooke and I created an additional business called Atlanta Restaurant Partners [ARP, Atlanta, Georgia], and this is basically the operating company for a series of Friday [TGI Fridays] restaurants, TGIF franchises that, that we own. And so we are very blessed that we've been fortunate in being able to build a very strong business. In '94 [1994], we were grossing about twenty-four million; today, we're closer to forty, to doubling that, forty-something million in terms of revenue and sales and so forth. So, we're, we've been very fortunate but we work hard, you know. I'm, I personally visit many of our restaurants and very involved in strategy planning, you know, for future stores and for maintaining what we have. So, it's, it's keeping me sharp. It keeps that M.B.A. in use so I'm delighted that I'm able to, was able to come in and be a part of the business after Maynard passed. Speaker 2: Okay, now is there a particular stance TGIF, Friday, has in terms of the black community that--I know, Magic Johnson owns--. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --several TGIF, Fridays, too-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --so was there a, some amendment that they have? Speaker 1: I don't know whom might have the most franchises or the most stores but I do know that the TGI Fridays at the Hartsfield-Jackson International Airport [Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport, Atlanta, Georgia] is the number one Fridays in the country. So, and I think we're number three or fourth in the world. So, we're, we're doing, we're doing okay. We're doing okay. Speaker 2: It sounds, sounds like it, it sounds like it, and so you do spend a lot of time--is there one aspect of management of these restaurants as the most important thing that you kind of handle? Speaker 1: Well, I don't personally have to handle because we've got excellent people working out at, vice president of operations and sales and so forth; but I'm always looking at the bottom line, obviously, and always looking at ways that might be able to improve the relationship between the guest and our workers and the important thing for us is that we are able to maintain good people. Our retention, or our turnover rate is not as large as, or as many Fridays or any franchises for that matter, so we train our people well and we keep our people and we, that's part of why I think that our stores, or our restaurants are successful. Story_ID: 303540 Speaker 1: Mayor Maynard Jackson, former mayor [of Atlanta, Georgia] at this point, in 2002 was considering a bid for the U.S. Senate. I think they wanted him to take Zell Miller's place and-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --how did you feel about that? Speaker 2: Actually, the very first position that Maynard ever ran for was for the U.S. Senate against Herman Talmadge back in, what year was that? I forget now, but anyway, the very first public office that Maynard ran for was the U.S. Senate against Herman Talmadge and even though--first of all, it was a statewide race and no black had ever won a statewide race except back in reconstruction era and they didn't have them anymore. But everybody knew that it was impossible to beat him, but that wasn't the point. The point was that Maynard could not let this man go unchallenged, a man who did not represent all the people as he should have and even if he couldn't beat him, he wanted there to be a voice out there saying, "You need to pay some attention to us, we are not let you going to slide back into office again without being aware of what we need." And so, as a matter of fact, it was during that campaign that Herman Talmadge called Maynard at five a.m. one morning and said, "Maynard, you up yet?" Of course he wasn't, but he didn't tell Herman Talmadge that. So they proceeded to talk and wherever the conversation was, but from that day on, Maynard never slept past five a.m. in the morning or-- throughout our marriage. Now he would set the alarm clock and it would go off and he wouldn't hear it and I'd have to wake him up, but he was up every morning at five a.m. Anyway, so getting back to the U.S. Senate, yes, Maynard was seriously considering it but he had other things to consider also, his health. Once again, we still had, we've had children in school all of our lives, you know like twenty years, we've got five kids. So, once again, he was thinking very much about the financial health of the family and he knew that there were some other things that he wanted to do in life. He wanted to be a good businessman other than just a good politician or a good statesman, which is what I prefer to call him because he's not a typical politician. He's, he's really more of a statesman. And so, he wanted, he knew that there were other sides of him that he hadn't explored, like the business side and, and so that's what he started doing. So, that was good. Story_ID: 303541 Speaker 1: Do you have any, just can you like capsulize your reflections of Maynard Jackson for us. Speaker 2: I think the most important thing about Maynard Jackson was that he was a man of vision and action. If he said he would do something, he did it. If he stood for something, he stood all the way for it and reminds me of one of his favorite mentors who was Benjamin E. Mays, one of his sayings, one of my favorite of his sayings was that, "If you believe in something, you must act on it. If you don't act on it, it's not a belief, it's an opinion." Maynard Jackson believed in acting on things that he believed in. As a matter of fact, he nicknamed himself Action Jackson but his commitment, his follow through, his will, was exceptionally strong and, but most of all, he had a noble heart and by that I mean that he cared about other people. He wanted everyone to have a seat at the table, the politics of inclusion and he was a very generous man, not just with money but with his time, his advice, his love, his mentoring and Maynard was a very big teacher. You know, he taught every day of his life. He was teaching somebody whether it was the children at the foundation [Maynard Jackson Youth Foundation, Atlanta, Georgia] or even the people in his own office. He, he was known for his red ink pens and the corrections that he'd make on things that they would submit to him and send them back to his, you know, chairman of the department of, you know, the bureau of waterworks or whatever it was or the, or his chief of staff, you know, they wouldn't be surprised to get memos back that they had written to him all marked up in red ink with directions on how to improve it but that's wonderful. I loved that. I love people that you can learn from, that you're constantly learning from. And I think that was what we both fed in each other. It was that intellectual curiosity and that we both love people, love, you know, just being a good old human being. Story_ID: 303542 Speaker 1: You have five children, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Tell us about them. Speaker 2: Okay, Maynard [Maynard Jackson] and I have five children, three from his previous marriage [to HistoryMaker Bunnie Jackson-Ransom]. His oldest daughter, Brooke [Brooke Jackson Edmond], scratch, scratch, three from his previous marriage, Beth [Beth Jackson Hodges], Brooke and Buzzy, who is Maynard, III [Maynard Jackson, III]; and then Maynard and I have two daughters, Valerie Amanda [Valerie Amanda Dejoie Jackson] and Alexandra [Alexandra Josephine Richardson Jackson], and she's the baby girl and was just like, you know, a carbon copy of Maynard, she never meets a stranger. All the children, all of Maynard's children are very bright, very bright, and they've pursued their different areas. His oldest daughter, Beth, is in artist management and event planning. Brooke, as you know, is a business woman with me. She's involved in Jackmont Hospitality [Jackmont Hospitality, Inc., Atlanta, Georgia] and Atlanta Restaurant Partners [ARP, Atlanta, Georgia] with me, we're equal partners with Daniel Halpern, and Buzzy, the only son in the group, is a musician. He's out in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], honing his craft, he's a drummer. Valerie Amanda is a lawyer. She learned about the politics of inclusion at his knee and she's now the worldwide director of diversity and inclusion for K and L Gates [K&L Gates LLP] which is one of the major international law firms in the country. And then Alexandra is also a musician. She teaches voice and piano and she's a jazz vocalist. So, once again, there's that music coming through the family. When I was younger, I used to sing in choirs as did Maynard, in the glee club at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] and so the, the children, like I said, well diverse in their interest, all of them very smart and all of them appreciative, very appreciative. Story_ID: 303543 Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: My hope is that, that we take a little bit more time with our young people. We had a recent horrible shooting in an elementary school where twenty young children were killed. Yes, we need stronger gun control in this, in this country but we also, I think, need more parent control, more supervision, more leading by example, for our young people. I think too many of them are sitting in front of the TV and in front of their--I don't even know what they call the games these days, but whatever those boxes are, and, and they're missing out on some very important human lessons, how to treat other people, how to respect life, you know. That person that shot in the street, is not going to get up like on TV and get up and go and walk off the lot, you know. These reality shows, they're not real. We need to get our kids away from that kind of stuff, so, a lot of it has a lot to do with who's raising and who's parenting or how they're raising and parenting but I'm an old fashioned--I come from the old school, very strict mother, no TV during the week, no Game Boys and stuff like that during the week. They had to practice their piano for an hour each day. Homework, at least two or three hours. So, I'm, you know, I'm old fashioned but there's a room, I think more room in this world that we can go back and, and recapture some of those old fashioned values that might help to serve us overall in society. Story_ID: 303544 Speaker 1: And here in 2012, do you, what are your hopes and concerns for Atlanta [Georgia]? Speaker 2: Well, I think Atlanta's in good hands with Kasim Reed. I think he's doing a pretty good job. It's a tough job, one of the toughest jobs, you know, one can have in this country. And knowing what I know about the situation, about the position, I think he's doing a pretty good job. So, I think Atlanta is, is still strong. Like everything else, we're facing those financial challenges, the typical issues of pensions for our workers and increases, salaries for our city workers but I think that if you've got elected officials in office who are compassionate and who are caring more about delivering services as opposed to whether they're going to be elected next term, and I think we do have good members like that, I think we're going to be, continue to be a leader in the country for all cities to keep an eye on. Story_ID: 303545 Speaker 1: As one who is married to the first black mayor of Atlanta [Georgia], what do, how do you feel about our first black president who was just re-elected to a second term? Speaker 2: Of course I'm very happy about the re-election of Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] and the thing that surprised me about his first election was that so many people said, "Oh, I never thought I'd see the day." Well, I did think that I would see the day when I would see a black president and maybe it's because I was a little bit closer to the situation knowing that Maynard [Maynard Jackson] considered running for the presidency and others, you know, who were considering running. I knew from the, from the early, you know, foot ground troops, so to speak, that that was coming, that that black president was coming as well a female president and maybe even next time. But the, the funny thing is that in a way, when Maynard was elected mayor for the first time, the reaction in Atlanta was very much like the national reaction to when Obama was elected the first time. I was talking with [HistoryMaker] Pearl Cleage, one of the, she was my husband's first director of communications, a playwright, and she's written several plays, as a matter of fact, one about the night that Maynard was elected mayor called, 'What I Learned in Paris,' [Pearl Cleage] but in that play she talks about the reaction of the people in Atlanta to Maynard's election. She said, "The horns were blowing in the street, people were coming out of their houses, into the streets, yelling and laughing and talking and playing music." And she said, it was really a precursor to what we saw with Barack Obama's election and so, you know, that's why I knew that I would, or I hoped that I would see a black president in my time because the march had already been started a long time ago. Story_ID: 303546 Speaker 1: Now, we always ask this question. When you look back on everything you've done to this point and to where you are right now in life, is there anything that you would do to change something or, you know, any major thing? Speaker 2: Well, without sounding like Frank Sinatra or someone like that, I have no regrets, but no, I really don't because I've always tried to live my life to its fullest. If I regret anything, it was not doing even more of something that I was already doing. For instance, when I visited Korea, unfortunately, I felt ill and so I wasn't able to visit a school and a department store. In hindsight, I wish I had, you know, you know, sucked it up and, and gone anyway because I regret missing that experience now. I had an opportunity to travel to Cuba with Maynard [Maynard Jackson], but I had a personal family--with my mother [Cora Feggins Richardson], a health issue, and so I wasn't able to do that. So I regret not going to Cuba but it's those kind of things that I regret, not anything that I would say would be a serious issue in my life. I think I made an excellent choice in my husband. We had a wonderful twenty-seven years together. Solid, good, devoted, faithful marriage. Before that, I believed in working hard, that's why when a lot of others were in this, at the university playing bid whist, which I never learned how to play because I was, you know, in class, in business, and economics was kicking my butt and I didn't have time to learn how to play bid whist. Now I regret that. That's one of my regrets, that I didn't learn how to play bid whist but for the most part, I have been a very fortunate woman. I've been at the right time, at the right place, some of the time. In 1973 when I came out of Wharton [Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], I believe the average white male student, which was 98 percent of the class, received an average of three job offers. I received about fifteen, I believe. I was in the right place, at the right time and I was prepared, you know, that's a key element. It's not just all about luck. I had studied hard, gone to school, worked on my M.B.A. and so I was in a position to be prepared to accept those opportunities when it came along. Story_ID: 303547 Speaker 1: The follow-up to that is really, when you look back on everything you've done to this point, again, what today would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: Mothers often say this, but I'm most proud of my two daughters [Valerie Amanda Dejoie Jackson and Alexandra Josephine Richardson Jackson] and the kind of people that they've turned out to be, loving, appreciative, smart, caring, generous and I'm also proud to be have been a part of Maynard's [Maynard Jackson] support system. I enabled him to do many of the things that he was able to do and I don't say that out of any vanity, but I say it because, you know, I took care of all the bills and the finances and the yard, you know, and the housemaids and I'd send the, you know the social calendar and all and that allowed him to be able to spend more time on resolving the sewer issue or, you know, a tragedy that might have happened, a boiler exploding, boiler homes or, you know, that kind of thing, he was freed up to focus on because he didn't have to worry about a lot of other things and I see that as a major role of my life as being his partner and his helpmate. Story_ID: 303548 Speaker 1: Now is there anything I haven't asked that we need to talk about before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: Well, what's your last question? Speaker 1: Well, okay--. Speaker 2: All right. Well did we talk about my parents [Cora Feggins Richardson and Charles Richardson] a little bit ever in the first part, I don't remember? Speaker 1: We did, but we can go back. Now, are they still with us? Speaker 2: Yes, well no, both of them have passed now but I'm one of eight children and my father has, well he's passed now, as is my mother, but I've never known my father to work less than two jobs when I was growing up and my mother was a clerical worker and a domestic worker and we grew up thinking that white people were rich, black people were unfortunate, you know, we just didn't have access to the same things. And so, when my mother decided that she was going to, or rather that my two brothers, my two--when my mother decided that my two older brothers and I would integrate an all-white high school [Henrico High School, Richmond, Virginia] in 1963, that was very traumatic for me. She decided that she was not going to send us eighteen miles past a perfectly good school, which is what she called the school, to a black school [Virginia Randolph High School; The Academy at Virginia Randolph, Glen Allen, Virginia] that was twenty miles away in the country. And so she marched us up there and made us register and, of course, my two brothers and I did not want to go because every day we were harassed, our lockers were burned out, our yard, a cross was burned on our yard, I had boys following me all day long, teasing me and calling me Sapphire, so it was a difficult first couple of years but we pursued and we managed to win over most of the students and started having some successes. My oldest brother was a big football player. My other brother was an artist and sculptured an Indian [Native American] head that was so wonderful that they had it bronzed and it stood in front of the school for thirty years before vandals tore it down, and I became the first Miss Warrior that the school had which is, you know, the typical kind of homecoming queen, although it was really a little bit more than just a popularity contest because we had to answer serious questions, we had to have good grades, we had to have a talent and so forth. The bottom line is, I won the contest and the Miss Congeniality, which I was really shocked but that, those, it was that winning though that really kind of gave me the impetus to do other things that I had never thought about doing. I was like, wow, if I can be Miss Warrior, then maybe I can do this and maybe I really can go to business school and be a CPA [certified public accountant] and, and that's what I had to do. I had to, because there was no money in my family for college. I'm the first in my family to attend college. I had to work my way through college [Richmond Professional Institute; Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, Virginia]. I started at sixteen as a telephone operator at night, while I was still in high school. When I started college, I worked in between classes, once again as a telephone operator for four years to get out of undergrad school. Then when I went to Wharton [Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], I managed to get a few little grants but most of that money was money that I had to borrow and that I had to work for also. I worked my way through Wharton. So it was, it was a good lesson in a way that I came up hard because it taught me the value of hard work. And my mother and father, even though they didn't have a lot of money, they, my father taught me the value of hard work, my mother taught me the value of reading, she was a big reader too and that was my escape, that's how I learned about the world, was through books, through reading. And so, I was very blessed that I had two parents who instilled in me some good values that allowed me to carry on. My father was a sanitation worker. He drove a trash truck and when we were in school, and they would ask for your father's occupation, I was always told to write down, heavy duty manual operator. I didn't know what heavy duty manual operator was but that was what I was told that my daddy did. And then I found out that what it was, it was that huge dump truck, garbage trucks, you know that they drive, that's heavy duty, and manually, he operated it. So, that's how I finally found out that my father drove a garbage truck, and proud of it. Speaker 1: Okay, so, did they get a chance to see you become successful and finish Wharton? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes. Both of them got a chance to see me graduate from Wharton, to marry Maynard [Maynard Jackson], to see my children [Valerie Amanda Dejoie Jackson and Alexandra Josephine Richardson Jackson] born, so, I was very fortunate. Unfortunately, my father passed nine months before Maynard did so that was a really tough year. I still get a little upset when I think about. My mother said to me, "Who would have ever thought we'd both be widows in the same year." Anyway, but, I had my mother for quite a bit longer and I'm very happy that both of them said, before they died to me, how much they loved me and how proud they were. Story_ID: 303549 Speaker 1: Now, the last question. Speaker 2: What's that last question? Speaker 1: The last one is similar to legacy but a little bit different. Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: I would like to be remembered as a wise, compassionate, generous woman. Speaker 1: Okay, well thank you very much. Story_ID: 303550 Speaker 1: This is my mother, Cora Ruth Feggins Richardson. Speaker 2: And that's about what year? Speaker 1: Maybe about 1960. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Okay. This is Hillary Clinton and Valerie Jackson [HistoryMaker Valerie Richardson Jackson], approximately 2007. Speaker 2: This is Ted Turner, Valerie Jackson and Jane Fonda at one of the World Series baseball games. Speaker 1: These are my siblings. From back row left, Monte Richardson [ph.], Chuck Richardson, Rick Richardson [ph.], Bobby Richardson [ph.], Butch Richardson [ph.], all nicknames and the women didn't get nicknames in the family, so, that's not really true. The two, the three women are Vicky [ph.], Valerie and Ruth [Ruth Richardson (ph.)]. Speaker 2: This is a shot of my 'Prime Time' [ph.] Georgia Public Television [Georgia Public Broadcasting] program. Two unidentified guests and this is my producer, Rojene Bailey, sitting on the desk. Speaker 1: Joining me in this picture is Maynard's [Maynard Jackson] cousin, Kathleen Clement Johnson, friend Deepak Chopra, spiritualist in mind over matter, let me do that over, 'cause you're not going to do all that anyway, okay, to my left is Maynard's cousin, Kathleen Clement Johnson, Deepak Chopra and Valerie Jackson. Speaker 2: About what year is that? Speaker 1: Hm? Speaker 2: About what year? Speaker 1: That would be, that would be about 2006. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Sidney Poitier, Valerie Jackson and Maynard Jackson, approximately early '80s [1980s]. Speaker 2: This is my father, Charles Hoover Richardson, my mother Cora Ruth Feggins Richardson and my brother, Henry Chuck Richardson, who served as city councilman in Richmond [Virginia] for seventy years. Speaker 1: My wonderful mother, Ruth, and father, Charles Richardson. Speaker 2: This is an early photo, approximately 1956 of my father, two of my brothers, one sister and myself. Speaker 1: One of my first baby photos, that's Valerie Richardson. Speaker 2: An even earlier baby photo, 1951, I'm about a year and a half years old, standing at my grandmother's door. Speaker 1: This is five generations of Feggins women. The top is my mother, next to her is her mother, Josephine [Josephine Feggins], whom I'm named after, below her is her mother, to the right of her is her mother and the fifth generation is myself, sitting on my great-grandmother's knee. Speaker 2: Just for the benefit of who is doing this caption, how do you spell Feggins? Speaker 1: F-E-G-G-I-N-S. Speaker 2: What's that doing in there? That's just the crazy two brothers and a sister. I didn't mean to be in there. Speaker 1: You're in the middle? Speaker 2: No, that's not even me. That's why I said, that's even (laughter)--. Speaker 1: Okay, this is a photograph of Maynard and me at our recommitment vows in Toulouse, France. Speaker 2: That's in--. Speaker 1: In 1993. Sorry. Speaker 2: This is my favorite photo of my two daughters and myself. To the left is Alexandra Josephine Richardson Jackson, of course Valerie Josephine Richardson Jackson and then Valerie Amanda Dejoie Jackson, on the end. Valerie Amanda Dejoie, D as in David, E, J as in John, O-I-E, Dejoie Jackson. Speaker 1: This is me speaking at, at a friendship, oh I see, this is in Toulouse at a sister city program for Toulouse, France. I'm speaking in Toulouse, France. Speaker 2: Just a party picture. Speaker 1: Oh my prom dress, 1971. Speaker 2: Maynard's and my wedding day, kissing after coming out of my brother's house. Speaker 1: Another picture of us inside of our marriage day. Speaker 2: Oh, again, marriage photo. Speaker 1: From an article of Atlanta Looking Ahead magazine--Women Looking Ahead magazine, sorry. Speaker 2: Actually, this is a picture of me and Maynard when we were dating, before we got married. So that would be about '76 [1976], I guess, or '77 [1977]. Speaker 1: Arnold Schwarzenegger, Valerie Jackson and Steve Labovitz, I believe. Let me be sure that's who that is, whoops, excuse me. Speaker 2: He's got a name tag on actually. Speaker 1: That's what I'm saying. Is that what that says? Steve Labovitz, okay, good. Speaker 2: My high school [Henrico High School, Richmond, Virginia], oh, it's all beat up, my high school graduation picture. Speaker 1: One of my favorite pictures of Maynard and me in his favorite room, the kitchen. Speaker 2: Oh, that's the same one we did. Speaker 1: Yeah, I didn't know if you could do them. Speaker 2: Ah, Maynard had lost all that weight--. Speaker 1: This is 1977? Speaker 2: Yup, we got, we had just gotten married and he had lost a lot of weight. Boy, he looks like Buzzy on that, his son [Maynard Jackson, III]. Speaker 1: His son is like that? Speaker 2: Oh, man, that picture right there is just like Buzzy all over again, wow. Buzzy--Maynard used to be called Buzzy when he was a kid, too...