 Story_ID: 136452 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Napoleon Jones-Henderson; that's N-A-P-O-L-E-O-N, J-O-N-E-S, hyphen, H-E-N-D-E-R-S-O-N. Speaker 1: And sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: 11/13/1943 [November 13, 1943], Chicago, Illinois. Speaker 1: And what is your occupation and title? Speaker 2: Interesting (laughter). I'm a visual image maker, sometimes called an artist, and I'm a retired professor of art. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today I believe is the 22nd of--what month is this--April, 2013 [April 22, 2013]. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're at my home in Roxbury, [Boston] Massachusetts, 12 Morley Street, Roxbury, Mass. Speaker 1: Okay, now this is the Edward Everett Hale House. Speaker 2: Right, this is the national historic landmark home of Dr. Edward Everett Hale, who was clergy to the U.S. Congress until he died in 1909, and notably wrote a book '[The] Man Without a Country,' and was very active within the abolitionist movement and as well as many others at that time of his adult life here in Roxbury. Speaker 1: Okay, and I guess maybe this is a--well, I'll save the other story about your name till we, till a little later. Story_ID: 136453 Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --that only require a short answer. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: The first one is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Well, maybe I should say yeah, lima beans. Speaker 1: Okay, you're the first one I think with that, with that answer. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: All colors are my favorite color. Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Actually, all seasons are exciting. They have their own merit, but I could, at this point in my life, I can do without winter. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: No, I, anywhere on the planet, just drop me down and I'm fine. Speaker 1: Okay, and the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: I have one that I use, yes, which is: History does not make appointments. Story_ID: 136454 Speaker 1: So I'm gonna ask about your family history now-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side, but we'll do it, do 'em separately, and then-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --put 'em together. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So, can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Her name is Maxine Unger, M-A-X-I-N-E, U-N-G-E-R. Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Her date of birth is June the 14th, 1924 [June 14, 1924], and she was born in Bessemer, Alabama. Speaker 1: Bessemer, that's a steel town. Speaker 2: Mhm. Right outside of Birmingham [Alabama]. Speaker 1: Okay. Now what can you tell us about your ancestors on your mother's side? How far back can you trace them, and were they always in Bessemer, or did they, were they from some other place? Speaker 2: Well, my brother [Woodrow Henderson], the one next to me 'cause I'm the oldest, is, we've been working on this family tree for quite a while. And interestingly enough, this preparation for this has helped me a lot in getting some of this work done. But my mother's father is, document-wise, is the furthest back I can go in terms of having records, written records. But we have oral documentation of-- Speaker 1: Well, oral history's fine-- Speaker 2: Yeah, right, right. Speaker 1: --I mean 'cause these are the stories--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --so, if we know the stories, then the, you know, the documents take care of themselves, but-- Speaker 2: Right, well-- Speaker 1: But what did your family say about the history? Speaker 2: --that goes all the way back to, prior to the Emancipation Proclamation [1863]. And it's been Alabama from principally around the Birmingham, Bessemer, you know, Pulaski area of Alabama. Speaker 1: So this is, this is back to slavery, pre-emancipation, right? Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely, absolutely. Speaker 1: So what were your ancestors doing there, and what are the stories that--did they pass any stories down about what it was like in-- Speaker 2: Yeah, my granddaddy, who was a very important figure in, in our, our, me and my family, my, just my siblings, our growing up. He was a tall man. He was good, well over six feet. And his father was actually Irish. And my granddaddy, had he elected to do so, could have passed for white, always talked to us about growing up in Alabama and con--subsequently, his life in Chicago, 'cause they moved up to Chicago before the, in the early--no, it was in, in the early thirties [1930s] I believe. And so his life in, in, in, in Alabama pivoted around his working on the farm and working on various kinds of other jobs that were available to him at the time, you know. Speaker 1: Now he would have been born around the turn of the century--(unclear)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: He was born somewhere--the exact date, it's 18, I think it's 1890--'94 [1894]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --or '91 [1891], something like that. Speaker 1: Okay. And what, what was your grandfather's name? Speaker 2: His name was Bodie, Bodie Washington, B-O-D-I-E, Washington, W-A-S-H-I-N-G-T-O-N. Speaker 1: Born about 8--1894, you said? Speaker 2: Eighteen ninety-four [1894], yeah, 'cause I have the exact date in the-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --the document I sent you--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: But this is good; this is good. Story_ID: 136455 Speaker 1: So, he [maternal grandfather, Bodie Washington] actually moved the family from, you know, Bessemer [Alabama] to Chicago [Illinois] in the '30s [1930s]- Speaker 2: He moved, yeah, his, his, he came to Chicago as a, as a single man, because my mother's [Maxine Unger] mother, her birth mother, passed away when she was I think just two years old. And so the woman I grew up with that I know as my grandmother from my mother's side is my granddaddy's second wife [Media Washington] who he met in Chicago. So when he came to Chicago he was single. And of course, he, like many others, were a part of that movement from the South to the urban North, as I call it, going up the golden highway of the Mississippi, you know, from down South to up South. So, the only family he had was himself, and cousins, and relatives and friends of that nature, because at that time, as he told me, they would come--if anybody moved from the rural area to an urban area, they were responsible in many ways of making a space for somebody else to come, because the understanding was that life was better, and that's with quotations around it, relative to the rural, rural South, and opportunities were broader. So, of course, that was how others came, by the help of the others. So it's the family linkage in a sense. He didn't bring 'em directly, but he brought 'em by extension as they kept coming up, you know. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So-- Speaker 1: So they knew if they came up, they could stay with him-- Speaker 2: Oh yes, absolutely. Speaker 1: --and he'd them to get started-- Speaker 2: And he'd help 'em, right. Speaker 1: --give them orientation. Speaker 2: At least they'd have somewhere to sleep and someplace to eat. And they could find, you know, get out there and make it and find some kind of employment. So my Uncle Skeat [ph.], who came up from Alabama, who actually worked in the coal mines, cause he left Alabama after some years, after my granddaddy left, and came to Chicago, my uncle went to Kentucky, to Lynch, Kentucky (laughter). And he worked there in the coal mines in Lynch, Kentucky. And I went there to visit him some time ago, just before he passed, and had the opportunity to see the Lynch Colored High School [Lynch, Kentucky]. And it's written-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Lynch Colored-- Speaker 2: --it's written, it's written in the capstone across the top of the building ["Lynch Colored Public School"]. And they wanted to tear it down. This was in the 2003. And the citizens, the black citizens of Lynch decided no, we're not gonna tear this down. We're gonna turn it into a cultural center. So he left from Alabama and went out, 'cause he was working in the coal mines, and he went out there, and my granddaddy came up there. And subsequently, my uncle Skeat did come to Chicago. Speaker 1: So this is something you can't make up, Lynch-- Speaker 2: I know. Speaker 1: --Lynch Colored High School-- Speaker 2: Right, Lynch Colored High School. Speaker 1: --in the age of lynching, you know. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: There it is in-- Speaker 2: In the town of Lynch, Kentucky. Speaker 1: Okay, wow. All right, so, yeah, that, that's a story worth telling. Story_ID: 136456 Speaker 1: But are there stories, are there any stories about emancipation days that go, that go back that far in-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: --in the family? Speaker 2: --not, not that I recall, because they did--I mean, Decoration Day [later, Memorial Day] was always there, which is sort of like family reunion. And interestingly enough, I don't recall growing up in Chicago that Emancipation Day was actually celebrated. I know in Chicago it was always Bud Billiken [Parade and Picnic], and Decoration Day, memor--you know, various other kinds and Fourth of July [July 4] and things of that nature. But Emancipation Day I don't recall as being celebrated in a deliberate sense, that this is what this day's activity that we were engaged in is about. But I do know that they talked about other parts of the family who did, as a result of their living, you know, over in Arkansas and going to the West, you know. Speaker 1: Okay, so, so, relatives down South did celebrate Emancipation Day-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and remembered the day? Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: And, and it is curious, as you point out, that we don't, as a people, you don't have a, a universal celebration of that day--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: You see and that's the interesting part about it because, as I mentioned to you in our earlier conversation, is that here at the institute [Research Institute for African and African Diaspora Arts], the Hale House here [Roxbury, Boston, Massachusetts], we have since 1982 been celebrating Juneteenth [June 19], Emancipation Day. And my research into the celebration of Emancipation Day or Juneteenth across the black community pretty much was interrupted by the Civil Rights Movement because of the energy and the amount of pressure that that period from say the late fifties [1950s] coming on up through say the early seventies [1970s] didn't leave much room for people to have, you know, celebratory kinds of engagements like that, because we were, every month, every day, every week of the year we were engaged in challenging the issues of, you know, being denied our civil rights. And so, until about the late seventies [1970s], you know, it began to be a movement toward getting back to celebrating that, you know. Speaker 1: There's another side of this too, I'll just interject for whoever is watching this, is that in many places emancipation celebration was discouraged with violence-- Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely. Speaker 1: --on the part of Southern whites. Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely, it was always that, you know. And the, the thing about it, the history of it is that when--I forget the colonel's name [General Gordon Granger] right now; I think his name was Garrison [sic]--was sent down by the president [Abraham Lincoln] to Texas to inform the Texans that emancipation of former enslaved Africans had already passed, and folks were not to be continually worked as they had been before. And from that, when they came there and made this pronouncement and enforced that proclamation from the president on the citizens of Texas, the celebration began because people just then felt free that they didn't have to adhere to those rigors before. And it was, according to the history, and history always is very fluid, there were three days of, you know, celebration. People had picnics, and people just enjoyed themselves out from under that yolk. And subsequently, it continued on as a yearly celebration in recognition of the Emancipation Proclamation [1863], as many other types of celebrations around the black community throughout the South and the North in recognition of the Emancipation Proclamation. So it was one of those celebrations that was continually celebrated self--also initiated by Africans in this country until the upsurge of the Civil Rights Movement. And so the two things were not able to be simultaneously continued, but it was continually celebrated in small ways, sometimes by family reunions and things of that nature. But it's the longest ongoing, you know, self-proclamated [sic] by African people in this country holiday. Speaker 1: So is, is there a tradition of any kind of celebration for Emancipation Day in, in your family as such? Speaker 2: No, not in my family, other than our recognizing it. We, but we had, I guess as the way we got together for holidays, and birthdays, and various other kinds of celebrations, I guess we continued to, you could say they were emancipation celebrations 'cause-- Speaker 1: Yeah, okay, but it's interesting though that Texas hung on to that. Maybe it's because of the distance between the-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --black community and the white community and all that space in Texas. I don't know, but I've heard stories of, you know, the actual physical squelching of the celebrations in, in-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: --the Deep South, you know. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Yeah, here were many. There are documented many confrontations between the white community and the black community around the celebration of Emancipation Day. So it's not a celebration that is absent of any kind of struggle or difficulty, you know. Speaker 1: Right, right, right. Story_ID: 136457 Speaker 1: Exactly. So, yeah, you know, at any rate, so, so your, now did your mother [Maxine Unger], now, talk about what it's like to--did she grow up in both places, in Bessemer [Alabama] and in Chicago [Illinois], or did-- Speaker 2: No, mother grew up in, in Bessemer-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --running around on the farm and growing up with--actually 'cause since her mother passed, she grew up with an aunt who took her in 'cause that's just normal process in black families. If something happens to somebody, the child goes to whoever next can take that child. And so she grew up very happily there and with her brother whose name is Booker T. Washington, and it was just the two of them. And he's actually the oldest. And she spent her whole life right there in Bessemer until she came to Chicago, and she said came to Chicago looking for her daddy [Bodie Washington]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So she came up specifically to find him and to live with--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well, she knew where he was, but she just had to come up and, and, and--(unclear)--the way she said it, to find my daddy is that I'm going up to be with my daddy, which was in 1942, because I was born in '43 [1943]. And so she was coming up that way because she was pregnant, and she needed the larger family structure. And my daddy was away in the War [World War II], so she came to Chicago. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: But her whole childhood and young adult life was Bessemer, Alabama. Speaker 1: Now did she get a chance to finish school in Bessemer? Speaker 2: Yeah, my mother went through eighth grade. And she came to Chicago, and she had all of her children. And my mother in 1971 got her high school diploma. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: 'Cause she got that diploma the same year and in the same month that I got my B.F.A. [degree] from the Art Institute [of Chicago] in Chicago [Illinois]. Story_ID: 136458 Speaker 1: Well, let me go to your father's side and then-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --then, then we'll put 'em together. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: My father's name is Woodrow Henderson, W-O-O-D-R-O-W, L., well, Lewis, L-E-W-I-S, Henderson, Woodrow Lewis Henderson. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: His date of birth is 1917, and it is May the 16th [May 16, 1917], I believe. Speaker 1: And where was he born? Speaker 2: He was born in Yazoo [City], Mississippi. Speaker 1: Yazoo City, yeah. Speaker 2: Yazoo City. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, what do you know about the ancestors on your father's side, how far back? Speaker 2: I know a whole lot more about them than I do my mother's side because they were just a great big family, you know, batches of children. And they also owned a sizable amount of land in Yazoo, which they still own. And they--I've, I've met members of the family way back when I was very young who had, in fact, been enslaved, and just a very rich, you know, body of people. I knew more of them than--because there were more of them on that side of the family than on my mother's [Maxine Unger's] side, 'cause there was just my mother and her brother and my granddaddy [Bodie Washington]. And on my father's side it was he and his three brothers, Uncle Eddie, Uncle Charlie, and Uncle Henry, and just all the cousins, and nieces, and nephews, and just a whole battery of people because a larger number of them moved to Chicago [Illinois] just there's a bigger number, you know. Speaker 1: Well, Chicago was the place for Mississippi. Speaker 2: Hey. Speaker 1: That's--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Everybody came up the river, straight on up, you know. Speaker 1: That's true. I mean it's--so, in terms of the older relatives, you said you knew some that had, that knew slavery. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, I have a very-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: They, they didn't talk about it in as much as I knew them by having seen them and been in their company, 'cause they very far up in age at that time. And so it was more being in their presence than having conversations because that's not always the easiest thing that people have talked about. So, it was about taking care of them in their older years and just the normal family, you know, relationships between coming to visit folks and then making sure that you got by to see grandma so and so or granddaddy so and so, Uncle Henry, uncle so and so, so that you could lay eyes on them, you know. And we had-- Speaker 1: Yeah, they were--(unclear)-- Speaker 2: --that kind of stuff. Speaker 1: --eighties and nineties--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: They'd have been in their late eighties or early nineties, yeah-- Speaker 1: --late eighties and early nineties. And, and it's curious to think that, you know, people were alive when you were growing that had experienced-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --slavery. People think it's so far in the past--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Hey, yeah, I think everybody--it's like, as students always say, back in the day. No, the day is very contemporary. So, but they, you know, a very large farming family; they all grew up on a farm. And I think my father, I think he finished grammar school. I don't think he finished high school. Speaker 1: So did he finish grammar school in Yazoo City? Speaker 2: Yes, that would have been Yazoo. Speaker 1: Okay. Now do you know the name of his, of the school his family attended--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: No, I don't. Being that they were back in rural area, the little one-room schoolhouses or the school being in the basement of the church or in the church itself, may not have had a name. It was just that's where you went and got your education unless the name was the church that the school was attached to. Speaker 1: Is there a church associated with the family down there? Speaker 2: Not one church, because everybody--well, you know the church story in the black family, you know, somebody fall out in the church over here, and they go to one of the other church over there. So, you know, you got the husband's in one church, and the wife's in another, cousins over here and so no particular church but quite a number of churches in the community. Folks were always going to church for sure. Story_ID: 136459 Speaker 1: Now here's a question I always ask when people--or I try to always ask if I can remember it, that when, when people mention land, I always, I'm curious about how did they acquire land, you know, in the midst of political turmoil and, and you know, I mean a conscious attempt to keep us-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --from land, you know, in the South. Speaker 2: Well, that's interesting, 'cause I really don't know the history of how they got that land. But I do know that the way they got it is probably not too different than the way most black people got land in the South after emancipation. But I do know they bought a lot of the land. Because that's one thing about my daddy's [Woodrow Henderson's] side of the family, they were, they were fiercely independent, always worked for themselves, always had a skill. And I say a skill in the sense that they mastered many skills, but they maybe spent most of their adult lives in exercising, you know, living off of one particular skill. But my granddaddy, he moved up to Chicago [Illinois], and I don't--he moved up there probably in the late, mid-thirties [1930s]. Speaker 1: Now what was your grandfather's name? Speaker 2: Lewis, L-E-W-I-S, Henderson, Lewis Henderson. Speaker 1: Okay, and so he moved to Chicago in the thirties [1930s]. Speaker 2: Yeah, he moved in Chicago probably in the thirties [1930s]. And my daddy was, he was inducted into the [U.S.] Army in Yazoo [City, Mississippi], and he was discharged from the Army in Yazoo as well, discharged in 1942. Speaker 1: So he was discharged during the war [World War II, WWII]? Speaker 2: Well, he was, he suffered what they called then shell shock. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: And so he was discharged in '42 [1942] and spent pretty much most of the rest of his life in and out of veterans' hospitals for that condition. Speaker 1: Now how did the condition manifest itself? I mean what was-- Speaker 2: Well, he was just very withdrawn, just very sort of in a universe of his own but always--it wasn't that way all the time. He would have moments of that, but he was--when he wasn't responding to that, very funny guy (laughter), fun-loving and always engaged in the family, 'cause I remember he used to--we used to look forward to it, 'cause always on Sunday morning he'd always cook breakfast. And so he cooked breakfast for, at that time it was just four boys and my mother [Maxine Unger] and he. And he was always working. Yeah, he worked a lot with my granddaddy, his father, or his uncles, because they were masons, and carpenters, and plumbers, and so they always had their own business. And my granddaddy owned a grocery store, and so my daddy was always for the most, many times working for my, his father in the grocery store. So that was primarily his, his employment after he was discharged from the service. He came up to Chicago. Speaker 1: So he worked in the, in the grocery store? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Looking at his discharge papers, he had him classified in the military as laborer. Speaker 1: Yeah, as many-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --black soldiers were-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --in the [U.S. Army] Quartermaster Corps or something. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. So now, is there, is there a story about how your parents met? Speaker 2: I don't know the story about how they met, but I, there's a story about, my mother shared with me once, about her and my daddy out courting when he came to Chicago after she had come to Chicago. And they actually say they spent the night sleeping under the stars in George Washington, in Washington Park-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --which is now, and has been since the sixties [1960s], late sixties [1960s] and seventies [1970s], known as Malcolm X Park [sic] in Chicago, that they were just under the moonlight and the stars, you know. They had a, they had a good life, as much as that debilitating illness from the war would allow. Story_ID: 136460 Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, we were just talking-- Speaker 2: Oh-- Speaker 1: --about-- Speaker 2: --about, about the, the, the changing in terms of my mother [Maxine Unger] and my daddy [Woodrow Henderson] spending a night under the stars in Washington Park [Chicago, Illinois]. Moving, moving here to Boston [Massachusetts] in 1974, I was unaware from, from, until we talked about it, you and I, that it's now called Harold Washington Park [sic, Washington Park and Harold Washington Park are different], being that that was Harold Washington's name, who was the mayor [of Chicago]. And we all know the, the landmark that he made, you know. So, very interesting that it's now called Harold Washington Park. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: So maybe we'll get a statue to replace George. Speaker 1: Could be, I don't know. We'll see what happens. Yeah, but his statue is still out there on a horse--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely, you know. Speaker 1: --on the outskirts. Speaker 2: Oh, I don't--hey, don't take him down. Just put Harold out there also. You know, put Harold near 55th [Street] and [Martin Luther] King Drive, you know, so that'll, that'll be the mark for that, you know. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, I often hear these stories about people that we interviewed, they talk about being able to sleep in Washington Park. And, and they could, they could lay there, and nobody-- Speaker 2: oh-- Speaker 1: --would bother you in those days. There's no-- Speaker 2: You-- Speaker 1: --violence, no-- Speaker 2: No, no such--see, one thing about growing up in Chicago which is unique, but it's not unique over with the exception of other places and so forth. But people did; people could go out; people would have picnics all day. And folks who just didn't feel like going home, and they'd just crawl up on the blanket and go to sleep. And Washington Park, or I should say Harold Washington Park [sic], and my growing up as a child was a big, safe, wonderful place that you just used to go in and play with your kites, and play baseball, and just run around and picnic, and have family gatherings, and just go out there and just be, you know. It, it--violence, I mean that, you know, that sort of stuff just wasn't part of my growing up, because everybody who was in the park was a part of your family by extension. So you were always mindful of how you conducted yourself, because, I'm sure you've heard this from many other people, you know, you always represent your family. You're not representing yourself. And so when you act up, it's on a reflection on the family. And we respected our elders, and elders didn't have to be old people. Elders had to be the one who's older than you who's responsible for looking out for you because you're the younger one. And so it was just, it was the community square, you know, I mean from all over the South Side everybody was, it was Washington Park, Washington Park, Washington Park, you know. Speaker 1: And it, for those who don't, not aware, kind of sprawls from, you know, over several blocks and connects with Jackson Park through the Midway [Plaisance]--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Absolutely, because Washington Park and Jackson Park was all a part of the World's Fair [1893 World's Columbian Exhibition] in Chicago that extended from all the way downtown where the Art Institute is [sic, Museum of Science and Industry] of Chicago all the way out to what they called the Columbia Circle [sic], with the, the statue of Columbia [sic, Statue of the Republic, Jackson Park] there. So that whole swath of lakefront was developed for the World's Fair, and subsequently, there were segments of residential housing along the outer borders of it. But it, it's a very vast area of, of land which the Field Museum [sic] it's got a wonderful, almost a little wildlife sanctuary on the back side of the Science Museum-- Speaker 1: Yeah, it is--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --that no, most people don't know. You'd go out, we used to go fishing over there. We would see egrets over there and, and, and, and other kinds of waterfowl. And it was just a comfortable place to be. It had all kinds of things, you know. So it was, it was, it was the normal place for black people to go in Chicago on the South Side is the Washington Park. So it's, it's a, it's a landmark and significant piece of real estate in the black life of Chicago. Story_ID: 136461 Speaker 1: So you don't know how your parents [Maxine Unger and Woodrow Henderson] met, but you know that they, they got together in Chicag--in Chicago [Illinois]? Speaker 2: Well, they got together before that, because when my mama-- Speaker 1: All right--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --came to Chicago I was already in the basket (laughter). Speaker 1: All right, that's right. All right, so-- Speaker 2: Right, yeah. Speaker 1: --this is in, in Alabama. Speaker 2: Yeah, they, they met, they met, I, and interesting, I, from the, after this, I'm gonna go and find out from my mama. I think they met in Ala--in, in Alabama. Because her coming up to Chicago, she came straight from Alabama to Chicago. So, him having been inducted into the military [U.S. Army], he may have been in Alabama. You know, I don't where all those different forts and training camps are, but he may have been there. I don't know how they actually met met. Speaker 1: In, in--okay, so-- Speaker 2: In-- Speaker 1: --he may have been actually-- Speaker 2: He may have been stationed somewhere in Alabama in, in-- Speaker 1: --stationed in a fort there-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Now, now did you father--I didn't ask you this. I should have. Did your father, was he posted overseas during, during-- Speaker 2: Yeah, he was overseas, right. He was overseas, and I, I don't know exactly. I'm, I'm thinking on his papers that I've seen, it said he was in New Guinea. So, I don't know. I haven't looked that far back into his papers, but I, I think I recall it said he was in New Guinea, and that's when he was shipped back here from, with shell shock. Speaker 1: Do you, do you have any idea what happened over there to him, 'cause this is-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Huh-- Speaker 1: --the scene where the Japanese-- Speaker 2: Nineteen forty-two [1942]. Speaker 1: --were on the-- Speaker 2: Right-- Speaker 1: --island and-- Speaker 2: --that, in the, in the midst of all this chaos that was going on over there in New Guinea and all those islands out there in that archipelago was some fierce and savage kind of you know, combat. So-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --being that he was a laborer, he surely didn't have a weapon. He was probably doing what laborers do, making sure that munitions and everything else was being brought forward to the front. But I don't really--and he never talked about that because he just never did. 'Cause when he wasn't, you know, having an episode with that illness, we always were just busy doing family stuff, you know, and we never talked about that. So I really don't, really don't know that much detail about-- Speaker 1: What happened in--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --what happened to him, other than he came back here completely disfigured with this, you know, shell shock. So it's--one would have to surmise that he was in the heat of some savage kind of stuff going on. And-- Speaker 1: So he would just shut down. Is that-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Just kind of shut down. Speaker 2: Right. It's what they now call post-traumatic [stress disorder, PTSD]-- Speaker 1: Stress. Speaker 2: --stress, you know, which is just events and circumstances that are just a hell of a lot more difficult to handle. Story_ID: 136462 Speaker 1: Do you have--I mean when you think about your parents' [Maxine Unger and Woodrow Henderson] personalities, their dispositions, their sense of humor, their interests, the way they walk, talk, look, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: (Laughter) I probably, I take, I take after my, my daddy a lot in, in, in some particular ways of I think having to do with my personal appearance, hygiene, if you will, the way my, my dress, my mannerisms, my sense of industry, in the sense of, you know, being about my own professional life, working for myself. Because even though one is a academic, one is still working for themselves, you know. But I take a lot of my common sense from my mama (laughter). She's got so many sayings. I'll tell you, we've audio and videotaped her, and she, things just flow out of her mouth that just, you know. One of her favorite ones is that, you know, two heads are better than one, especially when one's a goat head, you know. So, those, those little things to live by, you know, I get from her. But I think I got an equal amount from both of them, and it's served me quite well. Speaker 1: I was thinking about what you just said--(laughter). Speaker 2: Right, it takes a minute, and you say, wait a minute. Speaker 1: Yeah, you--(unclear)-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: (Unclear)-- Speaker 2: Which one of us is the goat head? You know-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --so you had to think about (laughter). Story_ID: 136463 Speaker 1: You have brothers and sisters, right? Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: Can name your brothers and sisters, and put yourself in, in the order that, that you all were born in. Speaker 2: Okay, well, that's very easy 'cause I'm the first; and Woodrow, better known as Woody Henderson; then we have my brother, Seth, who is the third; and my brother Frank, who is the fourth; my sister, Mazal, who is fifth; then my brother, Howard; then my sister, Cheryl; and then my brother, Glenn, so that's eight of us. So from '49 [1949] to '54 [1954] there were just the four of us because, the four boys, first four. And I remember very interestingly that there was a, a lady who lived--well, she actually owned the house that we rented the second floor from, ma, my mother and father rented; I didn't rent. And we would be going out to church all the time, and we'd come busting down the steps. And she used to all, she nicknamed us the gangbusters, 'cause you know, we'd come stomping down the steps all the time. But that's the, that's the siblings. Now I have five other siblings, stepsiblings. And let me just pull that term; that's not, they're not stepsibling. They're the children of my stepfather who my mother, after my father's passing, remarried later on. And so his children, they're just, we're as close to them as I am to my birth siblings. Speaker 1: Now what is their names? Speaker 2: Jeanetta [ph.], Pearlie [ph.] Unger--they're all Unger--Jeanetta Unger, Pearlie Unger, Olu [ph.], oh, gosh, the other two children, one, she's was a--and she's born with a lot of birth defects, and she's been in an institution most of--damn it, I'll have to--it's all in my document. I--two names, 'cause I've had very little--she was always in, in Detroit [Michigan], and-- Speaker 1: Well, there all Un, Ungers? Speaker 2: Yeah, they're all Ungers. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, okay, so when you--the first part of your growing up years are spent with your four brothers, right? That's pretty much--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, we all, well, all, all eight of 'em until--well, let's see, my, my, Howard, Cheryl, and Glenn, I was out of high school, well, just getting out of high school, when they were born, 'cause I graduated in '62 [1962]. So, my sister, Laverne, and my other three brothers, I grew up very much with them. When the little sister came along, I mean she was just a little precious thing, so we, you know, had her all the time. We were looking out for her. So I grew up, I would say, my formative, young years was with my other three brothers, just the four of us. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: So from '43 [1943] to '54 [1954] it was just the four of us, and then from '54 [1954] coming forward, the other four came on board. Story_ID: 136464 Speaker 1: Okay, now, is there--now this is a time--(unclear) ask this questions--now what is the story behind your name? I know there's a story behind the name. Speaker 2: Oh, what, Napoleon? Speaker 1: Yeah, well, you're whole--yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter). Yeah, well, actually, now that you mentioned that, there's a story about my whole name, right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: As I know the story, during World War II, you know, I was born in '43 [1943], so we know the war was up in the middle of its stuff. And it was the understanding between my mother [Maxine Unger] and father [Woodrow Henderson] is that if it was a boy child, he was gonna name him. If it's a girl child, she can name it. And when I was born, she, I was born in Cook County Hospital [Chicago, Illinois], so she sent him a letter telling him that it was a boy child. I had been born, and you know, what did he want me to be named, which I guess it had been presumed I was gon' be named Woodrow after him. And he lost the letter, and he wrote her back, asking her to tell him what was in the letter 'cause he didn't get a chance to read it. And so, you know how a mail went at that time, and they used to tell people that, you know, the baby had to have a name before he leaves the hospital. And so my mother said well, I'm not gonna have this on my head when he gets back and not having named him the name he wants him to have. So the nurses all put names in a hat, and she drew a name out of there, out of the hat, and Napoleon was the name. So that's how I got Napoleon. My, my next brother, who he did get my daddy's name, Woodrow, you know, so. And my daddy was back home by then. So when-- Speaker 1: So that's the only--I mean it just came out of a hat and-- Speaker 2: Well, I mean not just came out of a hat, but you know, you can, you could, it was, it was an, an assortment of names that--well, it was a, it was a selection my mother had to make-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --in the serendipitous manner of the choices by all the other attending women who were there at the hospital who helped her get through that difficult period of-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --getting the right name. Speaker 1: And now why is your name Jones-Henderson? Speaker 2: Well, I got married in 1974. And my wife's [Annette Jones'] family name was Jones. And it was our decision that we would--our last name would be Jones-Henderson, which would have her name and my name as both of our last name as opposed to the Eurocentric tradition of just the woman taking the man's name because we were two families joining. And so as our children--we didn't have children, but we knew if we did, and we wanted children, that we wanted our children's names to carry both sides of their family because that's important. So we, we joined names, and that's how I got Jones-Henderson. Speaker 1: Yes, it makes, it makes sense to me, but you know-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --you know, but-- Speaker 2: It made-- Speaker 1: --people don't do that. They follow the, what they've-- Speaker 2: Right, and, and-- Speaker 1: --been taught. Speaker 2: --from '74 [1974] up until I think somewhere in the maybe late eighties [1980s] to early nineties [1990s] or mid-nineties [1990s], it's a little more popular now for people to do that. But I used to be asked that all the time, 'cause I travel a lot around the world, and I'd always be asked. People, they would always say well, is your last name Jones or Henderson? I'd say it's Jones-Henderson. Oh, with a dash; no, not a dash, a hyphen, which means that the two words are connected. Oh, why do--and then women, of course, always would ask: why, how did you get to be Jones--what's, how, how did this happen? And I'd tell them, and they'd--I used to always get some upgrades in my seating on the airlines from the sisters 'cause they'd say that's, I like that, you know. Go ahead, we upgraded your seating here, you know. So it was, but it was, it was a, it, it was seated in history for family history, and it's traditional in the sense of looking back through various African cultures. One's name is not just the name of the father. It's the name of the family, and it goes on, and goes on, and goes on. And so, it was important for us that our children would have a direct connection to their heritage, their ancestry, by their name without it having any possibility of it being disconnected or lost some kind of way, you know. Speaker 1: That makes sense. Story_ID: 136465 Speaker 1: So, do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: (Laughter) I have a lot of 'em, but one of 'em, most memorable, is when I was gonna run away. Speaker 1: Is it a first one? It's the first one I'm asking about. Is it the first--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh, the first one. Speaker 1: --you said you--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I think, I think this probably, yeah, this one would qualify as the first one. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I might have been four or five or something like that. I was gonna run away. I don't know what, what it was I was gonna, why I was gonna run away, but I was gonna run away. And my mother [Maxine Unger]--my father [Woodrow Henderson] got a little suitcase, packed some clothes in it, and took me outside the door, 'cause we were living on the second floor of an old coach house on 47th and Indiana. And he took me outside, put the little suitcase on the porch, set me on the step, or left me standing outside with the suitcase, and closed the door. And my mother [Maxine Unger] was begging him and pleading, telling him don't do that, bring, get--(unclear). So my daddy said no, he wanna run away, let him go. And I remember sitting out there on that top step, 'cause I didn't go anyplace. I mean I had made the threat, but after getting out there, I found out that that was a different story. So I'm sitting on the step, and of course they were peeping through the window. I didn't see all of this, but they were paying attention to what was happening with me. And by the time the sun started going down, my daddy opened the door and came out, and oh, you're still out here; thought you were running away (laughter). I'm sitting there with tears running down my face. And my mama, she said come on back in. And the next time I left home I was nineteen (laughter). So that's my, that's probably, that's one that just sticks out in my head the most, yeah-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --of many. But that one was memorable for sure. Story_ID: 136466 Speaker 1: Now, so you were living then at 47th [Street] and Indiana [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Yeah, 47th and Indiana. Speaker 1: This is in the heart of what's going on over there on the South Side-- Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: --in those days. We always ask this question: what were some of the sights, and sounds, and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Bud Billiken Day [Parade and Picnic] for sure, 'cause we lived on Indiana, and Bud Billiken then came down Michigan [Avenue], not [Martin Luther] King Drive. And so we just walked one block. We would across the alley and go cut between the buildings on the other side, which was Michigan. And the week leading up to Bud Billiken we would collect--well, we'd get these from my granddaddy's [Lewis Henderson's] grocery store, the bushel baskets that they used to deliver vegetables: string beans and, and, and greens and things of that nature. So we'd have those, and we'd collect 'em, turn 'em upside down to sit on, on the curbside and watch the parade go by. And always, always there was a place known as Chili Mac's on 47th, and my daddy [Woodrow Henderson] used to go there. They had some of the best chili. And next door to it was a place called Queen of the Sea, and that's where you got all of your seafood. And-- Speaker 1: That's on Stony Island [Avenue] now. It's, it's--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well, they got a place-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--say-- Speaker 2: --called Queen of the Sea, but it was right there on at the alley of 47th between Michigan and Indiana. Speaker 1: So it's not the same-- Speaker 2: No, it's not the same. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They just picked up the name, because it actually closed and went out of business somewhere in the '90s [1990s] and in the '80s [1980s] I think and somewhere in the '90s [1990s]. I was trying my best to find out who owned the building so I could get the marquee that was outside, the neon marquee that said Queen of the Sea. It was just a spectacular thing, but I missed it. And there were two other sort of institutions that resonate for me, and that's the Hall Branch Library [Chicago Public Library] on Michigan-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --very small little library. It's just a little neighborhood jewel. Speaker 1: It's a beautiful library. Speaker 2: Oh, it's a beautiful. It's a landmark structure, and it's a landmark in terms of a number of things. Because I remember this lady who used to have these really thick glasses on, and she used to--'cause my mama [Maxine Unger] used to send myself and my three brothers, we'd go up there after school to the library to read and do our homework or, and stay till she came home from work. And I remember this lady had these thick glasses. And she used to read stories and poems to us as some of the activities that happened there. And it wasn't until really in the '70s [1970s] when I really came to find out (laughter) that that lady was Gwendolyn Brooks, you know, who'd have thought. And Gwen and I became friends, you know, as a result of the, all the fervent activity of the Black Arts Movement there in Chicago in the '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s]. And I had the opportunity to tell her about that one time when she came here to read over in Cambridge [Massachusetts] a few years before she passed. And you know, living in the midst of one's own history. Story_ID: 136467 Speaker 1: There was one--another institution, and Hall Branch Library [Chicago Public Library] was one, it was called Madame, Madame, I think it was Madame Queens [ph.]. She was a, she was a fortune teller, and my daddy, he used to go down there and get his fortune told. She was on [Martin Luther] King Drive [Chicago, Illinois], 47th [Street] and King Drive, down in the basement of one of the--right near the corner, one of the--in the basement of one of the brownstones there. And of course, across the street was the Regal Theater and the Metropolitan Theatre on the other side of which the Regal Theater is no longer there--but going to the--passing by Madam Queen's palm reading, tarot cards, and all the other fortune telling stuff she used to do, see people going in and out of there, getting their numbers and getting their good luck charms and things, and going on Saturday after we finished all of our work across to the Regal Theater where you can go and see two movies. See, it was always two movies, and we would go. I, I would be in charge of my three brothers, and I'd have the responsibility for making sure we got safely across. At that kind--time it was called South Park Way-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and South Park Boulevard, and we'd make sure we got across, got into the theater, bought our popcorn and all this other stuff, and just enjoyed ourselves for the whole Saturday afternoon. I mean we could stay in the movie and see it two or three times if we wanted to stay that long. You know, now they throw you out after the first movie, almost before it's over. But it was one of the, the things that I remember. You know, these were the kinds of activities that were day-to-day activities for us and growing up, going to the Hall Branch Library, going to the movies on Saturday. I had a cousin who used to always pick us up. And this was before we moved to 47th and Indiana [Avenue]. We lived with my grandparents, my mother's father [Bodie Washington] and her--his wife, or on 47th and Vincennes. We used to be picked up after school by one of my cousins. And she would take us over to the Museum of Science and Industry. I mean I knew the Museum of Science and Industry as well as I knew my house. You know, we used to go over there all the time, and we would go around the museum, and she would talk to us about things. And we'd just go off and explore on our own. And again, you know, reflecting back on Washington Park [Chicago, Illinois], 'cause it's in Washington Park [sic, Jackson Park], you know, as a part of the larger complex. So it was just those are the kinds of things we just, I grew with, so those are things that always resonate, you know, fond memories for me in terms of just being immersed in intellectual activity, which at the time, I didn't see it as intellectual activity; it was just the stuff that we did, you know. Story_ID: 136468 Speaker 1: Now at that time, were you aware of the South Side Community Art Center [Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: No, I didn't become aware of the South Side Community Art Center until after I was out of high school, consciously. I may have, you know, known about it in the mix, because I was, I was very privileged in, in terms of my high school education. I went to George Washington Carver High School [now Carver Military Academy, Chicago, Illinois] out in Altgeld Gardens, because in 1955 we moved to Altgeld Gardens. Speaker 1: Okay, you got thirteen--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Aaaah, yeah. Speaker 1: --thirteen. Speaker 2: Yeah, I was--no, I was eleven. Speaker 1: Twelve--okay, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, '43 [1943]. That was twelve-- Speaker 1: Twelve, okay. Speaker 2: --about twelve, yeah. Story_ID: 133399 Speaker 1: Yeah, I was asking off-camera about Mr. Hammurabi, Frederic Robb [Frederic H. Hammurabi Robb], who had a place called House of Knowledge [Chicago, Illinois] off and on. Speaker 2: Right, off and on. Well, let's put it this way, off and on in terms of a physical place but always on because of his presence and his being. As a matter of fact, I have two of his calendars. And I actually, I can't remember where, and, and I do remember him as a person at a presence in the sense of having encountered him at gatherings that might have been in Washington Park [Chicago, Illinois] or might have been at some other--a situation that was just things that took place, 'cause he was always around, and people were, were always aware of his presence. And he made--he was, he was an extraordinary person, you know. He was someone who, I guess if you look back and, and were to identify him, he, he was an encyclopedic man. He was the quintessential--what do they call him? It skips me. My old gray matter at this moment--Renaissance Man. And he was a, he, along with the other memorable entity and personality from growing up, was Chicken Man [Anderson Punch], the Chicken Man. See, I remember riding on the streetcars when they still had streetcars in Chicago. And there was an old man. He may have been about five foot five [inches], or he might not have been that tall. But when I was a little boy, five foot five or five feet tall was still a tall man. And he would just be dressed in overalls or pants with his suspenders and regular just sort of everyday kind of fellow with a scruffy beard and an old beat up hat on his head and a rooster. And that rooster, he used to get on the streetcar or he'd be on the street corner, and the rooster would dance. And-- Speaker 1: So--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --people would give him money, would, you know, it's like the, the, the, the organ grinder with the monkey, but this man had a rooster. Speaker 1: A friend of mine, a brother named Kofi Boyo [ph.], in Chicago, or Lloyd Sanders [ph.], he shot a picture of chicken man. I saw it. I never saw him, you know, 'cause I didn't move to Chicago 'till late-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: The, the chicken actually sat on his head--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause he, he, when he get off the chicken would do his little dance or whatever he had to do, and then he'd pick him up, and he'd get back on his head, and he'd walk around with him on his head. And he'd get on--and they passed an ordinance, not just in Chicago, against anyone carrying livestock or transporting livestock on public modes of transportation, which meant streetcars, buses, and taxis and that kind of thing. But the state legislature passed a law in the state of Illinois stating that he was the only person, until his passing, allowed to carry livestock or transport livestock on public conveyances, because he was a national treasure, a state treasure, a city treasure. He was just-- Speaker 1: Now, how did you-- Speaker 2: --the man. Speaker 1: --how, how did he do financially? Did, was he able to make a living? Speaker 2: Apparently, an article published in the Jet magazine after he died, believe or not, that man was very wealthy. He owned lots of property. See, people mis--mistook his shenanigans, if you will, as, you know, less than a capable individual. But see, he reminds me of my granddaddy, Lewis [Henderson], who had the grocery store. We go buying supplies for the grocery store to the market, you know, the general market, and bring it back to the store. And one of the merchants there as adding up his bill and carrying on and told my told my granddaddy it was, came out to this particular amount. My granddaddy said no, it should be thus and thus and thus. And the man insisted. He said look, he said I may not know how to count, but I know how to figure, you know. And see, and that's a saying from the community from the South. People, you went to school to learn how to figure your numbers, which meant how to count. And so his issue was that no, I'm not a fool. I may not be as educated as some others, and that's the same with the Chicken Man. People presumed he was not too astute, but he apparently was pretty well off. That was just what he did, you know. He was an--(unclear)--he, and I think he really saw his, his, a part of his mission in life was to entertain children and people. He'd get on the bus, hey, chicky, chicky, chicky, chicky; dance chicky, dance. And that chicken would jump down, and he'd put his hat down there, and people put money in the hat; pick his hat up; put the chicken back on his head, and get off the streetcar, get off the bus and go on about his business. You know, so that's, that's one of those other memorable sights, sounds, and smells. Speaker 1: Thank you for that. Is there, do you have any idea what his name was [Anderson Punch], what his--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I really don't know. We just knew him as chicken, as the Chicken Man. Speaker 1: Yeah, somebody probably-- Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: --got, got on--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --it's in the, it's in the Jet magazine, the article. But I couldn't tell you what it is, but I just know him as Chicken Man, you know. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Just like all of us growing up and we know our friends, and relatives, and associates, we know 'em by a certain name. And if we saw an obituary, we wouldn't know who that is. Speaker 1: Yeah, I think [HM] Ausbra Ford talked about Chicken Man too, yeah. Speaker 2: Right, right, yeah, yeah, Ausbra would know. Speaker 1: Yeah, so. Speaker 2: Yeah. If you grew up on the South Side, you knew about the Chicken Man, unless you lived under a rock somewhere (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 133400 Speaker 1: Well, now, what about, I guess I'd be remiss if I didn't ask you about the music and the, and the life over there on 47th Street [Chicago, Illinois], what was on going on in the-- Speaker 2: That, you know, 47th Street, actually, 47th Street was downtown. That was the Loop for us. You know, the few times we went to the Loop, and I guess it was because my mother [Maxine Unger] was buying something from either Sears or Goldblatt's, which doesn't exist anymore. And I'd have to get on the streetcar or the bus, whichever one, but actually it was on a streetcar. I tell people, in a humorous kind of way, my three brothers and myself would probably still be standing on Jackson [Boulevard] and State Street if my mother had never showed up, because we used to, after school, we'd get on the bus. And she'd have a note that we pinned to tell the bus driver, or the streetcar driver, the conductor, I get on, get the note, and he'd tell us y'all sit right down there. And when he got to where the note told him that we were supposed to get off, he said get off the bus and stand over there on the corner till your mama comes. And she'd get off from work, and she'd come and meet us, and we did what we had to do. But that was the rare times we would go downtown. 47th Street, though, Fuller Brush products, our, our gynecologist, the guy who birthed me and my three brothers into this world-- Speaker 1: Dr.--what is his name? Speaker 2: Dr.--oh, gosh. Speaker 1: Had the big house with the piano and all that, with the grand-- Speaker 2: I don't know-- Speaker 1: --white grand piano I think. Speaker 2: I'm trying--I think it is. I've just--what is, his name just gets me right now. Speaker 1: I think [HM] Dorothy Tillman lives in his house now. Speaker 2: But, I think he probably birthed if not 90 percent of the South Side, at least 89 percent, if not 90--optometrists, pharmacists, lawyers, various kinds of merchants. You know, 47th Street was, in a way, you could say it was like a, a bizarre at a kasbah in, in, in Cairo [Egypt]. Every manner of merchant and merchandise was there and the teeming community going in and out. I mean we--and, and I couldn't--I grew up knowing that I could be any one of these kind of things, also knowing that with my grandfather [Lewis Henderson], he had his grocery store. I had an uncle who had a restaurant, and I had other uncles who did the various professions. They were in carpentry or masons and so forth. And 47th Street was an exciting place to be on a Saturday, after you finished doing your chores at home of course and any other time of the week. But on Saturday people came out to shop and came out to just do things, going to the movies and various kinds of other, you know, weekend activity, you know. So, 47th Street and the music was always there. The clubs were always around, so I didn't, until I was much older, become aware of the clubs in the sense of that was an activity that went on in the darker part of the day. But in the earlier part of the day, we could, we passed by 'em, and we'd see people going in having the occasional drinks and just doing the daytime activity things. And so we'd peep our heads in sometimes, and somebody would throw something out and say boy, get out of here. And, but we peeped our head in 'cause we were just interested to know what it was 'cause it wasn't the grocery, it wasn't the shoe store, it wasn't the clothing store, you know, and it wasn't the theater. But there was music coming out of there, and there were people having a good time, so we wanted to see what it was. Speaker 1: Was that the famous Gerri's Palm Tavern? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, all of those different joints up and down the street. And so, it was just, it was life, you know. It was, it was, it was the good life, you know, definitely good life-- Story_ID: 133401 Speaker 1: Now did you know any artists growing up? Speaker 2: I didn't--well, yes, my art teacher in high school [George Washington Carver High School, Chicago, Illinois], Helen Joyner [ph.], who was a wonderful young black woman who had just graduated from University of Arkansas in Little Rock, Arkansas, and came up to Chicago to get her master's degree at Illinois Institute of Technology [Chicago, Illinois]. And she got her first teaching job at George Washington Carver High School. And I really owe an awful lot to her in terms of my life career, because she, beyond my family, was the pivotal link in the chain that said this is something honorable you can pursue, and you have a gift. You need to develop the skill, and keep on moving forward with it. But I had other artists who were my high school teachers, Thomas Green [ph.], who was our English teacher, I mean, was steadfast, devotee to good and correct English. You know, there was no substitute for it. You know, you know, you can speak the colloquialism, that's fine, but you need this as well. So we were bilingual, you know, standard English and the neighborhood English. But there as Jean Lightfoot [ph.], who had come to teach English as well, who graduated from Fisk University [Nashville Tennessee]. She'd come up along with Conrad Kent Rivers, who you know is a poet out of Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: So he was at Carver too? Speaker 2: At George Washington Carver High School. I mean, you know, from '58 [1958] to '62 [1962], when I graduated, was an extraordinary period of time, because not only were they artists in the sense of the written arts, the theater arts, poetry, and the visual arts with Helen Joyner, we had all manner of activity going on at George Washington Carver High School--Mrs. Green [ph.], who was our, our choir conductor, the librarian, and Mr.--oh, the gym teacher, Larry Hawkins, who was--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Same Larry-- Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: --Hawkins went to the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] and became the-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --head of the-- Speaker 2: Yep, that's-- Speaker 1: --Blue Gargoyle, yeah. Speaker 2: Right, that's the same Larry Hawkins. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I mean we had a, a, a depth of intellectual, a reservoir of intellectual wisdom at George Washington Carver that was, for such a small school, was a rival of any of the larger schools in the City of Chicago. Story_ID: 133402 Speaker 1: Now was Carver [George Washington Carver High School, Chicago, Illinois] rather new, I mean new when you when you moved out there (unclear)-- Speaker 2: No, no, it was an old, old--well, it might have been new in the sense that the high school building might have been built in the '50s [1950s], early '50s [1950s], before I moved out there. But the older part of the school, which were single-story long structures, because Altgeld Gardens [Chicago, Illinois] was built right after World War II, as those sort of settlements they were building around the country for relocation of military and their families. Brother Green, Thomas Green [ph.], the English teacher, he was friends with, and it's not surprising when I think about it, they were all colleagues together with Lorraine Hansberry, and Gwendolyn Brooks, and [HM] Margaret Burroughs, and you know, you go on down the line. All of these people were a part of the people who taught me at George Washington Carver High School. And actually, when Lorraine Hansberry's 'A Raisin in the Sun' was on Broadway, because of that friendship with my teachers, T. Green, we were the only persons outside of the Broadway production who were given rights to perform 'A Raisin in the Sun' while it was on Broadway (laughter). Speaker 1: So were in it? Did you, did-- Speaker 2: Walter Lee. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yep. I still got my script and all my notes. And-- Speaker 1: Now that's some, that's basic, that's one of the lead roles-- Speaker 2: Hey-- Speaker 1: --in the play. Speaker 2: --you know. Speaker 1: Yeah, the role played role played by Sidney Poitier and other great actors. Speaker 2: Yeah, but I don't think they did as good a job as I did-- Speaker 1: Okay (laughter). Speaker 2: --'cause see, I'm from Chicago (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But, yeah, so we had a, we had a deep education in terms of our school being populated by artistically engaged faculty. And I mean they, they didn't just--we didn't have a relationship with them just in school. We had relationships with them after school as well, 'cause they were very much committed to that community of students beyond the classroom, 'cause Helen used to, Mrs. Joyner [ph.] used to take us out to tile companies and get all the broken tiles or out to bottled soda distributors and get all the broken bottles that they'd have, 'cause back then they used to put soda in glass bottles. Yeah, we'd get all that broken glass, and we'd get ceramic tiles. And we'd go to fabric stores and get all the leftover fabric. And you know, she just opened up where that art was more than painting, and drawing, and sculpting. It was anything you can do with the stuff you do things with. And so she would have us, and our parents were very comfortable in lettin' us do whatever the teachers wanted after school, and they'd take us to do different things. And they were really, they were just an extension of our family. Story_ID: 133403 Speaker 1: I wanna go back to grade school, if we can, 'cause we didn't talk, talk about that. And then we'll, we'll get you back to high school. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So we'll go over, just kind of go over what--now, where did you start school, you know? Speaker 2: Well, I started, I was at Ingleside [School, Chicago, Illinois]; I was at--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: So you started at Ingleside School? Speaker 2: Well, I can't stay I started at Ingles. I can't remember the order 'cause we moved quite a bit-- Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: --in my grammar school days. And we moved, actually, we just moved east or west on 47th Street, from Vincennes [Avenue], where my grandfather [Lewis Henderson] and grandmother [Eva Henderson] lived, to 47th [Street] and Indiana [Avenue] to 47th and Calumet [Avenue]. And we lived, yeah, we lived at, yeah, Indiana, Calumet, and Ingleside [Avenue], Vincennes. So, I went to a number of grammar schools around in that area, so at--when I was in grammar school, you went to the closest one to where you lived. So I ended up going to two or three different ones but very good, you know, very good experience. Speaker 1: Can, can you name 'em for us? Speaker 2: No, I can't. Speaker 1: No (laughter)? Speaker 2: (Laughter) I'll have to 'em up 'cause they actually--I really can't. I was over at Ingleside. Speaker 1: What about Forrestville [Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois]? Did you go-- Speaker 2: Forrestville, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, you went to Forrestville? Speaker 2: That was, that was one of 'em. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: See, you have to, you know, figure this memory bank here, you know. Yeah, I remember, yeah, Forrestville was one of 'em and another one that began with a 'W' somewhere over in there. But-- Speaker 1: You got me on that one. Speaker 2: --they, they were at--but grammar school is sort of just a, you know, sort of a mixed salad. It's just all sort of, you know, merges with nothing necessarily outstanding-- Speaker 1: What, so, so you don't-- Speaker 2: --that I remember. Speaker 1: There, there are no teachers who were mentors in grammar school-- Speaker 2: Not in grammar school. Speaker 1: --that you sort of-- Speaker 2: No, I didn't have-- Speaker 1: No. And, and what kind of student were you in school at, at that, at elementary level? Speaker 2: At the elementary level, I was, actually I was a ra-, I was a pretty decent student. I mostly, you got A, B, C, D, and F, and I was mostly in the A and B, generally. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I rarely, I didn't get any D's and F's, no. Speaker 1: Did, did you have a favorite subject? Speaker 2: Art. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, but I did like English. And I guess a part of that had to do with, you know, conjuring up visual images from the stories, depending on that. And also many stories were illustrated too, so looking at the illustrations and, and dealing with that kind of thing. Speaker 1: Did you ever go to that blue school over by George Cleveland Hall Branch [Chicago Public Library]? It's-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --a school made of blue tile. It's a distinctly looking-- Speaker 2: No, I know the one-- Speaker 1: --distinct blue-- Speaker 2: --you're talking about. Speaker 1: Yeah. No, okay. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: I just wondered if--I can't think of the name of it, but-- Speaker 2: Neither can I, but I know the one you're talking about. Speaker 1: My son would know that better than I (unclear). But okay, so, but there's no really mentorship. And did you-- Speaker 2: Not in grammar school. Speaker 1: Grammar school, okay. Speaker 2: But when I hit high school-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --all those people I just named were the people. Story_ID: 133404 Speaker 1: Okay, let's go back to high school [George Washington Carver High School, Chicago, Illinois] then (laughter)-- Speaker 2: Okay, well-- Speaker 1: --where everything-- Speaker 2: --you had-- Speaker 1: --is really happening, so. Speaker 2: --Thomas Green [ph.]; we had Jean Lightfoot [ph.]; and we had-- Speaker 1: You had Conrad Kent Rivers and-- Speaker 2: Conrad Kent Rivers-- Speaker 1: --you were talking about all these people, Larry Hawkins. Speaker 2: --Eugene--I mean Helen Joyner [ph.], and we had an assortment of other substitute teachers who would come in as a result of those individuals that I just mentioned. They were friends of theirs, and they would have them come in and be substitute teachers as opposed to the principal going to the pool that would exist, 'cause they wanted to: one, they were reaching out to their friends; and one, they also wanted to keep our level of education at a high end and enrich it by, you know, infusing these other individuals in, so-- Speaker 1: So who were the subs then? Who were some of these subs? Speaker 2: Conrad Kent Rivers was one of the subs-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --who came in. And I mean we, we had an assortment of other people whose names don't really stick. But they were people who came in and augmented the educational program that we had at Carver, so-- Speaker 1: You, you remember who the principal was then? Speaker 2: His name was Melnick, M-E-L-N-I-C-K [Curtis C. Melnick]. And I can't remember his first name, but I do remember he went on to become the [Chicago, Illinois] superintendent of schools shortly after Helen Joyner got there. And he was a very instrumental, a very interesting man because he allowed all of the faculty there at the high school to pretty much write their own curriculum based on the school board's curriculum. But it was elevated so high, so much higher than that, that was fully grounded in what we now call black history or Afrocentrism. Speaker 1: Now, Melnick, himself, that sounds like a Jewish name. In fact, it's-- Speaker 2: I think, I think, I think he was. And what was, but what was interesting about him, not only did he encourage and was open to allowing the teachers to teach and not micromanaging and then going on to become superintendent of schools, that when he got that position, Helen Joyner [ph.] had her art class create some works that were gifts to him for having been our principal and going on to become superintendent, in which I created a, a weaving with melted marbles, melted glass marbles that we put in a kiln, and they'd melt down to being flat. This whole piece that was given to him, which interestingly, I'm sure he's probably deceased, but I would have always been interested in trying to see if I could find his family and see if they still had the piece. But that was back in high school. Speaker 1: So this is a work that you contributed to, or did, it was a work that you-- Speaker 2: Yeah, it-- Speaker 1: --did by yourself? Speaker 2: One I did by myself-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --but it was given to him as a gift by my art teacher, Helen Joyner. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 133405 Speaker 1: 'Cause I routinely won one or more scholastic pins for art in the yearly scholastic art competition, yeah, which I still have all those little pins. Speaker 2: So, so what was your favorite medium in high school [George Washington Carver High School, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 1: I, I guess I would say textiles, weaving. And, and I guess it became that because it was Helen Joyner's major medium. She was a weaving major. And I grew up around quilting and crocheting. My grandmother on my mother's [Maxine Unger's] side crocheted profusely, always crocheting. We had quilts, of course, as part of the process on both sides, my mother and father's [Woodrow Henderson's] side of the family. So I, I--textiles have always been a integral part of my life. And Helen Joyner [ph.] coming into my life in high school, and that being hers, and my then continuing on as it being my major medium, is rather interesting. I have to sometimes sit down and consciously look at that course of steps in individuals. Speaker 2: Now, I didn't ask you about the move to Altgeld [Gardens, Chicago, Illinois]. Was that, was that, how did that come about, I mean? Speaker 1: Well, I think it came about as a result of my mother having a more stable living circumstance in terms of, you know, moving from apartment to apartment in these three and four and five-story tenement houses in the heat of the city. And it probably also had something to do with my father's veteran status. So, I don't know the particulars, but I do know in '55 [1955] we moved there. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And the interesting thing about Altgeld Gardens, they were what they now cal, call duplex townhouses; you know, we had a first floor and a second floor. You came in door; you had living room, kitchen, and a little utility closet on the first floor. And you go upstairs to the second floor where the bedrooms and the bathroom. And the buildings were constructed in a sort of a quadrant where you had four buildings facing, their back doors is facing onto a kind of a courtyard where we could all go out our back doors and play. And that's where we all, you know, played out there. They, we had clotheslines; you hang the clothes out there to dry. And out front he had a, a lawn; we had grass out in front, so we had flowers we grew; we, you know. So, Altgeld Gardens, as far out of the city as it is, it was like living in the suburbs. And there was the high school and the grammar school there, and we had the Children's Center out there where we would go with Mr. [Bill] McQuitter, who was in charge of all the athletics and things of that nature. Speaker 2: Oh, that's the famous Mr. McQuitter who was on that-- Speaker 1: Yeah, that-- Speaker 2: --Xavier [University] basketball team in New Orleans [Louisiana] that won every game. Speaker 1: (Laughter)--(Unclear) the quitter. Speaker 2: McQuitter with Charlie Gant and-- Speaker 1: Yeah, tough man, tough man. Speaker 2: --there in a sports encyclopedias, that, that team they played at Philips [Wendell Phillips Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois]-- Speaker 1: Yeah, right, un-huh. Speaker 2: --they were a championship in Philips, and then they-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: -they went to Xavier and won every game. Speaker 1: Yeah he, well, I can understand it 'cause he was, he was hard nail, I mean, but wonderful, kind, but very straightforward, very strict. Story_ID: 133406 Speaker 1: And so, that's how we moved to Altgeld Gardens. And it, it stabilized my mother's [Maxine Unger], our family life and my mother's working life; it gave a sense of community, 'cause that's what it was, you know, 'cause they had--each one of those little configurations of four buildings or so were located in what then were called blocks; you grew up in blocks. You grew up in block five, block ten, block twelve, block sixteen. We were in block sixteen, and we lived, our address was 707 East 133rd Place. That's an address I'll never forget. It was a beautiful thing. I remember we hard large areas of, of landscape that had trees and grass that were not connected to anybody's house, just big swaths of grass, and I mean, it was, it was, in a way of speaking, you could say you could build these houses in Harold Washington Park, 'cause we had that kind of greenery and trees and stuff all around 'cause the Calumet River was just about maybe a couple of blocks or five blocks down, down the slope away from us, which we used to go down there and fish and play in the water. And there were a large, there was a large area of unincorporated land, which we called the woods, 'cause that's what it was, trees and forest and all that. Speaker 2: Now this-- Speaker 1: And we used to go out there and play. Speaker 2: This is not the projects of, of-- Speaker 1: Oh no. Speaker 2: --of today. Speaker 1: Right, and, and we actually never called it the projects. We all called it "the Gardens." And it was called Altgeld Gardens, you know, like Madam C. J. Walker, you know, not Madam C. J. Walker but the ab--lynching. You know who I'm talking about. Speaker 2: Oh, Ida B. Wells. Speaker 1: Ida B. Wells-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --Gardens. Speaker 2: Those are--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Those complexes built with those duplex type of housing complexes, many times had the word garden as the last word of its title. And it was interesting enough because of this unincorporated land out there, we used to actually grow--many people out there grew a lot of their food in their own gardens. Everybody had a garden. Story_ID: 133847 Speaker 1: So high school [George Washington Carter High School, Chicago, Illinois] now, that now--did you, you know, were you involved in other aspects of high school; like, did you run for class office? We already know you're the star in a class play, the big--(unclear). So, did you, were you-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --very much so because, and this is the, the outgrowth of those people who taught us. Some friends of mine, who we're still very much connected with each other, we had a club called the Phi Theta Kappas [honor society]. This is in high school now, and at the time, I don't, I don't imagine any of us knew one word of Greek or Latin; however, we had this club. I was on student government. I ran track, and I was lettered in track; I used to run cross-country in 440 [yard dash], 220, before new configuration now in the track and field world; and I used to sometimes run a dash a two here and there. But cross-country was my major one, 'cause I just liked running on these large landscapes and just on and on and on and on. So, yeah, I ran track at school sweater, and to--I wish still had it 'cause it had all my letters and all my little, little badges with my various girlfriends' names on 'em. But my younger brother, some years ago, borrowed it and it got left somewhere. So, I was involved with the drama club, used to, I was in the choir. And I ended up in the choir 'cause I wanted to play timpani in the band, and they only had one set of kettle drums, so, you know, and that person played 'em all the way through high school, so it was never, you know. So I said well, since I can't--they offered me a trumpet and a sax, but I said nah, I can just go to choir, you know. That's the only instrument I was interested in playing. And, but I was just involved in all kinds of extracurricular activities and spent, as a result of working for my granddaddy [Lewis Henderson] in his grocery stories and most of--not most--all of the members of my little club, the Phi Theta Kappas, all of us were equally engaged in all these kinds of other academic more than athletic activities. And we all, for the most part, had jobs. We worked for somebody or some, somebody in terms of mostly in the grocery business, High Low and Jewel Tea Company and all the different supermarkets. So we would take the bus after school and go in town and work at wherever it is we had a job 'cause we had jobs. And we were always pressed and clean. We had our little Brooks Brothers, you know, jackets on, our ties, and our little, you know, flip hats-- Speaker 1: Was this the-- Speaker 2: --and our briefcases. Speaker 1: -continental look in those days? Speaker 2: Yeah, that's what they called it-- Speaker 1: The continental, yeah. Speaker 2: --the cont--well, no, the continental was that little tight little suit with the two little buttons. Now, we were, we were Brooks Brothers. Speaker 1: Brooks Brothers, all right, all right. Speaker 2: That's the khakis and the, and the, and the, and the paisley color shirts, pink, and the yellow, and the blue, and the burgundy shirts with the tie, you know, and the various tweeds, you know, so that we were--and the continental was I think Sammy-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --Davis, Jr. [Sammy Davis, Jr.], we have owe, give him the benefit of bringing the continental into it. Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: And, and trus--and, and, and as, as a part of the high school thing, Sammy Davis, Jr. came out there and performed for us in the gym, you know. We had people like that. Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] came and held, there was a march out there, there. I mean, these were the kinds of people that our faculty new, because they were their colleagues; they were their contemporaries, their peers. And so, to have them show up out there and just come to this school and talk to a class was nothing spectacular or unusual. Story_ID: 133848 Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, the aspect of Sammy Davis, Jr. performing [at George Washington Carver High School, Chicago, Illinois], I mean, when he--I don't know--well, very likely [English teacher] T. Green [ph.]; he was probably friends with T. Green because he knew the people in the, in the theater and that kind of world. They just brought all of the high school and all of the grammar school kids over to the gym, and Sammy did what Sammy does, you know, and sang and danced and did some performances. 'Cause actually, you know, early on in my, the end of my grammar school to the beginning of my high school, I thought I was gonna be a tap dancer myself, but I figured that that was not my best set, so-- Speaker 1: Now, did you take any dance lessons? Speaker 2: Oh no, I do dance though. I dance very well. Yeah, I did a lot of ballroom dancing, 'cause see, Larry, Larry Hawkins taught ballroom dancing. We all had to take--we squared danced, all the ballroom dances. All that sort of stuff were regular physical education activities. Speaker 1: Yeah, I've heard that--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: And he was a helluva, he was a helluva square dancer caller. Larry could call square dance now. He'd make the Beverly Hillbillies, you know, he'd shame them. You know, he could call square dance. And Larry Hawkins also had the basketball team, which we also in the, in the track team had to take ballet, and folks didn't wanna deal with that. See, Cazzie Russell graduated with me. And a part of it, and folks didn't wanna do it. And he said well, then you're not on the team. You're gonna take ballet. And the reason for taking ballet was so that one could begin to get full control of one's body, you know. And it wasn't about doing pirouettes and being on your toes. It was about dealing with those particular steps that are typical of ballet. And when you think about that, and you deal with the choreography of playing basketball, or the choreography of running in track and field or as a relay race, those are skills that they translate very easily. And so, as a matter of fact, there were a number of my graduating high school friends that I had to give them some tutoring, the fau, foxtrot and the waltz. See, and my granddaddy [Bodie Washington], my, my mother's [Maxine Unger's] father, had lots of trophies. He was an excellent ballroom dancer, you know. So back in their days, you know, dancing was something people did. You know, they went out and ballroom danced, and so, yeah, dancing, yeah. I, I was always into the dancing, still am. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right. So, it seems like a really exciting high school experience. Speaker 2: I, I wouldn't, I wouldn't trade it for anything. It was, it was just, it was just extraordinary, and that's all I can say about it; it was extraordinary. Story_ID: 133849 Speaker 1: So what kind of counseling did you have in terms of college? Were you thinking about going to college? Speaker 2: Oh, that was, that was the mantra from the first day we got in high school [George Washington Carver High School, Chicago, Illinois] from all of those people I talked about who was our teachers. That was--when they got us the first year of high school, it was, it was understood we were going to college, no questions, understood. And that was, that's what every student who was there, and in particularly for anybody who showed the potential and desire, because they made--I mean we were, we were given a college prep education in high school, but it wasn't identified as that. That was just the education we got. You know, my good partner, Jerome [Butler], went to Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee] as a result. Jean Lightfoot [ph.] came from Fisk, you know. So all those HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities], which were principally where all of those people, with the exception of a rare few, like Larry Hawkins and others like that, got their education at HBCUs, so they came up North to--up South--(unclear)--(unclear)--say to Chicago [Illinois]. And they were most often teaching in schools in black communities. And when you think about the mid-fifties [1950s], 1958 to '62 [1962], when I was in high school, that was the period when there were more black educated educators getting into the system of teaching in the urban areas. And for the most part, they were put into the black schools. So, that was just a well--you know, God sent for us. We didn't know it at the time, but it was just a Godsend, you know. Who, who would have thought that you would go to school and be educated by national, internationally known poets, internationally known entertainers, activists, playwrights. All of these are people that's just a part of your mix by extension of the people who are, are, are your daily teachers, you know. So, I, you know, I came--my, the arc of my life has been, you know, I wouldn't want anything other arc. Speaker 1: Now, was--I didn't ask you about--well, who else grad--you said Cazzie Russell graduated with you. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Who, who else? Speaker 2: Well, for anyone who would have become nationally noted, you know, 'cause he went to Western--up to Michigan, University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan]-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --and then went on to the [New York] Nicks. But other than that, I have my good friend, Jerome Butler, who is an attorney, who worked with, after he got out of law school, his first job was with Jewel Lafontant [HM Jewel Lafontant-Mankarious], her firm. He worked with her and has been a very successful attorney in Chicago. He's with, I think, now with CTA [Chicago Transit Authority], but he worked for, in the office of Dr. Carol Adams [HM Carol L. Adams] when she was heading--I forget which department in the Illinois-- Speaker 1: Oh, right-- Speaker 2: state. Right, Carol Adams. Speaker 1: --yeah, the, the Illinois Department of Human Services. Speaker 2: Human Services, right. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: He was the attorney for them at that time. And outside of anyone that would be notable in terms of the public knowing about them, per se, I would say virtually everyone in my graduating class has gone on to college, graduate and post-graduate degrees, and are doing and have done, 'cause a number had retired, and others have deceased, done major contributions in American life as a whole and black life in particular-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --you know. Speaker 1: So, about how big was your graduating class? Speaker 2: Being that George Washington High, Carver High School, I think from first year of high school to, to--from freshman to senior, might've had 250 students as a total. Speaker 1: Really, that's a small--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right, it was just a small school Speaker 1: --by Chicago standards, yeah. Speaker 2: And so the graduating class might have been sixty-some people or something like that maybe. I'd have to go and look at my-- Speaker 1: Then when you compare it to something like-- Speaker 2: --high school picture. Speaker 1: I think Marshall [Metropolitan] High School [Chicago, Illinois] had like 4,000 students--(unclear)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, we weren't--no, Marshall High School was a city. We were just a little cottage (laughter). We were right out there in Altgeld Gardens, so, and the interesting thing about--so it was, it was a small, small graduating class, 'cause it was a small population as a whole. Yeah, and if--actually, thinking about it, sixty might be a large number, 'cause they don't probably--'cause I haven't thought about it--'63 [1963], this is what? Two thousand three [2003], what's that, fifty years ago? Story_ID: 133850 Speaker 1: So, what did, did you graduate with any kind of distinction or anything that the-- Speaker 2: Trying to remember. I, I don't know. I think I was--I know Culpepper [ph.] was valedictorian. I think Jerome [Butler] was--(unclear)--yeah, I, I did have a distinction. They, I don't think it--what it was is I won (laughter)--growing up in the grocery business, my granddaddy's [Lewis Henderson's] grocery store and working at Jewel Tea Company and all the rest of that through high school, I--and that was the late fifties [1950s], early sixties [1960s]. You have to remember that was the period of the beginnings of integrating workplaces and all these sorts of things. And they had a program at my school called Distributive Education. And what that meant is that there was a teacher who taught skills that they now call where you go to learn how to dress and apply for a job, and how to go in for interviews, and put together a resume and all that sort of stuff. That was distributive education in high school. And his name was Munsel [ph.]. I can't remember his first name. His name was Munsel, and he was sort of a coordinator between students in our, in our high school and jobs where they worked. He went out and sought industries, you know, supermarkets, and, and, and department stores, and gas stations, and all this sort of stuff that would employ students, high school students. And I worked for Jewel Tea Company, and I won their first scholarship they offered for a grocery management training program at Eastern Michigan University [Ypsilanti, Michigan] in, it's not Lansing. It'll come to me. But, I remember writing the speech, and I was, that was a scholarship I had. And I, and a couple of other, several other students in the graduating class had scholarships to universities. Of course, Cazzie [Russell] went up to [University of] Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan], and Jerome went down to Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee], and others went to different-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --places. Speaker 1: Yeah, e, e, Eastern Michigan, that, that's Ypsilanti I think, right? Is, isn't that-- Speaker 2: Ypsilanti. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: It's one, it's-- Speaker 1: It's right, it's, it's east of--it's west-- Speaker 2: It's over there on the lake, yeah. Speaker 1: --of Detroit [Michigan], but it's-- Speaker 2: Right. But the interesting part about it, they had a big write up in Jewel, had their little internal little newspaper. They called it Jewel, Jewel News, and they had a photograph of me going down and accepting it. And I presented a speech, which I was digging for this stuff through my papers and found that speech. And I think the first line of my speech to the Jewel Tea executives and all of the people at that function they had for that, along with all the other awardees that had won awards--of course, I'm the only--at that time, I, I think the opening line was: As the first negro to receive a scholar--a Jewel Tea scholarship to go to da, to da, to da, to da. And I remember very vividly, after having gone back to that, that Mr. Munsel, our teacher in Distributive Education, working with me. And I still have the draft with all of the little editing notes and various other things on it from also going to talk to Mr. Green, T. Green [ph.], our English teacher, in getting this document written in such a way that when it was presented, it represented not only me but us and school. And just so interesting, I mean, you know, to read that statement, to see how, actually, how eloquent it really was, you know. And so that, and my letters in track and field, and my accomplishments in theater and, and that, those were the only kinds of, you know, only, I guess, well, they were the ones I did, things that were noted in terms of, you know, asterisks at my graduation. Story_ID: 133851 Speaker 1: So you were, you were going to--did you go to Eastern Michigan [University, Ypsilanti, Michigan]? Speaker 2: Well, no, 'cause I also had a scholarship to the Art Institute of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I knew that was where I wanted to go. And Helen Joyner [ph.], my art teacher, that was where she wanted me to go. My granddaddy [Lewis Henderson], always the practical man, said look, you know, I don't know anybody make a living selling pictures. You know how to do this; you, they gon' send you to college, go. And I struggled with that, and I decided to go to the Art Institute. Speaker 1: So you, you had a scholarship? Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I had a scholarship to the Art Institute and a scholarship to, to Western Michigan, with, from Jewel [Tea Company]. And what I did, though, is I didn't throw away the scholarship with Jewel 'cause I continued to work for them. I just postponed on the pretext that I wasn't, I wasn't ready to go to college at the moment. And I was then, at the time I graduated from high school [George Washington Carver High School, Chicago, Illinois], I was elevated to manager of frozen foods, that department of all the frozen foods. And a year later I became the assistant manager, which was in '63 [1963]. And they weren't upset that I wasn't going off to the college 'cause they, they thought from how I was still continuing with the company, I was gonna remain. And sooner or later, I would. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I won a partial scholarship to go and study French art history and drawing and painting in Paris [France] in '63 [1963]. Speaker 1: Okay, so just for the record, you graduated in '62 [1962]? Speaker 2: Right, I graduated in '62 [1962]. Speaker 1: And you kept working for Jewel and-- Speaker 2: And I kept work-- Speaker 1: --and, and-- Speaker 2: --continue working for Jewel. Speaker 1: --and as you, as, as you start at the Art Institute? Speaker 2: As I, no, I didn't get to the Art Institute-- Speaker 1: You didn't start? Okay. Speaker 2: --until '68 [1968]. I started at, I went to junior, to [Woodrow] Wilson Junior College [Chicago, Illinois]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --which is now Kennedy-King [College]. Speaker 1: All right, so you went to Wilson-- Speaker 2: Right I went to Wilson Junior College. Speaker 1: --after your graduation? Speaker 2: After graduation-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --continued working for Jewel, and then I transferred from Wilson Junior College to South Shore Junior College. Speaker 1: Now did you think--I mean did you kind of heed what your grandfather was saying, that you didn't know-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --any artists, black artists. You're-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --not gon' make any money doing that? Speaker 2: Right, oh yeah, I, I paid attention to that. No, I, I, I, I wasn't arrogant. I, I knew better, and it was, it was, it was logical and sensible. You know, I didn't know anybody who could make a living, who was making a living selling pictures, as he said. So I had, I was making good money with Jewel Tea, and I continued my education at the junior college 'cause I wasn't ready just to drop the job and go straight into college. Story_ID: 133852 Speaker 1: And that summer--that fall, I won--that summer, rather, I won this scholarship, partial scholarship, while a student at South Shore Community College [Chicago, Illinois]--'cause my art instructor in the class offered out to the students there's a possibility to go to France and study at the American Art and Student Center in Sorbonne [University of Paris, France] for, or a summer semester. And you know, all, several students in the class raised their hand. And 'course, I was the only black student in the class. And I knew I didn't have any money. I didn't have the time, and I hadn't really seriously considered it. And the next class he said you know, why didn't you raise your hand? You know, you know the, you're the best student I got in the class. I said well, you know, I got a job. I don't have any money, and you know, that's just, that's why I didn't. He said well, I'll see if I can get you a scholarship. Will you go? Get that, I'll go. So I got the scholarship. Speaker 2: Who, who was your teacher that did this? Speaker 1: I can't remember his name. He was, you know, that was one of the, that was, I was running in taking art class. And it was one class I took, and I'd go back to work and that kind of thing. It was just keeping my hands in the, in the studio. Speaker 2: So here's a scholarship to the Sorbonne. You know, did you have-- Speaker 1: And some-- Speaker 2: --at the time appreciate the-- Speaker 1: You know, I did when I was there, because it was simply a life-changing experience, because the little money I'd able to save to carry, tide me over while I was there, you know, in terms of my food and other kinds of little things, wasn't a whole lot, but that was all I had. It was enough, calibrated; it would get me through. Speaker 2: Now, now, let me ask you this, did, did, had you ever been--how far had you ever been out of Chicago [Illinois] at this point? Speaker 1: Back and forth to Mississippi (laughter) and which is why I didn't raise my hand. I mean, you know, Paris, you know, that's over, over there, okay. You know, I knew about Paris from the art history and all the rest. I, I mean I wasn't unfamiliar with it, but it was just something outside of my orbit of-- Speaker 2: So-- Speaker 1: --possibilities. Speaker 2: --let's take our time with this now. You've gotta get to--what, you had to go to New York first or something to--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, I had to go to New York. Well-- Speaker 2: So that takes you to New York City [New York]. Speaker 1: Well, let me, let me, let me-- Speaker 2: Okay, all right, all right-- Speaker 1: --let me roll this piece out-- Speaker 2: --all right okay, all right. Speaker 1: --'cause this, it's a story. So I got my, my few pennies together, you know, that I saved up. I'd asked my grandmother, and at this time, my Grandmamma Eva [Henderson] was still alive, my paternal grandmother. She said boy, you know, the only thing I know about France and the French is oui oui and non, non (laughter). She reached and got her little, reached down in her apron pocket, brought out her little handkerchief, untied her handkerchief, rolled out a, some, a few dollars and she said this is some money to help you get something to eat while you're over there. So I got a little, little stuff from all the family pitched in, 'cause they were all supportive, but they, too, were excited and perplexed about this too. Why--first, you know, why are you going over there? For doing what, to draw and paint? You do that here. Why you gotta go way over there? You know, I say well, you know, that's where the real stuff is, so I'm going to see that. Story_ID: 133853 Speaker 1: So, I told my manager at Jewel [Tea Company, Chicago, Illinois]--(unclear)--when I was given the scholarship, I said I'd like to take some time off, take my vacation time and extend it, you know, beyond that, to go to Paris [France] for the summer to do this project. Bill Gillespie [ph.] was his name; that was my manager. And he was a young white kid who had come out of West Virginia to Chicago [Illinois], and he was the manager of the store. And Bill Gillespie was one of these guys who--I don't know if Bill actually graduated from high school, but maybe he did, but it doesn't matter--he was the kind of guy that was just gon' work himself up the ladder; I mean he lived for Jewel. And so, we got along quite well in terms of working together. I told him I was going to, to Paris. He said oh yeah, no problem, no problem. Just let me know when you're ready to go. So several more months went by, and so I got ready to, it was time. I said hey, Bill, in two weeks I've got to, you know, leave for this thing I told you about. And I'll, I'm gonna make arrangements for who's gonna replace me, and 'cause I've talked with my other workers, and we've got the schedules worked out. He looked at me and he said no, you ain't going. I said what do you mean I'm not going? He said I can't let you go. (Laughter) I said well, you know, actually, this is not up to you. I said and I called the district manager. I spoke to the district manager, so I said well, you know, it's simply this way: if Gillespie doesn't wanna work to arrange substitutes for me during this space of time, then in the two weeks when it's time for me to go, I'm leaving, and I won't be back to Jewel at all; I'm finished. Oh, oh, oh no, no, you don't have to do that. You don't have to do that. 'Cause see, I was there stellar star in terms of their integration and that whole nine yards that was going on at that time, and so I understood that as well. And Gillespie, at the meeting I had with the district manager, him and myself, he told the district man, he said now how could he be going to Paris when I can't? And I told him, I said well, that's not what you wanna do. That's what I wanna do, and the district manager says you work with him, get the arrangements set up, 'cause he's going. And that's the end of it, and I left. We had this big party for me, all my friends and everything, because (laughter) still, to this day, it was, it's people still talking about it, you know. Here we are, somebody from Altgeld Gardens housing project--project [Chicago, Illinois], going to Paris, France, to study art. We always knew you were different, and an artist, but going to Paris, what's this all this about? So we had this big party, and I (unclear) and I partied. Story_ID: 133854 Speaker 1: My bags were all packed. I got on a Greyhound bus downtown [Chicago, Illinois] at the Greyhound station to ride all the way to New York City [New York]. It was raining. Water was dripping down through the top of the bus under my seat, and it was only one other seat available on the bus. It was all the way in the back, and there was this extraordinarily beautiful sister on the back of the bus. She was a much older woman. She was a fully grown woman. I was, what, nineteen--'60 [1960]? No, I was just twenty. Sitting in the back, everybody was, people were kind of afraid to sit next to her 'cause they didn't want her to think that they would--so it was the only place to sit so I went and sat back there. I'm trying to sleep. I didn't have any. She had an extra pillow. She said here, take this pillow, go to sleep, you know, rest. So when I got to New York we got off at the Penn Station, and I was staying just for one night. I was supposed to stay at this, it was a hotel. It's, I, it's the hotel that Sun Myung Moon and his people bought some number of years ago. And so, I walked out of the train station. I'm in New York, and I mean stuff was going everywhere, and I went down into the subway to try to get the subway to get to where I was going. And you got halls going here, there, and people all over the place. And I'm asking people, and nobody knows. And I just, and I'm saying to myself, the last thing I need to do is get lost in New York City and miss my plane in the morning, so I turned around, went back upstairs. She was still standing outside, the woman who was in the seat next to me. Her name was Helen, serendipitous. She said look, you're just here overnight. You look like you don't know one end from the other. Get in the cab, come on. She took me down to the hotel where she was staying. I stayed, slept in this big--on the little couch, a little, you know, loveseat, in that room. The next morning, got up, went out, got on my plane. And sitting on the airplane, and I'm looking around. The first time I had, I mean, you know, on an airplane, that's the first time I'd ever been on an airplane, been to an airport for that matter. Sitting on the plane, they asking everybody to buckle up and all the rest of that stuff. And I'm sure the stewardess is probably deceased, but I'm sure for the rest of her life she will remember this. Everybody is buckled in, and they getting ready to, you know, taxi out. I pushed the little button for the stewardess to come back. I said excuse me. I said but what about our parachutes? She said, and I can remember it to this day, her, you know, gripping the muscles in her face to keep from laughing. She says but, but, sir, you don't have to worry about it. If we go down, you can use the cushion on your, your seat. And I said well, you know, you mean we don't have parachutes? She said no, you don't have parachutes--went on over there, got off the plane at Orly Air Field [Orly Airport, Paris, France], went to my--met by the people I needed to be mit, met by. Story_ID: 136469 Speaker 1: So, arriving, you know, landing in, in, in, at Orly Air Field [Orly Airport] in Paris [France]-- Speaker 2: Now this is in-- Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty-three [1963]. Speaker 2: --May or June or what, what-- Speaker 1: June or July. I can't remember. It was June or July, something like that or late May. But landing there, being met by our hosts who were, you know, there to meet the whole group, 'cause I was a part of a, a group of traveling students. There were students, some of 'em were going to study history; some was going to study painting, and drawing, and various other aspects of concentrations that that program offered. And they gathered us up and took us to our residences at the universite [University of Paris, the Sorbonne, Paris, France] dormitories. And we were deposited there. The next day we met up at 56 Raspail Boulevard [Boulevard Raspail] at the student center and got our orientation and started into our classes. As a matter of fact, the next year's program they had on their advertisement brochure a photograph of the Life Drawing Studio with me there drawing the life model. And I showed that to my grandmother when I got back. And she said were you there drawing naked women? I said well, grandmamma, that's, you know, nude models. That's what they are, you know. But that experience, I met a lifelong friend, Carole Allen Ward [sic, Carole Ward Allen], who lives in California, a fellow artist, whose father [Claude O. Allen] is an extraordinary activist-attorney out there in Oakland [California], very much involved with what was going on with the [Black] Panther Party and [HM] Angela Davis and all the other stuff out there. But I met all manner of Africans. And the conversations we would have were just, you know, searing conversations, because their concept of black America was Ebony and Jet magazine and the magazines that still--that no longer exist that most people don't know were around: Tan magazine, and Bronzeville, and all those others. And of course, their assumption was that I was rich 'cause I was able to come to Paris to go to school for the summer. And many of them were struggling students, which they quickly learned that I was just as struggling. And then there were a whole handful of others who just summarily, you know, went back and sent a telegram or a wire home and more money showed up at the bank, 'cause they were of the aristocratic society from post-colonial Africa. And many of the others who were "struggling" (in quotations), like myself, were individuals who found their way to Europe to study as well. And many of them were committed to going back home to help in the development of their countries in the post-colonial period. And our conversation, and I was telling them, I said you know, this is the money I have. I, I don't, I can't wire anybody. I said and the images you see in Ebony and Jet, that's not my life. My life is very much like yours, in the sense that I'm at the lower strata of the socioeconomic structure in my country as you are from yours, with the exception of those who come from the upper strata. And I learned a lot about Africa, post-colonial Africa. I learned a lot about America and African-American life and history by the conversations that was, were always being engaged between myself and these students. And that was the summer of the March on Washington [Washington, D.C., 1963], which I wish I could have been here, but I had gone. The book I took with me was James Baldwin's 'Another Country' as my reading. Since I couldn't be here for the March on Washington, they had a simultaneous gathering of people in support of and in solidarity with the March on Washington in Paris by just--and whole, a sundry of individuals from all around the world, 'cause being as international a city as it is, people were from everywhere. And the whole issue of the Civil Rights Movement and all these things were on the tip of everybody's tongue in the rest of the world. So, in a sense, I did attend the March on Washington, but I attended it in Paris. Story_ID: 136470 Speaker 1: So, well, how was it? I mean what was, how many people were there [march on the U.S. Embassy, Paris, France, August 21, 1963]--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh, it was just thousands of people, thousands of people. Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: It was just throngs of people. I couldn't, I couldn't give you a estimation or a guesstimation except for it was just, as far as you could see, there were people. And so, being in Europe at that time and after our official studies were finished, Carole Ward [Allen] and I took a student Euro Pass. And we took the train, and we traveled from Paris all the way through, we went through Luxembourg; we went to Frankfurt, Germany, which I had a friend there who was in the Air Force, and we stayed with their family in Frankfurt, Germany--nah, it's Spangdahlem, [Rhineland-Palatinate] Germany. And we went on down to Rome [Italy], and in Rome, Carole had to get back 'cause her group was leaving earlier than myself. And I hitchhiked the rest of the way. From there all the way to Pisa [Italy] to Florence [Italy]. I went to Florence to Pisa and down to Nice [France], and then I took the train and came back to Paris and caught the plane home. But in hitchhiking, once from Rome around the rest of Italy and the bottom of France, I would just stand on the roadside. Somebody come along on a motor scooter, pick me up, take me to the next place. Or even an Italian family, as I was trying to get to, to Florence, tried to marry me off to his daughter, because it was raining and I went up under this long eave of this barn, 'cause you could tell it was barn; you could smell it. And then to keep out of the rain, 'cause I had my knapsack, my bread, and my wine, and you know, the typical, you know, travel stuff back in those days. And the guy came along on a little motor scooter, went through the door and went in. And then the next thing I know, he comes back out, grabs me to take me in the house. Their house was connected to the barn, which is just normal for rural families, you know, rural farms. They sat me down, and they wanted to feed me. I tried to tell 'em no, I got my own. No, they gon' make sure that I eat. Then he's gonna--and best of their understanding what I was trying to do, there was more sign language and all of this other kind of communication that I was trying to get to Florence. They understood, Firenze? I said yes, Firenze. And so they said fine, so they sat down, we ate. So he took his, told his son to take me to the bar down the road, a little cafe. Went to the cafe, there was somebody there who had taught in the United States who spoke English. So we had a jovial, wine-drinking time at the cafe 'cause he then took me on down to Florence afterwards. But in the meantime, the bartender was trying to get me to marry his daughter so that she could come back. I said no, no, I didn't come here to get a wife. Oh, you need a wife. I said no, I don't need a wife. I need to get to Florence, you know. So I got to Florence, hitchhiked from there to Pisa, and actually slept in the moat right around the Leaning Tower [of Pisa], which, can't do that anymore, and went on down to Nice and got the train back to Paris and collected all my goods and got on a plane and got back to Chicago [Illinois], and haven't been the same since. Story_ID: 136471 Speaker 1: Now, were you able to go back to Jewel [Tea Company, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: Yeah, I went back to Jewel, 'cause the, the district manager, he had set that aside. That was a given. It wasn't, it wasn't dependent on the manager that I worked for. As a matter of fact, when I came back, they sent me to new store rather than to send me back to that one, 'cause he knew there was gon' be chaos. So they sent me on to another store where I was the assistant manager of this whole store, and that was down in Lake Meadows [Chicago, Illinois] as a matter of fact. And they were trying to--for a couple of more years I worked there, and they were trying to encourage me to go on. They wanted to elevate me to a manager. And I said well, I don't have a problem with that, but I, I am going to the Art Institute [of Chicago]. And I would reapply every year to the Art Institute, and they just finally told me: look, whenever you want to come, come on. The scholarship is here. Don't keep applying and not come. So that--I went to the Art Institute finally in 1968. And from '63-- Speaker 1: So, so you're said-- Speaker 2: --to '68 [1968], I was going around to junior colleges. I was traveling around other parts of the country and the world. I was just, I guess in a way of speaking, I was somewhat living that bohemian kind of life, yeah. Speaker 1: So, so you say that you were changed forever by--I should have asked you like how, and so just-- Speaker 2: How, how? By actually meeting people who looked like me who I found out came not from Mississippi or Chicago or Detroit [Michigan]. They came from Ghana, Nigeria, Zimbabwe, Tanzania. And so I had, I got an international education on Africa. Speaker 1: So, did you know any Africans in Chicago before you left? Speaker 2: Oh, no, not, I wasn't aware that they, no, I didn't. Well, let me correct it. Yes, I, I, I met a couple of brothers through the rehearsals and the, and the play we, the '[A] Raisin in the Sun' [Lorraine Hansberry] in high school. They came through the class rehearsals that were doing. T. Green brought them through, but I didn't know them, know them. I, I'm, I'm aware that they were from Africa because we were dealing with the part of the African character in the play. Speaker 1: Right, there's an African medical student [Joseph Asagai] in, in the play. Speaker 2: Right. And so, the change was learning that, becoming aware that the struggles that we were having here, they knew probably as much or more about it than I did and that they were not that dissimilar from what they were dealing with, you know. Speaker 1: Now, now through that period of time from high school [George Washington Carver High School, Chicago, Illinois] through 1968 I mean it's, that's really the hot time for the Civil Rights Movement. Did--I know in Chicago, I know there was a CORE [Congress on Racial Equality] office. S, SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] even had an office--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, SNCC had an office there. We had topographical centers [Black People's Topographical Research Centers]. You had, you know, Black Panther Party; I mean everything was there. Story_ID: 136472 Speaker 1: Tell us about the topographical centers [Black People's Topographical Research Centers], just 'cause I don't think anybody else is gonna talk about it, since you-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: --you mentioned it. Speaker 2: --see, and actually, I've tried it. I've gone on the Internet to try to, you know, to Google it. They don't exist. You know, you can go on the Internet and everything exist that you don't even know exist. Topographical centers for some reason they ain't on the Internet. The top centers, and they had one when I came here in '74 [1974], it was just not, not long-lived after that. But topographical centers were really I would say cauldrons of information dissemination. People from all manner and walks of life met there. And it was a place that, where discussions would be held about all manner of subjects and topics, but it was about correcting misinformation. And one of the very particular ones I recall was a discussion, very lively discussion one day around sewer caps, the sewer covers in the street. And there were people arguing about, nah, man, that's just where all the waste water goes; those are sewers. And somebody, they threw up some images and said look, all those, they are called manhole covers. And the ones that have sewer written on it is a sewer cover. But then there are others that say Westin Electric or General, Com Edison [Commonwealth Edison Electric] or, these are utility manholes. And that's where, if one is interested in disrupting the system, that's where you go. All of those covers are not sewers. So understand what all of these instruments and structures are within your larger community so you understand how the community works, how these systems are related and interrelated to each other and how they are related and interrelated to you, because if they wanted to shut down the black community in terms of its utilities, all they can go down one of these manholes, disconnect this apparatus, and you're in the dark, and circle the community with the National Guard, shut off all the lights and gas, and where are you? Speaker 1: So you were--there had been riots throughout the sixties [1960s], from about '65 [1965] on through-- Speaker 2: Right, through '68 [1968] and '9-- Speaker 1: --you know, in '68 [1968] and '69 [1969] in, in some, you know, in recent days as well-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: But in those days, the, the, the, the, the aspect of the riots where the black community would, would have a rebellion basically. And-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and so, so the Topographical Research Center was an institution that kind of addressed the fear a lot of people had of what could happen to them and what--yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, it addressed, it addressed all of those things, and it also talked about the rest of the world, you know, South East Asia, and Africa, and all these other places, the struggles that were going on around the world. And so it was simply, you know, it was an information center-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --that we talked about all manner of things, you know, and highly charged conversations and some very highly charged and emotional people. And they were not just highly charged and emotional, but they were intellectually astute. Speaker 1: Yeah, now correct me if I'm wrong: I think it was started by Vietnam [War] vets, I think, I believe. That's what--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I'm not sure of the genesis, but I wouldn't, I would venture to say that's very likely the case, because those were the brothers who were very clear about the interrelationships between the systems that oppress a people and how that can be done very easily. And that was during a period of time when there were quite a number of brothers coming back from the Nam. And at that time, '71 [1971] at least, I was teaching at Malcolm X Community College [then Theodore Herzl Junior College, Chicago, Illinois]. And if 70 percent of the students weren't Vietnam [War] vets, we didn't have student, you know. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: That was what it was. So, yeah, many then, 'cause I did--if they didn't start it, they were very, very present-- Speaker 1: Yeah, I think-- Speaker 2: --in the, in the top centers. Speaker 1: No, the topographical maps, you know, the name comes from-- Speaker 2: Right-- Speaker 1: --topographical studies. Speaker 2: --looking at that the cartography of the land. Speaker 1: So whoever start--I don't know who started it, but, but I know that, that they were topographical maps of the-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --military maps were, were-- Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: --prominently displayed. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And in terms of how, where the black community was and, and, and how it could be defended-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --or attacked. Speaker 2: (Unclear)--defended or attacked, in terms of looking, knowing where the highway system, where the, where the armories were located and all these other kinds of things. So, your, your suggestion of the Vietnam veterans, possibly the genesis of it is very cogent, you know, because-- Speaker 1: Yeah, I think in Chicago they're on 75th [Street], right? Speaker 2: Yeah-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --on the other side of Cottage Grove [Avenue]. Story_ID: 136473 Speaker 1: Coming back--that--so I was, I had become an international person. And sharing this with my friends, my buddies, my partners that I grew up with and graduated from high school [George Washington Carver High School, Chicago, Illinois] and lived with, we always had these interesting conversations back and forth because they were equally as internationalized in their studies and dealing with issues and the struggle here as I. But mine came at the, through the opportunity of going right to the source and being able to see here from out there. So, to be in Paris [France] and have people having a simultaneous March on Washington in Paris [march on the U.S. Embassy, August 21, 1963], surely didn't resonate with me at the time as the power of it until later, you know. Speaker 2: Now did you, you mentioned you were reading 'Another Country' by [James] Baldwin-- Speaker 1: Right, Baldwin, right. Speaker 2: --who was, you know, known as one of the prominent black expatriates--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --negro expatriates in those days-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --living in Paris with the a community of artists and writers. So did you interact with that community in Paris? Speaker 1: Yes, I did, because that was the community where all the African students all in the, in other expatriate blacks from the Western Hemisphere, 'cause it wasn't just the U.S. It was the Caribbean, and from South America and all the rest, so everybody was up in there. Particular names, I have no particular names. It's just that these were, this is where everybody was. So, over on [Boulevard] Saint-Germain, over in all that area, just in along, along the Cite [le de la Cite] at the University of Paris [Sorbonne] and all of that, there was just these spaces and places where people went, and people congregated, and you had this, if you will, cross-cultural interchange. And reading 'Another Country' was quite--I don't--I do know, too. I almost said I don't know how I got the book, but I got the book from my English Teacher, Mr. Green [ph.]. Green said take this and read it. And actually, when you, when I, not you, but I think about that period, I don't--there was no sense of being, if you will, if there is a sense, an expatriate. They were just people living their lives with a degree of freedom to do so. And that freedom is, is, is, is not absent of racism, but that freedom is exemplified by a society that encouraged and embraced intellectual and artistic pursuit as not an oddity or peculiar but as the norm for life. You know, and so you had people who were engaged in these dialogues who were not students at the universities at all. They were just regular citizens. And every one of the various non-Europeans I met there who were from other places wasn't themselves necessarily not in schools, but they were in the mix. So, I, quite honestly, I never had a feeling nor picked up any feeling of expatriateness from anybody. They were just people who were able to pursue their passion in a society that allowed for that to happen, you know, differently than here, you know. Story_ID: 136474 Speaker 1: And, and, and you know, 'cause when I ( laughter), when I came back, I, I, before leaving, I had worked part time at my granddaddy, Bodie [Washington], and Uncle Skeat's [ph.] barber, his barbershop, Mr. Young [ph.] on 71st [Street, Chicago, Illinois] and about four blocks east of King Drive. And I used to shine shoes there. And on Sundays--I'd have people drop their shoes off on Saturday, and I'd have all these shoes ready for 'em to go to church on Sunday morning, 'cause the barbershop wasn't open. I just had a key to go down and give 'em their shoes. So I came back. I went to see my uncle Skeat. He said hey, boy, how you doing? I said I'm fine. He said you're back from Paris [France], that's good. He said they didn't have any barbershops over there? I said yeah, they had barbershops. He said you been down to see Mr. Young? I said yeah, I went to see Mr. Young yesterday. He said no, no, no, you didn't go see Mr. Young. I said yes, I did. I went--he said not with all that wool on your head, 'cause I had come back with this fro, as they would call it, 'cause I couldn't get a haircut. And I found out as I was living my life there, whether my hair was short or long, it didn't, it didn't factor into what was going on. And from that point forward, I've never had another haircut. And my Uncle Skeat, he said well, boy, he said look, I don't want you--'cause my granddaddy and my grandmother [Media Washington] had the second floor. They had a two-story building they bought. And my uncle and my aunt was on the first floor, 'cause my aunt and my grandmother, they were sisters 'cause there were four girls. They were--so my uncle and my granddaddy, they married two of these sisters. And he said I don't want you in my house until you get your hair cut. I said well, I guess I won't be coming back down to the house. You know, I'll be upstairs, but my aunt, she'd send some food up, and I'd see him on the back porch. But he talking about I could not come through his door into his apartment 'cause I had all that wooly hair on my head, looking--said boy, you need to get a haircut. And I think it was about three years later, I was gomin--coming over, going up to the back, back, up the back steps. Hey, boy, come on in here and get something to eat 'cause he was (unclear). Huh? Said Uncle Skeat, you talking to me? He said yeah, boy, come on in and have a seat, get something to eat. Your grandmamma, you know, your aunt, your mama cooked that, that, that pound cake you like. I got some greens over here. And so we sat down. So I'm just looking at him. I said Uncle Skeat. I said when you're going to see Mr. Young? What? Oh, boy, shoot, I ain't enough hair up here to be spending all that money to get this stuff cut. (Unclear)--he had grown himself a fro (laughter). So he had finally come on over, so I could come back in and have, have a meal with him. But it's the, that, that's an example of the, the, the aspect of change that had occurred to, in a sense of seeing the things that are important and having the passion and compassion to pursue that, you know. Story_ID: 136475 Speaker 1: This is an important, you know, juncture in the history of black culture in this country. This period went from between '63 [1963] and, and '68 [1968], I guess. You know, there, there's a like a, an awakening of culture, you know, in the country, and so, and you're, you're a part of that. Were you a member of any--or did you organize anybody to form any organizations at--during this five-year period before you go to Art Institute [of Chicago, Chicago Illinois]? Speaker 2: Not really in a formal sense but in a loose sense of there were people that I was close with. But until '68 [1968], when we formed AfriCOBRA, prior to that it was just a, a, a, a loose association of creative people, visual, poets, writers, dramatists, dancers, musicians, just, we were just all, you know, agitating together. Speaker 1: Now, did--let's see, now, now what about Malcolm X? I know he was, he was, came to Chicago a lot, but he was-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and you also have like Muhammad Ali--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --prominent with the Nation of Islam and all that. What was you, what were your--did you have any interaction with the Nation? Speaker 2: I had interactions with the Nation in a sense that I was always supportive of Muhammad Speaks; I was always supportive of their businesses; and I was always supportive of the education they put out. But I was never inclined to be a member of the Nation of Islam for a number of reasons, which were just simply my own personality. I'm not a person to be, to follow a didactic structure without question. I got a mind that works, and it's it not about right or wrong. But I knew a lot of folks who were in the Nation. And actually, my position is very simple, that whether you a Baptist, Catholic, Protestant, Methodist, if you were black in Chicago [Illinois], you were a Muslim during that period of time because the Nation of Islam's philosophy of supports and self-help was overarching. All of that community, we all went to your supermarket. They didn't name it your supermarket, your restaurant capriciously. Your means whether you are a Baptist or a Protestant, if you come in there, you see it as belonging to you. It's their enterprise, but it's your enterprise. And so, I became aware of South Side Community Art Center [Chicago, Illinois] at that time. I became much more active with Dr. Burroughs [HM Margaret Burroughs] and the rest of the visual arts community. Speaker 1: Now, now she was beginning there--she was putting together the, the DuSable Museum [Chicago, Illinois], or she had it in her house--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well, she had--it, what it was, it always was sense way back. It was her house. She was looking for a place to put it and didn't wanna at all think about taking the South Side Community Art Center. It needed to remain an inter--entity for the arts, the visual arts and until her and Harold [Washington] hooked up, and we got the situation we got over there. She was always a very instrumental part of that community activism. Story_ID: 151354 Speaker 1: Now do you have a story about Malcolm X at all? Did you meet him at all? Speaker 2: No, I never met Malcolm, no. But I had the opportunity to see the Honorable Elijah Muhammad rather often at events and things. And, and ironically, where my--when I was at the Art Institute [of Chicago, Illinois], my house and studio was right there next to the building, which is no longer there now, right next to [HM Reverend Jesse Jackson's] Operation PUSH's headquarters on Drexel [Avenue], 52nd [Street] and Drexel there. And of course, you know, Elijah's house is just a couple of streets back over and one block down. So I was, you know, always engaging the various activity going on there but never had the opportunity meet Malcolm or Elijah personally but was, you know-- Speaker 1: Did, did you have a--I know a lot of the artists during those days, poets, and visual artists, you know, you know, lionized Malcolm X. And did, did you, did you, what, what was your feeling in those days? Did you, how did you feel about the split with the Nation of Islam in those day and the-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: --lot of tension and which leads to his death, his assassination. Speaker 2: Yeah, all of that is, for me, the minutiae of life and organizational structure. But I definitely continued to honor and respect Malcolm greatly as well as Elijah, Elijah Muhammad. The tension within the Nation itself, I don't, I don't let that factor into my assessment of what their value is to us as a people, because all organizations have difficulties. But I don't underestimate the degree to which that friction, along with a whole assortment of other entities, led to Malcolm's demise, you know, because when you have somebody like Malcolm meeting with people like Patrice Lumumba and Kwame Nkrumah, and you know, [Gamal Abdel] Nasser and all these individuals, you're not talking about the brother off the block. You're talking about a serious person who has the skill, and ability, and the passion to communicate the interconnectedness of "third world people" to the issues that are taking place here and not in any kind of romanticized or an emotional context but just flat out the way it connects. Speaker 1: Okay, so, I know--okay, so, in, in these days in Chicago, leading up to '60 [1960], I think '68 [1968] is a pivotal point--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Very much-- Speaker 1: --(unclear) then. That's the assassination of Malcolm, of, of-- Speaker 2: Dr. King. Speaker 1: --Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]. It's also when a big riot takes place-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --in Chicago [Illinois] where the West Side kind of burns up. So, leading up to that point, then, you're working, and you're becoming more involved in the cultural organization. Speaker 2: Right, yeah, very much involved in not just the cultural organization but the cultural organization from a political position, because I've always been active politically from high school. I mean my teachers, you know--for me, and that's to use this term, people say being an activist--in Chicago, within a certain structure of upbringing, you had to elect not to be an activist. That's just a part of being in black Chicago, you know, Oscar Brown, Jr., his father [Oscar Brown, Sr.], and I mean, you know, you just keep going on. I mean you just name people here, there, all across the board, the Leaks in the funeral parlors [Leak & Sons Funeral Homes, Chicago, Illinois], I mean everybody, the churches, everybody was engaged in activism before the term got attached to it. So, being engaged with the artists across the board in all disciplines was a politically engaging enterprise. We weren't doing the things we were doing outside of there being connected to a reaffirmation of our Africanness, a reaffirmation of ourself. Story_ID: 151355 Speaker 1: I guess it was in '67 [1967] that OBAC [Organization of Black American Culture] was formed? Is that-- Speaker 2: --Yeah, yeah-- Speaker 1: --'67 [1967]-- Speaker 2: --Organization of Black American Cu-- Speaker 1: Now this is the year before-- Speaker 2: --yeah, OBA-- Speaker 1: --Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And were you a part of OBAC (unclear)? Speaker 2: I was a part of OBAC tangentially in the sense of going to activities around the music and the visual arts and so forth. But I wasn't organizationally connected into it, because I was still engaged in a number of individual things I was doing and making preparations for getting back to the Art Institute [of Chicago, Illinois], and, and teaching, and just doing my work, and having a, a studio with a number of other artist. But that was a part of that as well; OBAC was a part of that, that-- Speaker 1: Just for the, who help us trans, doing the trans, you know, writing this down, OBAC, O-B-A-C-- Speaker 2: Organization of Black American Culture. Speaker 1: There you go, all right. Speaker 2: And it was, in a sense, it was an umbrella where AfriCOBRA spun out of, Kuumba Workshop [Kuumba Theater] spun out of, EPAY [ph.] spun out of, the AACM [Association for the Advancement of Creative Musicians] spun out of, the Writer's Workshop spun out of, [HM] Phil Cohran, you [Larry Crowe], [HM] Darlene Blackburn, you know, you, your, [HM] Haki [Madhubuti], all of us, everybody came out of that. You know, you had Hoyt [W.] Fuller's all up in the middle of it, you know, and everybody. So, like I said, you had to opt out of being an activist if you were in Chicago, you know; you just were, you know. And so, being involved in visual images, my inclination was more toward that. Story_ID: 151356 Speaker 1: Now let me ask you about that, about, at that juncture, what was your philosophy of art? I mean what were you thinking about in terms--and, and what kind of art were you doing? Speaker 2: Well, I was more involved in investigating and looking at elements of African textiles, because my major was textile weaving, and looking at African textiles, and by extension, can--extension, African textiles in the Diaspora, quilts, crocheting--'cause it's like I said, my grandmother crocheted profusely, making these big afghans that you would sit down and cover over on chilly evenings, quilts that were passed down through the family and knowing the quilts, and just generally growing up having to patch up your own pants, you know, how to put a patch on the knee of the pants and things of that nature. So, my heart was about investigating those things, and it wasn't--I can't necessarily say it was an deliberate choice to do it that way. It's that it was a part of my, if you will, DNA. I was, I was already in it, and it was revealing itself to me. And as I be engaged in the rest of the education of post-colonial Africa, you can't deal with those things without being a part of the mix of the politics and the academic end of that. So, those things of course fed the work, because in looking at African textiles in the Diaspora, you can't but help but get involved with the political academic aspect of it because it's all a part of what those things are. Story_ID: 151357 Speaker 1: Now this is interesting because I'm sitting here thinking, did I know anybody or ever heard of anybody that got, you know, that started becoming aware of the, keenly aware of the cultural connection to Africa and the ancestral connection to Africa that was not working toward some kind of social change their art. You know, I mean I, I, I can't think of anybody who that just did it for decorative reasons and didn't-- Speaker 2: Yeah-- Speaker 1: --think about it. Speaker 2: --and the interesting part of, and your, your comment brings something else to mind, because when I was at the Art Institute [School of the Art Institute of Chicago, Illinois]--I went there in '68 [1968] and stay till '71 [1971], yeah. I had an interesting experience at the Art Institute, and this, it, it then was nothing like what it is now. To now, now it's some kind of unbelievable palace. Then it was just a little cubbyhole in the basement of the back of the Art Institute of itself, and it was just down there in the basement. I was going past a classroom which was used for art history lectures, and I do recall there was lecturer at the art institute. His name was Whitney Halstead. He was a retired, or ex, or I don't how he would describe himself, or did describe himself--missionary, in Africa, and as such, he was qualified to teach African art. So this was probably my first year at the Art Institute or my second year. And the weaving studio was past, down the hall, past this room. So I'm walking down the hall. I passed the room, and it's completely dark. And I see these images up on the screen. I said bam, so I stop, and I just stepped on in 'cause it's dark and you know, it wasn't sequestered in any way. So I'm just standing in the back, and so Whitney is going on and giving the lecture about the works that he was showing. And he made a comment that I can't really tell you how it affected me or point to anything that would be evidence of it, but I know it did 'cause I don't forget it. As I'm standing in the back of the room, he's talking to the class. He said you know, and these works, these works that these Africans do, we have a love/hate relationship toward them. And he went on to continue talking. And that was close to the end of the class, and then up come the lights. And Whitney was standing in the front of the class. And he looked up and saw me standing at the back of the class next to the door 'cause there were no other black people in that class, just all white students. And that comment he was making in a family context, because we have a hate/love relationship with it, and that's the same relationship with regard to the struggle in this country for our human rights. And that thing, it stuck to me like, you know, just like glue, bam! And looking at those images, and I, it began to trigger things in my intellect and in my emotion to how I needed to look at these works because it wasn't a--'cause the exact term we use was repulsive/attracted. We're repulsed by it, and we are attracted to at the same time. I was attracted to it but never, ever repulsed. And it was one of those moments that it takes you almost a lifetime to fully digest. And you never really fully digest it 'cause it's constantly giving you nourishment. Story_ID: 151358 Speaker 1: And so my fellowship, my graduating body of work, which I was one of the four graduating students [at the Art Institute of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] that year in '71 [1971] to win a traveling fellowship, because are the things at the end of the year they select, bring in these jurors from wherever they get them to select a body of your final graduation exhibition to award you a fellowship, a monetary fellowship, to give you a certain amount to, supposed to be, to go Europe to study and become more endowed as an artist. I won a fellowship, but the works that I had were works that were based on my interpretation in textiles, of the manner in which the Maasai young boys wear their hair when they're, and those long kind of twisted dreads, before the, you know, the transition [circumcision]. And so I created these three-dimensional sculptures with woven portions, tapestry woven portions that employ that ethos or that kind of, that, that hairstyle. And I won, I won the fellowship, but those, and I had two tapestries that were there, and one of them was entitled, "African Solar." And it was utilizing various Egyptian hieroglyphic symbols that had particular meanings as the symbol and within the context of the various symbols in that tapestry, they made a particular statement. So, my work was very much during that period, you know, driven with an investigation of Africa, the politics of Africa, the politics of the Diaspora, and becoming aware of all the other cultures, 'cause I'd gone to other parts of the Caribbean and looked at and saw how the textiles were used there and just the creative works that were being--and so, I, I was just being infused with all this stuff. There was an energy-- Speaker 2: So-- Speaker 1: --taking place at that time. Speaker 2: --so, while you were at the Art Institute, you, you, you traveled to the Caribbean in that period of time? Speaker 1: No, I had done all of that before I went to the Art Institute. Speaker 2: Before you went--(unclear)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Right. 'Cause see, when I got from-- Speaker 2: All right, all right. Speaker 1: --France, see, I was, I was, I wasn't fit to stay here anymore. Speaker 2: So you, you were just--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: After I came back-- Speaker 2: --during that period of time through that-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --five-year period? Speaker 1: Yeah, in that five-year period-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --I had gone to Barbados, I'd been to Jamaica, looking at how they use the arts among the Rastas [Rastafari] within the context of symbolism with, with Haile Selassie and the Ethiopian context of that religious structure and how it and its textiles when you think about the, the Timkat celebration of the Ethiopic church, where they have the massive umbrellas and all the regalia of cloth, garments and so forth. Even when we think back to the, the coronation--not coronation, well, maybe it is coronation of the pope, all of these vestments and garments. Go to the, to, to, to the Yoruba, and they deal with the Gelede mask and the Egungun dance with all this flowing fabric. Fabric is a part of the spiritual, political, and social structure of cultures and not coincidentally, massively a part of African culture, from the continent to the Diaspora. The Ndyuka men down there in, in, in Suriname, with the, the skirts that they wear and the cloth. So, you know, between coming back from Europe and going over there and seeing all this stuff at the Museum of Mankind, the Musee de l'Homme [Paris, France], and all the other places, and seeing these collections of African works that were fully there and out to be seen in Europe, that were not out to be seen here in the same manner. And so, I mean, being unconscious of it but being, but absorbing it all at the same time because it's in my, it's in my view. It's in my conscious view and in my visual view and picking up the spiritual aspects of all that, because it's not without looking at those textiles without understanding the spiritual aspect of what they are. Because even if you take quilts from here, the spiritual aspect of a quilt is, at least the heritage and the older quilts, are the embodiment of the spirit of the peoples whose pieces of fabric are interwoven together to make a covering to keep you warm at night. Story_ID: 151359 Speaker 1: I didn't ask you before, but--'cause somehow it got away. I usually ask about the peo-, ask people about going to church or whatever their spirituality is. Was church a big part of growing up? Speaker 2: Oh yeah. I grew up in the Grant Memorial A.M.E Church [African Methodist Episcopal] on 30--38th [Street], I think it is, and Drexel [Boulevard, Chicago, Illinois]. And then we went to Mount Olive [Church, Chicago, Illinois] when we were out in Altgeld Gardens. It was a little tiny church, by comparison to Grant Memorial A.M.E. (laughter). Mount Olive was Baptist, and A.M.E., of course you know, that. So yeah, church was always, it was a bedrock, you know, as a little kid going to Sunday school in summer, summer church programs and things of that nature. I, I was baptized at Grant Memorial, but I, I've basically never belonged to a particular church because, and I owe this to my profession as an image maker, as an artist, that as you look at all the different places visual works come from, and you really honor them and get involved with them beyond the beauty, the prettiness of them, you cannot not do that and be disengaged from the spiritual, religious, social, and political aspects of it. So, in being a part of that, that being a part of my vocabulary, all these different religious systems come with it. And for me in the final analysis, there's only one creator. Speaker 1: Okay, so you didn't have a like a fundamental upbringing where--'cause I know a lot of people, you know, there are a lot of people in the black community that are afraid of anything African 'cause they think it's the devil or something if it's not like the-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --doctrine of their particular, you know, church. It's-- Speaker 2: No, we, we weren't--I wouldn't say we were fundamentalists in any way. But my family, in my upbringing, you didn't play with the stuff about God. Now whether you want to call 'em Jesus, Jehovah, Shango, all that, same thing, as far as my grandmother, you know, when, I remember one day she was, she did her crochet. She'd crochet these long strips, and then she would then bind them all together like kente cloth. And so one day I walked in. I said hey, grandmamma, look here. I said you, you're doing, you're making your quilts the same way they make these big large fabrics in, in Africa, in Ghana. And she looked at it. She said they got a nerve, doing the same thing that I'm doing (laughter), which is her understanding that, not being, you know, put off by it but embracing it in that kind of flip of the humor, you know, saying well, oh, they got a nerve doing what I do. Story_ID: 151360 Speaker 1: And I had my great-grandmother, her mother, never had any fingernails. And she always said that she was from a particular African tribe who didn't have fingernails. And that's something that for my whole life I've been wanting to investigate. And I've, I, I've got to get to it. Speaker 2: She just, she didn't have any? Speaker 1: She didn't have fingernails. And my daughters, when they were small, I made a point one particular Christmas, 'cause Grandma Bess was very up there. She was about close to hundred. I made--that particular Christmas she was in Chicago [Illinois] from California. I made a point that they were going to Chica--we were going to Chicago that Christmas season for them to be there with, I mean, you know, how lucky are you; you got grandmother, great-grandmother, and great-great-grandmother--(unclear)--so that's the fundamental aspect of the spiritual realm that is deeper than any particular denominational identification. So, you know, it's, it is those types of--that's the religious underpinning of my family. You know, and she used to sit and talk to us about those, you know, those fingernails, the lack of I should say. And my grandmother, as much as she was A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal], she was a very learned woman. She knew a lot and was very much up on what was happening in Africa and the rest of the world. Speaker 2: This is your-- Speaker 1: My mother's [Maxine Unger's]-- Speaker 2: --mother's mother. Speaker 1: --mother. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: She didn't give a lot of, you know, we didn't have all these back and forth long didactic discussions. But when I would be talking about one thing or the other, or I would show her something or other, she, she wasn't unaware of it, and she did not look at it as being something, you know, as a negative or unholy or all that other. She looked at it with the same sense of curiosity and the astuteness of seeing the similarities and the translation of how that same thing is done in her A.M.E. forum. So she wasn't gonna not be an A.M.E. and become a Yoruba. But she was very clear on how the Yoruba related to the A.M.E. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: You know, so, my, my religious founding, foundation is, I think it was very balanced. You know, it wasn't over the top in one direction or the other. Story_ID: 151361 Speaker 1: Now, did, did you become a member of, were you a, a part of--I know you're a part of AfriCOBRA so-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --did, did you, were you a part of that before you started Art Institute [of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] or afterwards? Speaker 2: No, 'cause they didn't start until after the-- Speaker 1: After you-- Speaker 2: --rafter, yeah-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --'cause I started at the Art Institute either in '68 [1968] or--see, I'm trying to really--'70 [1970], '71 [1971], '67--[1967]. So, I was already, I was a sophomore at the Art Institute when AfriCOBRA formed. Speaker 1: Okay, that's also means that you were, you were there before Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --too--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yes, 'cause a matter of fact, on the day that Dr. King was assassinated I was at the Art Institute, and as you know, all hell broke loose, and that's in downtown Chicago. And all of a sudden all the black students at the Art Institute, which it wasn't but a handful of us, I mean a handful of us, my fellow white students say well, how we gon' get home? I said we who? I said if I were not in here, I would probably be out there, the same people you're worried about how you're gonna get past them to get home. I said so, let's not forget how you were just two hours ago, okay? It wasn't we then; not it's we. I said but I understand what you're saying. I said but I was, I was there. That was in--I was a student at the Art Institute at that time and of course, the following madness of the Democratic Convention [1968 Democratic National Convention, Chicago,Illinois] and all the rest of that stuff. So, the sixties [1960s], and my time at the Art Institute, and the energy, cultural, political, academic, and religious, social energy of Chicago, black Chicago, was, that was, that was a turning point for the planet. Speaker 1: Tell us about the beginning of AfriCOBRA, how you got involved in that--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well, AfriCOBRA was, the founding members were Barbara Jones [Barbara Jones-Hogu], and Gerald Williams, Wadsworth Jarrell [HM Wadsworth A. Jarrell, Sr.], Jae Jarrell, and [HM] Jeff Donaldson. I knew all of these folks 'cause all of us, we, we all knew each other, they, the Wall of Respect. Bill Walker [William Walker], who was a muralist from Chicago, deceased now, brother, had decide--came up with this project under OBAC [Organization of Black American Culture] and the Artists Workshop to do this mural. And so, I don't know the particulars of how they ended up with the building there on 43rd [Street] and, and Langley, but--Vincennes [Avenue]--but they got it. It was a building nobody was living in. And coincidentally, right on the corner, they had one of their little newsstands, you know, the newsstands that populated the black community, little, little huts out in the middle of the, on the corner. And the project was a project that allowed visual artists to make and have a presence in the community not unlike, say, any speaker, like the Nation of Islam and its, the various gatherings, or, or, or, or Ebony magazine, or the [Chicago] Defender newspaper, or any of the churches in the community, or CORE [Congress on Racial Equality] or, or any other organization. They had some kind of physical entity that people in the community can, you know, recognize. What does the visual artist have as we do our individual work? So we say we come together and do this piece. And that, and what it was, it was not the artist doing it but the artist working and engaging the community, because the community was out there while this thing was being produced. We asked the people who were the images they wanted to see on this wall, so the people, you know, nominated who would go on the wall. The AACM [Association for the Advancement of Creative Musicians] musicians were out there playing; the poets were out there reciting and writing poetry, Kuumba [Theater]; the dramatists were out there, Valpray [ph.] Ward [ph.] and all these folks. It was every entity, and OBAC was there with its own creative contributions to that wall. And so I knew these artists, and there were many other artists who worked on it as well, because everybody, nobody had a section. People just worked altogether. It wasn't, this is mine, you know, that thing; it was ours. And shortly after that, Jeff, and Barbara, and, and Wadsworth, and Jarrell, they were sitting and talking. And I think Jeff mentions after he and Wadsworth had come back from an art fair up north somewhere in the North Shore and find that there was no reception for what they were doing in this wonderful white community as an "artist", they needed to have a reevaluation of what it was they were trying to do. Story_ID: 136484 Speaker 1: So, we're talking about the AfriCOBRA coming into being. After Wadsworth [HM Wadsworth A. Jarrell, Sr.] and Jeff [HM Jeff Donaldson] came back from this exhibition, they decided to talk about what it was they were doing, in terms of what kind of images they were, were creating, and what did those images mean, and to whom did they mean anything to, you know, and going to the North Shore Art Fair [Chicago, Illinois], and the Evanston Art Fair [Evanston, Illinois], and all these other "nice" (quote) communities that buy art, but nobody bought your art. And how important is that? Is what you do--what's the relevance of what it is you're doing? And being a part of OBAC [Organization of Black American Culture], being just a part of the whole black world at that time, it was just the natural progression from a self-assessment. Why is what I'm doing not satisfying to me or to anybody else? And the dialogue began to assess: what are the characteristics, the aesthetic characteristics of African people that ought be investigated and employed to create these visual images that we didn't learn at the Art Institutes [Art Institute of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] and all these other good European institutions of artistic education. Because, I mean a, a, a little microscopic example, I was taking a drawing class at the Art Institute. And the instructor wa--gave an assignment. He said look, bring back some drawings of some people in your community the next class. So, came back; we all put up our drawings. He looked at mine. He said well, I asked you to bring some drawings of the people in your neighborhood. I said well, these are the people in my neighborhood. And I still am, am, am friendly and friends with this particular--(unclear)--Martin Prekop. He's, he said but that--I said you asked me to draw people in my life away from here. These are the people in my life. Now, if I were asked to draw people here at the school, they may let, look like any of my classmates. Seeing I'm the only black one in the class, it might look like any of them 'cause I wouldn't be drawing me unless it was about a self-portrait. Speaker 2: Yeah, so he was upset because, or he was-- Speaker 1: Well, he wasn't-- Speaker 2: --flummoxed because they weren't white people or-- Speaker 1: He was confused. He didn't realize how myopic and racist his vision was intellectually and visually, in terms of seeing the world in its reality. I'm a black man in this class. And if I go home, I'm sure in 1968 or '67 [1967] you would--(unclear)--you'd have to be blind, deaf, and dumb to assume that my regular world at home look like the classroom I was in at the Art Institute. And it triggered for him to have to confront and deal with himself. And it also triggered and helped me to start looking at myself too in terms of what is there, what, what kind of images am I gonna do, and what's the relevance of these images, and what are the elements that need to be employed to create these images? So if I'm looking at the physiognomy of the people in my environment, I also have to look at the rest of that: what do they cover their bodies with? How did they decorate and adorn their face, and what kind of manner do they put their hair in, and what kind of body postures do they take, you know. You know, hey, [HM] Barack Obama, it's very clear if you didn't, couldn't see his, his skin, you'd know he's a brother, the way he walks. I mean, you know, there's a particular gait, it's a partic--particular manner in which you move the body, which is a visual language, and it's about color. And so, what are the colors we find enjoyable, you know, or what are the colors and what are the emotions that these colors generate? Story_ID: 136485 Speaker 1: So, to, we begin to start looking at image-making as an extension of our culture. And it wasn't from a ro--, a romantic type of we're going to do black art. It was a given it was black 'cause I am. What are the components of this blackness? And so when we started dealing with that, we came up with our set of principles and a set of aesthetic, aesthetic principles and criteria of how we would move forward and creating the work we create as AfriCOBRA. And the first and foremost thing, one of them, that we elected was that we were image makers not artists. Because as artists, that was what Wadsworth [HM Wadsworth A. Jarrell, Sr.] and Jeff [HM Jeff Donaldson] were coming back home and encountering that as artists, it didn't make any difference that they were up there at the South Shore [sic, North Shore, Chicago, Illinois] up in Evanston [Illinois]. They still didn't matter. And so if here in the neighborhood, in the community, what I'm doing has to have relevance, and so if it's about being relevant, it has to have a message, and that message has to resonate from in. So, if I'm gonna do a, a painting of a group of people, if it--who's it gonna resonate to if it don't look like you, you know? And people gravitate toward what looks like them. I mean that's why people look in the mirror. I mean we, you know, we're excited about seeing ourselves in the mirror. We're always looking in the mirror to get ourselves properly appointed aesthetically. So, AfriCOBRA grew out of a political and aesthetic concerns, doing an art for the people or to make work that was what Larry Neal said in an essay he wrote for one of our catalogs. He said AfriCOBRA pretty much we will see them as visual griots. We're the storytellers with images, which is why AfriCOBRA deals with the elements we have in terms of words, and frontality, and symmetry, and hora vacia [ph.], and shine, Kool-Aid colors, Kool-Aid colors. Now, I mean we're all cool, and cool is an attitude. It's a, it's a, it's a way of being as black people, whether you are in Nigeria or whether you're in Chicago [Illinois]. Cool is a way, it's, it's an, it's an aura. But at the same time, Kool-Aid, the stuff you buy to make the little colored drinks, the raspberry, grape, lime, lemon, orange, all the rest of that, same, it's a pigment in a form. And if you mix it with water and place it on paper, it's just like watercolor. So we can use it, and we did use it, you know, in some of the works. So cool and Kool-Aid, you know, become a part of the aesthetic principles; shine becomes a part of the aesthetic principle because when you take, and we all have had the experience of auntie, grandmother, or a mother saying boy or girl, come back here and put some grease on them elbows, them rusty elbows and knees. You put that oil on it, you get that nice shine to the body. And one, and one of the things that people just get excited about when they see athletes sweating, and I mean, you know, black athletes be shiny, so shine, symmetry, a message, positive images. And it's not about people, you know, being put upon or depressed. It's about people standing upright, people talking and engaging and having relationships, you know, families, and, and men and women together, and men by themselves doing things, women by themselves doing things, honoring these people and bringing forward those images for those who are our audience. Story_ID: 136486 Speaker 1: You know. We [AfriCOBRA] were creating work for the people and not for museums. And it wasn't about denying museums, 'cause right now all of us are in museums. They own our works and all the rest of that. But the issue was what are the political and cultural imperatives for doing this work, which is why we, in 1970, at our first exhibition at the Studio Museum in Harlem [New York], we had a ballot that we gave to people who came to the exhibition. They asked them, if you could own any one of these works in here, you know, put a check mark by the one that you would like to own. And from the balloting, we selected a body of work that, rather we took the body of work that the audience selected and made silkscreen prints out of them. We produced these silkscreen prints because that's a, a, a process you can create many works as opposed to the one of a kind "fine art" through prints or art for the people. And that was a way of allowing the people to own fine art, art created by us, images that look like them, which they wanted to have on their walls, in their homes, in their businesses. And so, that's, you know, AfriCOBRA and, and the formalized aspect of my affiliation with artists in a formalized sense was only through AfriCOBRA, you know. And AfriCOBRA, this is our forty-fifth year as an organization. We are, if hiffrey--history serves me correct, this is the longest surviving artist collective in American history. Story_ID: 136487 Speaker 1: Now, I wanna ask you about another artist collective I think it might be longer in a sense. I don't know. You, you gotta tell me. You know better than I do, I think. But the National Conference of Artists, you know-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --started in the forties [1940s] I think--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: No, they started-- Speaker 1: --took off-- Speaker 2: in '58 [1958]. The National Conference of Artists is an artists' support organization. It's an organization, it came about pri, primarily because black artists in the forties [1940s], fifties [1950s], sixties [1960s]--and it's still going on today but more prevalently then--couldn't get employment at universities outside of HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities] to teach their skill. So they, of course, automatically became a cadre of colleagues and decided that, at Atlanta University [Atlanta, Georgia], that they should get together and start over--and it started out over the Easter break, 'cause everybody's out during Easter. And the dormitories are empty on the HBCU campuses, so they had somewhere to stay. They didn't have to try to rent a room, and then moreover, you possibly couldn't have rented a room in those days, in '58 [1958], down in Atlanta--and talk about common issues within the profession: the race issue, the aesthetic issue, the employment issue, the education issue, student, all manner of things; what happens to our work; where does this work go, you know; do we have the structure within the HBCUs to, to do something with this? And it became, it was an instrument by which people could share. Oh, by the way, there's an opening over here at such and such and such; there's a show happening over here; well, there's an opportunity for somebody to go over here; I can't go. Would you go? You know, that kind of thing, so it was a, actually, it became a mutual society, so to speak. It was a support system, different than AfriCOBRA. AfriCOBRA is a collective of artists, image makers who have a set of principles, aesthetic principles and a philosophy by which they create what they do. The-- Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: --NCA, it's organizing principle is supporting each other no matter what manner of--quote--"images we make." Whether it's sculptor, it doesn't matter. If you-- Speaker 1: Okay, so, you know, from what I've seen of NCA work, I mean that, there were certainly some very conscious artists in NCA-- Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely. Speaker 1: --making conscious art. But then there were people that were just drawing-- Speaker 2: Sunday painters. Speaker 1: --flowers and-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and, and sort of thing-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and that sort of thing too. So it was no-- Speaker 2: It was a support organization. Speaker 1: Yeah, I think the leadership of NCA, you know, would, a person like, say, [HM] Margaret Burroughs would be more inclined towards an AfriCOBRA-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --type of vision-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and somebody else may be--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely. Speaker 1: But it's 'cause-- Speaker 2: And see, and the NCA was a good place 'cause that as where we, we, AfriCOBRA, NCA, this is where these dialogues would take place on the validity and the value of all of this and the, the, the cross-fertilization. 'Cause Margaret was always--I mean Margaret was the one who brought me into the NCA. You know, and that was what one of, a part of their mission, bring their students to these gatherings that they had too, so that they get to meet each other; they get to meet these other artists, these other people out here making a living doing this thing called art. And so, it allowed--(unclear)--allowed for us to have these kind of dialogues with our elders about the issues and concerns we thought the works we were producing ought to address in relationship to the ones that they were addressing-- Story_ID: 136488 Speaker 1: Can, can you kind of summarize what the principles of AfriCOBRA, you know, are, I mean the--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Okay, (unclear), I'll give it to you. Well-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --awesome frontality; symmetry; horror vacui, meaning that there's no space on the surface in which you create a piece of work on that is to be left untouched or untreated; shine; the use of lettering and words; and I don't know, did I mention frontality, the fact that images, when you're painting the portrait of a person or someone's face at--they're looking directly out at you. It's not off to the side, unless there's a reason for it to be off. But frontality, that is not simply that they have to visually be looking at you frontally, but the presence of that image is a frontal image. It's there to be dealt with, and so--and rhythm and the element of music, because if we take all of those principles and fold them into one thing, one could best describe it as creating what I and we call visual music, because we go back to some of the earlier works. Everybody's work is infused with music some kind of way. Music is an important element because music, the sound has color. Music is a color, can be translated into a color pallet. I mean you know, Miles [Davis] didn't come out with "All Blues" just because--it ain't about the blues. It's about "all hues of blues," as Oscar Brown [Jr.] took it to the next level. See, so, whether you're into the, into the, into the instrumental music, or whether you're into spoken music, or into written music, and Lorraine Hansberry's got the blues all up in there, because if, if Walter Lee [sic, Walter Younger, 'A Raisin in the Sun'] ain't going through the blues with, with sister Bertha [sic, Beneatha Younger], you know, and all of this thing, and the mama and the son, oh, please, you know. All of those shades of blue are a part of what creating--the works that we create is a synthesis of all those different components; it's, you know, the different ingredients come out with the end. And that end work is a work that speaks to people when they see it, you know. Story_ID: 136489 Speaker 1: Now this is--another aspect of AfriCOBRA I think is important that hadn't happened before, I mean not, not, not on the same scale. I think in a--we had muralists before, like, like Aaron Douglas. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and others. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: You know, Charles [Wilbert] White and--(unclear). But, but I think public art, in terms of AfriCOBRA was like paramount--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well, the, several of the founding members were. Barbara [Jones-Hogu], Wadsworth [HM Wadsworth A. Jarrell, Sr.], and, and, and Jeff [HM Jeff Donaldson]. But OBAC [Organization of Black American Culture] would be the entity to give that-- Speaker 1: Oh, okay, all right. Speaker 2: --to, because the Wall of Respect [Chicago, Illinois] is the mural that started what we now have internationally going on, mural movement. That was the first mural of any particular note after the mural, the Diego Rivera, and [David Alfaro] Siqueiros and all these other folks back in the WPA [Works Progress Administration] period up into the late forties [1940s] maybe, murals that were engaged in social commentary, so to speak, which a lot of it was individuals such as Margaret [HM Margaret Burroughs] and others, who were, had a political inclination toward this socialist-communist configuration. And those works came out of that ethos, which is about art for the people, you know. And so, the Wall of Respect was the resurgence of art for the people, because that's what the Wall of Respect was. And that wall was never defaced by anybody. It was protected by those people in that community until the mayor [Richard J. Daley] finally tore it down. Speaker 1: Now was it--there's a story associated with that of a young brother that was shot in front of it, right over in a gang--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I, I, that I don't know. I'm not familiar with that, but I'm sure a whole assortment of different things happened there. And when people start doing those kinds of things, it's likely to happen anywhere. I would say, if it did, I would chance to say it probably was not related to the mural in as much as it was related to the disharmony within the community-- Speaker 1: Yeah, they were-- Speaker 2: --that-- Speaker 1: --I think there was a rivalry between two gangs over what-- Speaker 2: Yeah, well, you had-- Speaker 1: --turf--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --the Blackstone Nation and the-- Speaker 1: --whose turf the wall was on-- Speaker 2: Right, yeah. Speaker 1: --(unclear)-- Speaker 2: So yeah, so it really--and, and, and, and at some particular small point in the life of the mural, some folks, as I understand it, 'cause I wasn't there, tended to try to find a way to make, make some money out of it, in the sense of people coming they gotta pay to look at it and that kind of thing. So that might be what that friction came out of, in which is completely 360 degrees [sic] away from what, what this was about. But then, again, that speaks to the deterioration of the moral fiber of the community with regard to, if you will, progress, a progression or evolution, evolving onwards. Story_ID: 136490 Speaker 1: Now I wanna ask you about something else too about Chicago [Illinois], 'cause this is such a rich period of time. I know you're probably saying why, when is he gonna get off of this, but-- Speaker 2: Mm-mm. Speaker 1: --but the Afro-Arts Theater-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --takes place in Chicago during this-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --time. [HM] Phil Cohran and-- Speaker 2: (Unclear)--Phil Cohran, and he's still kicking it. Speaker 1: --all these artists, poets, visual, everybody's participating in-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --Afro-Arts Theater-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --for about a year and a half or something. Speaker 2: It was actively for about two years, but it sort of dribbled on and you know, had a petering life and continued on, 'cause Phil Cohran is still playing, his, his group, the Pharaohs. But yeah, that was what, it was it was sort of a, it was a coexisting entity similar to the AACM, the Afro-Arts Theater-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--the AACM-- Speaker 2: --with Phil Cohran. Speaker 1: --is? Speaker 2: The Af--the Association for the Advancement of Creative Musicians. So, like the Art Ensemble [of Chicago] comes out of that, Muhal Richard Abrams, you know, Lester Bowie, and you know, Lester Lashley, a, a bassist and a visual artist in Chicago. So, it was both of those entitles existing at the same time. They weren't in competition. They were just different orientations toward what they were doing with music. But they both embraced in the entirety all the other art disciplines, which is the same thing that AfriCOBRA did, you know. We infused the music knew, Muhal, we, I mean, all of this stuff, 'cause Lester was a bass player and a trombone player--he is not was--is a trombone and, and bassist with the AACM. They used to come there and practice in our studio around 71st [Street] and Exchange [Avenue]. So the music, I mean, you know, we, if in a way of speaking, I'm painting or weaving the music, you know, the colors are the sounds. And the colors are the threads I'm using in my tapestries and all of this sort of stuff, or the prints that I'm doing, or the collages. All of this stuff is dictated by the music or the relationship, the symbiotic relationship between the sound, the rhythm, and the color, the pigment, and the image I want to come out from that composition to-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --that community that's receiving it. Story_ID: 136491 Speaker 1: So during this period of time Operation PUSH is going on. You got Communiversity going on at Northeastern [Illinois University, Chicago, Illinois], and-- Speaker 2: You got-- Speaker 1: --I mean all these-- Speaker 2: Hey. Speaker 1: --Lu Palmer [HM Lutrelle "Lu" F. Palmer, II]--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: When you--right. When you have that many different tribes in a little continent called Chicago [Illinois], you will have those many different manifestations, because in a metaphorically speaking way, I see the Afro-Arts Theater, the AACM [Association for the Advancement of Creative Musicians], OBAC [Organization of Black American Culture], you know, all these entities, AfriCOBRA, all as, if you will, tribes, a little-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --or little nations-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --the Top Center [Black People's Topographical Research Center]. So you got all these little independent nations that have this overlapping relationship, you know, and we all grow because of each other. And, and, and some, of course, live longer than others, and that's the nature of families. You know, some members live longer than others and so forth and so on. So, it was one big family of Africans in Chicago at a particular period of time in which a lot of stuff was being born. Or, I should say a lot of stuff was being, was transitioning from its adolescence into its adulthood. Story_ID: 136492 Speaker 1: In terms of that, just speaking about that, I mean, I, I haven't asked you who your, other than high school, I haven't asked you who your mentors were. And did you have a particular mentor at, at Art Institute [of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], and was there, was there any particular mentors amongst the older artists in Chicago [Illinois]? Speaker 2: Yeah, well, you know, Marion Perkins, and [HM] Margaret Burroughs, and Charlie Burroughs [Charles Gordon Burroughs], and [HM] Richard Hunt of course 'cause I knew about him because he had gone to the Art Institute, and he graduated in '55 [1955]. And, and serendipitously I guess you could say, since he graduated in 1955 and won a traveling fellowship from the Art Institute, no other black person had won one until I did in 1971. So, I mean, you know, take that, you know, so those and Etheline [ph.] Henderson, who was a ceramist and [HM] Geraldine McCullough, sculpturist, I mean, you know, all these different people, and Bill Walker [William Walker], and you know, on and on and on. I, those, particularly those who were older than me, I knew about them when I was at the Art Institute. And in our--quote--"activism" at the Art Institute, the handful of black students I mentioned were, that were students there, lobbied the school for--(unclear)--you need to get some black instructors here. And of course, the first thing they say, "We don't know no black artists." Oh, I do, we do. And so we just, we just pull it a lit--you know, we went from Jeff [HM Jeff Donaldson], from Margaret to Jeff. And he was doing his graduate work at Northwestern [University, Chicago, Illinois] then. And of course, they brought Margaret in to teach a class, and that's fine, 'cause we, we done, we're not trying to get the whole door. We just want the doorknob now. We'll get the hinge next, we get this part; we, you know, we move on to the whole thing. And even for the fellowship competition, the way they invite jurors into judge, and we said no, you've got to have some black artists as a part of this jury. You know, you've got black graduates here, so how is it that you cannot--and there are black artists out here, so we gave them a whole list of people. And of course, they, they took [HM] David Driskell--not so much of course, but they took David Driskell 'cause he was the most prominent academic artist out there at the time. This was '71 [1971]. So-- Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: --Driskell came in and was a part of the jury. And so, all of these were people--you know, I knew of, of Aaron Douglas, and I knew of you know, Hale Woodruff, and you know, all these people. And I, and, and I knew about them because of being in, in, in, connected to Margaret Burroughs, you know, and her being the well-spring of information. And at an NCA conference, I mean, you know, Margaret had you by your collar, not by your hand, but by your shirt collar, taking you around saying: well, this is Charles White, this is Elizabeth--(unclear)--this is--(unclear)--you need to sit down here with this person and talk to them, sat us down there, and she'd go off someplace else. So we had to get engaged with these people, so they became my mentors from afar. But the ones who were up close and personal was Margaret, you know. And so, through Margaret, I mean, you know, that was like having a job, being with Margaret, 'cause she put you to work. I mean you had to go to this; you had to do that; you had do this; you had do that, and all, all it was about was giving us the stuff we need to have to go forward, you know. She was committed. And from her level of commitment, which was the same as I was speaking about my high school teachers, it became mine. Like I said, you had to choose not to be an activist if you grew up in Chicago. Story_ID: 137135 Speaker 1: Okay, so, you won the fellowship your senior year at-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, at the Art Institute [of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: --and, and so, so that was part of graduation, I guess. You were going to-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --Europe again. Speaker 2: Well, that was, that was, that's the intent for those fellowships, to allow an art student to go to Europe, particularly that was to Europe, 'cause that was supposed to be where all the real art was-- Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: --or go work with some other--(unclear), I call 'em name-brand artists in the United States, so you can really learn what it's like to really be an artist. Speaker 1: All right, so did you disappoint 'em by-- Speaker 2: No, I took the fellowship. I got an invitation from Claire Zeisler, who was a very well-known textile artist, heiress to the Florsheim [Shoe] fortune, has done some extraordinary work in the general area known as crafts, but in particularly in textiles. And what was so interesting, I really didn't know Claire Zeisler's work at that time. But the pieces I mentioned that I did based on the Maasai hairstyle from Kenya were very closely related to the kind of work she was doing, which also was inspired by all these different African and other third world cultures. And she, of course, was prominent in the art circles in Chicago [Illinois]. She came to the graduation and the fellowship ceremony and all the rest of that and offered me a, asked me if I'd like to come and, and work with her at her studio. And I, of course, said wonderful, for sure, you know. So that's the kind of thing the fellowship winning opens you up to. So, oh, maybe a few weeks or a month or so later--I forget exactly how much longer, but I, I went to her studio, which was on North Michigan Avenue, far up there, down there where the 'Oprah' [Oprah Winfrey] studios are located now. Speaker 1: So you're saying now she's the heir of the Florsheim-- Speaker 2: Of the Florsheim-- Speaker 1: --shoes? Speaker 2: -fort--that's right. Speaker 1: You know, so many brothers have bought those shoes, and we--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Hey, I'll tell you, we wore them out, brother. Speaker 1: So, her money was really, you know, we-- Speaker 2: There you go. Speaker 1: Yes. We are walking-- Speaker 2: So-- Speaker 1: --in the shoes-- Speaker 2: We were walking, yes. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay, all right. Speaker 2: So, I went up to her studio, and we had coffee, and we talked, and we sat around and you know, in an exchange 'cause she was a much older woman than myself. And I respect, and she was my elder. And we were talking, and so I--we finally got around to, I said well, If I'm gonna share a studio, we a studio, how, how does that happen? She says well, I want, I've got, I'll do with my drawings, and you're going to execute these. I said how do you mean execute them? I mean, I'm not gonna be doing my work? She said no, you're gonna actually be making my work. So she had all these other young artists, and then they all, they were making her work. It was the apprentice system. I understand that. But I wasn't coming there to be an apprentice. I was coming there to do my work. And so I said thank you, but no thank you, and I left. And Lester [Lashley], Murry DePillars, Raah Bird, Arnold Barnes [ph.], and Thomas Wickes [ph.], we rented us a studio on 71st [Street, Chicago, Illinois] and Exchange [Avenue], which we named it Ankh Studio, A-N-K-H. And we painted on the window a big Egyptian ankh. And I took my fellowship money, and I went to 71st and Exchange and started making my work, 'cause I was not inclined to go work for somebody else. I wasn't looking for a job. I was looking for a studio and a relationship between a senior, elder, respected artist whose craft and skill is similar or something I would aspire to that I could get something from it. I didn't come here for a job, so-- Story_ID: 137136 Speaker 1: Well, I, okay, so, now, Ankh Studio [Chicago, Illinois], now this is interesting because this speaks to this persistent notion that black people have something to do with the biggest African civilization of all time, Kemet [Egypt]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So, so is that, that, that was, was that something that was commonly on people's minds in, in, in the seventies [1970s] or, or, or-- Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely-- Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: --absolutely, you know, because during that period of time, in the late, late sixties [1960s] on up to about '73 [1973] or '74 [1974] I mean, you know, within the artists who would come together every year at the NCA [National Conference of Artists] conferences, you would just have just a profusion of works that were just em--had all these hieroglyphic and otherwise symbols just meshed into the works, you know, whether they were doing crafts or whether they were doing paintings, or prints, or sculpture, you know, you name it, those, the, the, it was there. And so the aspect of African aesthetics, African visual form being utilized by artists in the [African] Diaspora was, I guess you could say people couldn't get enough of it. But, on the one hand, people just took it carte blanche and replicated it. And then others investigated it, and infused it, and married it into what they did, you know. So, you had those basically sort of two camps: people who just simply used the image in the aspect which sometimes accuse some of the artists from the Harlem Renaissance as simply just putting up an African sculpture into the painting that they did of this setup that I have here and just put a, a little Ibeji doll right here or something like that. But still, that's valid, you know, because what it does, it introduces another element of one's history and ancestry, even if you're just putting it in as an object in the still life or in the composition. You have to engage it at another level. Speaker 1: It raises the question, what is doing there? Speaker 2: You're right, what's it doing, not just what is it doing there; what is it doing to you as you got it in the studio to make it, put it into the work? Now, the energy that created it and that comes out of it is still there. It didn't disappear, 'cause whoever took it from the place where it was and made it available for you to have it in the place where you have it. So, that aspect of Africa's ancient and present history was actively engaged by artists at that time, every artist. Story_ID: 137137 Speaker 1: So Ankh Studios and AfriCOBRA artists were primarily there or was it--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: No, no, actually the only AfriCOBRA artist that was at Ankh Studio was myself, and later on Murry became a part of, became, became a member of AfriCOBRA. But-- Speaker 1: He was independent. Speaker 2: --Murry, Murry DePillars. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Murry DePillars and I were the only two in Ankh Studio. The other four artists, we were just all friends and colleagues together, Lester [Lashley] and Raah Bird, well, actually, all, all of us. We were, we were students at the Art Institute [of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] together. And so when we graduated, 'cause Raah Bird graduated the year before us, and we graduated after that in '71 [1971], and so we just all, we knew we needed to have a place to work. Speaker 1: Raah Bird, I think it was the first time he's been mentioned in our interviews. He's somebody that we know very well in Chicago [Illinois]-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah, the Bird. Speaker 1: --spelled R-A-A-H-- Speaker 2: Yeah, you're right. Speaker 1: --then B-I-R-D. Speaker 2: B-I-R-D, rare bird. We used to call him rare bird, you know, but-- Speaker 1: Formerly Robert Lewis [ph.]--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right, formerly Robert Lewis, right. And, and he was also a textile artist. And so he and I had this other kind of, you know. When I got to the Art Institute [of Chicago, Illinois], and he was already down there taking classes, say well, who are you, and where--you know, I said what. Who am I? I'm Napoleon, and who are you? And we, you know, we've been tight every since then, you know, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, I think he's in Ghana now--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --time, yeah. So, so this is 71st [Street, Chicago, Illinois] and Exchange [Avenue]. Now for some reason, now-- Speaker 2: You got Exchange and South Shore [Drive]. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: South Chicago run into each other there, Yates [Boulevard] and Exchange, right where the south--where the South Shore Country Club is, right there at that intersection, that building that takes a V shape, right at the, the commuter rail station [South Shore, Metra Electric District]. The commuter rail station actually faces it. If you're standing on it, you are fa--and it's a two-story building there; you will face where our, our studio used to be. We had the whole second floor, which was about maybe five thousand square feet. And we had a small storefront that was downstairs, and which is where we had, we would have work for sale and all that sort of thing. Story_ID: 137138 Speaker 1: It seems to me that--now I came to Chicago [Illinois] late '70s [1970s], but by the time I got there, South Shore was like firmly established as kind of a cultural-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --center for--AACM [Association for the Advancement of Creative Musicians] was there-- Speaker 2: Right, right, everybody, yeah. Speaker 1: --a lot of-- Speaker 2: (Coughing)--'Cause I think by that time they had taken the South Shore Country Club into the Chicago Park District. Speaker 1: That happened in '84 [1984]. Speaker 2: In '84 [1984]? Speaker 1: In '84 [1984], yeah. Speaker 2: And when did you come there? Speaker 1: In '77 [1977]. Speaker 2: Seventy-seven [1977], okay, because see-- Speaker 1: There's a few more years before that was--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right, because it was a long, it was a long battle because the, the Nation of Islam offered to buy it from 'em. And they said no, we'll never sell it; we'll, we'll sit here and let it rot. And it sat there for all those years unused, until finally, something happened where the city, it got, you know, into the coffers of the city. Speaker 1: Yeah, cultural center, South Shore Cultural Center, now they call it, the former country-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --club was on-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --the lake, the beautiful beach-- Speaker 2: Right, oh, it was right on the lake. Speaker 1: --and lakefront property-- Speaker 2: Right-- Speaker 1: --you know, golf course-- Speaker 2: --'cause they had a golf course. They had a riding stable out there. They had all this stuff. I mean it was--and they being they had this out there. And when they were ready to move because the come--South Shore had become more black than it was white, and the Nation said well, we'll buy it, they weren't that interested in moving (laughter). Speaker 1: (Unclear)--Muhammad Ali was a neighbor of the-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --country club. He lived about-- Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: --down the street I think, yeah--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: And I used to sell his first wife [Sonji Roi] shoes when she used to buy shoes when I was working, I was at the Art Inst--just before I started at the Art Institute [of Chicago] I was a shoe salesman at Chandler's Shoes downtown, Sonji. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: When him and her came in, and I was in, and they came and she said oh--(unclear)--and walking past all of the salesman. They all looking, 'cause I was a junior sales part time. They trying to figure out--and I never seen anybody--(unclear)--that man's got a big hand. 'Cause I shoot his hand, man, my hand just disappeared up in there. And sittin' there looking; I said man, no way I would come up against you in any ring or out in an open field without running in the other direction. Yeah, so, yeah, that was a interesting time-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --interesting time. Speaker 1: --'cause South Shore kind of develops like a cultural kind of identity. It didn't get, I don't it's fully developed. But it's, it, it is a cultural identity--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, it is. It's, it's, it's a, it's sort of mixed. It's such a big area. You've got little pockets of stuff, you know. And the real estate landscape has changed so much. Story_ID: 137139 Speaker 1: So and you started teaching too at this time, after you graduated-- Speaker 2: Yeah, in '71 [1971] I started teaching at Malcolm X Community College [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Okay, now that's on the West Side. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's on the West Side right near the Dan Ryan [Expressway]. Speaker 1: Now is this when Charles Hurst was the president? Speaker 2: Yeah, when Charles Hurst, when he left Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] and came--well, I don't whether he left Howard or got ran out, whichever, when he came from Howard to, to, to Malcolm X Community College. Speaker 1: He was an interesting figure, Charles Hurst. Speaker 2: Oh no, he was, he was, he was a very interesting brother, and he was the appropriate person for Malcolm X Community College too. And recently, in the last year or so, I was just over there 'cause I wanted to see if the doors that Gene Eda [Eugene Eda] painted, the doors going into the auditoriums, these big huge, I think they're about twelve-foot-high doors, about five feet wide each, painted these beautiful murals on them, and that was during the time that I was there. He and Bill Walker pained those, and they, they're still there, you know, so they're still up--but yeah, Charles Hurst, little Charles Hurst. Speaker 1: Yeah, Malcolm X Community College, part of the system. I was really shocked to find that there was a community college named after Malcolm X or anything-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: --and, and you know. Speaker 2: Well, all other in New York [New York City, New York] that I know of. But, I mean it was, it was, it, it happened because of the moment, 'cause if that college had been built [sic, renamed from Theodor Herzl Junior College] any other time, that wouldn't have happened. But that was a pivotal point, that there was no way that Mayor [Richard J.] Daley could not acquiesce to the college being named as we wanted it to be named, because at that time, I think that was the most recently built junior college [sic]--college in the junior college system. And so, if it's new, it's gotta have a name. It's built over here on the West Side. Who's populating the West Side? So, you know, you're gon' have to deal with this. Speaker 1: Yeah, this is right after the riots. Speaker 2: Right, right after riots. Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--on the West Side was really devastated-- Speaker 2: Right, yeah--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --West Side being kind of a distinct part of Chicago, a black community-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --distinct from the Southside community. Speaker 2: Distinct, right, two, two black populations but distinctly full black community; there's a west side and south side, and you know, differently than [Woodrow] Wilson Junior College now is called Kennedy-King [College, Chicago, Illinois], you know. So, it wasn't about naming it one thing and renaming it later. That was its name from the beginning [sic]. And I think a part of the other mix was that I, if I'm not mistaken, that's a Mies Andero [sic]--[Ludwig] Mies van der Rohe's building-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --architect. And he was the preeminent European architect brought to the U.S. or immigrated, however he got here, IIT [Illinois Institute of Technology, Chicago, Illinois] and all the rest of that, the new, the Chicago architectural, you know, paradigm. Speaker 1: (Unclear)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: And so--yeah, just glass-- Speaker 1: --use metal and glass-- Speaker 2: --and steel-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --glass and steel. And I guess it was, you know, for them it was an affront to be naming [Ludwig] Mies van der Rohe building after the firebrand Malcolm X. But hey, no, it wasn't the firebrand. He was a brother who was full of himself and full of his people. And if this college was gon' be here in the midst of his people, who better to name it for? You know, so. Story_ID: 137140 Speaker 1: Okay, so, well, how did you enjoy teaching [at Malcolm X College, Chicago, Illinois]? I mean did you like-- Speaker 2: Loved it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Loved it, because every class, I learned more out of teaching there than I could taught, could teach, could taught, could teach, because at that time you had quite a large number of brothers coming back from the Nam [Vietnam War]. You had all of the youngsters from the West Side [Chicago, Illinois]; the Black Panther Party with, with Fred Hampton and Mark Clark and all those folks. They were a regular on the campus; the cultural entity in terms of music, and dance, and the visual arts; and the political, social, cultural dialogues that used to take place in the classes like Duke Jenkins, Ulysses Duke Jenkins, who used to teach a class, anthropology class. He was an extraordinarily brilliant brother, a dramatist, an actor, scholar, lived for a great amount of his early life, early adult life, in Germany, spoke fluent German, Swahili, taught there, principally responsible for me getting there. Our, our classes, for the most part, beyond the subject matter of what you were there to teach, always found itself grounded in the contemporary circumstance of whatever that subject might be. And it was taught from the perspective of looking at life experiences as a valid aspect of the academic process. So when we're teaching social studies, these brothers talking about their experiences in Vietnam, or in an art class, doing works that depicted some experience, or some feeling, or emotion, or something related to their situation in the Nam, was integral to the whole educational atmosphere at Malcolm X Community College. And it, and, and, and, and the education didn't take place in the classroom. It took place in the classroom, and the class continued outside the door, in the lobby, you know, in the auditorium, outside on the benches or wherever, or you--if it wasn't a class coming in, scheduled for that room next or next couple of periods, nobody left. We just, you were just in there; that was your space until the next class had to come in. And it just, it was, it was, it was a dynamic environment, you know. And it was a place where people were able to develop relationships that are lifelong, 'cause many of the people who came there are still connected, you know. And it was a, it was an experience that I would daresay doesn't exist there when I visited there a year ago. It was just sort of like a building with people who come in here taking classes. There was no energy. I mean, the guards, they didn't even realize the doors, those paintings [by Eugene Eda] were even on the doors. I mean you can't help but see 'em; I mean they're as, as big as the, the, I mean it's a huge, they're huge doors. But the degree of engagement with the college, and what its name stands about and for, and what the institution was at that time and/or could and should be even today, just not even there. I mean the guard, they sit there. The students, they come there to get their little degrees and whatever else they're there for. And I asked several students, as I was walking around to the office they sent me to, to get permission to actually take photographs of the doors, nobody know what I was talking about. And I had to point it out to a couple. I said the doors right here--oh, you mean, oh, those, and oh. And so it's just I mean, from that time to this time, it's, it's just a building. Speaker 1: Yeah, there's a discon, there's a big disconnect-- Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely-- Speaker 1: --I mean it takes--it takes continuous kind of education. Story_ID: 137141 Speaker 1: Some of the other artists I was thinking of, people, when you mentioned Raah Bird, I was thinking of other people that had not been mentioned in this process, and one, you know, people like Beni Casselle, Omar Lama-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah, Omar Lama-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right, yeah, I just talked-- Speaker 1: --Marva Jolly [HM Marva Lee Pitchford-Jolly]-- Speaker 2: --said Omar--(unclear)--yeah. Speaker 1: I mean we can't name-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --them all-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: But I think these, you know, it's, Omar Lama-- Speaker 2: Yeah-- Speaker 1: --especially was like-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --contributed a lot of-- Speaker 2: Omar Lama contributed a lot, and he's a very unique individual in the sense that, I just call him a magician of the line, 'cause he worked magic with that line. That's all he ever did, was line drawings. I've got several of 'em here. And he exhibited with us in our first exhibition at the Studio Museum [in Harlem, New York]--we, with us being AfriCOBRA--in New York in 1970--'71 [1971]. Yeah, O, Omar Lama was--is a very interesting, he's an interesting person period, irrespective of the art thing, a very, if you will, spiritual person, you know, or he likes to walk in his, in his, he puts himself only in his own aura, intersects with everybody else, but he's, you know, he's Omar Lama. That's an entity in and of itself. Speaker 1: Right, I mean and-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --did you know Mineral Bromletter [ph.]? Speaker 2: Oh, Mineral Bromletter? Mineral Bromletter, the artist of calligraphy, with his long braid. Oh, Mineral Bromletter used to come by the [Ankh] Studio all the time over there on 71st [Street, Chicago, Illinois] and--no, that brother was very special. And we used to have long conversations, and I used to talk to him about, I said man, how do you come up with a name, Mineral Bromletter? Yeah, and he never would, he never said why or how. But he was the most open spirit, you know. I mean he was, I mean, in a way you could say he was Buddha walking, you know, or Orisha walking, walking the earth. He was just--and, and the skill he had with calligraphy, man, I mean you, you just--I mean anything--I've got several pieces upstairs, but any--if he wrote, made a mark on a surface and gave it to you, you treasured it; you didn't wanna use it for what it was it was supposed to be for. And if it was an invitation, you didn't wanna send the invitation out; you just wanted to keep it. It was just--yeah, Mineral Bromletter, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, these are some interesting people. I mean when you-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --think of--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: And Ed Foo [ph.], you remember Ed Foo? He was a brother that worked in wire. He, very--if you know Raah Bird, Ed Foo would be Raah Bird's twin, but he works in wire. And-- Speaker 1: Was he the one that do the crowns-- Speaker 2: The crowns, right. Speaker 1: --out of wire crowns, right. Speaker 2: The wire crowns, right. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: That's Ed Foo. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Then you had Babatunde [ph.], who did the jewelry-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --and a sister named Oshun [ph.], who just recently passed not-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --couple of, few years back. Speaker 1: I think Mineral passed-- Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: --a few years ago too. Speaker 2: Yeah, and-- Story_ID: 137142 Speaker 1: Doug Williams. Speaker 2: Doug Williams, okay. Speaker 1: Douglas Williams. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But we call him Doug William, yeah. So, yeah, there, there, you know, and, and sher--not sher, but Sherman Beck, of course, but there was Ben Bey and [Luther] Kush Bey. You remember them? It's never, well, at least I don't remember it being clear whether they were actually brothers, 'cause there was a point that people said they were actually sibling brothers, but there was, Ben Bey was always of the espousal that know he was not connected to Kush Bey 'cause Kush Bey tended to always have, he was in and out of the judiciary system all the time. And Ben Bey was, you know, so, so whatever. But they-- Speaker 2: 'Cause Calvin [B.] Jones--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Calvin, oh yeah, C. J., without question. I'm glad you-- Speaker 2: Mitchell Caton--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Oh yeah, Mitchell Caton and Calvin, they were just-- Speaker 2: --murals-- Speaker 1: --sort of like Siamese twins almost, I mean those two brothers, most definitely, yeah. C. J., we called him C. J., and Brother Caton, yeah, those are two very, very strong--(unclear)--and very much a part of AfriCOBRA in the sense of being very close to all of us but never being a member. Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: You know, they're with these-- Speaker 2: --this is something you're telling me that I assume they had been members of AfriCOBRA when I heard about it, but I, but I'm hearing something different. Speaker 1: No-- Speaker 2: I know they, they're responsible for murals all over-- Speaker 1: Oh-- Speaker 2: --the city-- Speaker 1: --murals all over the place and their sensibility, they embraced our sense of aesthetic and our principles. But C. J. and Caton personally just weren't about being a part of a group. You know, they just like, they (cough), they hang with the group, they be with the group, but they're not--(unclear)--interested in being a, a member or a part of the group, 'cause everything we did as AfriCOBRA they were always up in the middle of it anyway, you know. And we always hung together. And when we had exhibitions they were always there. When they had exhibitions we were there. If they're working on a mural we worked with 'em and da-da, da-da, da, you know, we being one or the other of us not necessarily the whole group. But, yeah, those, those two brothers right there I think, beyond Bill Walker and Eugene Eda, put the four of them together, they are the major muralists in Chicago. I mean they've-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --they've painted the city. Speaker 2: And Calvin Jones is really--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, Calvin Jones-- Speaker 2: --and Mitchell Caton. Speaker 1: --and Mitchell Caton, and Bill Walker, and Eugene Eda. Eugene and, and, and, and Eda, and William Walker sort of worked more or less together, and Caton and C. J. worked a lot together. So they, they had this sort of relationship, yeah, two, two very, very powerful brothers. Speaker 2: This is a vibrant art community in, in-- Speaker 1: Oh, absolutely. Speaker 2: --the '70s [1970s]. Story_ID: 137143 Speaker 1: So, so you were at Malcolm X [College, Chicago, Illinois] from '71 [1971] until-- Speaker 2: Seventy-one [1971] to seventy--actually, just for a academic year, 'cause then I went up to Northern Illinois University. Speaker 1: Okay, this is in DeKalb, Illinois. Speaker 2: In DeKalb, Illinois, out there in the cornfield where the, they invented barbed wire. Speaker 1: Right, [Joseph] Glidden (unclear)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Mm-hmm-- Speaker 1: --products and-- Speaker 2: Yep, yep, yep. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: All the corn. Speaker 1: Yes, yeah, so, well, so, so you, did, so you were teaching there--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: No, I wasn't teaching. I went up there as a graduate student-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and studied under my Mahboob Shahzaman, who was a Pakistani woman, just an extraordinary human being but just a simply great person in terms of textile arts and textile arts from Pakistan in particular, 'cause she always wore saris. She never dressed in any other kind attire other than saris, and she was immaculate, 'cause she actually came from the very high royal family there in Pakistan at some, she's a part of it in somewhere. Speaker 1: Can, can you spell her name for us? Speaker 2: Mahboob is M-A-H-B-O-O-B, if I have that correctly; Shahzaman is S-H-A-Z-M-A-N [sic], I believe it is. Story_ID: 133448 Speaker 1: All right, so, so you're at Northern Illinois [University, DeKalb, Illinois]--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, at Northern Illinois I spent a couple of years up there doing graduate studies, and, and a job opportunity to teach at Mass College of Art [Massachusetts College of Art and Design, Boston, Massachusetts] came up. And I opted to leave DeKalb, come back to Boston--I mean come back to Boston--come back to Chicago [Illinois]. And I got married [to Annette Jones], and I, two or three days later, we packed up everything in the car, and I came to Boston to teach at Mass College of Art. Speaker 1: Now we gotta back up a little bit to-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) I thought that was a fast trip for you. Speaker 1: --now, now, yeah, the marriage, now, now this is a very, this is important, so-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --you know. How did you meet your wife, and, and how did you know she was the right one, and-- Speaker 2: Well, oh, okay, I'll tell you. I met her through one of my buddies, AfriCOBRA buddies, Nelson Stevens. Nelson was teaching at Northern Illinois University. Actually, he got his job at Northern through coming to a CAA [College Art Association] conference and a conversation he and [HM] Jeff Donaldson were having at the CAA conference, if I remember correctly. And the position was open, and he went up there and made application and got the job. So he was teaching there, teaching art, painting and drawing. And the woman I married, I met--she was one of his students he brought to an NCA [National Conference of Artists] conference. And he introduced me to her, or maybe I asked him to introduce me to her. I'm not sure which way it went, but he and always talk about this. And so during the two years that I knew her while she was a student at Northern with Nelson, him coming back and forth to Chicago. And when he'd come, sometimes he would bring her, 'cause she was from Chicago as well. She'd ride with him and so we got to know each other rather well. And when I was deciding to come to Boston for this job, we were very tight. I asked her, I said well, you wanna come, you wanna come with me? She says well, yeah, but we gotta get married. I said okay, that's cool. I said because I had asked her earlier to, to get married, and she didn't wanna do it. And I said well, I'm not gonna ask you again. I, you know, so, we can keep this relationship; it's cool, and we're going forward. And, and, and so, when it got to leaving Chicago and coming here, so we got married, beautiful--I still, I have a film of it. A friend of mine--oh God, these names, man, you know, this is, what, that's '74 [1974], that's thirty-seven, thirty-eight years ago. He was a videographer for WGN-TV [Chicago, Illinois], and he came by. We filmed the wedding. We had a wedding outside in her yard, of which Barbara Jones [Barbara Jones-Hogu] made the robes that we wore. And Babatunde [ph.] made our wedding rings and a wedding bracelet. And we got married, had a big celebration, and packed up a couple of days later, drove on out here to Boston, and next I, we adopted two girls, one [Mamemaeli Di Jones-Henderson] in '75 [1975] and then the next one [Lylana Von Jones-Henderson] in '77 [1977]. And well, they're now both fully grown, doing quite well. I got one granddaughter, as a result of those, one daughter not the two daughters, but because I had two daughters, I got one granddaughter. Story_ID: 133449 Speaker 1: But I had--it was a very good move for me, artistically speaking. And principally, one of the overriding elements that was a factor in my taking it, see, 'cause it was a part-time position, and it was supposed to be just for a year. Speaker 2: Now this is at the University of Massachusetts-- Speaker 1: No, this was at the Massachusetts College of Art [and Design] right here in Boston [Massachusetts]. Speaker 2: Massachusetts College of Art. Speaker 1: Yeah, Mass Art now they call it. And it was in textile weaving, 'cause some students had come to an NCA [National Conference of Artists] conference in Chicago [Illinois]. And of course, Margaret [Burroughs], being that's her hometown, she's making sure that students get to go to all the different art studios around. And a group of students came by our studio--(unclear)--Ankh Studios there on 71st [Street and Exchange Avenue, Chicago, Illinois] And I mean they just say what, you're a weaver? They said we didn't know anybody that weaves, nobody black especially. And they said well, you know, they need a part-time faculty in the weaving department at Massachusetts College of Art where we go to school. And we're trying to get more black faculty. They said would you be interested in coming? I said here, sure. Take this, go back, give it to the dean. And tell 'em to get in touch and send me a ticket and all the rest so I can come out. And they said well, I don't know if they'll do--I said no, this is the way it's done. You give them the information, and the rest will take care of itself. Came out for the interview, and apart, beyond coming out here to be with, one, be a faculty at an art college; be a mentor and an instrumental person as an adult image-maker to students and to respect their requests and they, their concerns, I was right out here where all the wonderful seafood. I'm right here in, where all the textile industries used to flourish, and much of the yarns and all of the raw material I use for my weaving was right here. All I had to do is just go down the street and get it. So I had, all of those things were benefits and blessing. And so, we got up, and we came here, got a studio at a big old factory building that subsequently, it didn't burn down. It, it did burn down, but it was set on fire by the owner, who was involved with all of that urban renewal, buying up buildings and getting that government money to redevelop 'em but never did. And then subsequently running up on this house [Edward Everett Hale House, Roxbury, Boston, Massachusetts] a year after getting here, and so this is where I've been for thirty-eight years pretty much-- Story_ID: 133450 Speaker 1: Now say something about this house [Edward Everett Hale House, Roxbury, Boston, Massachusetts]. This is an interesting place. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, it's an interesting place, alright. People say wow, I really like it. I say well, let me give you a dust rag. And you get to having to dust all these fourteen rooms and all the stuff in here, you won't be so happy about coming here. But, as I was sharing earlier with Matthew [Hickey], as an artist, one of the major things that artists, if you're really passionate about it and pursue it, and especially when you're a young artist, you always find that you get a studio. And you're always getting these studios and these cheap run-down old places that, you know, all the artists end up coming there. And after a while, you've done all these creative things to make this thing the shi-shi, pooh-pooh [ph.] place to be. And that time the realtor says oh, wow, you've increased my value. Now we're gon' rent it to the people who wants to, who wanna live in the arts community in the studios. And the rents go up exponentially, and the artists are pushed out 'cause you can't afford it--(unclear). So coming here, you know, and also coming out of the family I come out of, 'cause my family, they have always owned, they, they believed in owning their own, from the land, to the house, to the job, to the everything. So I come out of the ethos of owning, you know. So, we had the studio, beautiful studio, but the building wasn't going to be developed. It was just there. The guy was sucking money off. And after the first couple of months, there were some fires all of a sudden happening in the building. The fire department comes. They can't get in the building 'cause the fire doors are locked and all these other kind of crazy--it was a huge, huge, huge building, one of the Industrial Revolution buildings that had multiple factories, and they had an artesian well that ran underneath. It had a spa down in the basement that generated its own electricity, because there's a, brook called Stony Brook that runs under the, under the ground here up in this area. And it turned the turbine that furnished electricity for this entire building, that which would cover two blocks in one direction and five blocks in another direction, and it was six stories high. So that's a massive structure. So, I, you know, you know I come from Chicago [Illinois], and I, I, I know the signs of how people set up stuff to get the insurance. I was the artists, I said look here, man, this guy is gon' burn this building down, you know. I'm going, and with all this and--(unclear)--at that time when I moved here in '74 [1974], half, I would say a third of the housing stock in Boston [Massachusetts] was completely vacant. Nobody was living there. It was just here vacant. And up here in this area, Highland Park [Roxbury, Boston, Massachusetts], if there were a hundred people up here, the only number--if it, if a hundred people could live up here, there were only five actually living up here. So that's just how much property was up here unlived in by anybody. So I thought, I said well, why not get a couple of these brownstones butted up together, knock the walls out between there, and just open it out, make myself a nice little studio. And so I went about looking for--my wife at the time, Annette [Jones], we went about looking for some structures, 'cause you can buy a building for a thousand dollars, two brownstones, five hundred dollars apiece. You know you can't--I mean you couldn't do that--at the, in the worst condition in Chicago you couldn't find anything for that. So, we scouted around and scouted around, didn't see anything, so I was coming up this particular street over here called Bartlett Street, which is the Bartlett pear is named after it, 'cause that's where it was propagated, right there. And as we were coming up the hill, and this thing is sitting up on top of there, as you come up a hill, you know, it sort of looks like it's rising up out of the hill. And I come up and I'm looking at this Greek revival mansion sittin' here looking like--'cause this is the exact same architectural format as the White House in [Washington] D.C. I come up, I see these columns sitting here and this Greek revival structure sitting here, and I'm just saying wow, that is fantastic. It's big enough to house my studio and everything else, but I'm sure whoever owns it wouldn't want to sell it. So that was the last building we saw. Went back to my studio over in the old factory, talking to a friend of mine, Camille Hildebrand [ph.], who was a ceramists, and she said did you have any luck? I said no, we didn't really find anything, but you know, we'll go back out and look again tomorrow. So she said I have a friend who's been trying to sell her house--and this was in August--and she's leaving in September whether she sells it or not. She's just leaving. I said well, then let's go look at it. We got right back in the car, came right back to this house. I looked at it. I said now, you--I said Camille, this was the last building I saw coming back to the studio. And we said to each other that whoever owns it wouldn't want to sell it--'cause we saw some repairs that were necessary, but that was just cosmetic stuff--and you would bring us right back here. Talked to the sister who owned the house, told her, I said look, we got five grand in the bank, but it's after hours. I can't get it till tomorrow. I want the house. Tomorrow morning I'll go to the bank. I'll give you this money. I need a week or two to go back to Chicago to work out getting the rest of this money with the rest of my family and friends. I went back with my bucket and had everybody put ever, whatever they could put in, said, took out a CD [certificate of deposit] against it, paid her the rest of her money, paid off their CDs in five years, and been owning it outright ever since then. And-- Story_ID: 133451 Speaker 1: Little did I know when I bought the house [Edward Everett Hale House, Roxbury, Boston, Massachusetts], that it was a national registered historic monument. It's the former home of Dr. Edward Everett Hale, who was clergy to the U.S. Congress till he died in 1909. Speaker 2: The Unitarian-- Speaker 1: The Unitarian minister. And at, at one point in his earlier life, or earlier in his life, he was in the running to be president of Harvard College, which is now Harvard University [Cambridge, Massachusetts], but he didn't take it. But he's the nephew of Nathan Hale, and all of the Hales that, from the American history, he's a part of that. And his sister--his wife, actually, was the sister of Harriet Beecher Stowe. And up in this same area, just around the corner, a block or so over, was William Lloyd Garrison's house. And all those, this community up here were, was the community where the wealthy lived, because they carved out this area of the city of this area of the land and named it and incorporated it as Roxbury. And that's because of the very peculiar kind of rock that's up here in this area. It's a volcanic rock. And basically houses don't have basements up here because it's a rock foundation right underneath the layer of--(unclear)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--hard to dig-- Speaker 1: You gotta blow it out to put a basement in. So, primarily you don't have all of that. But they moved up here along with all the rest of the wealthy. As they say in their document about establishing the city, they want, they look down on the pastures, and the cows, and the pigs down in Boston. They were tired of being down in the commons, so they-- Speaker 2: So, are these-- Speaker 1: --came up here. Speaker 2: --the people that they call the "Boston Brahmins" up here back in the, in the literature--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: These are some of them, yeah. Speaker 2: --John (Adams ?)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, John Quincy Adams, all of them, yeah, from down there to up here, so it's sort of Beacon Hill down there where the state house [Massachusetts Statehouse] is and the other folks who moved up here. And the people who moved up here were more inclined to be politically different than the Quincy Adams and the other folks down at the, near the state capital. Speaker 2: So is this the more liberal bunch of people-- Speaker 1: Well-- Speaker 2: --or would it be-- Speaker 1: --if you would, if you wanted it-- Speaker 2: --or--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --for that label, yeah, you would say this was the more liberal, the abolitionists, Unitarian, nondenominational, you know, that--what is it--golden pond [sic, Walden Pond]. You know, it was that whole thing. It was--but up here on the hill. And I, finding that out and then doing the back history, come to find out that that's the history of this house. And knowing his relationship with Frederick Douglass, and, and, and Harriet Tubman, [Sojourner] Truth, and you keep naming 'em, I know they all, their feet have been in this house. Story_ID: 133452 Speaker 1: So, after several years of living here [Edward Everett Hale House, Roxbury, Boston, Massachusetts] and having the blessing to have the large body of work that I have, that I've gathered, gathered from gifts or purchases from different artists, friends, and colleagues I know from around the country and around the world for that matter, I've a master, a collection of about 350 original works of art by African and Africa-American, and when I say African-American, I'm talking about North and South America and the Caribbean, artists. And being as engaged in my community as I always have been, there was a big old space, people always gathering here for different kinds of things going on. And one day someone said well, you know, you got this big collection. You need to make this available to the community. And for me, I was just, it was just the stuff I have in my house. It's the artwork I live with. You know, I didn't consider it a collection or anything like that, you know. And after looking at what was said, I said you know, you know, you got a point, and it's consistent with how I live anyway 'cause I'm doing this with all these people who're coming through anyway, so why not put it in some sort of structure? And plus, I got a library of probably about three thousand volumes of different books, and pamphlets, and documents, and things, and I've vociferously collect stuff, you know, brochures, pamphlets, you know, stuff about everything that goes on. And so we've got this library, and we've got this collection of artwork. And so incorporated it in 1979 as the Research Institute of African and African Diaspora Arts, which is, our mandate is to make available to the larger community the collection and body of work that I have through workshops, and tours, and lectures, and social events, and various kinds of other activity that we schedule with churches, schools, and various other social groups and/or just personal friends of mine who want to do things. I've had marriages happen here. I've had a Ghanian weaver, Nana Asante [Frempong], come over and set up his kente cloth loom for two months with a kente warp [ph.] strung out from the front of the house to the back of the house. It's forty feet deep. Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--it's how, how, many, many-- Speaker 1: The house is forty feet deep. Speaker 2: Forty feet? Speaker 1: So he had that warp stretch from the front window all the way to the back. And we had students and church groups and people coming through to the whole month that he was here weaving kente cloth. And so we've had all manner of activities here. We've hosted artists from all around the, the world who have come as a part of, say, the Museum of the National Center of Afro-American Artists [Roxbury, Boston, Massachusetts]. They have an artist over, and either they can stay here or they come here. And we'll have a reception and a dinner or a gathering so that it was an environment where people can come just in general, and they can relax. And it's after the formal art opening or whatever have you at the museum, because I'm a private entity, and they're a public entity. And so the public entities have restrictions they can't do, and I have others I can't. So we balance each other in working, you know, collaboratively in that way. And in '82 [1982], through the suggesting and encouragement of a friend of mine, [Aaron] Ibn Pori Pitts, artist out of Detroit [Michigan], we started an annual Juneteenth [June 19] celebration. So this year would be our thirty-first year of Juneteenth. And the Juneteenth celebration pivots around an exhibition of artwork that takes up the main hallway here and a program that would consist of any number of things, but more often, we'll invite an artist to talk about their work. We'll invite a, someone who's active in the community, a political activist, or poets. We've had Askia, you know, Toure [HM Askia Toure] here, reading and speaking, other dramatists come and do a piece of a play, musicians who come and play, and the general public. We may have as many as two to four hundred people come through over a one day Juneteenth celevation--celebration event. Story_ID: 133453 Speaker 1: As an example, in 1999, that was the year Fern Cunningham created a sculpture that's in the South End [Boston, Massachusetts] of so--of Harriet Tubman. And at the other end of that same little park is the first time the casting of Meta [Vaux] Warrick Fuller's 1919 sculpture entitled "Freedman." That sculpture, 'cause she was the wife of Solomon Carter Fuller, who was the first black psychologist to graduate from Harvard University [sic, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts], back at the turn of the eighteenth century [sic, twentieth century], 1800s, and she was a, an artist, the Victorian period, and of course, you know, the restraints on women's movements and so forth. But that sculpture, her family still lives in Massachusetts, and that particular piece was cast finally in bronze from 1919 to 1999. And that Juneteenth, [June] 19 was on a Saturday, and so that was the day we had the event [at Edward Everett Hale House, Roxbury, Boston, Massachusetts]. So we had Fern Cunningham, who came and talked about the whole process of working with the students at the school and all those other kinds of things that went into her inspiration for creating this sculpture. Barry Gaither [HM Edmund B. Gaither] came and gave a talk about the significance and relevance of Harriet Tubman and presence in Boston and the black community. And Askia [HM Askia Toure] read poetry, and several musician friends of mine were here, and they played music of course. And there were some buildings just around the corner from me here that had been boarded up and abandoned since when I moved here. And they had these four-by eight-plywood enclosure around it, you know, just about twenty-five of these enclosures. And every year since our first Juneteenth, Ibn [Aaron Ibn Pori Pitts] and I used to go around there and paint a mural there. With all the kids and all the people who would come to the Juneteenth celebration, we'd just go around and we'd make this mural. And each year we refurbished the mural. So it was a community mural that was there for about twenty years before they finally redeveloped those buildings, and they tore it down, which I've got portions of it here. As a matter of fact, I was in South Carolina teaching at Benedict College [Columbia, South Carolina] when they finally tore that wall down. And the people who live across the street from it actually collected all of those panels and saved them for me until I got back up here because I didn't know that that was going on. And they knew they had some value to me, and they also had value to them, 'cause that's what they did it. They kept 'em. They said we didn't know whether you were gonna come get 'em. We wanted to keep 'em. So that '99 [1999] Juneteenth was significant in a number of ways: one, Meta Warrick Fuller's sculpture from 1919 had finally been cast in bronze and installed, as she had wished it to be; the Harriet Tubman sculpture was created and inaugurated. And those were the last two pieces in 1999, works put in a public space in the city of Boston, before going into the millennium of 2000. And not only were the last two, but there were of works of an African woman and two pieces of works done by African artists. So, how much more significant can Juneteenth emancipation be, in the sense that someone like Harriet Tubman, who was clearly a pivotal figure in the whole emancipation process as a whole and its legacy, and someone who Meta Warrick Fuller is a part of the legacy of African-American art in the twenty, twentieth century in the United States? You know, I mean that's in Boston, of all places. You know, 'cause when I came here in '74 [1974], they were just starting the busing, desegregation of the schools. And let me tell you, you'd of thought you were down in Birmingham, Alabama in 1963. Story_ID: 133454 Speaker 1: So, to see that kind of spin in the space that happens here, and these are the things that have spun themselves out of this house [Edward Everett Hale House, Roxbury, Boston, Massachusetts], just, you know. So this is how I lived in Boston, so this is how--I mean in Chicago [Illinois], and this is, you know, that's just the way I live, you know. Speaker 2: So it sounds like you, you found a similar community here in Boston and in Chicago. Speaker 1: Well, been working on making a similar community, 'cause this a different political animal here than Chicago. Here, you can--and the quote, Bostonians might wanna jump on me for his, but like I say, it's different than Chicago. I'd say in Chicago you have to choose not to be an activist. In here, you have to make a choice to be an activist, which is-- Speaker 2: It takes a little courage, more courage-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --to do it here, I guess. Speaker 1: Yeah. And you, and, and it it's not so much courage as it, it has to be a mindset. You know, you have to, you have to have, it's a mindset. And this funny thing I found out about Boston, that it's, the bigger picture here is not to minimize race, but it's class. The issue in Boston is a class issue on the backs of the race issue, you know, in terms of looking at the black enslaved population. Because see, New England, they had to abolish slavery laws out of their constitutions. They talk about it as if somehow slavery was only in the South. See, I maintain that the Mason-Dixon Line is not there in Maryland and Pennsylvania, down in there. It's at the Canadian-U.S. border. You know, that's the, that's the real Mason-Dixon Line. When I came here to see--and so you have these early Africans who were here agitating for their humanity from the shackles of slavery and racism and then the importation and invitation of European immigrants, the Irish in particular, into this mix here in Boston. And the friction that was generated and cultivated and continues to exist until today was a class thing. And you've got the Irish, the Italians, the African Americans, Jews, Unitarians, Presbyterians, you name it, all of these, and you got the elite and the working class. And I didn't find that out until I got here that in Boston if you don't, if you're not involved in banking, medicine, or education, you basically don't have employment. There's no industry here, or rather, those are the industries. And that's a volatile mix when you have the base population that for the most part are not plugged into those three industries, because, like myself, I immigrated here. Most of the movers and shakers, Deval Patrick [HM Deval L. Patrick], you know, our governor, you know, Pat Patrick [Lourdine Patrick], his father who's a musician with Sun Ra, you know-- Speaker 2: Did you know him? Speaker 1: --he can--yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: He immigrated here. He sent his son here to go to school here. I mean, you know, so we, we, you know, the folks who, as I've lived here and, and, and met, for the most part, the larger number of those who are, if you will, to use that term, the movers and shakers, they've come here from afar to go to school or whatever have you else and stayed here. Story_ID: 136493 Speaker 1: Okay, I want to go back to an incident that happened at the NCA [National Conference of Artists] conference in Detroit [Michigan]. And I think that's my first--well, I, I think I'd heard your name before. But we were--in fact, I think I was supposed to talk to you. [HM] Haki [Madhubuti] had sent me up there with books from Third World Press. When I got there, we found out that you'd been arrested before the conference started. Now, now tell us about that. This is 1979 in, in Detroit. Speaker 2: Yeah, I think it was '79 [1979] in Detroit. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: At that time I was, I think I was the coordinator of regions or third vice president, one of the two of those. And my very dear friend, E. J. Montgomery [HM Evangeline Montgomery], along with everybody else in the NCA, but E. J., and, and you'll see why I point her out. I landed in Detroit from, from here and was going over to the Cadillac Radisson Hotel [Radisson-Cadillac Hotel, now Westin Book Cadillac Hotel, Detroit, Michigan] where the conference was being held. And I go in and meet and greet and talk to folks and you know: hey, man, what's happening, how you doing, you know, yeah, what's up, da-da-dot. And so Nelson [ph.] says yeah, man, you need to see Edsel [B. Reid]. So I, I went, talked to Shirley [HM Shirley Ann Woodson-Reid] 'cause Edsel wasn't there, his wife, Shirley Reid. I said they told me I need to get in touch with Edsel. What's happening? She said well, you know, we are in, we're doing some murals and some schools and community centers around Detroit while we are having the conference here. And Edsel wants you to come with him over to this school and help with this mural. I said cool. I said let me go upstairs, drop my bags. I went upstairs, put my bag in the room, hollered at E. J. for a minute and was yacking with her, and so, waiting to, for the person who was gon' take us to the school. So they came and just another good brother, a friend of mine, Suria [ph.], out of New York [New York City, New York]. Suria is sort of a spirit-like Mineral Bromletter [ph.] in a way of speaking. Speaker 1: I know him. I met him last summer. Speaker 2: Suria. So Suria and I, we go downstairs. They said they'll meet you outside of the hotel. So we go downstairs, standing outside, just talking, you know: how you been man, what you been doing since last year and all of that, shooting the breeze. And so, all of sudden it's about lunchtime. We, you know, everybody's out for lunch and things like that, and we see these two Detroit cops running up the street toward the hotel lobby. And we're looking, and all the people were standing around looking at 'em rushing through the crowd, 'cause they were trying to figure out what's going on too. And they went into this little drug store, which was on the floor level, ground level of the hotel. So we could say, ah, you know, interesting. So we peeping in to see what's happening, 'cause there was no big stuff going on in there. And we see this cop grab this young teenage brother by the hair. He had this big blown out afro--grabbed him by his hair, and they were dragging him out, he and another officer, dragging him out. And they were just manhandling this kid. And the so we're looking. And so, they had 'em all up against the wall, and they were just, you know, going through their regular police thing. And so all the people just walking by and looking, you know. I mean throngs of black people and throngs of white folks and everybody just lookin'. So, I took the--I said excuse me. I said young man, you okay? 'Cause I mean they were really, you know, jacking him up. And he, he tried to talk, and officer said get away. You don't have anything--are you his father or something? I said yes, I am his father, you know. Well, what--and I said you know, I'm just interested in making sure that his family knows what's going on with him. When you all take him in, then he needs--does he need to contact anybody? And he said well, you just, you know, you have nothing to do, just step back And so I continued to ask the young man. I said look, if you just give me your name. I'll, I'll find out where your people are. And Suria and I were standing there, and so all of a sudden three or four mounted police came up on the horses. And so the next thing we know, he says--they had put the young man in their squad car, and then the officer points back over at us. And so then the cops come over, the rest of the cops come over and grab us, handcuff us, put us in this squad car, and take us down to the, to the jail. Story_ID: 136494 Speaker 1: We get to the [Detroit, Michigan] jail, I say hey man, you know, they gettin' ready to put us in lockup. I said look, I need to make a phone call. I'm entitled to one call. And I think at that time phone calls were still a dime. I don't know. But at any rate, I said I'm entitled to my phone call. So, I call back to the [Radisson-Cadillac] Hotel [Detroit, Michigan], and because I had spoken to E. J. [HM Evangeline Montgomery], I knew her room number. So I got her--the people at the desk to ring the room. And I told 'em, I said look, don't hang this phone up. If she's not in that room, ring Shirley Reid [HM Shirley Ann Woodson-Reid]; ring anybody with the NCA [National Conference of Artists]. Don't just disconnect this call 'cause you can't find E. J. Montgomery. Luckily, she picked up the phone. I said E. J. (laughter), I say you can't guess where Suria [ph.] and I are. She says well, aren't you over at the school with Edsel [Reid]? And somebody bangs on her door telling her that--asking her where we were, 'cause she knows they know that if anybody knew where I was, E. J. would. I say we down here in jail. So all of a sudden they come down to the jail. They get us bailed out. The brother's name, I'm trying to remember, who was an attorney in Detroit. He was a very-- Speaker 2: Not Henry, Milton Henry, nah-- Speaker 1: Nah, what is his name? Speaker 2: Chokwe Lumumba or-- Speaker 1: No, but Chokwe was in his firm. Oh, the name won't come off my tongue right now. But he was, he was one of these, you know, Malcolm [X], you know, Amiri Baraka, you know, kind of brothers. And he came down--he's an attorney--came down to the jail, got us out of there. We went back to the hotel. Next thing we know, Detroit Free Press was down at the conference. They wanted to find out about the two artists that just got arrested for trying to help a young man outside on the street. And so they took us back out, you know, staged the photograph that you saw, which was on the front page of the Detroit Free Press the next morning. All of a sudden we had Councilwoman [Erma] Henderson is her name--I remember that 'cause it's same as mine--who was on the city council. She had sent one of her aides over to the conference to get Suria and I, to bring us down to city hall--to the city council meeting for the city to apologize for the harassment that we had suffered and all the rest of this. And the article in the paper said "Artists come to town to have a conference from all across the country and arrested by police because they thought they were members of the United Auto Workers who were on picket." And so, it was--dah, the brother's name almost came to me--but it was just, all of a sudden the NCA was the biggest ticket in town. Leon Spinks, the good boxing world, Leon came over with his fur coat on and this fur hat. And he, he got, he come over so quickly, he forgot his teeth (laughter). Leon came over. He said man, I had to come and see what this was, with you all on the front of the newspaper. So, it was a spectacular conference that, but it was one of those conferences where, you know, there, in the history of any organization there are particular conferences that-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --have something that just stands out. And to this day, people are always-- Speaker 2: Yeah-- Speaker 1: --asking about that 1979-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I remember. Speaker 1: --conference. Story_ID: 136495 Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, it was a memorable--I mean the conference [National Conference of Artists (NCA) 1979, Detroit, Michigan] itself-- Speaker 2: The conference itself was memorable, but that event just sort of threw it out there in the stratosphere, you know. Speaker 1: I think that the Honeywood Sisters were there--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, Varnette Honeywood-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --and her sister, who was a, a parole officer there in Detroit. I forget her name at the moment. Yeah, 'cause, and Stephanie, her other sister, who was a part of NCA as well-- Speaker 1: And [HM Willis] Bing Davis-- Speaker 2: --Gwen was her sister from Detroit. Speaker 1: Yeah, there, there, it was a quite, it was quite a con, conference--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah, it was, it was-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: That was an extraordinary conference-- Speaker 1: But-- Speaker 2: --and those murals, I guess it be interesting to know if any of 'em still up, you know. So yeah, that was the 1979, you know, magnanimous Detroit Free Press. Speaker 1: Yeah, so it, it kind of inadvertently boosted the conference--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely, absolutely. And it actually made the Detroit chapter and the Michigan chapter of NCA, it boosted their membership and visibility quite extensively, you know. Speaker 1: And I think about like a Jon Lockard [HM Jon Onye Lockard], you know-- Speaker 2: Yeah, Jon, right there at Ann Harbor [Michigan]. Speaker 1: --on a (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right, yeah. Speaker 1: --prominent artist there--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh, very much so. Speaker 1: Yeah, and the brother [HM Tyree Guyton] who does the, the-- Speaker 2: Oh, the houses? Speaker 1: Yes-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I know who you're talking about. Speaker 1: Right, right, right, that's him-- Speaker 2: I can't think of his name all of a sudden, in Germantown [Detroit, Michigan] over there. Speaker 1: Yeah, I know it's, I know his name. Yeah, on-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I, I-- Speaker 1: --(unclear)-- Street. Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I, it just won't roll. Speaker 1: Heidelberg [Project]-- Speaker 2: Heidelberg, right, (unclear)--something-- Speaker 1: I interviewed him, but I can't-- Speaker 2: --something Heidelberg, right. Speaker 1: I'm, I'm trying to think of his name. I, I know it, but--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I can't think of what his first name is, Heidelberg is, is--(unclear)--yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, Heidelberg Project, right? Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: I mean on Heidelberg Street on the east side there. Yeah, people come from all over the world to see that. Speaker 2: Yep, it's, it's similar to the Watts Towers out in [Los Angeles] California, you know. Story_ID: 136496 Speaker 1: So, so during the '80s [1980s] here now, you were at University--I mean at MassArt [Massachusetts College of Arts and Design, Boston, Massachusetts] just for a year--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: No, I was, I actually-- Speaker 1: --right? Speaker 2: --I ended up, the political battle of staying at MassArt, I was there until, I was there for four years. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And after four years, I just had it with 'em, doing battle with them, and just simply really wanted to get more into my work, studio work. And I was doing a lot of workshops and residences all around the country at different colleges and universities. And so I really needed more time to do that. And it paid better, and it was more what I wanted to do anyway. And it didn't have the hassle of Mass College of Art. But after leaving Mass College of Art, I subsequently did teach at Emerson College [Boston, Massachusetts] and at Roxbury Community College [Roxbury, Boston, Massachusetts] and did, you know, residences and fellowships at various colleges and universities as visiting professor here and there-- Speaker 1: What are the-- Speaker 2: --or visiting artist. Speaker 1: --sort of the, the, the, your favorite assignments I mean, you know, for-- Speaker 2: I would say, actually, the last one that I finished with, and I say that with mixed description of blessing, but very memorable, in 1999, I was actually in Chicago [Illinois] visiting with my family. And I was planning on going to South Africa 'cause I had had work in 1995 I think it was or '96 [1996] as a part of the first [International] Print Biennale of artists, printmakers in South Africa since the abolition of apartheid and since the boycott of artists around the world and exhibiting anywhere in South Africa until apartheid was abolished. And I was coming back to Boston to get my things in order to then fly to South Africa 'cause I had some friends who had moved to South Africa. And a number of the Free South Africa Movement South African brothers and sisters lived up here in this community with me. And their children and my children grew up together, and they and I were all engaged in many activities together. As I was going over to see them, Tempe Villacasi [ph.] one in particular, and a friend of mine, I'd just helped him move to, from Boston to Columbia, South Carolina. He took the position as director of the gallery at Benedict College, which is across the street from Allen University [Columbia, South Carolina], which are two HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities] there in South Carolina. And so, he called me and said hey, man, I just talked to the president and showed him your stuff. And he'd like for you to come down here as a visiting professor and teach printmaking, and weaving, and art history, and art appreciation. I said hey, man, I'm on my way back to Boston. I'm heading to South Africa. I said now--he said no, no, no, no, no, I want you to speak to him. So I spoke to him, and I told him, I said well, you know, doc, Dr. Ben Swinson [sic, David H. Swinton], Swinton, I said I'm on my way out of here now to the airport. I will be leaving Boston tomorrow. I said now, if you don't call me back by 10:00 so we can discuss it, not 10:05, 10:15, not CP time--I'm talking about the real Eastern Standard Time 10:00--if I don't hear from you by then, I'm gone. 9:55, the phone rang, talked to him. He said what he had to say, and I told him, I said well, you know, I'll come. I said I'll come for three years. They were trying to really develop their art department and really trying to put this thing together, which that was what I was told, and that's what I believed, so. And my partner had just gone down there, Tyrone Geter. So, I said that's a nice, nice fit, warm weather, HBCU, and I always did, I, I always wanted to teach at an HBCU full time before I fully left teaching. And so I said well, you know, the stars line up on your arc the way they do. You either deal with 'em or you don't, so I went down there. And I was there for just about ten years. I left for a couple of years and went up to Baltimore [Maryland] to get a M.F.A. [degree] in interdisciplinary arts at Maryland Institute College of Art. And teaching at an HBCU was quite an experience. It was everything I had hoped for, and it was a little whole lot of other stuff I had never, I had no idea was or is. Story_ID: 136497 Speaker 1: But the, the thing that troubles me the most is that--and when I was going down, I have a couple of friends that live around here [Boston, Massachusetts] who had graduated from Benedict College [Columbia, South Carolina] actually. One's a dentist and another just an academic friend, and they were just pleased as punch about me going down to Benedict. And they talked about when they were at Benedict and so forth and so on. They're about my age. And after my first year there and coming back and talking to them and telling them that hey, what you told me it was when you were there is clearly not what it is now, which is the sad part about the university system across the board, but more specifically to HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities] in terms of the struggle to try to remain in existence, because we had one of our conferences in Dallas, Texas, and that was the last year [1988] that Bishop College [Marshall, Texas] existed. It closed right after we finished the college--I mean the conference. So, HBCUs are struggling, but the struggle is exacerbated by the general education system that is not the preparing students to go to college, and that's when I was teaching at Emerson [College, Boston, Massachusetts], at Mass College of Art [Massachusetts College of Art and Design, Boston, Massachusetts], Roxbury Community College [Roxbury, Boston, Massachusetts]. Students come to college very poorly equipped, white, black, or otherwise. And I am particularly concerned about black students because that's our legacy. And they can all write very quickly in this stuff they use as text language, but they can't write in standard English. And I have students turn in papers--and this is just not at Benedict, but this was at Emerson, everywhere--turn in a paper starting at the top of the page proceeding all the way down the entire page with not one capital letter for any proper noun, or indentation, or paragraph breaks, just words lined up from top to bottom an don't really see--'cause they, you know, made this comment to me: well, I don't see what the problem is. I do. Take the page in your book. Look at the page in your book and look at the, the page you gave me. What is the visual difference you see here? You got indentations for paragraphs; you have spaces between paragraphs; you have, you know, structure between the, you know, through the punctuation mark at the end of the sentence and next. I said so what am I to make of this thing you're handing me, a litany of words that don't communicate anything? You're to communicate something. So, Benedict was a blessing in terms of being able to be in that culture of the, of the black world that I had not had the opportunity to be embraced by-- Story_ID: 136498 Speaker 1: It's clearly a family, 'cause when I moved there [Columbia, South Carolina] in '99 [1999] that was when they were having the big brouhaha around the Confederate flag on the capitol [South Carolina State House]. And since I was the, the new, the new, the new--'cause if you at an HBCU [historically black colleges and universities], everybody's doctor. I don't care if you just have a bachelor's you're a doctor no matter what. If you're teaching, you're a doctor, doctor, doctor, doctor, doctor, and I said you don't get a doctorate in the studio arts. You get an M.F.A. [degree]. That's as far--okay, doctor, we got you. So I had to leave that alone. I was just Dr. Henderson. That was the end of it. So the, in the faculty dining room [Benedict College, Columbia, South Carolina] they asked me, you know, what do, what do you think about this thing about the Confederate flag? 'Cause I had just gotten there, and that had just jumped off that summer. So, I said oh, man, now they startin' this, like what church do you belong to. Where your home church? You know (laughter), you come in you gotta have a home church, who your people, and all the rest of this. So they knew I wasn't from there. They knew I hadn't had a home church yet 'cause I had just gotten there, so they let me go on that one. I said let me ask you a question. I said when did they put this flag on top of the state capitol? Well, that's been up there ever since 1962, when they celebrated a hundred years of the seceding from the Union. I say and you all just saw it? I say well, you asked my opinion. Leave it up there. It's been there since 1962. This is 1999, you know. What's the ruckus? I said it clearly hasn't bothered you. And then within the, the entire battle to get it down, when they finally took it down, would you believe that it wasn't even the South Carolina flag. That was the North Carolina flag [sic] they'd been flying all the time. Speaker 2: Now how was this happen-- Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: --that they were flying a-- Speaker 1: Hey-- Speaker 2: --North Carolina flag? Speaker 1: --that's the arrogance of that whole racist South and their arrogance. And I mean the, the, the whole structure of racism is simply a structure undergirded by ignorance. And that was the best example of the undergirding of that ignorance of that whole, you know, this is our heritage thing. Speaker 2: This is the state capitol-- Speaker 1: That's your heritage? You got the wrong flag up [sic]. Speaker 2: --of South Carolina, but they're flying-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --a North Carolina flag [sic]-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --and didn't know it. Story_ID: 136499 Speaker 1: So, you know, so that, that's a part of--and then getting there [Benedict College, Columbia, South Carolina] and being, you know, just completely embraced by the, the family of an HBCU [historically black colleges and university] and just--and then the other headaches that are incumbent with that. But I enjoyed all the time that I was there. And I, I'm glad I had the opportunity to teaching at HBCU 'cause it's something I always have wanted to do, but based on the history of HBCUs and the history of the professional of the art departments as such, all HBCUs don't have art departments. Those that do, you know, and the colleges offer art appreciation or art courses, but by and large, whoever ends up teaching at those universities and/or colleges for the most part have always done it for twenty-five, thirty years. They started out once they got out of graduate school, and they've been there until they pass away. And so, during the period of, say, from the fifties [1950s] and sixties [1960s] and those individuals who graduated from colleges and universities took on those departments at these HBCUs, they've stayed there for thirty, thirty-five years, until they passed away there. So, between 1970 to 2000, 2005, many of these HBCUs, they've had the same person in its art department and no more faculty, or they were they only faculty. So, you know, it was still the difficulty of black professional academically trained and otherwise artist getting, having gainful employment--(unclear)--at the, you know, basic university system across the board. So, as life would have it, I didn't have much of an opportunity to, to teach at an HBCU until that one came up. And I went for it, and I am glad, you know. Story_ID: 136500 Speaker 1: Now, just going back a little bit, in the '80s [1980s] you were a consultant in Haiti and in Barbados is it? Speaker 2: Maurit--Barbados-- Speaker 1: --And-- Speaker 2: --Mauritania. Speaker 1: --Mauritania. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And those experiences--how long did you stay in those countries when you were a consultant? Speaker 2: When I was in Haiti, I was in Haiti in '82 [1982]. I was there--I got back from Haiti. I was there for three months, and I was to go back for another three months. And I was there as a State Department [U.S. Department of State] USAID program, specialist in textiles, 'cause I'm a weaver, and they were running a project. It was a food for work project, run by CARE International and another entity from Canada, the equivalent of CARE International from Canada, with the Haitian entity, called Cano [ph.]. And they were--this cushion I'm sittin' on is one of those cushions--they were dying these patterns on to the cotton. But when people washed them the dye ran. Now, the woman from CARE International who was running the project, it was her bright idea to do this. And the reason the idea came up, the project was initiated was because in Haiti, and in Peru, and in Egypt, those are the only three places on the planet that there's a natural cotton that grows that's brown. Now you may have remembered from your youth they, when they used to have, when there was a fashionable Egyptian cotton, upholstery fabric, and Egyptian cotton this, and Egyptian cotton that. It's a brown cotton. If you look closely at these cushions you can see it. The woman who was running the project and the Canadian, French Canadian colleague of hers, none of them knew anything about weaving, or dying, or any of the rest of that, but they're the experts. And when this--'cause they tufted all of these, and when the stuff started running when people bought 'em, 'cause see, they would produce these; they'd raise the cotton, spin the cotton, dye it, make these cushions, sell 'em to the tourist, and that's an income coming to them. So it's just work for income, and this was way out in the rural, back in the mountains. And so they brought me over as a, as an expert to work this problem out. First day I get there, all right, I figured it out. The people needed salt, regular table salt to put in their food, you know, 'cause they were a very impoverished community, out in the back country. So instead of putting this salt, 'cause, 'cause the people who were running the projects told 'em mix the dye in the water, keep the water boiling; put the salt in, put this little baking soda in, and then stir it up, and then dip the yarn in and the whole process. They weren't putting the salt in. Speaker 1: The were putting--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: They were putting the salt in there, in their little, in their little skirt and taking home to put in their food. I peeped that straight away. Next day I told Xavier [ph.], who was the French Canadian guy who was taking care of this for me, 'cause he spoke Patwa [sic, Haitian Creole]. And I told him, I said now, I'm going down to the workshop tomorrow. And I want you to leave, just leave me here with the workers, just me and them. And it was all women, so that was another thing too, so they, they were, they were excited. And then my name was Napoleon. They said ah, Mr. Napoleon. I said bonjour madam, mademoiselle, you know. So we had this little thing going on, plus I didn't have a woman with me. So I wasn't married, so they're looking, you know, on the, the social entity of this. So it was just a nice little thing going on. So, he said but you don't speak--I said that's all right. I know how to talk to 'em. I say we all black people together, so don't worry about. We can communicate. He left, told 'em to go on do what they were doing. And so they doing--I said ah, mm-hm. I moved the sister out the way. I sat down. I put the dye in the water. I mixed it. I took the salt, tied it up in my shirt, stuck it down in here, and they broke out laughing 'cause they had been busted. And I told 'em, I said look--and here goes another young man who spoke a little bit of English. I told him, I said look, tell the women this: give me my teaspoon of salt, and they can have the rest. But if they don't give me my teaspoon of salt, they're not gon' have any of it. And I'm not telling anybody; this just between us; this stay our secret. And the, the whole project was resolved in one day, but I had to work with some technical aspects of carding and spinning yarn and that kind of thing. Story_ID: 136501 Speaker 1: But that was a project I was there [Haiti]. And when I came back that was '82 [1982], and when I hit back here in the U.S., they were talking--that's when AIDS sort of hit the, hit the landscape. And of course, 'cause that was, they blamed it on the Haitians. They said the Haitian immigrants were bringing it here. And so, but what I saw in Haiti, with the German and American homosexual community coming over there, that was their plaything. They had a, one of these palatious [sic] resorts, the Omni. It was called Omni International. I mean it was just--that's a whole 'nother story. But I was there for, for that period of time of six months. And then later on, I got the opportunity to do a similar kind of project for the artist on a little resort area, Pelican Island it's called, in Barbados, and that was right after I had done the piece in, in Haiti (laughter). And to show you cultural differences, I mean, I had gotten so used to saying bonjour, bonjour, bonjour and come in the morning. I get to Barbados. I walk in, and I just--they took me down to the Tourist--Cultural Ministry. And I, I said oh, bonjour. Excuse me, we are not French. We are English. I said oh, pardon me (laughter), you know, I'm sorry. I said I just came, I just had six months in, in, in, in, in Haiti, okay, so this is not to deny that you are English, okay. I'm just saying good morning. How are you? And so I had a wonderful time there with them. And I brought my daughters [Mamemaeli Di and Lylana Von Jones-Henderson]. At the time they were six and seven years old, and I brought them over. Their mother [Annette Jones] and they came over after I finished the project I was doing. We stayed for a couple of weeks so they could get to experience that, that whole part of what my life was about, which is a part of their life. So I wanted them to be able to see some other parts of the world. So, they came over and had a ball. They still, from time to time, talk about the flying fish, and the horses racing, the black belly sheep. And then, some years later, I got the opportunity to go to Mauritania. And that one was a memorable experience as well, being in the Islamic Republic of Mauritania, the only two cities that are of note and on the map, Nouakchott and Boutilimit. And Mauritania, in terms of a landmass, it's huge. It's next I think to Sudan, which is the other largest, I mean massive. And, but it's nothing but desert. And so I was asked to go there to help the nomadic people, who were being devastated by the drought. Their camels were dying, and they wanted to help them weave these traditional carpets for export. Story_ID: 136502 Speaker 1: Okay, so Mauritania-- Speaker 2: So-- Speaker 1: --and yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, so, what I was doing there in Mauritania was, my, my goals were two: to find out why the yarn they were spinning from the wool they were getting from Spain, because, you know, they got this little piece of Mauritania up there between I think it's Morocco and Mauritania. It's called Spanish Sahara [Western Sahara] they call it. They've been fighting about this since that period. They were getting, since the Spanish still have their fingers in it. All the previous colonial--quote--"powers" still got their fingers in everybody's stuff. They were shipping, because they grow, raise a lot of sheep, mutton, sheep meat is a big product in Spain. The skins for tanning is a big product and the wool. But if you shear wool from a dead sheep, it's not usable. It's like any other dead thing, it's dead. Sheep, that's why sheep are sheared when they're alive. That's why the wool has the resiliency. And it remains as a usable fiber because it's still living even when it's sheared from the animal. So, that's the crux of what the real problem is. The nomadic peoples in Mauritania were devastated by the drought. So the way they travel is by camel. All their belongings go; they pack 'em on their camel. You know, this particular group may have fifty, twenty-five, a hundred camel. They provide 'em with meat; they provide 'em with milk; they provide them with the, the hair from there, the mohair, the camel hair; and they provide them with transportation. So if your mode of life depends on your hundred camel, and all of a sudden an environmental situation causes you to diminish from a hundred to twelve camel, your way of life is devastated. You can't continue your way of life. So they were being stuck, so to speak, 'cause they couldn't continue to move. And they were dying from malnutrition and all kinds of other stuff because they weren't able to keep a stable living life, you know. So, the government came up with the idea, with a few other people, is to have--since they could get all this wool from the meat industry in Spain, through this relationship they had with Spain, and give it to these people and have them spin it into yarn and weave these carpets using their traditional carpets. They needed somebody to help them work on the technical aspect of weaving these carpets so that their edges are parallel, 'cause they just weave them and they get a little smaller as they got down. But it, they weren't exporting 'em, and they weren't dealing with Eurocentric aesthetic about everything has to be perpendicular or ninety degrees and so forth. They used them for covering their floors, and traveling, and making their tents, and the housing--and to introduce some other kinds of colors to their color palette from the natural colors of brown, gray, black, and white of the goat and sheep. So I get there, and I'm taken from Nouakchott, which is the city I landed in, and this two or three, four-hour ride into the desert. And when I say into the desert, if you've never been in the desert, you don't want to be in the desert unless you're with somebody who know what the hell they're doing, because it's sand in every ca--it's not even in every compass direction. It's like a gyroscope, any one of those circular configurations around the planet is just sand. There's no other structure there; no trees; there are no buildings; there are no roads. And the road that they have, occasionally you'll find it's been taken over by a sand dune. So they always got the crew out there coming back to remove that and open up the highway. But-- Story_ID: 136503 Speaker 1: I get out there [Mauritania], and the culture is that women do the weaving, not men. And so, here I am, a man, coming to engage the women in this Islamic culture in something that's specifically women's domain. So I get there. I'm being welcomed. And the brother who brings me, his name is Braheem [ph.]. And Braheem was an interesting brother, because the language they speak is called Hassani [Hassaniya Arabic]. And the, a lot of the anthropologists or ethno-anthropologists and all these other sort of pologist folks say that the Mauritanians or that Hassani is not a language, but it is 'cause it's a congomelation [sic], conglomeration of Arabic, Spanish, English, Mandingo [Mandinka], Wolof, Arabic, and who knows what else. And so, I land, we get there, and I'm greeted by the community as, you know. I'm brought into this big huge tent, and we're sitting down. I have to sit, and all the men, we're sitting in this wonderful circle. And I'm gonna be served, you know, the traditional drink for host who's coming. And so Braheem introduces me and the other USAID staff person, who speaks French, and today we're all doing this thing. So, I know that as the newcomer, I'm gon' be offered wherever this is first. So I'm sitting and I'm looking, and I see this woman coming toward me from a distance. And I see this sort of black cloud. From the distance she was it looked like a, you know, a black cloud, like you would have whip cream on top of a, a lemon meringue pie that's piled so high as you walking it sort of shifts around. So I'm saying now I don't know. I, I know I can't refuse it. I've got to take it, and I've got to do it with a smile. And whatever it is, I've got to keep it down. When she got close enough, I saw what it was. It was flies, desert flies. They congregate wherever there's moisture but entirely different thing. So what you have--and I had looked at Braheem. I said Braheem, what am I supposed to do? He said you take it, and you move it real fast, and the flies will light up. Then you turn it up and drink real quick and pass it, of which I did. But coming out of this sensibility, you know, you have to work on making sure it stays here (laughter), and it did; it stayed down; it went on around. Then all the men [clapping hands] did one of these. Then we had tea. And they had these little shot glasses we have here for shot glasses in a bar. That's what they're drinking the tea out of. And after you finish the tea, you spin the glass back out into the center of the circle. And it's supposed to spin on out there and stand up. Don't stand up, you're a pretty weak man (laughter). I spun mine on out there. Luckily it stood up. So I was cool then, being a man, coming out there to work with the women in the women's domain. And I was out there for a couple of months, and it was just an extraordinary experience. And just being there and having the aspect--I saw one, one young lady one day, and I just knew she was dying gangrene or something 'cause she had these plastic bags all tied around her hands and stuff. And they were all green and it, I mean it just looked so unsanitary. I was trying--I said you know, they need some medical attention out here. And so, Braheem, I asked, and he said nah, nah. He said that's fine. That's the henna. Her hands were wrapped in plastic so that she wouldn't break the designs of the henna, 'cause, 'cause once they paint those designs on, they have to leave their hands, or whatever part of the body, untouched or unmolested for sometimes two or three or four days. And so when women have their hands or their feet in that condition, of the design from a henna, all the other women in the community pick up whatever their responsibilities are for their families. So they just sort of, you know, lay back. But they really can't do anything 'cause they're hands are encumbered, so they even have to be fed. And when they unloosed her hands from those plastic bags and did, scraped it off, I mean, man, that was the most wonderful works of art you could imagine. And I was able to--I mean that, that for me was of more value than anything I was delivering to them in my time there for as far as I'm concerned. And truly camels are cantankerous animals, and they are not nice creatures, you know. And, but living out there, we had fresh mint. They had onions. I got to see actually couscous being made, the little kids who make the couscous. And they eat lots of butter, camel milk butter, and camel milk is pretty tasty. It's kind of sweet--(unclear)--it's more like goat milk almost, 'cause they are in the goat family. And eating goat milk, drinking goat milk, and eating goat meat, and camel meat, and couscous, and tomatoes, and mint, and onions, that was the diet, and it was wonderful. But they, they just put too much of--I had to tell 'em they had to take the butter back, reduce it. You're giving me too much butter. It just wouldn't sit with me. And so I have to ever so often tell 'em I'm fasting; no, couscous, I'm fasting. Oh no, you have to eat, you have to eat, because they want 'em--you have to eat. You know, that's the black thing, you got to eat. You can't come visit and don't eat. You know, the kitchen is where you go, 'cause we're almost in mine (laughter). So, the, the, the beauty of it was just fantastic-- Story_ID: 136504 Speaker 1: Now I didn't ask you about Festac '77 [Second World Black and African Festival of Arts and Culture, 1977]. I'm sure you participated-- Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely. Speaker 1: And so this is 1977, where-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --I guess over a thousand African American artists-- Speaker 2: Artists-- Speaker 1: --gathered to-- Speaker 2: --of every discipline. Speaker 1: --in Nigeria. Speaker 2: And political scientists, academics, you name it, medical. 'Cause one of the (laughter) memorable things about Festac was there was a Nigerian brother who was a physician in Chicago [Illinois], 'cause at that time, they probably had more Nigerians in Chicago than they had--outside of Nigeria than they had any place else. And you laugh, right, 'cause they were there thick as, thick as fleas. This brother had a Corvette that he drove in Chicago. And when he goes home to visit in Nigeria, he would have them fly it back on the plane, plane with him, the Lagos [Nigeria]. So, we over in Festac, we walk out into the village and we see this Corvette, and if I'm not mistaken, his license plate was, I think his license plate said "Chicago 1" or something like that--said man--(unclear)--who know who the, who this is. And yes, Festac was quite an experience, 'cause it happened very quickly in terms of the plane and the logistics and all that, because the U.S. government was fighting the North American Zone Committee throughout the entire process because the Festac Committee mandated that Africans in whatever country they were coming from, European or not, that the Africans in those countries selected their artists-representatives in academics and whoever else to participate in Festac and not the government. And the U.S. government wanted to do that, 'cause they had they folks they wanted to send. And the battle went on. So at any rate, with other, the other political turmoil in Africa, which mended up, it had, it did, didn't happen until '77 [1977] 'cause it was supposed to happen in '75 [1975]. At the last minute, we got it together. The committee got it together. A plane showed up in New York [New York City, New York], and I had to fly from Chicago to New York right away 'cause Jeff told all of us, hey, man, get your passports together; get your shots; and get all this other stuff, and be prepared because I can only call you one time. And you gon' have to get to New York before the plane leaves if it, if the plane shows up. So, that happened, got there. And Festac was, Festac was the next event in my life, like going to Europe, to Paris [France]; the first one was at nineteen--seeing Africans from all over the planet. I mean you go from Australia, you see these brothers coming at you, and you can feel 'em talking to you. You know, 'cause we've seen this whole thing about the, the, the communication the Australian has that the nonspeaking, nonverbal talking, the dream world, dreamtime. And it's serious. And we, Nelson [Stevens] and I, shared a room there at Festac, and we use--we hung out at Fela's [Fela Kuti] down at the path, at the Palace [Iga Idunganran, Lagos, Nigeria], and we hung out with these Australian brothers and Africans from every, we met Africans from Iceland. You know, it was just, you know-- Speaker 1: Really, seriously-- Speaker 2: Yeah, seriously, brothers from Iceland. Story_ID: 136505 Speaker 1: You know. I mean we're everywhere. There's no place on the planet we're not. I made, I figured that out in 1977. I don't ever expect to go any place on the planet and not find another one of my brothers or sisters there; it's just gotta be. But the depth of spiritual, intellectual, and philosophical, aesthetic investigation that took place at that time is unprecedented in the twentieth century because the colloquia that was going on, with all of the papers being presented. I mean it was going on nonstop from eight o'clock in the morning till eight o'clock, nine o'clock at night. I mean people were giving papers, and they were printed; and people had the papers, and there was dialogue going on, the exhibition with the artists from all the different places that people came from, the music, the dance. I mean we had black Mexicans from Mexico over there. You know, I mean just recently, the last maybe five or ten years, people are beginning to realize there are black Mexicans. I mean, you know, it was, it was so deep, I mean I'm still digesting it, you know. Everybody that I know who was there is still digesting it, because it was just that deep an, an experience. And it fortified a lot of what many of us felt, but we didn't know how to, to, to, to validate that. We didn't have the evidence. But when we hit the soil there, we had the evidence, because we saw it. It came up through the earth right into us. Speaker 2: Now these are associations that were in dispute even amongst black scholars. I remember a teacher telling me at Central State [University, Wilberforce, Ohio] that there was no relationship at all between the black church and Africa, none. And-- Speaker 1: Wa-- Speaker 2: --and this is not unusual for those--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: No, I know, I know-- Speaker 2: --for those in the seventies [1970s]-- Speaker 1: --I know. Speaker 2: --or, or sixties [1960s]-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --for black people to believe that they had no relationship with the, with African people in any other part of the world. Speaker 1: Well, you see, and I would have to give them the benefit predicated on this: they'd never been to Africa, had never seen African religion practiced, 'cause if they did, they would know there was no way they open they mouth and say that, you know, because the evidence is in the practice. You know, even in the good Methodist church it's still there, 'cause they get the spirit too, not as exuberant as they do in the Holiness church, but they still get it, 'cause that black Methodist church and that white Methodist church, very different Methodist. Story_ID: 136506 Speaker 1: So, being there [Festac '77, Second World Black and African Festival of Arts and Culture] with Stevie [Wonder], and with Fela [Kuti], and with all these other people, 'cause that was--and, and for me it was a, an, a very--some other special stuff, 'cause I met some lifelong friends there. And [HM] Della Hardman, which is one of your--I met, met, I, I knew her before getting there, but she and I spent a lot of very special time there because her husband-- Speaker 2: (Unclear)--Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts]--(unclear)-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --Della Hardman, yeah, that writes the Gazette in the--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Right, from Charleston, West Virginia though, yeah. Her husband took ill, and she had to leave and get back. And we spent a lot of time together. And I was trying to help her negotiate her getting her money exchanged and stuff while she could get out, get back to the States from there. But, and from that, we continued to be close until her passing. All of these people being there, bringing all these energies from every place. I got there, we, I met a number of Nigerian artists, this textile artist [sic, sculptor] named Fekiyi [ph.]; went up to see him at his house in Ife [Nigeria], right outside of Osogbo [Nigeria] and of course, wanted to go to Osogbo, you know, to the shrine [Osun-Osogbo Sacred Grove]. And Winnie Owens-Hart, who is a ceramist and teaches at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], I met her there, and she and I just hooked up. And we took a lorry, 'cause she wanted to go up and meet with the ceramist up in the area and learn some of--and see how they made their pottery. And so we got a lorry and a couple of other artists, all of us, you know, people would rent lorries and go traveling around, so we went up to Ife. And we went by Agbo Folarin's house. Fekiyi was the sculptor. Agbo Falarin was a textile artist. And we went by Agbo's house, and we sat there, and we ate, and so said, "Hey, Agbo, I need to and I want to go to Osogbo. We wanna go to the shrine." Story_ID: 136507 Speaker 1: So, he [Agbo Folarin] arranges for us to get there. We get to Osogbo [Nigeria], and I walk into--we get out the, the, out of the van, and we are met by this small group of, of women. And through the interpreter, one of 'em walks up to me and she says, "They've been, they've been expecting you. You're the weaver." I said, "I didn't know I was coming. How did you know?" "They say they've been expecting you." And they then took me and took me around to all of the, all of the fabric dealers, to their stalls, and introduced me to several of the weavers. And then they gave me--told 'em I had two daughters. They say here, these are fabrics for your daughters when they get married. And then we, we, we spent the time and did those things. And Winnie [Owens-Hart] was looking at the ceramics, and Agbo took her to meet some potters. And then we went to, went to the shrine [Osun-Osogbo Sacred Grove]. And the Osogbo shrine is quite an experience, 'cause when we go through--it's sort of like a, in a way it would be a real grotto. It's, you walk in, to, to this space, and it's, it's almost surreal. It becomes--I mean you're out here in this marketplace. And you've got bustling noise and activity going on, and all this sound. And you walk into this sacred area, Osogbo shrine and you, and there's nothing to block the sound from coming in, but it's just not there. I mean it's just peaceful. And you actually do know you're in the presence of spirits, of gods, orishas. And it's a very sacred, you know, experience. Speaker 2: This in Ife in-- Speaker 1: In Ile-Ife [sic, Osogbo], yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Now this is suppo, this is, according to Yoruba tradition, this is the birth place of mankind, right. Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. And not being from there and stepping in there you can feel that. I mean, you know, walking on the soil where everyone went, that's all of us who came there from here particularly, I would say, you could feel it, because it came up through the souls of your feet. And to have been met by this little boy that ran up and said come with--(unclear)--come with us, that we've been expecting you, you know, that's not, I mean it wasn't an issue of questioning. It wasn't an issue of anything, because I didn't speak the language, and I felt completely at home. And to this day, I still, you know, try to figure out how it was they knew--how it was they were expecting me. I didn't know I was gonna get to Ife, let alone think I was gon' get to that area of the shrine. You know, all of that happened as, in a way of speaking, seren, serendipitously of as a result of being there at Festac [Second World Black and African Festival of Arts and Culture, 1977], you know, us getting together, getting the van, getting the lorry, then coming up, knowing Agbo Faloren, in terms of him being a textile artist and him inviting us to come and then ta-da, da, da, da, all these, everything just rolled out on its own. So, who am I to question what the creator has laid out there, you know. I'm just, I'm on my arc. And if you are true to your passion, you'll be in the places where you're supposed to be when you're supposed to be there, even when they're places where it's unpleasant, you know; it's a part of the journey. Story_ID: 136508 Speaker 1: You know, but Festac [Second World Black and African Festival of Arts and Culture, 1977] was a phenomenal event in the twentieth century for African people on the planet. Speaker 2: Do you think we'll ever have another one? Speaker 1: You know, probably not in my lifetime. I would hope, 'cause I'd like to go. But the next one was supposed to been in Ethiopia, and we know what's been going on in Ethiopia since before '77 [1977]. But I think, I think as, as mankind, I think we're at another place on the arc of mankind's journey, in the sense that there--if we look back over history, there are spaces of time that momentous and monumental things occurred that just tilted the axis a bit, you know. As a friend of mine in Buford, South Carolina, made the comment which reflects back to this when Barack [HM Barack Obama] was first running for office and got elected. She said you know, his election has changed the axis of universe, because when you take that and think about all of the things that would say no matter what, that was an impossibility. But when you look back at how it was done, when it was done, that clearly was a shifting of the axis of things, because his use of the current technology, his infusing himself into the younger population, the younger generation internationally, because he got elected internationally not just nationally, and coming along the path that he came along, and this is in no way a judgment about Sharpton [HM Reverend Al Sharpton] or Jesse [HM Reverend Jesse L. Jackson], but when you take the three of them and look at their assets of life, their lived life, he, Barack is the only one who actually, you could say, caused a shift in the axis of things, you know, because--and that whole axis, that shifting of the axis is, is, is, is consistent with whether they'll be another Festac. I think things are at another kind of place, that Festac won't occur. But it might be something that might happen in Africa, but it's a world-tac, a world Festac, in terms of the people of the planet, not the African people of the planet. Story_ID: 133471 Speaker 1: Okay, go, go ahead-- Speaker 2: I was saying-- Speaker 1: (Unclear) the aftermath of discussing-- Speaker 2: Yeah, one of the interesting things of many interesting things I brought back, sort of souvenir-type things from Festac [Second World Black and African Festival of Arts and Culture, Lagos, Nigeria, 1977], was something I just thought was just, I mean it was just extraordinary. We went into our dormitory room where we were staying, Nelson and I. And of course they were still building the Festac village. It wasn't fully finished yet. And in the bathroom, we see sitting on the counter two rolls of toilet paper with the Festac emblem on it and wrapped Festac toilet paper (laughter). I said how black can you get, you know. So I told Nelson, I said well, I'm sure we're gonna have to use the toilet paper, but I'm taking the wrapping. And I, I gingerly took the wrapping, which I still have 'em, which I thought was just one of the most unique, spectacular, little, you know, anecdotal type of things you would find as memorable. Speaker 1: The one thing I've heard from those who went--I mean a lot of them talk about the opulence of the village that was created by the Nigerian government and an inordinate amount of money spent on, on luxury for this-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: --village. Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: I mean a marble floor, all kinds of--they, you know, and in a country where the common person is really suf, suffering, and the rich-- Speaker 2: Oh-- Speaker 1: --are very, very rich. Speaker 2: --heavens. Speaker 1: So I, I, I, I suppose a lot of the African Americans, you know, you know, were shocked at the accommodations. Speaker 2: Well, we were. And I think those of us who were worldly enough in our view of post-colonial Africa or post-colonial world anywhere, understood that that was there but were not impressed by it and were, and did not engage it as something we should have. We engaged the Nigerians about those very things when we were in various one-to-ones and various other kinds of things as why is it that we have all of this stuff? We're just here for this short period of time. And after we're gone, what happens? You know, and you've got right outside of here, we've got open sewers and all the rest of this squalor going on here. This is, you know, this is counterproductive. This is contrary to what this celebration is about. So, this should spill out of here into out there. We know it won't spill now, but it should spill after we leave here. And I mean we saw earthmoving equipment and all that sort of stuff for building highways just sitting on at the, at the pier just rusting away, never taken out of the crates, never put to use. I mean, they had traffic lights, and they even had some overpass skyway type of highway--(unclear)--you know, the cloverleaf, get on and get off thing. There was, I mean there was an all-evening traffic jam. The traffic lights that were there, they didn't turn on. They weren't even working, so what's the point in having--(unclear)--(unclear)--telephones all over the place. I mean it was a, it was a stark contradiction. And I think those who were politically and philosophically wise enough saw it, and questioned it, and brought it to the officials, the Nigerian officials at every opportunity that we had, you know, including the artists, you know. We talked to them, to the other Nigerian artists, you know. A lot of them were, had traveled all over, Twins Seven Seven and all those different artists had traveled all over the Western world. I was saying hey, you know, you guys are very privileged, you know. And you also need to make sure that this gets expanded out beyond here, you know. So it was--I mean, for what it was, and that's with everything, there are two sides on everything, you know, the positive and the negative. You know, they, they coexist, 'cause if you don't have one, you don't have the other, you know, and one couldn't, shouldn't necessarily outweigh the other. But they need to exist in a degree of harmony that's, that's helpful as opposed to harmful. Story_ID: 133472 Speaker 1: Now what are your future plans? You know, I know you're retired from teaching, right? And you're-- Speaker 2: Well, retired from being officially teaching, but I go in and do courses for people who want to take a sabbatical for a while or things of that nature, yeah. I love teaching. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know, so, I'm just out of it as an official faculty member of some institution. But actually since I've retired, I probably taught as much or more by going and doing somebody's sabbatical class for them or doing a fellowship here or something other there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But it allows me to, to, to, to give my full self without having to be bound by any administrative kind of, you know, tinkerings I have to deal with, you know, advising, going to meetings and all that other stuff. Speaker 1: So do you--is there, is there a major project that you wanna finish that you're, that you're looking at right now, or, or is that, is there any major thing that you would like to do--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I want to, I want to get back to my looms full-time, my weaving, and create. Although she's passed on now, [HM] Elizabeth Catlett, I know her family very well. I knew her very well. For, for the family, the gift I've been trying to do over the years and that's to do a tapestry of her print 'Sharecropper,' the one of the woman, just the head with the big hat on. And I talked to Elizabeth about that for years and years and got started a couple of times. It's on, the warp is on one of my looms. But I really wanna--because the last time I was with her was two, two years ago when they gave her an honorary doctorate at Syracuse University [Syracuse, New York]--'cause I was also teaching there at that time--and went back and spent just that whole week with her and her family. And when she passed, you know, last year, and talked to her several times about it, and I just--so, any particular thing, that's one, and probably the one. You know, 'cause all the rest of what I do in life I'm gonna continue doing that all the way on down the road, but that's the one something I've wanted to do that I haven't done, so. Story_ID: 133473 Speaker 1: You've lived in Chicago [Illinois], lived in Boston [Massachusetts], and a lot of places, but what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African community today? Speaker 2: I would hope we can revisit the period from about 1980 going back go 1940--and, and I stop at 1940 just because I wanna keep a round number--and look at the values and the context of community that existed then till '80 [1980] that does not exist today because we have lost, I believe, the spiritual and philosophical grounding of what community means and is. See, people tend to say well, I live in this community. No, you reside in a particular area. Community is an experience and a shared concern. And people don't know each other; people don't speak; people are--and I tend to think some of that is exacerbated or fed by the kinds of technology that we are all connected to 24/7. You know, and I point this out to my students all the time, and to my daughter, and young people in generally, 'cause I think if they, if they forty-five or fifty almost, they're young people to me (laughter). That people--'cause I did that at Benedict College [Columbia, South Carolina]. I've had colleagues, they're in the office next over or upstairs, and they'll send me a, an email. And they'd always get mad 'cause I would never bother to answer their emails or open 'em. I said hell, I'm right downstairs. Come on down and you know, I'm right next door, 'cause I'd always go up. And they said ah, man, you could have sent an email. I said yeah, I could have, but I'd rather look you in the eye; I'd rather talk to you; I'd rather be here in your space, and have you in mine. We have lost, I think, the sensibility of communication, and, and I don't mean talking, the ability to be in each other's presence. And and we don't have a conversation. We'll just be in each other's presence, just sitting. But see, nowadays, people are in each other's "presence," but they got one of these things going on. When I ride public transportation, I mean, I can get on the, on the, on the subway, and if there are fifty people on the subway, me and probably three other people, and most of the time they're about my age, that's not looking at some instrument in their hand. They don't, they don't know the world is around them. And so, until we get back to community, as it was, as I remember it, in those, during those times--I mean I only got on the planet in '43 [1943], but the point from caring for each other, you know. And, and it's--not caring for each is different than liking somebody. I don't have to like you to care for you, 'cause I don't wish to see you in, in bad health or, or, or, or dismemberment or any other difficulties, you know. That's because you're a human being, you know. But people use terms and words nowadays, you know. People, like this Facebook and Twitter stuff, talking about friend me. You know, how you gon' have a thousand friends? You've--and how many of 'em have you even seen? You know what I'm saying, and that's not, that's not a friend. That's a--(unclear)--a language for that manner of social structure that, that you all are not--call it social structure 'cause that's what they call it. I can't identify it any other way 'cause I think it's an antisocial structure, because you don't have any real contact with people. You can't feel somebody's heartbeat. You can't feel their pus, you--pulse. You can't tell whether they're going into an asthma attack or having a heart attack. They can be on the other side on that Twitter and be having all that and drop dead before they finish the message. But if they're sitting in front of you, you'd of got another kind of relationship to that, you know. So, that's why I don't bother with it. I don't do any of that Facebook and Twitter and you know. Folks send me an email, I say well, join LinkUp so you can see my new work. I said no, if you want me to see your new work, send it on the email that you sent me to ask me to join this to see it, okay. Otherwise, I ain't gon' see it, you know. So, when we get back to, to, to communion with each other, that's what I would like to see the black community, and by extension, the community of humankind, get back to. Story_ID: 133474 Speaker 1: Now, when you look back at everything you've done to this point in life, what today would you consider to be your artistic legacy or your legacy? Speaker 2: Well, actually, I won't have a legacy until I leave the planet, because everything I have already done is just simply a part of the journey. And when the journey's over, if, if I have left a footprint here, or as the African proverb says is that: if somebody continue to speak your name, you're not gone. So, that would be the legacy is that, if there is a legacy, and the life I've lived is the only thing I would wished to have done 'cause that's the thing that I've done. And I think that it's been of some value to others because I--my daughters [Mamemaeli Di and Lylana Von Jones-Henderson] are sane, and educated, and moving on with life. I got a granddaughter who is sane, and being educated, and moving on in life. And I got a wealth of friends and associates that I can always, you know, depend upon. Story_ID: 133475 Speaker 1: You know-- Speaker 2: --That's a question we ask, actually was the next question was can you tell us about your family? Speaker 1: Yeah, well, my family is, it's big. I got family, I got a sister who's been living for thirty-four years now, her and her children, which are the same number--no, she's got nine; my mother [Maxine Unger] had eight; she has nine--in Israel. I got a brother who's been living in New York [New York City, New York] for well over forty years and brother in Milwaukee [Wisconsin]. The rest of 'em are in Chicago [Illinois], and I'm here. I had a sister who lived in California for about twenty-five years. She's back in Chicago now. So, I got a big family. We've lived and do still live in different parts of the world. And it's been a, it's a been a, I mean I wouldn't trade this family for the world, you know. Speaker 2: Okay. And your children, you got, you got two daughters, right? Speaker 1: I got two daughters [Mamemaeli Di and Lylana Von Jones-Henderson] and one granddaughter. And you know, it's been fun. Well, not been; it is fun. Speaker 2: One of the ironic things that we discussed when we came in is that you have a daughter that's a police officer, right? Speaker 1: Right (laughter). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--after, after the arrest story in Detroit [Michigan]-- Speaker 1: Yeah, that's, I sent that photograph just recently to someone, and the, and that was their comment back to me: You would never have thought when you were being arrested in Detroit that you would end up having a daughter who's a police officer. And the interesting thing about her is that she's only been on the force seven years, and she has, and she's received three commendations from the commissioner. She's been appointed to a couple of taskforce looking into issues of representation of women on the police force and community policing. And the year before last she was awarded the VFW [Veterans of Foreign Wars] Officer of the Year Award for the VFW in Boston [Massachusetts] and for the VFW for the state of Massachusetts. So for someone who's been on the force for as little as seven years, she's done quite a lot and has quite a degree of respect from her fellow officers and a sizeable bit of envy from some others, which she shares those conversations with me, which are their actions. But, and I mean here is the serendipity of it all: my good partner Nelson Stevens--Johnnetta Cole, who is the director of the African museum [Smithsonian National Museum of African Art] in [Washington] D.C., she used to teach up there at U Mass Amherst [University of Massachusetts, Amherst, Massachusetts], and Nelson was up there for himself. So in growing up, I used to go up there with my daughters and with Nelson's chill--child and, and all his assorted friends, who Cole was growing up with him. Come to find out, in the same graduating class of the Boston Police Department, Johnnetta Cole's son and my daughter, who are very close friends, neither of them knew that we knew each other or had this asso--that their parents had this association (laughter). And one day he was over, and he, and she, and she went out, and she came back in. She said daddy, Cole wanted to know do you know the woman who was the director of the African museum in, in Washington, D.C. I said who, Johnnetta? And she said yes, well, that's Cole's mama. I said yeah, well, that's it, you know. It's, if it's six of us that read, we all know each other, okay, so that's how that works. And so, yep. Speaker 2: And, and your other daughter, what, what is she-- Speaker 1: My other daughter, she has, when she finished college and started working for this financial management firm, which the first day on the job she called me to tell me that's the firm that handles Oprah Winfrey's money. Is said well, that's nice. That means maybe you'll have a job for a while. She's still working there. That's her profession. She enjoys it. And so the two of them, you know, I'm very proud of 'em, you know. Speaker 2: Okay. And your, your wife [Annette Jones]-- Speaker 1: Well-- Speaker 2: --passed away? Speaker 1: Yeah, she passed away two years ago. And we had been divorced for quite a number of years, but we, she lived around the corner, and so we still raised our children as a family. And she just passed two years ago now. And so that's--my daughters moved in with me here. And so, yep, that's the full family profile. Story_ID: 133476 Speaker 1: Okay, now, is there anything I haven't asked you about that we need to discuss before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: Based on as long as we've been talking, I think I've told you everything except for what? I can't (laughter) imagine-- Speaker 1: You had probably a million other stories, but I guess we-- Speaker 2: Probably, yeah-- Speaker 1: --we can't cover all of them, but you know, that's--is there any major thing that we haven't discussed? Speaker 2: No, I guess the only thing is that it's interesting, reaching the age that I am and to think about in a very different way, because it becomes something on the front lobe as opposed to in the gray matter. What do I do with this collection of art with all these books and all of the other things that I have amassed and when I'm not here to continue, you know, managing them? And it's something that I've talked with over the years with many of my other colleagues, that what do we do with that? So that's what basically I've been doing for since about 2008, just really making an inventory of, and cataloging, and putting all that stuff together, which is this whole interview is so timely with that because it's fit, it fits right into what I've been doing--(unclear). So I guess that's about it, you know. What-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --what was the question (laughter)? Speaker 1: Was there, was there anything else, that was-- Speaker 2: No, no, no. Speaker 1: --the question. But, so, so do you have--but just to follow up on that, is there, is there, do you have an idea of what you're gonna do with it? I mean are you gonna donate it to an institution to--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, well, I'm in the process now of trying their--a few institutions that from colleagues of mine like [HM] Camille Billops, of the Hatch-Billops Collection [Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia], then [HM] Samella Lewis, and a couple of other friends of mine who've--[HM] David Driskell and others who've given their papers. There's some, couple of institutions around, and so I'm, you know, feeling out these institutions and seeing what that is. If, if my daughters [Mamemaeli Di and and Lylana Von Jones-Henderson] don't want to continue administering the institute, and I understand this institute is my passion not theirs, but they share it because they grew up in it; they know it. It's a value to them, but that's not necessarily their calling of what they want to do. But I might be around long enough for my granddaughter, who has been wrapped into this aura 'cause she's living it, she might want to do it, you know. But I am looking into that, and that's the dilemma I think that our generation of elders have to deal with. What do we do with this material and this resource in light of the fact that 1963, hell, I knew I was gonna live forever, whatever forever is. And I'm here at 2013, and a lot of stuff has happened, and a lot of stuff yet has to happen. And I've got stuff that is important to the stuff that is yet to happen. So, how do I set that so that it's useful in that particular part of the journey? So, that's what I'm working on now, still doing the other stuff but working on that simultaneously, sort of being in, as they call, parallel universes, the universe of the future and the universe of the present future, so. Story_ID: 133477 Speaker 1: Our last question is similar to legacy but a little bit different. Sir, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Well, I guess it's very much, pretty much the same as, as legacy. When, when I'm gone, I, I am certain I will be remembered on, in terms of both extremes of how one can be remembered. They have people who probably say I wish he'd never been here. And there are a lot of people who would probably say I'm so glad he came through here. So I will leave that to, to the people who remember me, you know. And I'm pretty confident that it'll be a while before I'm completely forgotten 'cause they'll have to reach the same point. So it'll be on--so if my name is spoken when I'm gone in this physical context, then I'll be remembered. Story_ID: 133478 Speaker 1: These are my two daughters when they were probably about five, four and five, probably about four and five. And they're sitting at the bottom of the sculpture of Dr. Edward Everett Hale, which is in the Boston Gardens [Boston, Massachusetts] just before you get to the swan boats, which everybody comes to Boston to ride, who is the gentleman who the house we presently live in, was his home until 1909. Speaker 2: There it is, that's the culprit. That's me. I think I am, I'm probably not five years old in this, this image here. Speaker 1: And again, this is a, a fuller view of these two hamming up for the camera. And this was taken by a, a friend of mine, a photographer. And actually the matching hat and coat and all that they have on, their mother [Annette Jones] made. She was an extraordinary seamstress. And she made them, and, and you can see the "M" on the biggest child's cape, which is the first initial of her name, Mamemaeli. Speaker 2: And, and the name--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: And then la, and the smaller one is Lylana. And both of their names actually are either the first two or first three initials of either their grandmother, or great-grandmothers, aunts and uncles from both sides of the family. So not only are their last name connected, their first name are connected. Speaker 2: And that's my mother and I at the airport when she in Baltimore, Maryland. This was in 2005. This was after she came with my daughter and granddaughter to celebrate my M.F.A. from Maryland Institute College of Art. Speaker 1: And your mother's name? Speaker 2: Maxine Unger. Speaker 1: And this is Maxine Unger in about 1955, '56 [1956] with five of my siblings, Seth in the background, going from the back to the front: Seth; Frank, who is the artist; Howard, who is heavy equipment driver; Cheryl, who is an early education teacher; and Glen, who is the youngest one. He hasn't quite decided on what he's gon' do yet. And that's in Altgeld Gardens [Chicago, Illinois] as a matter of fact. Speaker 2: And that's my mama and my daddy. And this was taken after I was born I believe. I'll have to ask her about that. But you can see they some sharp dressers, you know. Speaker 1: And their, and their names again-- Speaker 2: Woodrow [Henderson] is my father, and Maxine is my mother. Speaker 1: And that's my father's father, my grandfather, Lewis [Henderson]. And he's sitting, sitting on his lap on the right is my brother, Charles, stepbrother. And on the far side just out of the picture virtually is me. Speaker 2: And that's another shot of the actual photograph of me at about just before five years old I believe, definitely looking at the camera. Speaker 1: And that's my daddy. We--he had just come home from someplace, and of course you can tell it's the wintertime 'cause we were plastering him with snowballs. That was not just us, the children, but my mother was involved in it as well (laughter). And he was holding his hat so we wouldn't knock his hat off. Speaker 2: Woodrow Henderson? Speaker 1: That's Woodrow Henderson, Woodrow Lewis Henderson. Speaker 2: And this, again, is my grandfather, Lewis Henderson, and my grandmother Eva Marie [Henderson], who was born in Little Rock, Arkansas, and my grandfather, of course, Yazoo, Mississippi. Yep, that's the grandmother who took her little, her handkerchief out of her pocket and gave me so change to help me go to Paris [France]. Speaker 1: And this is my mother's father, Bodie [Washington], and his wife just next to him, Medea [ph.], and that's my great-grandmother, Grandma Bessie, my grandmother's mother, and that's my grandmother's sister, Aunt Eula [ph.], who, I'll tell you, I really miss her, 'cause, man, she could massage my scalp better than anybody I've ever had. I mean you just go to heaven when she gives you, wash your hair. Yep, that's Granddaddy Bodie, Grandma Medea, Grandma Bessie, and Aunt Eula. Speaker 2: And this is my granddaddy. I think he probably was the proudest he's ever been in this particular photograph, standing here surrounded by these four fine women, and all four of 'em are sisters. There's my Grandma Medea on the left, who he married; that's my Aunt Hale [ph.] on the, on his, on the right of the photograph as we lookin'; that's me; sister--my Aunt Meade at the bottom; and that's not, not one of their sisters but a friend of theirs, and I can't remember her name; and the gentleman in there is, is I think the young lady on the left, that's her boyfriend. Speaker 1: And this is a very precious photograph. This is my mother when she was just an infant and with her mother, who actually passed away when my mother was two years old, but my mother remembers her quite well. And she is just one beautiful woman. Speaker 2: Okay, this is an article for the Boston Globe that was done in 1980. Annette, which you see her with me in the bottom photograph, we adopted both Mamemaeli and Lylana. And at that particular time in the late seventies [1970s] and early eighties [1980s] there was a national discussion about the adoption of chill--black children in particular from these children's agencies. And of course, you see the two of them hamming it up in a, an empty picture frame. So they became a, my work of art for this, this issue. But we were very much a part of the black adoption network across the country. And this article was subsequently done as an article about a family adopting some children who were in the system. Speaker 1: And this is the, would you say famous or infamous, photograph of myself and my friend, Suria [ph.] Peterson, from New York City [New York]. We were standing in front of the Cadillac Radisson Hotel [Radisson-Cadillac Hotel, Detroit, Michigan], and this was the photograph taken by a Detroit Free Press photographer regarding an incident that occurred there in De, Detroit when both Suria and myself were arrested by the police for supposedly interfering with an officer in the performance of his duty, which was harassing a young kid. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: And this is a photograph of me wearing a second line costume that I created for, as a participant in Willie Birch's second line performance he did at the Maryland Institute College of Art [Baltimore, Maryland]. And my good friend, [HM] Leslie King-Hammond, snapped this shot of the good hefty police officer next to me, which I guess she was thinking back of 1979 (laughter). Speaker 2: (Unclear)--that, that thrilling day. Speaker 1: Right, the thrilling day. Speaker 2: And this is one of my public art commissions. This is at the Black Falcon Cruise Ship Terminal [Black Falcon Cruise Terminal] here in Boston [Massachusetts]. This is where all the ships, cruise ships come in, and people disembark to get processed and their passports and visas and so forth before being allowed out into the streets of Boston. Speaker 1: Now that, does this have a name? Speaker 2: These are called Diologia [ph.] Series. And all of these are quilted textile pieces that from the edge of the arc, looking at the top of the piece from one end if you drew a straight line across from where the arc meets at the top to the other side, that's close to sixteen feet. These are very large pieces, and they are based on Bakuba [Kuba] Congo, Democratic Republic of the Congo textiles. Speaker 1: And this is one of four pieces that were done for the Hartsfield International Airport [Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport] in Atlanta [Georgia] in 1982. This was my actual first public art commission. This is a tapestry that's roughly twelve feet by eight feet, and it's to, was to hang somewhere in that large airport. Speaker 2: And this is a second piece of four pieces that were done for that airport. This is an applique, similar dimensions. Applique is a quilt process, and it has a mask. And this, these pieces didn't have any specific titles. Speaker 1: And this is one of my more recent commissions, and this is a eight-foot by twenty-eight-foot enamel on copper piece that's in the Convention Center in Providence, Rhode Island. It's a part, like the Hartsfield International Airport and the cruise ship terminal, these are permanent works of art belonging to those facilities. Speaker 2: And these are two images of me standing with two of my most important mentors that's on the far left is John [T.] Biggers and his wife [Hazel Biggers]. And next to that is a friend of mine, LeMer [ph.] T. Frasier [ph.]. And seated is the dean of Boston African American artist community, is Allan Rohan Crite, one of the most extraordinary men ever to have crossed the planet, and that's me next to him. And the image at the top is John Biggers. We're looking at the works of Allan Crite that graced the wall of his home. And that's gold leaf in the same process and manner that they did during the Renaissance period. He was an extraordinary--he is really a Renaissance man. Speaker 1: Yeah, Allan Crite. Speaker 2: Allan Rohan Crite. Speaker 1: I forget to ask about him and, and Paul Goodnight [HM Paul D. Goodnight]. Speaker 2: And Paul Goodnight, who was one of the students who was responsible for me coming to Boston from Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 1: And this is a photograph of AfriCOBRA when we had an exhibition at the Fay Gold Gallery in Atlanta, and I think that was 1987. And the only two people on, in this photograph who are no longer with us, which is [HM] Jeff Donaldson, who is with the glasses standing in the background next to the ladder, and Murry DePillars, who is just between, in front of [HM] James Philips, who is standing actually on the ladder to the far right side of the photograph. Murry was dean of the School of Art at Virginia Commonwealth [University] in Richmond, Virginia. And Jeff was dean and, as well as chair early on at Howard University [Washington, D.C.]. As a matter of fact, the Gelede mask that we used as our sort of a mascot figure for AfriCOBRA is in the collection of Howard University. And it actually, at least for a long period of time, still had the sunglasses, which were mine, these pilot sunglasses that I put on the mask to say well, you know, we're gonna take this African form; we got the African American in it. And that was our symbol we used for our first show at the Studio Museum in Harlem [New York]. Speaker 2: And this is the School of the Art Institute of Chicago [Illinois]. This is when I was a student there in the sixties [1960s]. And that's, and as a matter of fact, those are the sunglasses I was speaking of I'm wearing in this photograph. I was a--this is a photograph of the student government and I guess my activism. I mean it was not to be taken lightly. We each decided that there was no reason to be--the student government made the decision about what all the student activity money got spent on. And so if you're not in on the policymaking decision, then you can't make any, have any impact on how it got spent. And while I--that, I was elected that year and the following year, we had five of the black students there elected to the student government. We ran a ticket of--'cause nobod--everybody only knew us by our first name. Nobody knew our last name, so we put our first name, the alphabet, and the last name, and we campaigned throughout the--(unclear)--all of us won. And some people were saying well, I didn't know that was you. Too late, I'm elected now; we in. And so I think Barack [HM Barack Obama] may have picked up on that. I'm not sure. Speaker 1: This is one of, this would be one of the emblematic and pivotal AfriCOBRA pieces I did in 1970, '71 [1971]. This piece is roughly about six and a half feet high by almost five feet wide, and it's entitled "Unite Wholy--W-H-O-L-Y--People." And if anywhere in the future anybody sees it, they'll know who it belongs to. It's a piece of mine that's gone missing, which many artists can tell you those horrif, horrific stories. Speaker 2: And this is a photograph that is a group of individual artists here Boston. This is shot on the grounds of the Museum of the National Center of Afro-American Artists, and this was in 1999. And just in the center, between my head and the smiling, laughing gentleman you see with the African robe and kufi on, Jimmy, Jimmy Gifford, who is now 103 years old. He lived across the street here from me [Roxbury, Boston, Massachusetts]. He's a painter, artist, and a hairdresser. He had a barbershop. When I first met him coming here I asked him, now I said Jimmy, they told me you were a barber. He said no, I'm not a barber-- Speaker 1: Now this is, this is this one? Speaker 2: Yeah, that's Jimmy Gifford there. And the sculpting--what's in the back? I think that's Paul--I don't know who--I can't--I think that's Paul Goodnight standing--(unclear)--but that's the head, the back of the head of John Wilson's "Eternal Presence," who, the artist who did the bust of Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]. Speaker 1: And this is Paul, Paul Goodnight standing there. Speaker 2: I think that's Paul. Right, I think, yeah, yeah, that is Paul. And this is Vinnie [ph.] Haynes, who is the brother of Roy Haynes. Speaker 1: The drummer. Speaker 2: The drummer, and the brother of Reverend [Michael E.] Haynes of the First Baptist Church [of Weston, Massachusetts] here in Boston. And that's Gary Rickson, one of the noted artists for doing murals here in Boston. And that's a bass player--oh, his name skips me right now. But this was, this little grouping right here, was just a cutout of people that were there. I organized a turn-of-the-century project, 'cause at, at that time I was president of the NCA [National Conference of Artists]. And I had launched a project of artists in whatever city there was a chapter or, or an artist, gather all the African American artists that are there, and take a photograph of all of these living artists at the turn of the century. So this is just a few of the people. We had about 150 people there. Allan Crite was up in there, and, and John Wilson, and Nelson [Stevens], I mean just folks from everywhere. So we-- Speaker 1: Can I get the photograph of all-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I have the photograph. You want me to go upstairs and get it? Speaker 1: Yeah, well, if you can. Speaker 2: Okay, yeah, yeah, it's, it's very, yeah, I--oh-- Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE): (Unclear)--that's an historic--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I'll definitely get that for you, yeah. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Let me see, where is Allan? Oh, there he is. I can always tell him by his puffs of hair. That's Allan right there, and that's his wife, Jackie. Speaker 1: There's Allan here. Speaker 2: Right, that's Allan there, and that's wife, Jackie [Cox-Crite]. And Jackie--and there's Paul right there-- Speaker 1: (Unclear)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, and--(unclear)--what I'll do is I'm gonna take this, not this one, but I'm gonna take one, and I'm gon' do one of these little, you know, circle head bodies so that, and number them, so that you all can have that for your, for the archive. What I did was org, just put out a call and told artists to, to be at the museum at nine o'clock. We gon' take this photograph. I, and I said I wanna be clear. We're not talking about CP [colored people's] time. So, about thirty people showed up later on. They weren't in the photograph, said no, we're finished; we've done it. I'll see y'all at the next ten years. So it was a project I initiated as president of NCA at that time to have us document African American artists all across the country...