 Story_ID: 63278 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. And Miss, can you state your name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: It's Shoshanna Jermicko Taliaferro Johnson. That's J-E-R-M-I-C-K-O. Well, I guess I should have said the first name first. I'm so used to calling my middle name my first name. Shoshannah is S-H-O-S-H-A-N-N-A-H; Jermicko is J-E-R-M-I-C-K-O; Taliaferro is T-A-L-I-A-F-E-R-R-O; and of course, we all know how to spell Johnson, J-O-H-N-S-O-N. Speaker 1: Okay, and is there a particular significance to the--it's an unusual name. Can you--is there a story attached to the significance of, of your names? Speaker 2: Jermicko is my grandmother's name, and Taliaferro was also her name. Shoshannah is my Hebrew name. I converted to Judaism when I was about twelve years old. So at thirteen I had a mikvah, and I was given the name Shoshannah, and so I put that name first. Speaker 1: Okay and Taliaferro is? Speaker 2: Taliaferro is, is a family name. And (unclear) because when I was in grammar school and you had to learn to spell your name, I hated all those names. And I tried finding some information about it. I've not, and I, I think I just forgot to continue looking. But I'm not sure of the origins of it. But I do know that my grandmother was Blackfoot Indian, so it could come somewhere from there. And my mom's Creole. And, yeah, so I don't know the history of that. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's Booker T. Washington's middle name; the T stands for Taliaferro. Speaker 2: Really? Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: So maybe, maybe we have some history there. Speaker 1: Could be. Speaker 2: Could be. Speaker 1: Now, now could you give us the date of your birth and the place of your birth? Speaker 2: Well, now I will definitely give you the date and the month --oh, my goodness. The month that I was born is August 20th, and the year is whatever year you wanna pick. A lady never tells her age. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And, and what--where, where were you born? Speaker 2: I was born here in Chicago at 4352 S. Michigan Avenue. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA INTERRUPTION) Speaker 1: And what is today's date? Speaker 2: Hmm? Speaker 1: What, what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date, right now it's July 26th I believe. Or is it 28th? Which one is it? Speaker 1: Twenty-sixth. Speaker 2: Twenty-sixth, okay, 2002. Speaker 1: And where are we? Speaker 2: We're here in Chicago at my factory, 1100 West Cermak Road. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and what is your occupation? Speaker 2: My occupation is designer, fashion design manufacturer, inventor. Story_ID: 63279 Speaker 1: Okay. Before we get into any in-depth questions, I'm compelled to ask you five "People" magazine-ish-type questions, the first of which is what is your favorite color? Speaker 2: Purple. Speaker 1: Okay, the second question is what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: Let's see here, sushi. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: I have two favorite times of year, summer and winter. Speaker 1: Okay, two extremes, huh? Speaker 2: I know. Yes, I've no middle, yes. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Yeah, South Beach, Florida. Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Yes, I'm terrific in getting better. It's not over till I win, and then I start again. Story_ID: 63280 Speaker 1: Okay, all right, well, let's talk about your family background. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Could you give us the names of your parents, and spell them for us, and tell us when they were born if you, if you like? Speaker 2: Okay, my mom was Teary Watson. She had a very unusual name, like myself, T-E-A-R-Y, Watson. And she was born in New Orleans [Louisiana], which is really right next door to Tallulah, Louisiana, so we just say Tallulah sometimes--in 1908 or 1911, depending on which one you wanna believe from her. My father was Albert Johnson, and he was born in Natchez, Mississippi. And I don't know what year, but I know that he was like twenty-some years older than my mom at the time. And my grandmother was Julia Jamaco John--Watson. And my grandfather was Joe Jackson. And they were born on Walter Scott's slave plantation, in which I grew up on, and so they stayed there. My grandmother's name was spelled J-U-L-I-A; Jamaco was spelled J-A-M-A-C-O. I spell mine differently. My grandfather was Joe, J-O-E. And my father was Albert, A-L-B-E-R-T. Speaker 1: Okay, is there any signif--particular story attached to your mother's name, Teary? Speaker 2: You know, I, I don't know. I got a feeling they were trying to say Terry, and it just ended up being T-E-A-R-Y. I remember asking my mom once, and, and she said something about tears and, and that was it. I, I don't really remember exactly what she said, but I always thought it was such a pretty name. And I know it's unusual, and, and I've never seen anyone else with that name, right. Story_ID: 63281 Speaker 1: Okay, now did your mother talk about where her--well, did you talk about her family background and where, where they came from and what they were--or did you just tell me that with--that, that was father's side or your mother's side? Speaker 2: On my mother's side. I don't know that much about my father's side. I, I-- Speaker 1: Okay, that was-- Speaker 2: --I think-- Speaker 1: --mother's side. Speaker 2: --I know a lot more about my mom's side-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --but not from my mom. They-- Speaker 1: You said that they grew up-- Speaker 2: --from my grandmother. Speaker 1: --her, her mother grew up on the Walter Scott plantation. Speaker 2: On Walter Scott's plantation-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --my grandmother. Speaker 1: Okay, in Tallulah? Speaker 2: In Tallulah, Louisiana. Speaker 1: Louisiana, okay. Speaker 2: And my aunt worked there, the whole family. Speaker 1: Did they have a story about why they stayed, you know, af--after slavery on the same plantation? Speaker 2: Let me just go back in my head here. I've tried to think about some of these things you were gonna ask me. My Aunt Rachel was a maid and housekeeper on Walter Scott's plantation. And Mr. Walter Scott owned some land at 406--204 Depot Street, which my grandmother later moved to. But I really don't know why they chose to stay there. I just know that we did. And I know that as a child I would play there, and, and I thought it was all okay, except I could never understand why I couldn't go in the same door that the little kids, the other little white kids went in. But it was a norm, so it wasn't something that I, I guess questioned. I, I was constantly getting spankings for going in there anyway. So, I don't, I don't really know that. Speaker 1: Okay and you said you didn't know much about your father's background. Speaker 2: I don't know any--except for he's Jamaican. Speaker 1: He was Jamaican. Speaker 2: He was Jamaican. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, I know that much. Speaker 1: And he was born-- Speaker 2: In Nat--well, he was born-- Speaker 1: Nat-- Speaker 2: --in Natch--his parents were Jamaican. He was born in Natchez, Mississippi. And then I think they tell me that when he was about two months old they went back to Jamaica, right. Speaker 1: Okay, and, and then he came back here or? Speaker 2: And then he came back here, right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then somewhere along the line he met my mom, and, and they got married. And he had a store on 43rd Street, and it was a, a meat store. I guess that's where my entrepreneurness comes from. And-- Speaker 1: So he owned his own store? Speaker 2: He owned his own store. Speaker 1: He was a butcher. Speaker 2: He was a butcher, that's right-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Butcher, yeah. Speaker 1: Such a--(unclear) kind of a negative twang, but, but you know, the name. But-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --he had his own meat store--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: He had his own meat store, right. Speaker 1: Okay, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, he was a butcher on 43rd Street. Now I don't exactly-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --know where on 43rd, but I know it was not too far from where I was born. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Did, did they have a story about how they met? Speaker 2: Yeah, I think my mom did tell me that once. I believe that my mom went to the store to get some meat. And her friends had told her there was this gorgeous man who owned this store, and he was single. So my mom decided she'd go up here and check him out. So she went to the store to get this meat, and this, this gorgeous man was in the store. And when she went up, there was another woman up there buying the same kind of meat. And so she bought her meat and went on home. And then the next day she ran out of meat, so she went back again. And, and then every day she would go back for meat. So finally he asked her what her name was. And she told him what her name was, and then they started to date, and the rest is history. And my mom was forty-nine when I was born. And so she tells me that they were getting ready to retire and do some things that retired people do, and she wasn't feeling very well. And my brother-in-law was a doctor, so my sister's husband. So she went to the doctor, and the doctor said oh, you won't re--retire for about another nine months. So she said she was so angry that she went home and she got this broom. And she went back up to 43rd Street, and she started chasing him around the corner. She said when she went in the door, he looked and saw her and said "Hi, babe." Mama said she just put that broom up and said all your fault, and started beating him with the broom. And he's running around the store--"What's wrong with you, woman? What's wrong with you?" "I'm pregnant." So, here I am, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, so they met here in Chicago? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They met here in Chicago. Story_ID: 63282 Speaker 1: So when you'd go down to Louisiana, you'd go down to visit and visit your grandmother, or? Speaker 2: I tried not to go back. My grandmother has passed away. She passed away in '70 [1970]--no, she passed away in '60 [1960], and I've only gone back one other time. And I'm sure--I have some cousins there, but I, I don't go back anymore. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, but you used to go down when you were little? Speaker 2: I used go--well, I lived there. I lived with my grandmother. I grew up there. Speaker 1: Oh, you did? Oh, okay. Speaker 2: I grew up on that plantation. I got up at 4:00 in the morning and went to pick cotton. That much I can remember. I can just remember all that. I can remember all the signs. I can remember growing up in what was called the shotgun house. That's a house where there's a room in the front and a room in the back. And if you open up the front door, you can see clean through to the back door with the outhouse out back. It was my job to feed the chickens, so as growing up I had a little chicken for a pet. It was old one-eye. One-eye and I was baddest thing on, on the plantation. Anyway, my grandmother would get us up at--get me up at 4:00 in the morning, and we'd go pick cotton. I hated that. All I could ever pick was twenty-six pounds, because I didn't like bugs. And usually the man would come by with the truck, you know, with that candy with the--it was pink and white and brown, the coconut stuff, and, and, and the pop and the candy. And by the time I had spent my twenty six cents. And then the next day we would get up and start this all over again. And as a matter of fact, I should've brought it with me, but I have the last piece of cotton I ever picked. So, I grew up on that plantation, and I just have these memories. That's--I can remember as a child we would go and visit my aunt, and my uncle would pick us up in this old T-Model Ford. And you had to put one leg--you had to put your legs up because you could see the ground underneath. And, and we would be going to my aunt's house through the, what was called at that time, the Fairground, and I would see these people hanging from trees. And my grandmother--my uncle would say don't look, and my grandmother would say no, I want her to see this, you know. And I would look and, and I can't remember now how I felt about it at the time. I can't honestly say whether I felt fear or what my feelings were at the time. I think I numbed them; I really do. But I, I, sometimes I close my eyes at night now, and I can just see those, those, those bodies hanging from trees. Story_ID: 63283 Speaker 1: And I remember that when I was growing up there, there wasn't a school for African Americans at that time. Of course we were colored I think. Were we colored? Yeah, we were colored then when I was growing up, so there wasn't a school for colored kids. And therefore, colored kids didn't go to school where I was until I think--the first year I was to start school is the first school they built there, and it was called Madison Parish, so I was enrolled in Madison Parish School. And I had to go through the Fairgrounds, and I had to go through another part of town in order to get to school. And I love pecans, and I had a best little friend. And my grandmother used to walk me to school, and then she started--stopped walking me. 'Cause I guess kids get to an age where we don't want you walking us anymore, and so we would walk together. And one day we were coming from grammar school, and we had to come through this little old fairground kind of park. And--these bugs decided--and there was a pecan tree, a couple of 'em. So we decided, oh, we'll just put our books down and climb up and get some pecans. And these little white boys came by, and they decided that they did not want us up this tree. So they started to call us names and get out the tree. And I guess I've always been a kid that I control me, you know. So I said we can climb up this tree if we want to. You don't own the tree. And my little girlfriend, Ellen, was saying oh, don't talk back, don't talk back, don't--what do you mean don't talk back? And I don't know whether this bravery from me came from me because I grew up on this plantation, and I was used to being around white people, and I was used to not following their rules. And, and I think I was just one of these little kids that sometimes they overlooked it. Like, Mr. Walter Scott never really told me that I couldn't come in the front door. It was my grandmother who, and my aunt, who would get upset if I went in the front door. And, and his cousin--his daughters, never really--so I was a part of that, so I didn't know this. So the boys decided that they would beat us, and so they killed my little friend. And what they did to me was they nailed my leg to the ground. And so of course, you know, they took me to the hospital, but nobody went looking for them. Nobody went looking for them at all. So I've got these holes in my leg where they did this. And it was shortly after that that my, my grandmother told my mother you'd better come get this kid and take her back to the North because they gonna kill her down here be-- Speaker 2: That's a horrible story (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: They killed your--they-- Speaker 1: They--she died, yeah. Speaker 2: How did they, I mean-- Speaker 1: They beat her so bad that she died. Speaker 2: How old were these boys? Speaker 1: She was very--and, and I--when I close my eyes today, I can see--I remember fighting them for her 'cause she was so frail. We were like eight years old at this time, eight years old at this time. Speaker 2: And how old was the boys that, that--how old were the boys that-- Speaker 1: The boys were I would say around twelve, thirteen, fourteen. One, the oldest one was probably much older, but they were big, big old country boys. And I can just close my eyes sometimes and see them with those overalls on. And that's all they had. They didn't have anything but the overalls and dirty feet. And ah, it was just--I was very angry for a long time, yeah. I think I was-- Speaker 2: I can imagine. Speaker 1: --very angry for a very long time. Yeah, so that I can remember, and I --. Story_ID: 63284 Speaker 1: I just can remember sometimes laying, laying in, in my bed at night and, and I would hear this, this noise, 'cause we had wallpaper. You know, you put up the wallpaper by mixing flour and water together; that made paste. And we put--my grandmother and I would put this wallpaper up, and it was great food for the rats. So we had--I'd lay there at night thinking one day I'm gonna get out of this. And I would always think of clothing. And so I remember granny and I--granny decided that she'd move off of the plantation. Now why she decided to move off, I don't know, but we then moved into the house on 204 Depot Street. And that had its own chicken yard, so we would--it was my job, of course, to take care of the chickens. And then the outhouse-- Speaker 2: And was that--that's into the shotgun house or-- Speaker 1: Hmm? Speaker 2: --that you moved into the shotgun house-- Speaker 1: Both were shotgun. Speaker 2: Both, okay. Speaker 1: (Unclear) shotgun on the plantation. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And they still had the old slavery quarters there and everything, 'cause other people lived there. And the house that we moved into was also a shotgun house. Speaker 2: How many people lived on that plantation? Speaker 1: If I can remember correctly, there was Mr. and Mrs. Scott, and they had two daughters and one son. And then there were like three or four other families that, that lived on that plantation, of which my grandmother wouldn't let me have anything to do with them, and I don't have a clue why. Speaker 2: And does that include everybody that lived on the plantation or just, just the white people? Speaker 1: That included everybody that lived there then, yes. Speaker 2: That's the white and black? Speaker 1: White and black. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, that included that. So then when we moved on 204 Depot Street, I had two best friends growing up. They were two twins, the first time I ever knew that there were two kids who could be born at the same time, James and Jonas Crenshaw, Jr. I will never forget their names. They were my friends that grew up there. And I remember I was looking through a magazine they had. And it was, it was an apartment or something. It had electric lights. I never saw any electric lights before 'cause we had coal oil lamps. And this one lady had a television, and I used to sneak away so I could go and watch this TV. I'm skipping ahead of myself here (laughter). This is all so exciting. And when my mother would come, I would ask her, Mom, do they have things like this in Chicago [Illinois]? 'Cause she would send me things, but she rarely ever came. And she said yeah, we have electric lights. I couldn't wait to figure out what an electric light did, or TV, or, or just anything. You know, but as a kid, I remember when you got ice, you stuck that sign in the window that said you wanted ice, ice for the icebox, not refrigerator for the icebox--and feeding the chickens, I hated that. One day I was feeding the chickens, and, and I got skunked. Speaker 2: An actual skunk got you? Speaker 1: Yeah, I loved animals, and I thought it was so cute. And just before my grandmother could say no, I reached for the skunk and it decided [sound effect]. So they, they deskunked me. And then I used to go hunting with my, my uncle, but-- Speaker 2: How do they deskunk you? How, how-- Speaker 1: Well, they put you in a tub--those metal tubs--in the middle of the yard with, with tomato juice and tomatoes. And they keep rubbing you down with tomatoes and toma--so you're sitting there and all your little friends are just laughing at you. So that was, that was part of my childhood. You know, it was, it was interesting. Story_ID: 63285 Speaker 1: You know, I can remember sometimes we would go on the Fairground, and I remember one time we were going to see aunt--we were always going to see Aunt Rachel or Aunt, Aunt Hattie. And I'll have to tell you about Aunt Hattie, 'cause I think that's where my fashion sense came from, Aunt Hattie. But we were going to see either Aunt Rachel or Aunt Hattie, and I can remember seeing the signs that would say "Colored Only" and "White Only." And if we wanted ice cream, there was this little place that was on the way for ice cream. And we'd always have to stand outside and get the ice cream, but the other people would go in. I remember one day I went in. Boy, I got a spanking. And I could never understand why this lady with me who loved me would spank me, but the people in there never said anything. They just stopped and looked at me. And now today I understand. She knew the rules, I didn't, and she didn't teach me those rules at the time, you know. Speaker 2: So they would have held her accountable for-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --your behavior. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: So she had to, she had to make a show of correcting you? Speaker 1: Right, that's it, yeah. So, and then I had a--my, my favorite aunt--well, actually, Aunt Rachel was my favorite, but my other aunt was Aunt Hattie. Aunt Hattie was one of those ladies who was elegant. As a matter of fact, my uncle, whom she was married to, Uncle A. G., had a barbershop in, in Tallulah [Louisiana]. And I used to always be amazed because we would go there, and he had his own business, and he didn't have to answer to anyone. And he bought me my first dictionary when I started school. I still have that dictionary. Anyway, we would go and visit Aunt Hattie, and Aunt Hattie had a neat house. It was so pretty where she was. And she had these strawberries that grew in back, in her backyard. And that's the only time I got--well, twice I'd get a spanking at her house. I'd go eat up all the strawberries. But she had this sewing machine, and it was a foot pedaling sewing machine. It was in her bedroom. And the minute I hit her house, I'd head straight for that sewing machine. And I would usually get a scolding, because they were always afraid I'd get the needle through my finger, but it didn't matter. I didn't mind. That was a whipping I didn't mind 'cause every single time I'd head for that sewing machine. And Aunt Hattie was the house you went to that, if there were three people, she'd cook three pieces of chicken. So if you wanted seconds, too bad. So I, I never left Aunt Hattie's full of food, but I always left there full of being able to sit at that sewing machine and play with it. And it didn't matter about the whipping. Aunt Hattie passed away, and she made certain that I got that sewing machine. So they dismantled it and shipped it here, so I own that sewing machine now. But I always loved the way Aunt Hattie dressed. She was always so fashionable, and I couldn't wait to grow up so I could be like Aunt Hattie. And then I would ask her, Aunt Hattie, where'd you get those clothes from? And she'd say, I make 'em. And she'd show me the sewing machine, and I'd be at that sewing machine again trying to make 'em. So the first outfit I made was for my grandmother. I tore up her white uniform and I hand-sewed it, and it was horrible. But my grandmother was a mother at the first, at the Baptist church, Ebenezer I think it was. And she wore this outfit to, to service, and her friends laughed at her and asked her where'd she get it from 'cause it was horrible. My grandmama said, my grandmama--my grandbaby made this, and she just walked on very proud. So that was my first one, aside from dirt clothes, you know, mud clothes I used to make. I used to go and get the--we'd catch these things called crawdads. We called 'em crawdads. I would dress the crawdads, and they'd die on me. I'd put 'em in--take 'em out and put 'em in the mud, and you know the claws would be like this. And so then what you do is build an outfit around them in the mud. And you go back a couple of hours later, and the crawdads is like [head tilted with tongue hanging out], it's gone. But it--so we'd give it a burial. We were just, we were fun kids, all right. Speaker 2: Well, it does sound like you had a good time, you know, doing what you were doing. Speaker 1: I thought I did. Story_ID: 63286 Speaker 1: Yeah, but, but after that incident, you, you came North, right, to Chicago? Speaker 2: After that incident, about a year later my mom came and got me when I was 10 years old, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And sometimes I like to say I left one hell for another, but at least I was here with mom and, and, and my nieces, and my sister. Speaker 1: Okay, well, when did you--you say you left one hell for another, what was Chicago like for, for you then, when you, you got here? Speaker 2: I remember it was 1956, and I remember getting on the bus here. We caught, we took the Greyhound bus here, and we were in the back. And I couldn't wait to get here, because being with granny it was just granny and I. I didn't really have anybody to play with, 'cause the other kids had to go in the house at night. But they--I was told that there were two kids here that I was going to, to be with. They were my nieces. Now, I don't really think I thought about what nieces meant or anything like that. And since I'd never grew up with a sister, or I didn't really put any importance on that either. I just didn't understand it. These were foreign people to me. So, oh, there's just really--so anyway, I remember that getting up the next morning after my first day of arriving here, and it was such a long trip, I went outside to play with the kids. And they started to laugh at me because of my accent, so I remember I wouldn't go out too much then. And I remember that at--in the South, it was my granny and I who would sit at the table and eat. But here, I didn't sit at a table. I sat on the floor to, to eat, and the other people sat at the table. And my mom was never there. She was working. And I couldn't understand why I was sitting on the--well, I don't know if I couldn't understand or I just accepted why I was sitting on the floor by the refrigerator eating my food. And I must have been here about six months, and this was still going on. My mother would work during the dinnertime hour. And I was going to school. I was going to Forestville, and that's where I was enrolled. And the kids there would laugh, so I would come home and just immediately go inside. Anyway, my mom came home one day and saw that--she was--I guess she got sick at work. She was a textile weaver at E. L. Manshore [ph.], which used to be on 16th and Michigan--Indiana--I'm sorry--6--1600 or 1400. The mayor's at 14--1400, 1400 South Indiana Avenue. So she came home early, and she noticed that I was on the floor eating. And she wanted to know why, why is she sitting out here on this floor with all these whelps on her? Well, my brother-in-law that was married to my sister was white. He was a white doctor. My sister was light, bright, and almost white. I'm the darkest thing in that family. I, I don't belong there. Anyway, she didn't like dark people, my sister didn't, so she decided that this is where I should sit. She didn't want me quote "sitting at the table with her--she didn't want the "little black nigger" quote sitting at the table with her kids. So, I was just so glad to be around kids as a child, it didn't matter where I sat. By the way, the first day that I was here, the first day that I arrived from Tallulah, Louisiana, and I woke up that morning, I spent the entire morning turning on electric lights. I'd run it--they had lights and flushing toilets, and they had toilets, and I had never seen this before. So I'd run from room to room turning on lights and flushing toilets, turning on lights and flushing toilets. I couldn't get over it, not one coal oil lamp in the place. But anyway, so my, my mom was very upset with my sister about this. And-- Speaker 1: Now, now how old is your sister? Speaker 2: My sister was-- Speaker 1: I mean how much older-- Speaker 2: -twenty-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --twenty when I was born, so she was twenty years older than myself. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And her kids were already older than me, right. So-- Speaker 1: Well, she was old enough to be your mother herself-- Speaker 2: Oh, she was old enough to be my mother, right. Speaker 1: --I mean in terms of that. Speaker 2: So what I was beginning to learn was that even in my race that I was still the wrong color. You know, not only was I the wrong color there, but then I came here and I'm still the wrong color. I'm the wrong color in grammar school. I'm the wrong color in my own family. Because if you were light, bright, and almost white, you had it made in the shade. But if you were dark, forget it. Story_ID: 63287 Speaker 1: You're in grade school at Forestville, and we were talking about, you know, we're talk--we were talking about the color caste system in your family. Speaker 2: Oh, it was deep in my family, deep. Not only did it go to my sister, but it also went to my mom. And I guess the challenge there with my mom was that I was dark. And I never really knew why I went to stay with my grandmother, who was, my grandmother was coal black. She was beautiful. And it was because my mother didn't, didn't want to keep a dark kid be-- Speaker 1: Now your mother was lighter than you, right? Speaker 2: Oh, my mother was light, bright, and almost white, right, and which it was puzzling because my dad was dark. So my dad and I was the same color. I guess she just thinks--didn't expect to have any kids. And I guess back in those days, they just didn't do the abortion thing. I don't know, but I know that I'm the only dark person in my family. And they both had the same attitude, and so I was given to my grandmother. So it wasn't because we didn't expect any more kids. It was two reasons: we didn't expect any more kids; and you're dark. And I was told this, you know, so it's not something I'm guessing now. And I wouldn't say it's something that maybe she was proud of later, but that's the way it was back then. And it took me a lot of therapy to get over that, Story_ID: 63288 Speaker 1: how did your father feel? Did, did you ever-- Speaker 2: I didn't know him. Now here's the strange story about that. I remember growing up with my grandmother in the South, and that there were people that had this male in the house. To this day, I question whether I even thought about there having to be a male in order for me to a part of this world. The only time I ever saw my mom up until I was ten was when she would come for a weekly visit every two or three years I would see her. I remember I would always pack my bags because hopefully this really pretty lady that they say is my mom is gonna take me back with her, only she would leave. And then I remember that one time I'd devised this scheme where, okay, I got angry with myself because I fell asleep. So if I pack my bags, and I put 'em by the door and I sit here by the bags, when she get ready to go I'll know, but she would still leave. I lost my train of thought. That was a deep one. What were you asking me? I'm sorry. Speaker 1: I was just asking about your, how did your father feel about this? But you were telling me--yeah, but everything-- Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: --your saying is important, so-- Speaker 2: Okay, any, anyway, my--when I came here, and I saw other kids that had these two people in their household, I don't think I ever really thought about it. I never really thought about it. And one day, we were living at 4511 Indiana in my sister's house. I was outside jumping rope. I loved double-dutch. I was good at double-dutch. I'd made a, a friend with one of the kids in the neighborhood who was kind of odd like myself, Belinda Hudson. Anyway, we were outside jumping rope, and this man walked up and said does anybody know who Tali is, 'cause my family sometimes would call me Tali. And the kids all say Tali? Yeah, do you know who Jay is? And so my little girlfriend, Belinda, said (unclear), and I went running in the house, 'cause it was me. And I'm saying, mom, there's some man outside asking who I am. Well, he did say--Belinda said, why do you wanna know? And he says because I'm her father. That sent me running in the house. And I said, mom, mom, there's some man outside that says he's my father. I didn't need no daddy, did I to get born? So, my mom came to the door outside on the stoop, and he was gone. And the look she gave me was like, and I said, mom, he really was here. And all the kids started say yeah, he was here, he was here. Well, two days later, I see this man coming, and I went running in the house--mom, that man's coming. So he walked up and my mom came out, and she looked at him and she said, this, you know this is one heck of a way to meet your daughter. And I remember looking at him. And we went inside, and I'm sitting there like a little kid just looking at this tall man, and he was my color. And that's what I thought, he was my color. This is my daddy? So, I've always been an entrepreneur. I sold looks for 25 cent. All my friends could get a look at him if they gave me 25 cents, until my mother found out. Speaker 1: You actually-- Speaker 2: I sold a look. I have a daddy too. This man said he's my daddy. Now if you wanna see him, you have to give me a quarter. And so, I think I made about a dollar twenty-five cents. Of course, we all used it to buy ice cream and cookies and whatever the next door--store that was next door to us sold. But every now and then he would come by. And I know he would always promise me he was gonna do things with me, and he never did that. And, and then I, I learned that he was living in Gary, Indiana, at the Washington--it was either Washington Street or the Washington Hotel. Story_ID: 63289 Speaker 1: And I would still look forward to his visits. And every now and then he would show up, and I would always be amazed that this person is a daddy. I--really, you're a daddy? And so then when I got older, 'cause he died when I was about fifteen, and, and I buried him-- Speaker 2: He was much older than, than-- Speaker 1: Much older. Speaker 2: He was like almost a grandfather age, I guess-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah-- Speaker 2: --even though he was-- Speaker 1: --much older, right. 'Cause I had a brother who died a couple of years ago that was 85. I didn't know I had him either, but it was a brother on his side. So, I don't really know that my father felt anything, you know, or heard--I don't really know. I don't know the man. I didn't know the man that well. I knew I used to make up stories about him. 'Cause then after I found out that a father was very important to a family, oh, I had some stories that wouldn't last. You know, because-- Speaker 2: What, you used to make 'em up about him? Speaker 1: Oh yes. All these other kids had these wonderful stories about their father and their mother, and I had nothing. So I would create my stories. And I guess that's why I'm very good at writing now, extremely good. It's, it's an interest of mine, and then I could really create my own little stories. You know, whatever they had a story for, I had me a story too. Story_ID: 63290 Speaker 1: Well, who really looked out for you, and, and--I mean, when you were coming up? I mean it seems like that, that, that's a question that, that comes to mind as I, as I hear this. Who really looked out for you, and who did you really look to for, for strength and comfort and that sort of thing coming up? Speaker 2: I believe it was me who looked out for me. And I think I've always been looking for that person who is in my corner, who's the wind beneath my wing. And I don't think it's ever been there. I can remember that I would get easily attached to, to people, and they were always the wrong people in my life. I would get easily attached to schoolteachers. I would get easily attached to friends. I was always looking for that mother, that father figure, you know, always. Even to this day, I still search for that. And sometimes I, I, I feel like I don't really know where I belong. You know, it's like here I am sitting with, with The History Channel, and you're telling me that I've made history. But there's a part of me that says well, who am I? You know, and I'm trying to find that out. Who, who am I? Because back then, I didn't belong with the black world, 'cause I was black. I didn't belong with the white world, because I was black. So what world did I belong to, you know? Within my family I can remember waking up many, many days wanting to really wake up and be my sister's color because it seemed that everybody loved her because of her color or whatever. I remember that I would love going to the grocery store for people. I would die to go to the grocery store for you so that I could keep the change so that I could buy some Ultra--I think it was called Archibees. Archibees was a skin tone color that supposedly changed the color of your skin. And at a, at a time in my life I messed up my skin trying to change the color of it so that I could fit in somewhere. So, I guess one day it--I guess my little brain decided at that age well, I guess I'll just fit in with me. You know, so I've always been somewhat of a loner, and always somewhat determined. I think I started out determined that if I was important enough and became important enough, you would love me. If I did and had enough scholarships or, or got great grades, or did this, or that, or the other, you would love me. And when the '60s [1960s] came by, and my color became very, very profitable. It not only became profitable, it became acceptable. I think a lot of us was angry, and I was certainly angry. And I think that anger came out in a number of ways, you know. I, I don't always, I don't, I don't know. A lot of it I've stuffed and just tried not to feel, you know. And, and so these questions you're asking me is bringing this stuff up, and that's good, that's good. Story_ID: 63291 Speaker 1: Okay, did you, do you think you understand a little better after--I mean over time? I know we've--in the--from the--at least I'm, I'm not. I'm about the same age you are, but over time, people have, or you know, scholars, and researchers, and, and people who are--who have the interest in the black community have tried to like peel down black culture, and understand like why we have these attitudes and feelings we have, and, and you know, and you know, the cultural attitudes, and the racial attitudes, the color attitudes and all that, in addition to the real response to a real oppression, 'cause this is real. I mean, do you, do you think you understand all that better now? Speaker 2: Well, yes and no. I guess I understand what happened. What I don't understand is why it continues to happen, and it does. And, and clearly this is just my personal opinion on, on why it happened. I look at what I've learned about slavery, and I look at my growing up on the plantation. And, and I realize that when I would go in the kitchen of, of Walter Scott's house, that the people in the house were light skinned black people. Those light skinned black people had nothing to do with the people who were outside. So I sat one day and I thought about this, and I thought, you know, we were taught that. It was inbred. It was something that, that--we were taught if you were light, if you had, as they used to say "good hair", then you were okay. You had some value. But if you were dark and you had kinky hair, then you had no value. If you were light, then you became the house nigger. If you were dark, then you became the yard one. And our parents grew up in that era. And I clearly believe that what we--what was taught those people who gave birth to us is exactly what we are taught. And somewhere along the line, until we reteach ourself, either it's, it's ethnical or, or just in general, if, if, if you don't retrain yourself when you discover that some of those things that you were taught are not sufficient to today's life, then you're just as bad as what you'd learned. I had to do a lot of forgiving. And that forgiving meant that the world gave me at that time exactly what it knew how to give me. If it knew better, it would have done better. I could either allow those things to continue to make pris--a prisoner of me, or I could understand myself what freedom really means. And freedom is in the mind and in here [pointing to heart], 'cause the world isn't gonna give me freedom, you know. It isn't gonna give me freedom for a lot of reasons. Sometimes I'm not free because I'm Jewish. Sometimes I'm not free today because I'm black. Sometimes I'm not free because I'm a female. Sometimes I'm not free because I am an entrepreneur. Sometimes I'm not free just because I'm breathing. So, do I allow those things to keep me a prisoner? Nah, 'cause if the world knew better, it would do better. If I knew better, I could do--know--do better. Story_ID: 63292 Speaker 1: So what I, what I look at today is my family. Although what they did was not a great thing, although what they did, did not give me good values in terms of, of being a child and, and finding worth, somewhere along the line God, or a higher power, or something I saw gave me the things I needed to get me here today. So, I look at all that negativity that happened to me back then as dirt. I have a saying when people ask me about my growing up and, and how I, I, I, I perceive that, and this is how I perceive it. I perceive it as a hole, and I was a beautiful eagle that had gotten knocked in the hole, and my wings were broken. And all these people and all these situations came by and looked at this beautiful little innocent eagle in the hole and decided that their arms weren't long enough to pull me out. But they couldn't stand my pain so what they would do was just throw dirt on me. They buried me alive. And for a while I allowed that to happen, because all I could see was I can't--my wings are broken, I can't get out of his hole. But you know, the dirt they throwed on me, the pile just kept getting higher, and higher, and higher. And I discovered that although my wings are broken, there is nothing wrong with my feet. And if I jump on this pile of dirt, and you throw some more on and I jump on that, and you throw some more on and I jump on that, pretty soon I could step right out the hole 'cause (unclear). Speaker 2: You take the-- Speaker 1: So you allow--I have allowed the dirt to just get me out of the hole. Speaker 2: You take the higher ground. Speaker 1: Right. And I say that to say this: I've allowed all that hate, all that negativity to just propel my life. What keeps me moving--one of the strong things that keeps me moving in terms of the devastation in my family is this: One day my sister did something to me. My light, bright, and almost white sister did something to me. And today I don't remember what it was, but this is the one thing I do remember. My mom and I were on, getting on the bus to go to Goldblatt's. 'Cause you know back in the day white--black people went to Goldblatt's, Sears, and if you had it someplace to go, went to Litton's. So, evidently, we didn't have no place to go, we were going to Goldblatt's. And I said something to my mom about what she had did. And my mother said to me, your sister can buy and sell you. That has stuck with me. You know, it has stuck with me, and I remember that it was that day when I became determined that nobody else in this world would ever be in a position to say that to me. You may say it, but it would not be true. No one could buy and sell me. If I had made it from the South, I had done something. So, every time, even in school or anything else that, that, when I would become disgusted, or I wanted to give up and quit, I could hear that. I could see that dirt, hear that dirt being thrown on me in, in my mind, and I would just jump up some more and keep going. Now maybe those were all the wrong reasons for achieving, but they were the only reasons I had at that time. Now I've given myself new ones. And those new ones are because I am capable, because this is what God wanted me to do. He didn't tell nobody else what my destiny was. He just told me this morning. And so, I don't achieve things now because I need to show you, because I need to gain worth. I do it now because I love it, and I deserve it. Story_ID: 63293 Speaker 1: All right, now, let's go back to grade school I guess. And you know, when you were in grade school with all, all these experiences, I guess you, you're saying in a way that you, you--they caused you to think more deeply about your future and what you had to do I guess, right? You had to kind of--you became more determined because of some of the, some of the negative experiences you were having? Speaker 2: Yeah, I think my first determination in grade school was to get rid of the accent. I remember I used to work really hard at trying to pronounce words correctly and to get rid of my accent. I thought maybe that's why they didn't like me, because of the accent. So then I got rid of the accent somewhat, and that wasn't it. I was still sitting on the floor. Speaker 1: They maintained that posture of keeping you on the--eating on the floor. Speaker 2: They kept me on the floor until my mom and sister had that fight. Speaker 1: Oh now, you didn't tell me about the fight. Speaker 2: Oh-- Speaker 1: I didn't know she had a fight. Speaker 2: Okay, well, my mom came home one day and I was sitting on the floor, and she asked my sister. And my sister was--had--was an alcoholic. And she asked her why was I sitting on the floor. And she said because she didn't want that little black nigger sitting at the table with her kids. And my mother and her had this fight, and that was the first time I could ever remember my mom taking up for me, first time. And it stopped after then, but then the beatings started, because my brother-in-law, who was white, would beat me with a syringe cord. And oh, and--yeah, you know those, those cords and on the, the hot water bot--bags. He would beat me, but he wouldn't beat his kids, and they were usually the ones doing the dirt, not me. So, I, I could just could just remem--I ran away from home. You know, I'd run away from home when they'd give me the beatings and--or either I would just-- Speaker 1: Now you said your brother-in-law was a--what profession was he? Speaker 2: A doctor. Speaker 1: He was a doctor? Speaker 2: He was a doctor, an M.D., yeah, medical doctor. Speaker 1: And he was white? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, he was white. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, you'll see pictures of him. He was white. Dr. William Edgar White was his name, yes. Yeah, he was white. So, they, they always say, you know, when I sit today and I see kids who survive abusive, either sexual abuse, mental abuse, physical abuse, and the--usually the ones that abuse you are the ones you're closest to, and no one understands that. I do. I do because it's that one that you're always trying to please, you know. You're always trying to get accepted by that person 'cause you can't understand why if this person is supposed to love you, they're doing these things to you. It must be something you're doing wrong. And I was always trying to please, you know. That's just how it was. Story_ID: 63294 Speaker 1: That's a lot, a lot or a little person to have on their mind. But when you were in, in grade school, did you have a sense of what you wanted to do when you grew up, you know? Speaker 2: When I was twelve years old, my mother bought me my first sewing machine. I wasn't sure if she bought it so--because of what I wanted to do, or if she bought it so I could stop running in the alley beating up the little boys. I was a little fighter. Anyway, I remember I used to tear up my clothes too at home, so I think that's why, 'cause I loved to sketch. So I wouldn't go out and play with the kids a lot of times. I would just stay in and, and sketch, or I would stay in and sew by hand. And so she bought me a sewing machine once, which, again, is confusing because here these people are who are on one hand abusing you, but on the other hand they're doing something for you. And, and so it, it becomes confu--really confusing. I don't know if I ever really thought about what a career--what career I wanted to have or if I just went by daily doing things that I liked doing. I don't think anybody rare--really ever asked me what I wanted to do with my life until I got to high school and you're getting ready to graduate, and a counselor takes you out and asks you those questions. Speaker 1: That's a fine time to ask you. Speaker 2: Yeah, right. Story_ID: 63295 Speaker 1: I know that during high school and--well, during grammar school, there was a year and nine months that was out of my life because I was hospitalized and I was paralyzed. I was told I was gonna die, and I had to learn to walk all over again. You know, and so I was-- Speaker 2: And what, what was wrong with you? I mean what happened? Speaker 1: When I was--let me see, I had left Forestville [Elementary], and I had enrolled in Coleman Elementary. And I think I'd maybe been there--it was almost near graduation or maybe a year down the line from graduating. And I got to a point where I just couldn't walk. You know, I couldn't walk very far. And so my mother sent me to a doctor, a white doctor, on 47th Street, and he told her that I was anemic. And I had a sister, a half-sister, on my father's side, Pecora Maxwell. So Pecora would come and get me, and she would take me to the doctor, and the doctor was telling her that. Meanwhile, I'm still losing weight, and I'm still losing weight, and I'm, I'm, I'm still anemiated [ph.]. I still can't walk, and my mother is kind of thinking maybe I'm faking it. And I don't know why, 'cause I am losing weight. So then all of a sudden, my brother-in-law decided that you need to bring her--my brother-in-law had had a stroke, so he asked my mother to bring me into his room. And she took me in, and he took one look at me and said you're gonna have to take her to another doctor 'cause she's gonna die. Well, the doctor that I ended up going to was really famous. I think it was Dr. Tillman, who used to be a famous--one of those doctors that went to Africa, did the safari. 'Cause when you went into his space, you saw all these heads of animals on the wall. Doctor--I think it was Dr. Tillman. Anyway, he took one look at me, took x-rays, and told my mother that she had to get me to the hospital that night, that he was going to make arrangements. So they took me to MTS for tuberculosis. I had tuberculosis, and it was so severe that the doctor told her, and I can remember these words: "We don't think she's gonna make it through the night." And I remember getting angry. How dare you? I'm gonna make it through the night, and I did. I made it through the night, but I stayed in that hospital for--flat of my back--for one year. And so I had to go to a special school, Spalding [School], for handicapped kids. So it was a year and nine months that I was in the hospital. And then after that, I came home. And it was happier being in the hospital than it was at home, so I managed to make my pack slip again so I could go back to where I was happy at. So I went there and I stayed another six months, and then I came out. Story_ID: 63296 Speaker 1: Okay, now, now where did you--what high school did you end up graduating from? Speaker 2: DuSable [High School]. Speaker 1: DuSable, okay Speaker 2: Yeah, DuSable. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: I graduated DuSable. That was an interesting experience there because I met a woman there that would change my life forever. And she would allow me to practice, and she would give me faith in myself. Her name was Dr. Margaret Burroughs (ph.). At the time she wasn't a doctor. It was just my teacher, Ms. Burroughs--and Ms. Price. Ms. Price was also an instructor of mine. Dr. Burroughs was my art instructor. And I can remember Dr. Burroughs was the first woman I ever saw with hair like this. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And I could not understand, why don't you press your hair? Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And I remember one day I sat down and I asked Dr. Burroughs why didn't she press her hair. And she told me because I'm an African American, I'm an African woman, I'm a black woman, and black women don't do that. And I thought well, I'm black. Yes we do. But I didn't say anything. So what I would do--there was something about her that I just loved, and I loved being around, and I wanted more of, and I wanted to really be in her embracing. So what I would do is every Christmas, I would crochet Dr. Burroughs a hat, a crochet hat. Two Christmases went by and I gave her hat, and she'd wear it. The third Christmas she gave me some beads, which I still have, from Africa. And I remember looking at those beads, and I could just feel that I was in Africa. Those beads were so important to me. They were like something I'd never seen before in my life. And Dr. Burroughs would always say, when I would tell her that they didn't--they said I couldn't be an artist, you can be an artist. I wanted to make clothes. I wanted to draw clothes. I wanted to do whatever clothes--whatever had to do with clothes. I didn't have a terminology for it, but that's what I wanted to do. I was editor of the, the school newspaper, and interviewed people from Hollywood. I'd go and do that whenever they would come in. And people who had modeling agencies, I'd go do that. In school, I was on the future nurses club because they said that's all I was gonna able--be able to do, or be a social worker, or, or a nurse, or what was the--a teacher. So, of course, you know, we--I'm looking for myself here. So it was time to graduate, and we have a teacher that called--counselor called Mrs. Bogan (ph.). Mrs. Bogan was white. Now I know she loved us. She was really a nice lady, but she--it was her job to tell us what we were capable of doing once we told her what we wanted to do. So it's time to graduate. She asked me what do I want to do. And there's three of us that are good friends, Janet, Cathy, and myself--Catherine Gross and Janet Blake. Janet wanted to be a nurse; Cathy wanted to be a neurosurgeon; and I wanted to be a clothing designer, a clothing maker--didn't know about fashion design, didn't know that word. So Mrs. Bogan told Janet that her career was safe, but that Cathy and I should look for other careers, because there weren't any blacks who were, had manufactured doing clothes, and there weren't any blacks who were neurosurgeons. So I got out of school and went to work for Illinois Bell, 'cause I couldn't be what I wanted to be. I had a scholarship to go study medicine. I didn't wanna do that. My brother-in-law was actually very smart there 'cause he arranged for me to do a one-day thing at Cook County. And, and when the first blood patient came in, that was it for me. Blood and guts just wasn't my thing. And I had an uncle that was an attorney, so they thought well, you've always been good at talking now so maybe you can do this. And I remember seeing the first African American lady judge, Judge Willie Whiting. I'm sitting in her courtroom, and she tells someone to stop talking or they'll be a contempt of court. That was the end of my lawyer right there 'cause I knew they would have me in contempt of court all the time 'cause I had to get my point across. Story_ID: 63297 Speaker 1: We were talking about Dr. [Margaret]Burroughs-- Speaker 2: Oh, Dr. [Margaret]Burroughs. Speaker 1: --and what a tremendous influence she was. Speaker 2: Yeah, so I have this necklace from Dr. [Margaret] Burroughs that she finally gave me. And we've kept in touch over the years. I remember in high school I was voted most pleasant personality. And, and then it came time for graduation. And when it comes time for graduation, you know, you're supposed to talk to a counselor, and they tell you what you're capable of, blah, blah, blah, blah. Well, as I was saying before, Mrs. Bogan told me that we couldn't--I couldn't be what I wanted to be, so I went to work for Illinois Bell Telephone Company. And while at Illinois Bell, as an amigo operator, I used to get taken out of the board to do the drawings on, on--for the telephone company. They'd have me get out to do the, the sketches around the office for some ad campaign they were doing or something like that. And we had what was called the TWP Tab for hotels. It was a tab about two inches wide and about six inches long. And on the back of it, it was plain. On the front, whenever someone called from the hotel and made a long distance call, you had to send these tabs over to the hotel so they would know how much to charge the customer. Well, I would sit and draw on the back of, of these. I'd draw dresses. My supervisor kept these. I didn't know this until one day a customer called from New Orleans and called me a nigger. So I plugged his phone up in the 1MW all day long. Now the 1MW was, it was an apparatus that if you plugged into it, it, it killed the ear. It was high pitch, very high pitch, which meant that his telephone was de--disabled all day long. But I forgot I had done that. So about 1:00--'cause this was in the morning. My shift started seven in the morning. About 1:00, Mrs. Jacknau (ph.) plugged into my board, and she got an earful. She was the supervisor, not the head supervisor. Then when I saw her coming down the board, and I thought uh-oh, she's coming to me. I remember, too late now. So she took me out of the board and took me over to the head supervisor's desk, and she wanted to know why did I do that. And I said well, because he called me a nigger. And you know, being smart mouth little kid, I'm 47th Street, I don't have that kind of culture. So she said well, are you? And I looked at her and I said well, of course not. And she said well, then you have been insubordinate. And I'm like, what is insubordinate? And she says it, it doesn't matter what he calls you. You have a job to do here. And I'm thinking, oh no. So she said to me, you know what? I don't understand why you're at this phone company. You are so talented. Why are you still here? And I said well, I need a job, don't I? I have to pay my rent, and if I don't have a job, I'll get put out. I just went through this whole thing. So she pulled open her desk drawer, and she said look at this. I could fire you for this alone. What did you wanna be? And as a matter fact I said to her they wouldn't let me be what I wanted to be, so here I am at the phone company. So she said to me, what did you wanna be? And I said I wanted to be a designer. I said I wanted to be a designer. She said I see. So this is when she pulled her desk drawer open, and she said I could fire you for this alone. She had kept every single sheet of paper that I had drawn on and thrown in the garbage for two years, every one of 'em, and I mean it was a lot of them. So she, she made me a deal. She said I'm gonna make you a deal. You're gonna leave the phone company early today and go find a school that you wanna go to, to become what it is you want to become or I'm gonna fire you. And if you do, and prove to me that you're getting in the school to become what you wanna become, I'll let you work for the phone company part time for as long as it takes you to get out of school, deal? And I thought that sound like a pretty good deal to me. Story_ID: 63298 Speaker 1: So at the time I was living on 75th and Eberhart [Avenue], 7553 Eberhart, with a roommate. So I go home and get my clothes on, and head straight for Saks Fifth Avenue. Now I have never been on Michigan Avenue in my life, in terms of shopping, but I've driven down that way. And I've seen all this wealth go in there, and I've seen these fashionable women go there. I mean we did our shopping at Goldblatt's, Litton's, or Sears, or South Center Department Store, which was on 47th Street and down Lake Shore Drive. And I was gonna live down Lake Shore Drive. I mean I would give up everything in the world just to live down here. So, I got to Saks [Fifth Avenue] with this outfit that I had designed that I thought was the most fabulous thing in the world. It was in the '60s [1960s], and so therefore, that was the first bell-bottom era we had, with the high shoes, okay. And I've got this on. I must have been about this big. And I had this hat. This hat was what got you. It was this huge mushroom hat that you twist, and you stuck this thing through it. And when I got to the door at Saks Fifth Avenue, the sales lady met me at the door. She said may I help you? I said yes, I came down here to be a--my hat's going from side to side like Aunt Esther. I said I came down here to be a designer for Saks. And she looked at me and she says, oops, I think you wanna talk to Nena Ivon. So she takes me upstairs to this office, and it's the most spectacular thing I've ever seen in my life. I've never seen anything so beautiful. And this very elegant woman comes out, and she sits behind the desk and says yes, may I help you? And I said yes, I came down here to be a designer for Saks, and from what I can see with those clothes downstairs, you all really need me. And she burst out laughing, and it was so funny to this day, 'cause we're friends today. And she says well, sweetheart, designers-Saks [Fifth Avenue] doesn't have designers. And I'm like, well, you get all those clothes from? And she said well, we buy these from manufacturers out of New York [New York], and Paris [France], and places like that. I said well, how do they do it? And so she's giving me a little bit of background, and I'm intrigued. But I got a challenge, and the challenge then how--they gonna fire me at the phone company if I don't come back and tell 'em I'm designing. Now, give me a break here. But I don't say that, because I'm so enthused at what she's telling me. So anyway, she said the key word. She said--I started showing her my sketches, and she said you know what? You've got a lot of talent. Let's get you in school. And I said there's a school that you can go to for this? And she said yes, there's a school that you can go to for this. I said well, what's it called and what is this called? She says it's called being a fashion designer, and the school is the Art Institute, the School of the Art Institute. Really? I didn't know that. So she told me to take a cab. She called Shirley Sherman, who was at the Art Institute, the school, and told me to take a cab there. Now, the bus fare I think then was 36 cents. The jitney was 15. Do they have any jitneys here? That's what I said. Do the jitneys come this far? And she's looking at me like what's a jitney? And so I'm explaining to her what a jitney is. And it was amazing because I didn't know where clothes came from, but she didn't know what a jitney was. That kind of put us on the same level, you know (laughter). Anyway, she gave me cab fare to go to the school. Story_ID: 63299 Speaker 1: So I got to the school, and Mrs. [Shirley] Sherman explained to me what I would need to do - put together a portfolio. I didn't know what a portfolio was. We didn't learn that at DuSable [High School]. And so they helped me do this. And I, I was getting ready to leave, and I said to her, oh, I can't leave now. You've got to give me a note. And she says a note? I said yes, ma'am. They gonna fire me at the phone company if you don't give me a note saying I'm gonna get in the school. So anyway, she gave me this note, and I went back to the phone company. And Mrs. Spragg [ph.]--Helen Spragg was her name--she kept her word. So now it comes times to how am I gonna get in school. I don't have no money to get there, but I'm determined now. I see an opportunity. I didn't fight that hard to get into medical school. I didn't fight that hard to get anywhere else, but I see this is like I can taste this. This is what I want. I, I would do this or die. So, I heard that Continental Bank, everybody had an account at Continental Bank, all the black folks did. So I went to Continental Bank to find out how, if I can make a loan or something to get into school 'cause my mom had said she couldn't afford to send me, blah, blah, blah, blah. So I learned about this scholarship thing, this, the state or the city or the government would send you. So the man that was there was getting ready to retire, and he gave me all these papers to take back to my mother. And my mom said to me, I am not going to sign those papers. And I said why, ma? I wanna go to school. She says because you might die on me, and I'll have pay back the money. Okay, now to be real honest, I don't know what my feeling was at that time. But I do know that it had to be a sense of panic, you know. But I, I either stuffed those feelings, or I just don't remember, because there was so much else going on in our household. I just thought the lady hated me, that was it. Anyway, a couple of days later, I went back to the bank, and I explained to the man that had been so nice to me that I wasn't going to be able to go to school because my mom wouldn't sign the papers. And he said to me, I'm retiring in two days. Come back down here. I said okay, and I couldn't understand, why am I coming back down in two days? So I went back in two days, and he gave me my papers. And I'm like, my mother signed them? And he said just don't ever let me down. And that's all he said to me. And I took my papers and sent them in. I got my scholarship, and that was all I needed from the state, was that one semester, because the next semester I had scholarships from every place I could get them from, the public--Chicago Public School Art Society, and Fashion Group, and Fashion Guild and all that stuff. And then I won the Stanley Korshak Award, the scholarship for there, and Mr. [Stanley] Korshak was the person who sort of introduced me to business. He said to me when he gave me that scholarship, what, what do you want to, what do you want to do with the rest of your life? Story_ID: 63300 Speaker 1: So Mr. [Stanley] Korshak--it's funny because my best friend at, at the Art Institute was Christy Schoeman [ph.]. So racism would rear its real ugly head again. Christy was Mormon, and Christy and I were best friends, but we had to sneak to be best friends. We were also very competitive with each other. We each were trying to outdo each other with the amount of outfits. So I had done so many outfits that come the day of the awards ceremony, I'm so tired I can't wake up. So Mr. Korshak decided that he wanted to meet his young lady, and that for the first time in the history of his award he was going to show up at the Art Institute to personally give this award to his recipient, but I'm at home asleep. So there was another young lady in another class there--because I was the only African American at the school in the, that, that art part, the design part. But there was another young lady there who was quite--oh, she was about five shades lighter than me, but black was black. So the night of the awards she showed up. And she wore glasses. So that he wouldn't be on stage by himself, they took off her glasses and pushed her on stage. So she became me that night, right, and I--so anyway, the next day when I come to school, my instructor, Mrs. McCormick, is explaining to me what had happened. And, and she, of course, understood 'cause I had brought all my clothes were--my clothes were there, I just wasn't. And so I went down to Mr. [Stanley] Korshak's to meet him and apologize, and blah, blah, blah, blah. And so when I got there and he looked at me, he said I knew that wasn't you on stage. I said you did? He said yes. He had actually seen me before. We had done this show at Mrs. McCormick's house, the McCormick Place McCormicks, up in the mansion in Lake Forest, so he knew that wasn't me. So he--you know, we talked, and he asked me what did I wanna do with my life, and I said one day I wanna have my own business. And he said well, would you like to come to work with me, or for me, so that you can learn about business? And I said oh yeah. He said well, it, it would be an unpaid job. And I said oh, I can't do that. And he says well, why not? And I said, Mr. Korshak, I have three jobs now that gets me through school. I suport myself. One job is I work part time for Illinois Bell Telephone Company as an amigo operator because I speak Spanish. The other job is I'm a--the first girl gas station attendant at Winston Service Station on Jeffrey. The third job is I'm the first girl car hiker at Hackles Garage on 71st and Exchange. Now, if you can meet all those salaries, then I can come and work here. So he--I'm, I'm--so funny. He said to me how much is that? I said oh, $200 a week. He said okay, we'll do that. So I quit all my jobs, and I went to work for Stanley Korshak. So the first day on the job I went, I was fashionably dressed; oh, I was sharp. They had me so far down in the basement, I don't think I was ever gonna come up. And of course I thought why am I down here, and then the boxes started to come in. And I started to see names like Norman Norell and people that--and clothes from places that I never even knew existed, and how fine clothes are made. And then I started to meet women that we--women and men that we read about in, in the book, the old money people, Mrs. Kroc, Ray Kroc, Mrs. McCormick, Ms.--Mrs. Edward Byron Smith, Mr. Potter Palmer. All these people would come there and shop. And I started to go to homes that I would never get in, and, and I didn't go in the back door. I went in the front door of these homes 'cause I was with Stanley Korshak. And it was just a, a magnificent experience, it really was. And they sort of took me under the wings, and the rest was history. Story_ID: 63301 Speaker 1: Oh, okay, well, Regal Theater. I, I need to talk about the Regal Theater. Speaker 2: Oh, okay, go ahead. Speaker 1: My first job. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: My very first job in high school was the Regal--I wanna get it straight--Regal Theater. There's history there. I was a popcorn girl at the Regal Theater. I was responsible for making the popcorn and giving it out. My godmother, whom I got adopted by at the time, was Mrs. Sylvia Taylor. She was married to the very famous son of a very famous lawyer, Euclid Taylor. The lawyer's name was Nicholas Taylor. He was the Johnnie Cochran of that day. If you got into trouble, Nicholas [Taylor] would get you out. And so she was married to his son. And she was in business with S. B. Fuller, and I know you know who S. B. [Samuel B,] Fuller is. Well, Mr., Mr. Fuller and my godmother owned-- Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: --the Regal Theater. Speaker 2: S. B. Fuller--for the, the sake of those who don't know that are gonna be watching this tape, who was S. B. Fuller? Speaker 1: S. B. Fuller was the owner, first big millionaire black businessman who owned hair products and the Fuller brush and that kind of stuff back then. The first--what was--what would you--we say millionaire entrepreneur back then. And he owned, he and my godmother owned the Regal Theater together. Speaker 2: And they had a big place on 47th Street too, a big place where their, their business center and manufacturing center, right? Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: Not too far from-- Speaker 1: Yes, they did. Speaker 2: --the Regal [Theater]. Speaker 1: Right, not too far. So I worked there. I'm one of the original Regal Theaterist, so I can remember stars like Jackie Wilson and all those people showing up. It was just like really neat then. And then my second job was at the, at Spiegel's. Everybody in the world worked at Spiegel's. I was quality control at Spiegel's. And then I left Spiegel's and I think Illinois Bell was, was the, the next job that I had, and then Stanley Korshak and, and so forth. When I was at the Art Institute, I met Gale Sayers. I, I got interviewed by Channel 44, ah, Merri Dee. This was another era--area--in my life that would be wind beneath my wings. I met this woman. I got a call from Ms. Dee. I had read about her, and I got a call from her that she wanted to have me on her TV show, and she had a show on Channel 44. And I remember to this day when I got there she had on--she was so pretty, and she had on this pink and white very tiny check dress that had a white ruffle around it. And when we got through talking for our interview, I said to her, Ms. Dee, may I ask you a question? And she said yes. I said how did you learn to speak so well? Because where she was, was where I wanted to get. And she said I practice. And I said really? And I never stopped practicing after that day. So I was determined that one day Ms. Dee would be my friend, and she is. We're very close. There have been--but these, these--there have been a lot of women in my life beneath--that were wind beneath my wing, but only in a later age, I would say after college. Before college, it was Dr. [Margaret] Burroughs and whomever else I could like latch onto, yeah. Story_ID: 63302 Speaker 1: Well, at, at the Art Institute, now, now when did you convert to Judaism. Now that's, that's something. You would-- Speaker 2: Ah-- Speaker 1: --was that, that near this period of time or-- Speaker 2: Oh, no. Speaker 1: No? Okay, well maybe we'll save that till we get to that then maybe. Speaker 2: I was adopted by a Jewish family. And my parents, I brought you pictures of them. And this is the next funny story. Speaker 1: When does this happen, in terms of time? Speaker 2: I was adopted at age thir--fourteen-thirteen, thirteen, thirteen. They adopted me. Speaker 1: Okay, so you're-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --at Coleman School. Speaker 2: Thirteen. I'm at Coleman School, 13. They were people that knew my mom, in a way, you know, but they sort of adopted me back then. And I was very, very close to the family, one of the family. So whenever we would all go out to dinner, they would always say--the waiter, waitress, or whatever would say oh, you brought the neighborhood little girl. My mom would say no, that's our daughter because my parents are white. So I'd be the only one sitting--my history's all screw up. I'd be the only one sitting there. To this day, my mom is still living. She's seventy-five. And my brothers, they're all still living. I have two brothers and two sisters on the adoptive family. Now, they're closer to me than my own real family, yeah. So that's how I became converted to Judaism. So I've been through the mikvah, had the name change, and I'm a practicing Jew. Sometimes I don't know who to get mad at, me or me, me, the Jewish part of me or the black part sometimes when, when, when, when blacks and Jews are having this little war with themselves. That's my own private joke. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, that's interesting. So, so you've been Jewish ever since you-- Speaker 2: Were a kid, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, since you were thirteen. Speaker 2: Now, but I was also having to go to Baptist church. You know, we used to--I used to go to Liberty Baptist. So when Martin Luther King, Jr. came to town, me and Henrietta Salter, who's now Henrietta Leaks, we were in the choir singing away. I remember Dr. King sit-- I was right behind Dr. King. I could just reach out and touch him, singing the loudest with the worse voice in the world. I remember him asking me, singing ain't gonna be your career, is it? And I said no, sir, I wanna make clothes, yeah. Story_ID: 63303 Speaker 1: Okay, at the Art Institute [of Chicago], you said the rest is history, but, but what happened, you know, after you started working with Mr. [Stanley] Korshak and basically just progressed from-- Speaker 2: Yeah, well-- Speaker 1: --from that into, into where? Speaker 2: --after, after Mr. Korshak--that's graduation, after I graduated, and my first job was with a leather company out in Evanston [Illinois] called Eucos, Eucos Leather or the Leatherhead, they had both names. And I remember my first day on the job, the guy asked me if I knew how to design furs. My instructor had always said never, ever say you can't do something. Just say yes, and call me the night before and find out. So, this had also been the instructor that made sure that I had just as nice a fabrics as the other kids had. Because I remember--and I, I'll back up here. I remember my first day at the Art Institute in class the kids are talking about Yves Saint Laurent; the kids from Barrington are talking about what they bought from Yves Saint Laurent. I'm trying to figure out Yves Saint Laurent is. So I remember the one young lady said something about she had this blouse, and, and someone asked how much the blouse was. And she sad oh, it's only $250. And I'm looking at this blouse, thinking you have one blouse for $250. Let me see, now that's rent, car note, food, I could get a hundred--two hundred blouses for that, blah, blah, blah, blah. But, obviously, there was something she knew that I didn't know. So I was embarrassed to say any of the things I'm saying to you. So after class, I went to Mrs. McCormick. Mrs. McCormick was from France, and she had a very beautiful French accent. And I said to her, Mrs. McCormick, who is Yves Saint Laurent and why does that girl have a 250 dollar blouse? And so Mrs. McCormick looked at me and gave me this big hug, and she said you and I are going to have an evening meeting for the next six months after class, okay? And I said okay. So after class, Mrs. McCormick and I would sit there for an hour after class, and she would tell me who these people were and what they did. And sometimes she would take me out to the finest stores, and she would show me these things. 'Cause I didn't know them from the South Side, and I needed to know that. And I didn't wanna do cheap clothes. I, I knew there was a better world out there. I just didn't know how to find it. And so I owe a lot of that to her. Story_ID: 63304 Speaker 1: After I graduated and, and went to the jobs that I spoke of, my first job was at Eucos, or the Leatherhead it was sometimes called. And the fur thing, so I called Mrs. McCormick, and I said Mrs. McCormick--no, I didn't call her the first day. I just knew, I knew how to make furs, to do this. So I went the work the next day, and they laid out all this fur, and I got the scissors and I started cutting. And the little fur things are flying all over the place. And I'm wondering why. Is this supposed to be flying? So I called Mrs. McCormick. I said, Mrs. McCormick, I have a job and I'm designing leathers, and suedes, and furs. And why is the fur flying all around? And she says well, how are you cutting it? I said with a scissor of course. She said oh no, sweetheart, with a razor blade. I'm like, I can't cut with a razor blade. So she said well, is there anything else you can do until you can get to me this evening? So I said yes, ma'am, they want me to make a pattern. So I sort of stuck the ruined stuff up underneath the (unclear), right, and I took a skin home. And I went by her house, and she sat there that night and showed me how to cut. So I went in the next day, and I was a genius at it. And then once I got it, I pulled out all the stuff I had ruined, which was about three skins, and I showed Mr. Johnson what I had done wrong. So I-- Speaker 2: How much was that worth, that stuff that you-- Speaker 1: The, the skin was about thirty, forty dollars, somewhere in there, right. And then after that, I stayed there designing for them for roughly about a year and a half, two years. As a matter of fact, her--Mrs. Johnson's brother-in-law is Bill Lehrich [ph.], who was the--oh, what do you call it? He was something for Bill Clinton in the Bill Clinton Administration. And Mr. and Mrs. Johnson now have one of the largest office supply companies here in Chicago. But I stayed there for a while, and then I went to design--where did I got to--oh, furs for Evans, because by now I know what I'm doing. So then I went to design furs for Evans, and I really liked that job a lot. And then I left there and I went to design in New York for a, a short time--Chester Weinberg, whom I had met when we were at school. And then I came back here and went to Revere Sportswear for blouses. So, but all these time--all this time I still wanted to have my own business. But I was afraid if I quit my job, how am I gonna pay my rent? You know, the how am I gonnas are coming back again. So anyway, I, I met a woman through one of the sales rep. called Meryl, and Meryl had this company that she did headbands. So, I saw such potential there. And I went to her and I said why can't we do clothes? And she says well, because I don't know how to do clothes. And I said okay, I'll come work for you and I'll do clothes and your headbands too, and she said okay. So I went there, and that's when my interest in coats started. So we started doing coats together, and that's how I got into coats. And I was with Meryl for about three years. All the time, I remember telling Mr. Korshak I want to have my own business. But you see, now I'm out here in the world, and I'm running with all the, what I call right people. They were all the old money people with the right names. And I've got the right address on the North Side. I don't have no furniture. I don't have no money, but I'm hanging out with them. Until one day I went by one of those stately lady's houses, and there was an eviction notice on her door. And I'm sitting here thinking, I have all this education and dreams, and I'm running around with you, who's looking for somebody to take care of you, and I can take care of me. There's something wrong with this picture. When am I gonna step out and do the things that I need to do for me? When am I gonna stop being afraid? Story_ID: 63305 Speaker 1: So you had come to the stage where you knew you had to do something for yourself. And-- Speaker 2: Yes, but I'm still fighting because I'm still living in somebody else's fear. You see, although I've graduated school, and I've actually, I've gone to now the Art Institute and the University of Chicago concurrently, by the way, and I studied psychology there. So, although I now am, am, am manned with all these degrees, there's fear still there. And the fear is letting go of something that I already have in order to step into new pastures. And today I understand where that fear came from, two places. As a child, if you're growing up and you don't have one--someone to instill taking chances on your life and, and, and, and understanding that you can do it, if you don't have that drive, people to drive into, then you don't have it. And if you get to high school and you, and you have a counselor who also is telling you, you can't, then you really still don't have it. So I was allowing myself to live in the latest fear, and the latest fear was my counselor's fear. She said I couldn't do this. Now I've come through school, but I still don't believe I can do this. I still don't believe I can do this on my own. What's--what would happen to me if I quit my job? How will I pay my rent? How will I eat? God forbid I should have to go back to these people. I moved away from these people because I figured if I got away from them, distance will be the cure. And it's not the cure at this point. I guess today I believe that when the universe and God is ready for you to do something, it, it, it, what the old saying? When the pupil's ready the teacher shows up, that you are put in a position that you have to do it, you have to go forward. So, I used to go to the Ambassador East to hear a friend of mine sing there, Nan Mason. So, I had gone over. I got a call from Nan Mason, and she asked me if I would come up. She wanted me to meet someone that her friend wanted me to design a gown for her. At the time they were having the Chicago Emmys here for newscasters. And Carol Marin was young then with red hair, long red hair. She doesn't know I remember that. Anyway, I went over to the Pump Room to meet her, and there was this wonderful woman sitting--gorgeous lady sitting in the window with this white suit on and flaming red hair. And I sat next to her, and her name was Terry Murphy. She did Channel 7 news here. Nan didn't tell me this on the phone, though. And then she also did "Hard Copy" in Hollywood. So, we sat there talking and, and Terry told me what, what the affair was. And, and I sat there sketching her a gown, and how I was gonna do it, and the slit. And she just let me go all out, so this gown was throw-me-down, beat me, bite me, but don't hurt me. I mean it had a slit up to here. And I had a beaded hand on it that held stars that came down from her shoulder, catch a falling star, blah, blah, blah, and it was navy blue jersey. And she had a body that just wore this gown. Irv Kupcinet had even put it in his column. Story_ID: 63306 Speaker 1: Well, she [Terry Murphy] invited me to a private club called Faces, and it was my very first time being able to go to Faces. And I knew I needed something spectacular to wear. I had three yards of gold lame at home. I had--I was living at 1 East Scott in the Gold Coast area. I remember rent was $230, and I thought that was an awful lot of money, and I had a studio apartment. Now, it had my two tree trunks here; it had these cinderblocks that you build houses with that have the holes in 'em that had these boards that went across it that I had made colorful for my bookcase. I had a daybed, which I had made into a bed, and all of my books, and my sewing machine. That was it, and my little dog, Lonesome, that I found or stole when I was twelve, 'cause I used to steal dogs. If you left that dog tied up outside to a pole, and it was crying, it went home to my basement. So anyway, I'm not quite sure I didn't steal him, but we stayed together for twenty-two years. So, I made myself these gold lame pants that night. The next day, I decided that I would go up on Oak Street and buy me a blouse. I have $50 to my name. So I went to a store called Botega [ph.] Glassair (ph.) to buy this blouse. I took three blouses into the dressing room. Botega Glassair was at 60--I think it was 67 or 62 East--63 East Oak. Anyway, I took three blouses into the dressing room. So while I'm in the dressing room trying on these blouses, I put my jeans on. And the sales lady comes and open the curtain. I guess back in those days they probably thought I was stealing. So she saw the pants, and she said, "Those are beautiful. Where you get 'em?" And I said I made them, and I said kind of irritable. And she said oh. She closed the curtain and left, and came back with two more ladies. They wanna know where'd you get these pants. I said I told her I made them. So she's the, the shorter lady of the two said well, can you make some for the store? Yeah, I can. She said how much? Well, it hadn't occurred to me how much, but the cheapest blouse they had was $135. So I said 65, and she said okay. And I'm thinking that must have been too cheap, 'cause they're supposed to give me an argument. So she ordered five pair of pants. So I put on my clothes, got ready to leave, she gave me the order, and she says which one of the blouses do you want? I said oh, I can't afford your blouses. I got $50. That's not working. And so she said okay. I put the blouses back, went home. I called Terry, and I said Terry, I cannot go out with you tonight. I just started my business today. And she said really? And I told her how it happened. Well, now I have some challenges here. And the challenge is: I have no fabric; I have no money; and at the time, my phrase was I have no money. Today my phrase is my cash flow and my desire are not meeting each other. I do not deny money today. It denies me, if I deny it. Anyway, my cash flow and my desire weren't meeting each other, and I had no fabric, and I didn't know how I was gonna do this. But I was determined at this point that God never gives you a plan to carry out, if he doesn't give you the necessary equipment to carry it out with. So I just needed to get silent and listen to which way I was supposed to go. Story_ID: 63307 Speaker 1: The name Harold Singer popped in my head. Now, let me tell you about Mr. Singer. Mr. Singer was a sales rep. who sold fabrics that would come and see me to show me his line of fabrics when I worked at various companies every evening at 6:30, when it was time for me to go home. I would end up being there till eight or nine o'clock. And I would always say, Mr. Singer, why do you wait so late to come and see me? And he would say because by the time I get here, the world has kicked my butt. And when I get here, you have a joke, a smile, and a hug for me. That ends my day, that's why I do that. So I thought, hmm, Mr. Singer, that hug, joke, and smile ought to be worth $250 in credit today. So I called him, and I said, Mr. Singer, this is J. I started my business today. And I told him how I had started with the jeans, and I said I would like to know if you could go to your factor and get me $250 in credit, because I'm gonna need fabrics. Now I didn't know what a factor was. I just heard that term, and I knew that in order to get fabrics, you needed a factor. You know, they gave you credit. So, would you like to think about this, Mr. Singer. So he said nope, I don't have to think about it. He said I'm gonna do this for you, but if I do, don't ever let me down. And I said yes, sir. Well, I was so afraid of letting him down and, and, and so grateful for having someone who believed in me, 'cause now I got two people, this lady who gave me this order and now Mr. Singer is gonna help me get the fabric, I called Terry Murphy back. And I said, Terry, you know the gown that I'm gonna make for you that I've charged you $450 for? And she said yeah. And I said well, do you think I can get a deposit because I need to get $250 so that I could put aside. And she said well, why don't I just loan it to you? And I said oh no, I don't wanna start business in credit, in, in debt. And so what she decided to do was give me the whole $450 up front. So she did that, and Mr. Singer arranged for me to get my fabrics. So I got my fabrics, and I made her her gown, and it was on TV. Story_ID: 63308 Speaker 1: And now I'm sitting here looking and thinking well, wait a minute now. I can't run a business on one order. They got all those stores on Oak Street and Michigan Avenue, and those are the people that I wanna sell. So I called every store on Oak Street and every store on Michigan Avenue except Korshak's because I knew that the product that I had designed wasn't right for Korshak's. They were a more mature, elegant kind of woman - gowns, yes. So my second store that I saw was My Sister Circus, which was right down the street, two doors from, from Botega Glaceur. And I remember when I walked in the door, Sue, who owned it with her sister at the time, Jan, said to me, oh, would you like for somebody to help you with your collection? And I said no, here it is. You know those bags that when men go buy suits, they, they put you suit in that zip bag? Well, I had my one little jean, one pair of jeans in the bag. And she said ooh, this is the smallest collection I've ever seen. So I unzipped the bag and she then saw the jean, and she said this is beautiful. But, you know, we need a blouse to go with it. And I'm thinking oh no, I don't have a blouse; I just have a pair of pants. So I thought and I said, do you--may I have a piece of paper and a pencil? And she gave that to me, and I designed a blouse, showed her exactly where I would put the gold lame, and made her a deal. And I said you know, if you order the pant today, and you order the blouse today, and give me the order today, if you--when the blouse gets here, if it's not the quality that you're used to getting, I will take it all back, except for the jean, 'cause you can see the jean, but you can't see the blouse. And I'll put that in writing. And she says, oh no, that's okay, I believe you. And so she gave me an order for six blouses and six pair of jeans. Now I charged her $55 for the blouse. She gave me a little argument. I knew that was right. So then I went right around the corner to a store called Angie's. Now Angie's was the kind of store if you didn't sell Angie's, you weren't a designer, you weren't in the know. You had to sell Angie's. So when I got around to Angie's, Angie's now loved the pant, but she needed a blouse and a skirt. This collection keeps getting bigger. Can't you people understand I got one pair of pants here. But I said just a minute. So I turned my piece of paper over, and on the back I drew her a skirt. It had tons of little tucks that went around, and it was in gold lame. And I charged her $110, so she--and I made her the same deal that I made with skirt and the blouse, 'cause the pants she could see. Well, she didn't order the pant, 'cause her woman was a skirt woman, so she ordered the skirt and, and the blouse sight unseen. And then I went over to Boward [ph.] Teller's, and at Boward Teller's, at the Safari Shop, it wasn't right of the right for the Safari Shop. I don't think that it wasn't right. I'm thinking I wasn't right for the Safari Shop, but I was determined; I'm gonna get in the Safari Shop. So, I went to a few other stores, and I sold everybody. I now went home. I had probably $15,000 in orders. I got $15,000 in orders, but I got $250 worth of fabric coming. We got a problem here. So I managed to get out my first order. And then from my first order, I think I had quit my job already. And I had this old car, so I sold my old car so that I could get money for the, for the rest of it. Well, the order got to the store. Ms. Glass, Botega Glassair, I got her order, and she called me on the telephone. Could you come up here, J? Yes, ma'am. I went up. She said, how many stories did you sell here? And I said oh, Ms. Glass, because of you and your faith in me, I sold everybody up here. And she said oh, Lord, no. And so she grabbed my face in her hand, and said, sweetheart, you're new, aren't you? And I said oh yes, ma'am. And she said 'cause you can't sell everybody. And I'm like, why not? They like my clothes. So she explained to me the marketing end of it, and I finally got it. Story_ID: 63309 Speaker 1: And then after that, you know, I started to get bigger and bigger. And I had just my tree trunks and my little dog. I would use him for weights. And I'm in a one-room apartment. And I had a friend named Stanley Hilton, who was the, the manager of the Blackstone Theater. So Stanley Hilton called me one day to see if I would like to be a dresser for James Whitmore. And I'm like, okay, I'll do that, and so I went to be a dresser for Mr. James Whitmore. And Mr. Whitmore used to pass my dressing room every day, and he'd notice me sketching. So one day he came by and decided that he would ask me what I was doing. And I told him what I was doing and, and where I--and you know my whole career, blah, blah, blah. Well, they were doing, Channel 7, a story on me. And I told him that Channel 7 was coming in to do this story and blah, blah, blah, blah, and Terry [Murphy] had arranged for it to happen. And so Mr. Whitmore went on TV to talk about me and my talent too. The tape was erased, because back in that day I didn't have a VCR, and Channel 7 News was on strike at the time. It was the only time the news industry here has ever been on strike, if you remember. But anyway, I went on to, to talk and, and he, you know, financially helped me with my career. And I now needed to hire employees, I had so much work. And it's like, I don't have a clue where you get this from, where you get people. I don't know how to hire an attorney. I don't know how to hire an accountant. We didn't discuss those things in my life. I've, I've no idea. Well, I had gone to a class at IIT [Illinois Institute of Technology] with W. Clement Stones. So I didn't know, but I knew who might know. So I called Mr. Clement Stones and he was helpful in, in a way, but there was still a lot of stuff I didn't know, you know. I think I was afraid to ask, and I, I think a lot of it came from, again, we're going back to childhood. No one's ever been there, so who's gonna be there now. So I'm not trusting. When I look in the mirror, what's looking back at me is what I have to depend on, and that's me. So, I remember that I was downtown, and there was a little old lady that I had met. Because prior to that--oh no, that's, that--let me not step out. There was a little old lady that I had met a couple of years before, and her name was Mrs. Elise Montight (ph.). And Mrs. Elise had eyelashes out to here, and she was about that tall, and little old lady; she must have been about eighty at the time. So I ran into her coming out of Marshall Field's. And she asked what I was doing now, and I told her. And I said oh, and I'm looking for employees. I need to hire somebody to help me sew. And she said to me, I can help you. And I said really? She said yeah, I used to make all the costumes for the Burlesque Theater. You kidding! That's why she had eyelashes out to here. So Ms. Elise was my very first employee. So Ms. Elise show up at work the next day in my apartment. And she said where's my chair, J? And I said here it is. She says these are tree trunks. I said, Ms. Elise, that's all I have. She said well, okay. What I had done with my tree trunks is--and they were cut down when I was a little kid. I like those tree trunks. I had 'em shave 'em off. They were cuttin' trees down in my neighborhood when I was in college. And so what I had done with the tree trunks is I had made pillows for the top of 'em, and I had nailed the pillows to it. And they were my, my chairs. So Ms. Elise and I used the tree trunk. And she sat at one machine, and I had bought another machine, and I sat at the other sewing. And one day she fell off the tree trunk, and she threatened to quit if I didn't buy her a chair. And I said to her, Ms. Elise, I don't have the money for a chair. So she bought me first $10 chair, which I still have. Story_ID: 63310 Speaker 1: And it was--from there on, I would earn money, put it back in the company, earn money, put it back in the company, earn money, put it back in the company, and just contact more stores. I remember wanting to get into Marshall Field's. And I used to call Marshall Field's, and no one ever knew who you could call Marshall Field's for. And I had gotten the sales rep. at the Apparel Mart. Racism was to raise its ugly head again. 'Cause when I was going into the stores on Oak Street selling them, it seemed that it didn't matter to them that what my color was. They bought my, my goods. All they cared about was what talent I had in terms of what would earn them money, so I guess I got comfortable. And then I get a sales rep. at the Apparel Mart. Cookie Robinson was my sales rep., really nice lady. It didn't matter to Cookie either. But somewhere along the line something had happened. And I remember saying to Cookie one time, Cookie, you're very proud of me when people come into the room and my history, and telling people that I'm, I'm the designer. And I think maybe that's gonna be detrimental, because I think maybe we shouldn't tell them. 'Cause sometimes I think it's gonna hurt you, and they're not gonna wanna order the line. And I remember the phrase I used was something my grandmother said, used to say to me all the time when we would talk about white people and what they would do. She'd say you have to feed a hungry man before you can talk to him. Now at the time I didn't really know what it meant, but I knew now what it meant. And I'd say to her, you know, Cookie, my grandmother would say you have to feed a hungry man before you can talk to him. And I think what she means by that for me is that we're gonna have to get the goods in the store before we can convince these white people that I am capable of telling them how they should be dressing. I'm the kid from 47th Street who's never had more than a $5.95 blouse, and I'm telling this lady that she should be buying this $600 outfit from me. And then I'm telling her that it's from me--and we're talking the early '70s [1970s] here--so I don't think this is gonna go over very well. Well, Cookie didn't agree. So I remember this woman that came in from Indianapolis, Indiana. She placed the very first large order that I ever had, 5,650 bucks. I wasn't there when she wrote the line. I came in about three minutes before she was getting ready to leave, 'cause she had already given Cookie the paper. Now when I say paper, that means the order. That's our terminology for, for the order. And when I walked in the door, Cookie said oh, you're just in time to meet the artist, to meet the designer. She--isn't she fabulous? And Cookie introduced me. Later on that day, the lady came back and canceled her order for $5,650 because she felt that she had spent too much money. So Cookie said that's very unusual. And I said to Cookie, it's not unusual, Cookie. She had not spent that much money. But you see, usually when people gave you those kinds of orders, they also wanted you to do a trunk show. A trunk show is when you show up personally, and you work with their customer. So I have a very good feeling that one or two things happened here. The lady was a bigot or she wasn't a bigot, but she knew that if she bought my goods, I would have to show up at her store to do a trunk show and her customers might not want to buy my goods. So therefore, she would lose money, one or the two. I don't know which one, and it didn't matter. But shortly after that, I decided this won't happen to me ever again. You have to feed a hungry man before you can talk to him, so how do I feed this hungry man. Well, you give a hungry man what he wants. They don't wanna know that I own anything. They don't wanna know that I design anything here in Chicago [Illinois] at that point in time at the sales rep--at the showroom. So how do I combat this? Do I get mad? Do I quit? Do I stop? There's gotta be an answer out here. I had made friends with a woman whose husband owned Goldblatt's. She was Mrs. Lynn Goldblatt Durocher. She eventually married Leo Durocher. And Lynn was a very nice, good friend of mine, and I went to Lynn. And I said, Lynn, I'm black, your white, and I'm not willing to allow that to stop me. So I would like for you to be my sales rep. so you can get me in doors that I never dreamed of getting into, simply because of who you are and what color you are. But, Lynn, remember this, there are doors that you can't get through that I can get through. So we're just gonna have to work like that, okay? I can't send you out in deep, deep of the South Side. You would never survive. So, can we do this? And so Lynn also disagreed with my theory at the time, until it hit. But she decided, okay, I'll come and work with you. Story_ID: 63311 Speaker 1: And I think that was probably one of the most amusing parts of, of my career. Because here we're talking about this very wealthy woman who had maids and servants, who didn't get up until 12:00, who now had to pick up clothing bags. And I remember the first time she was going to do business in Dallas [Texas] for me. And I said to her, Lynn [Goldblatt Durocher], you have to be in Dallas tomorrow at 12:00. And Lynn said, that means I have to get up what time? I said six in the morning. Oh no! Now only that, Lynn, but you have to carry these bags. Next thing I know, Lynn has hired two guys to pick up her bag for her. I just told her okay, as long as you--I don't care how you get your job done. Lynn also gave me my first coming out party in her apartment, and she invited all the who's who. I remember Mr. Charlie [Charles] Chew showed up and, and with his white Rolls Royce, as black as midnight, and he was so pretty, his skin was, and Mr. and Mrs. Gaines, and a lot of Chicago who's who came out and met me that night. Did it make me feel any comfortable? No, because you see, that lack of self-esteem, in terms of having to hide who I was, was so deep inside me then that when these people would come, I'd hide over in the corner. Because, again, if you know who I am, you may not like me 'cause I didn't like me, you know, but I didn't know it at that time. So anyway, I got into stores like Stevenson's, which used to be on, on Michigan Avenue. As a matter of fact, I opened up the Stevenson's there, the new one. And while I was outside looking at all my clothes in the window in every single window they had, my high school teacher, Mrs. Price, walked up behind me. And she said that's a beautiful gown. She didn't even know who it was. And I looked at her, I says, Mrs. Price, it's me, it's me, and she was so happy to see me. Oh, where do we go from there? Anyway, Lynn got me into a store in Highland Park [Illinois]. The store was a chic store, we should say. For sake of not embarrassing the lady, I won't mention the name, but it was in Highland Park. And I had sold this lady now for about three seasons. I would say she had probably done a good $90,000 on my, my goods, but she'd never met me. And one of her very wealthy ladies was going to a special affair, and they called the showroom. They called the factory. My little place at that time was at 12 East Grand. Lynn had got me that space on the third floor. They called the, the showroom because they wanted me to come out and design something special for this woman because she really loved the designer's clothes. So, my fear stepped in, and it said this lady does not know who you are. You are doing very well. You already have the fear of when they find out, they cancel orders. So I said this to Lynn, and Lynn says well, how are we gonna do this? I said well, we're gonna send out the sample hand, that's what we'll send out. We'll send the sample hand, because she basically needs measurements taken, and then we'll send the sketch out later and they can approve the sketch. You can take the sketch out. You can come up with any reason why I'm not there. I got the flu; I'm out of town. I don't care. So Lynn said okay. So sure enough, we get in Lynn's car and we drive all the way out to Highland Park. We get to Highland Park, they look at Lynn, and they're embracing Lynn and kiss, kiss, kiss. And they look at me and say oh, you're down in the basement. Go on in the basement. The lady's waiting for you down there. This was their sample hand. So I go in the base, and we're on our floor--on the floor. It's, it's hot in the basement. They're upstairs just having wine and champagne, having a good time. I take the, the lady--they finally bring me upstairs when the lady arrives, 'cause they didn't want me upstairs until she arrived. They bring the sample hand, me, upstairs when the lady arrives, and take me into the dressing room. I do her, her measurements, and, and then it's time to go. So on the way back, I noticed that Lynn was very quiet. And I said to her, Lynn, why are you so quiet? She says I am so angry. And I said why are you angry? She says I'm angry and I'm embarrassed. And I said why? She said because I can't believe what I just saw, and it is true. And I said yeah. She said don't you, doesn't it hurt? And I said I can't let it hurt, Lynn. 'Cause if I let it hurt, it'll stop me. I'm afraid it'll stop me. So all I can answer is this: the check that I gave you last week for your commission, did it bounce? And she said no. I said well, then let's just smile all the way to the bank. Because one day, these people will know who I am, and it won't matter then. And the time will be right, and maybe this is just not the time. And so, again, you gotta give 'em what they want. Story_ID: 63312 Speaker 1: And then I started going to New York [New York] to buy fabrics now. That was really a humiliating experience, but that was okay. I used that dirt to get out of the hole again, 'cause see, I'm looking at all this as dirt. So I remember going to this same guy I had bought tons of fabric from over the years, but they'd never met me. So I went to the showroom, and I looked at the line of fabrics. And afterwards he said to me, the new sales rep. said to me--I gave him my business card. He says oh, well, we're gonna have to ship this C.O.D. [Collect on Delivery] And I said why? He says well, it's a lot of fabric. And I said well, I've been dealing with you guys for quite some time. Well, you see what he was basically saying to me was you're a woman, and you're black, and you don't have no credit. Okay, so they shipped it out C.O.D. [Collect on Delivery] I paid for it. I then called up the guy who ma--I think it was Ace at the time who made cards for me. And I said I would like for you to make another set of business cards for me, and I want this card to say Designer, J. That's all. He says well, oh, you don't want president (unclear)? Nope, I have president designers on cards. I want this card to say Designer, J. That's it. So he said okay. So then I went back to New York, and everywhere I went to buy something, I gave 'em the Designer, J card. And they'd say okay, well, who do we call for credit? Now keep in mind, at this point in time I'm still working in my apartment at this time too, by the way. I haven't moved to 12 East Grand. And I said well, you can call Ashley, call, call Ashley, or call this person or that person. Who was Ashley? Ashley was my cat. You see, they didn't care that I was the designer. They did care that I would be the designer-president. Because if I was just the designer, then I was working for somebody, and if I was working for somebody, they had to be white, 'cause wasn't no blacks in this, not manufacturing. Story_ID: 63313 Speaker 1: Well, now, all right, I don't know exactly where we were, but we were talking about Ashley taking a phone--the cat I think at one point. I don't know-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: --where we left off, but-- Speaker 2: Yeah, what I discovered, and I discovered this by reading an article. I, I love to read biographies, and I was reading an article about Mr. John H. Johnson, whom I met once. I met him in the Indiana Fish House. Mr. White used to own the Indiana Fish House, and I was in there buying some shrimp one day. It was, it was--here's how it was set up: a fourth of a pound of shrimp was 52 cents, and a half a pound of shrimp was--no, a half a pound of shrimp was 52 cents, and a whole pound of shrimp was a dollar four cents back then. Anyway, I had 51 cent, 'cause somewhere along the line I dropped a penny, so Mr. Johnson loaned me a penny, yes. So, to this day I tease him. I told him that penny worth about a thousand dollars now. But anyway, I read an article in--and in the article he talked about when he first started--his biography--he talked when he first started Johnson Publications how difficult it was, and how he simply teamed up with a white friend, and that when they would go to New York [New York], the white friend would stay in a hotel; he'd have to stay someplace else. And I thought if Mr. Johnson could do that back then, I can put my ego in check and do what I need to do now to feed these hungry people and then let them know who I am, and then it shouldn't matter. And so, I decided that I didn't need a card that said I was the president of anything. I knew who I was at this point in time, that I can be whatever I need to be to get wherever it is that I'm going. So, I also knew that I needed a sizable company. Nobody wanted to deal with anybody when you went in and say I'm everything, you know. If you had to go in and be something that you wasn't. You had to be what they wanted you to be. So, I, I had my credit department; I had my production department; I had my sewing department; I had my sample department; I had my fabric buyers; I had my trim buyers; I had my sales force. I had all of that, and you're sitting here looking at it, me. So what I had by the telephone was a list of names of all these different people. So, Ashley was in charge of credit. And I had relatives' names or just names that I love, like Case Taliaferro. That was my Taliaferro name. I had her. She was in charge of production. And, and then I had--we had to throw one guy in there, you know, but it was real difficult doing a male's voice. This man was never there, you know. You could talk to his assistant. We, we had all that. And then, of course, we had the president of the company; well, that was definitely a male. But of course, the president didn't talk to anybody unless you were God. And when--I used to say that too. When they called and asked for the president or the CEO, I'd say unless you God, he don't talk to you, so would you like to speak to his assistant? And they would say okay, and so we, we would do that. The first time that someone was to find out that I, in fact, was actually Jermikko, the CEO, president of JJ Hobeau, was from the largest wool company in New York [New York] that I had done tremendous amount of business with over the years. The older guy that I had done business with had left, and they had a new person there, and his name was John Meyer. John wanted to know why my name was Shoshannah, and I told him why. And it was something about John that made me trust him, so I, I told him why. And a lot of times the, the companies there would deal with me because I was Jewish. It had nothing to do with the credit, but that got me through the door. And I didn't realize that until years later, and I just couldn't figure that one out. But anyway, John and I were talking one day. And I said something, and John said--I gave my card, and he said you're the owner, aren't you? And I looked at him for a while. And he said well, you know, I understand because I, too, am different. And what he meant by being different was he was gay, so he understood the bigotry and what have you. And so he was one of the people who knew, so John always made sure that I got my stuff on time. And he was the only one who knew basically back then. Now they all know. Story_ID: 63314 Speaker 1: But the beautiful story about Madelyn, the lady who did not want me to, to be at her store, or did not know. When Lynn and I got back, it must have been--oh, about two week later--I got a call from "Women's Wear Daily." And "Women's Wear Daily" is the "Wall Street Journal" to the fashion industry. You don't do anything until you read "Women's Wear Daily." "Women's Wear Daily" had never been interested in anything that happened here in Chicago [Illinois], although Chicago [Illinois] was a big industry here. They were in New York [New York] and so they stayed in New York. They decided that we had become an industry that was to be reckoned with back in the '70s [1970s], and that they were gonna come into Chicago [Illinois] and do for the first time on a designer. And guess who they picked? Me. Now, I had two feelings, fear and joy. Fear - oh, my goodness, everybody's gonna know. I'm not ready for everybody to know; joy - I've made it. I deserve this. So the woman that called me was Dottie Kagan. And she explained to me that I had been recommended by Dorothy Fuller at the Apparel Mart, and Dorothy Fuller of course knew. So I spoke with her on the phone, and I said to her okay, I will do this, but my conditions are--see, I now know you don't give the newspaper conditions unless you happen to be real big--that no photo of me is taken, that you take photos only of my clothes. And so she said to me that's impossible. We want to put you and your clothes on the cover of this paper. One cannot go without the other. And when she said that to me, what clicked in my mind was the numerous of times that I had expressed to Lynn [Goldblatt Durocher], when the time is right, we'll both know, and the--and, and the opportunity will present itself, that I can't hide any longer. And so I thought about that, and I thought the time must be right, 'cause this paper's gonna go all over the world. And so I called her back and I said okay, so she came down. They did my stuff for the cover. They did me sitting there like this. Story_ID: 63315 Speaker 1: We get a call. It's from the lady in Highland Park [Illinois]. She is so embarrassed. How could you not tell me this? So Lynn said to her, Madelyn, why did she need to be the designer in order not to have to go downstairs? Madelyn thought I was upset. She says and the thing about it is she's not upset with you. That's the beauty of her. She's just not upset with you, and it's okay. You don't have to apologize to her. The only apologize that you can actually give her, and I'm saying this, is to act differently. That was it. So then Madelyn set up this huge trunk show for me at her store. And she had all these ladies come in, and they were all shocked that I was black. One lady came in, she says you're black. I said no. And she says and you have a sense of humor. And I said, ma'am, you have to have a sense of humor if you're doing what I'm doing. And so we just got over fabulous. One lady came in and her back was hurting her. I had her all on the floor--I was literally walking on her back. And she's like, oh, I just love her. And it was okay, and I thought all right. Then what I need to do now is re-evaluate where I wanna go now. And what I did for myself in re-evaluating that is I did what I needed to do by hiding, because now I have fed you. But now I have enough strength that says to me if you don't want to do business with me because of this, that's your loss, 'cause my clothes is making money. And that was my attitude at the time. I don't want my clothes to be anywhere I can't go. So you cannot buy my clothes and tell me I can't come there, I'm sorry. And strangely enough, they like the snob, and I'm like, I don't believe this. It, it came only with the price point that I was selling to. Because then I got known as that person where if she doesn't like you, you can't buy her clothes. Story_ID: 63316 Speaker 1: And of course I've been the little token. I mean anything that I've been involved in, I'm usually the only one. I'm the only one in synagogue, only one. I remember saying to rabbi: Rabbi, I am so embarrassed that all these people know me, and I don't know them. I remember rabbi told me on High Holiday service there was gonna be like 5,000 people at church. And I invited my Catholic friend, Debbie, who was white. We lived in the same building. And I had told Debbie how many people would be there, and she says gee, how will I find you? I said well, I always sit right next to Mrs. Rabbi. That was not her name, but I called her Mrs. Rabbi from day one. So you will find me sitting next to Mrs. Rabbi, and Mrs. Rabbi always sits near the front. So she said but there's so many people. I said trust me, Debbie, you'll find me. So we had our services over at the Ambassador West in that huge room. They had two rooms they'd opened up. So Debbie shows up. Sure enough, it's a fashion show, and there's tons and tons of people, quite a few thousand. And she finds me right away. And I said how'd you find me, Deb? She said heck, you were the only one there with a chain. And I said that's exactly what rabbi said when I said to rabbi: Rabbi, I'm so embarrassed. He said look around, Shoshannah. You're the only one here. And I said--and I was the only one there, and it was okay. So I've often been the only one in a lot of situations. Maybe I'll look into that one day and see why, so that when I started off designing, I was the only one, only one. I had no company of my color that I could go to and say help me. Can, can you, can you lay a, a plank across this ditch so I can walk across on you? There wasn't anyone there. First of all, it's a selfish industry, and it's an industry where we tend to feel that if you get it, I can't. And so I've made it my business never to feel that way. If I got it, I'm gonna give it to you because then it's gonna live on. And whatever talent God has given me, it is mine. It has nothing to do with you. Nobody's gonna design my dress for me. Nobody's gonna write my book. Nobody's gonna tell my story. Nobody's gonna marry my man. Nobody's gonna do any of those things that the universe has for me. So, if it's been given to me, then the best gift I can give my creator is to give it back and to trust. And so I guess what I've done over the years is I've just had--and I won't say blind faith, 'cause blind faith says you don't know where you're going. You just--I have faith, and it's that I know where I'm going. I might not always know how to get there, but I definitely know where I wanna go in the end results. And those are the things that's probably kept me going. So did racism leave? Oh no, heck no. Story_ID: 63317 Speaker 1: Keep in mind when I started out. And then we started something here in Chicago called Designer of the Year. Well, that's a whole 'nother story. First year, sure wasn't me. Second year, sure wasn't me--took seven years. Finally, Nena Ivon said to them this is the lady that helped me get into school. Why do we keep passing over Jermikko? 'Cause everybody else was out of business. I was still here. And by the way, I was still here, having built this company with the $50. There has never been an investor, and there has never been a loan. I have never had either one of those. And I have never understood why the public has not stepped up. I have one African-American customer. I don't get it, but that's okay. That's a whole nother, that's another program. We'll get to that later. You'll ask me a question about that. Speaker 2: That's odd. I don't know anything about fashion, but I think that's, that's very odd. Speaker 1: Well, see, it's about manufacturing, and that's what I do. A lot of times when I, I--I also had to educate my people because they will--I'll meet them and they'll tell me oh, I have this pattern. Okay, what do you want me to do with it? Well, if I bring it to you--that's not what I do. I design and manufacture. I spent a lot of years following. Now I tell, okay. I predict what's happening in fashion; I make a line; I give it to sales reps throughout the country; the sales reps show it stores; the stores place orders; the orders come back to me; we process the orders, yay or nay; and then we ship out the goods. I ship out goods to 674 stores nationwide, in China and Japan and Australia. So a lot of the stores I've never met before. And it's a real difficult thing for them to understand that that's what I do. But in Chicago [Illinois] I'm the only one who does that. And they'll say well, Barbara Bates. Well, Barbara Bates is a very lovely lady. I love her to death, but she does custom work. I don't do custom. I manufacture, that's what I do. And there are a lot of stores that are African-American stores, so I don't know if they just don't buy my goods or if they just don't know me. It's okay though. They will. So how much did I leave out of here (laughter)? Speaker 2: I don't know. I was wondering, just, just to pursue that, that issue for a minute, I--I mean is that--do you know some of the, the boutique owners in the black community and--or, or, or-- Speaker 1: Well, I'm gonna tell you-- Speaker 2: -or do we have any retail stores anyway that-- Speaker 1: I'm gonna tell you what I suspect. I suspect that just like when I used to go to New York [New York] to buy fabrics and I went in, and I'm the owner, this stepped in the way: You probably don't have no credit, so we don't even wanna deal with you. I suspect that if you reverse that, the African American store owner that we know is hard hit whenever anything happens, goes--has gone into a showroom, and usually the showroom, ninety-nine percent of 'em are controlled and owned by white people, and have had that negative attitude given to them. So, my line is in here, and for them to buy my line, they gotta go through--and they just don't, don't do it. So what they do is they go to the jobber or they wait until I have a sale here and they come here and they buy. So it's the reverse thing there, and I don't guess a lot of 'em are smart enough just to go in as the buyer. You know, you ain't gotta own it (unclear) till you get them known--until you get known, you know, just--I don't know. What can I say? Story_ID: 63318 Speaker 1: So in 1997 I won, after all these years, Designer of the Year. That was the most empty feeling I have ever experienced in this industry. I had gone through all types of racism in this industry. Never have I felt as empty as I did that night. I remember the next day and, and the piece of crystal that they gave me, I remember thinking of it--somebody said something to me, and I said oh, my piece of glass is in the desk drawer. I kept it a desk drawer for a very long time. That night at the, at the Designer of the Year affair, there was one African American in the audience, one African American. And I looked out in the audience as I was giving my speech, and I remember that part of my speech I had wanted to say a little bit about how I got there. And when I looked out into the audience, I thought, how can I tell these people of my devastation, when my own people don't support me today? There's one African American in that audience. There's a woman on this stage that had her butt kicked for a lot of years so that she could open the door for other African Americans that wanted to be clothing manufacturers. You should be in that audience tonight. I did a lot of this because Jesse Jackson said, don't get out of school and go work for somebody else. Get out of school and start your own. Well, why is it you don't know my name? Where, where, where, where are my people? Where are my people that ought to be sitting out in that audience saying yeah, another industry we've cracked. They're not there. The people that were there for me were the people that tried to kill me at one time, and that hurt. That, that was probably the most painful thing that I've ever felt. It was more painful than sitting on the floor eating. It was more painful than watching them nail my leg to the ground, because those were people who didn't know me. But the people that should have been there were people that, according to us in the '60s [1960s], when we were out here fighting, this was what we were fighting for. Speaker 2: Okay, but do people really know, know of you in the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: It was in the paper. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: They should have known. There was no reason for them not to, I don't think. It's not like--you got all that press there. We read the paper. We read the "Defender." But they weren't there. And I don't know why, other than maybe they're not a part of the fashion industry. Speaker 2: Well, are they? I mean-- Speaker 1: But to me-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: You know something? To me it had nothing to do with the fashion industry. What it had to do with was a struggle. It had to do with a place that we were not allowed in, and now we were in there. It's like the first person who, the first African American who started a car dealership. We don't make cars. We probably didn't buy a car from that person. But we should have supported that person because isn't this what the struggle was supposed to be? So, I don't know. Maybe I'm kind of backwards there. But I certainly had to forgive that and to, to get over it and say well, I guess this is another hurdle that I, I--or either this is another door that I must open and say hey, here I am guys, yep. Speaker 2: I would suspect it is actually, you know, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I think we're, we're hard on each other sometimes, you know. Speaker 1: Very hard, yep, yep. Story_ID: 63319 Speaker 1: So, when you--now did your mother get a chance to see you become successful and-- Speaker 2: mm-mm. Speaker 1: Oh no? Speaker 2: No, no. My mom died in, in the '80s [1980s]. And when she passed, my mother was always very fashionable. And she used to wear this spider pin, and I loved that pin. I was scared of that pin. I loved it. So I wanted to get that pin, and I wanted to keep one outfit, and this fur that she always used to put on when she went out. So I went down to the house to pack up her stuff and pack up things that I'd given her, and give away. And I got all the pictures and, and that sort of thing. And I, and I brought back this folder, and in this folder was every article that had ever been written on me. So, my mother wasn't an affectionate woman. I, I can't ever remember kissing my mother. I can never--I can only remember my mother saying she don't kiss on women, so she wasn't that kind of person. So I, I, I wouldn't have suspected that she had these things, but obviously she was the kind of mom who just didn't express that kind of warmth. And she had, in fact, kept every single thing, so I guess she knew I was headed that way. She didn't know that--she does not know what finally--well, maybe she does if, if they say the after spirit--but I, I tend to not go that direction. But she knew something, and, and, and I--of all the kids that, that they fell in love with, I was--I am the only one who's done anything, the only one who graduated high school, the only one who graduated college, the only one that has a business, I'm it. And I'm the only one still living. Everybody else is deceased. Speaker 1: I suspect, from what you say about her keeping the, the newspaper articles, that she was probably proud of you, I would guess. Speaker 2: I think so in the end. Speaker 1: Yeah, I don't think it's-- Speaker 2: I, I really do think so in the end, yep, I think so in the end. I've always been proud of her as mom, eventually I was, you know, 'cause I can understand. And it took a, took a long time to get there, but my mother did the best job she could do at the time. And somewhere along the line whatever it was she did, it gave me the ability to step up and do better, you know, and to understand what better was. And so she did the best job she could do, and if she knew better, she would have done better and that's it, yeah. Story_ID: 63320 Speaker 1: What, what are your hopes and aspirations for the black community? I mean--and for those who might choose to enter--the fashion and de--and design and manufacturing industry? Speaker 2: Well, first of all, I'd like to see my community become a unit, and, and learn to support each other, and learn to give back to, to each other. That's the first thing. If you got one pencil, it's easily broken. You put two pencils together, it, it makes it a little bit more difficult--three pencils, four pencils, eventually you get a group of pencils it's almost impossible to break. And I, I think that we as a community need to nurture. And, and we need to start getting interested in young kids when, when they're in grammar school and start to teach 'em about business. A lot of my struggles have been because I didn't know about business. I, I was a great artist, but I knew nothing about business. I knew nothing about hiring a good accountant, a good attorney and all that stuff. We, we, we need to start to teach our young people entrepreneurship, and I think we're, we're starting to do that. I'm working with the high schools, and I've taken a few of 'em under my wings, and, and whatever I can do, I'll do it to help so that there's not another kid who does not know the word designer or fashion or where something comes from. For people who want to go into manufacturing, easy was never an option. Nothing is ever easy. You make up your mind that that's what you wanna do and you go for it. And you learn the rules, and once you, you--you can't win until you know the rules. And once you know the rules, then you can make those rules fit where you need to be, you know. When I started out with no money--that $250 didn't go too far--a part of my strategy was when you get so far, you need to buy X amount of yards of fabric, on one of the things that we did thousands of yards. Well, didn't need thousands of yards, but what you find is the rules say that you can get sample goods, that's three yards. So you can get duplicate goods, that's 200 yards. So I want 200 yards of fabric. Now they sitting there waiting on you to order the thousand, well, it didn't go too good. So, you know, you just kind of have to learn what the rules are and play the game. And if you're not willing to play the game by their rules or within their rules, then don't get in the game. I don't think there's any area that we should be ashamed of getting into or afraid to get in anymore. I also don't think that if our own community supports us we should stop. 'Cause, again, you gotta feed a hungry man before you can talk to him. So sometimes I think we as a community need to be educated about each other. But I also think that the young generation that's coming up now is a little bit more behind each other than we were. Because I think a lot of that old teaching that we were taught for survival isn't strong in the young generation, and I don't know why, but I'm glad, certainly glad of that. Story_ID: 63321 Speaker 1: There have been some changes, yeah. As you, as you mentioned Margaret Burroughs and the kind of things that she taught you when she was--when you were in high school, do you keep in contact with her? Speaker 2: Oh yes, I have prints of Dr. [Margaret] Burroughs here now. Dr. Burroughs has been very helpful to me. She calls me on the phone, and if she calls, I don't care what it is, okay, Dr. Burroughs, I'll be right there. Come and get me, take me to the hospital to visit my friend, yes, ma'am. I got twelve collections to do, but yes, ma'am. I tell her okay, I gotta go pick up Dr. Burroughs. Yeah, we talk quite often. I just got a--I guess she's doing a lecture or somebody's doing a story on her life or something. And I just got something in the mail about that, so I'm going to attend. And then something very neat, on her 82nd birthday it was held at DuSable [High School]. And I went and I met a lot of my classmates that I hadn't seen in years, and it was so neat. It was really funny because when I walked in, a couple of 'em had on my designs, only they didn't know it was my design, 'cause the company says JJ Hobeau and I'm Jermikko. And the, the name of the company comes from my growing up in the South. It's--I'm gonna change the name soon, because I'm learning now that Hobeau is a negative connotation, and I don't want negativity. But I have to keep it very close to the beau, so I'm gonna just do it-- Speaker 1: How do you spell it-- Speaker 2: --Hobeaux. Speaker 1: --just for the-- Speaker 2: H-O-B-E-A-U, the French spelling. So I'm changing it to Obeaux, O-B-E-A-U-X, which will allow me to take the O, the B, and the X and do hip hop wear, which I love doing. Speaker 1: Now what is the negative connotation of-- Speaker 2: Hobo. Speaker 1: --of Speaker 2: Hobo. Speaker 1: Like the-- Speaker 2: A bum. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: Okay, but the reason why I came up with the name Hobeau, when I wanted to incorporate--when I first started out I was not incorporated. And then when I decided that I wanted to incorporate, we knew that I would need to come up with a name that was catchy. And I didn't particularly want my own name at the time. I do now, so I'm gonna have a collection with just my name. But JJ is my initials, and Hobeau was my love of choo-choo trains. I collect choo-choo trains and perfume bottles. So when my attorney was asking me well, what are your hobbies, I said well, I collect choo-choo trains and--no, I collect perfume bottles and choo-choo trains. And I got ready to keep going, and he said back up. You collect what, choo-choo trains? I said yeah. He said my, you're just a regular little hobo aren't you? I said that's a good name, JJ Hobeau. That's, that's my initials and my love of choo--so, that's what I did. So everything I used to do had choo-choo trains on it 'cause I love trains. So that's where the JJ Hobeau comes from. Story_ID: 63322 Speaker 1: Talk about your, Eleanor. Speaker 2: Oh, okay, Eleanor, Eleanor Morris is her name, and she's really history too. Eleanor is the woman that had a modeling agency back in the '30s [1930s] and '40s [1940s]. And Eleanor is extremely light, but she wanted to be in broadcasting. And I met her at, at Science of Mind. And one Sunday--I've only ever said hi to Eleanor or bye and that was it. One Sunday I'm having coffee at the restaurant in, in the building where I never stop. And this little old lady walks over and said may I sit here? And I, I actually looked around and saw there were plenty other empty tables. Why couldn't she sit at one of those? But I had been having my morning conversation with God, asking him for his advice and help, and thanking him for his help. And I figured well, she may have my answer, so, yes and no. Yes, you can sit here because you might have my answer; no, 'cause if you sit here I have to talk to you, and I really don't wanna talk. But yes won out, so she sat down. And she looked at me and she said I have a story to tell you. And it was funny because my grandmother, whenever she saw turmoil in my face, she would always relate to me by telling me a story. And I started to smile, 'cause somehow or another I knew this was not an accident. This was the lady who was supposed to sit here. So I said okay, tell me the story. So I prepared myself for one of those little long old lady stories. And she told me about a frog. She said there was a frog one day. She said so let's just say the friend that I was walking with, her name was Gerta [ph.]. So me and Gerta, we're walking up the road, and I look and I see this frog in a ditch. And I say, Gerta, isn't that a frog stuck in the ditch. So Gerta say yep. She said that's all Gerta ever said was yep. So she said, I said come on, Gerta, let's go over here and help the frog out the ditch. So me and Gerta, we go traipsing over there pulling on the frog. Come on Mr. Frog; come out the ditch. And the frog won't come out the ditch, and we gettin' tired. I said come on, Gerta. I'm getting tired. That frog don't wanna come out the ditch. So Gerta said okay, so we walked on. Next day, we come back the same way. Just by the time we got up there where Mr. Frog was, I look and that little frog is sittin' on the side of the ditch just a slinging his little legs. I say, Gerta, isn't that that frog we tried to help out the ditch yesterday? Gerta say yep. Say, well, let's go over here and talk to him, and find out how come he's sittin' up swinging his legs today. So I go over and say, Mr. Frog, we tried to help you out of the ditch yesterday, and you wouldn't come out. How come you sittin' here swinging your legs and singing today? And the frog looked up and said 'cause I saw a truck coming last night. If I didn't get out that ditch, it was gonna kill me. So I looked at her, and I said well, you know, I'm sitting here questioning where God wants me to be and whether or not I'm supposed to be doing what I'm doing 'cause it gets harder and harder. And I said I think what you're telling me is if I don't get out the ditch, it's gonna kill me. But you see, here's what my brain is saying to me. My brain is saying how can I slow that truck down long enough until I get the courage to get out of this ditch? So from that day forward Eleanor and I were, we just click, we just clicked. She was my angel. Story_ID: 63323 Speaker 1: So one day a week later we're talking, and I was telling her about all the incredible people that I have met in my lifetime, and people of affluence who were capable of getting me anywhere I wanted to go, and how I did not know how to utilize that. Because to me, it seemed like usury, and I did not want to do that. And so Eleanor [Morris] listened to me, and she said to me--it was Martin Luther King's birthday too, by the way. 'Cause I was about ready to throw in the towel here. So Eleanor said to me I wanna take you to my house. I wanna show you something. Now keep in mind, this was my little old bag lady. I didn't wanna say no to her, so I went to her house with her out South. And when we walked in the back door, I'm looking thinking okay, this is my little bag lady. And then we walked into her main house, and it was incredible. And I'm thinking these two ain't matching here. And she said to me, the reason why I brought you here is because I don't want the same thing that happened to me to happen to you, so I wanna show you. Many years ago, in the '30s [1930s] and the '40s [1940s], Eleanor wanted to be a newscaster. And she speaks quite eloquent, and she's done commercials that if you heard them, you would think they were commercials for today. But she showed--she opened up her portfolio book, and she had me read that book from cover to cover, all the letters that she had gotten from white radio stations that said you are very talented, but you are too black to be white and too white to be black. And that's exactly what they said. And it wasn't that you had to read between the lines. They wrote it that way. She--and then I went ahead and I, and, and I kept reading, and she said--I got to that next to the last page, and she said--oh, and the pictures in the book were pictures with the, the man who made "Gone With the Wind," Er--what's, what was his name? Speaker 2: Clark Gable. Speaker 1: Clark Gable and Kim Novak, and oh, she had pictures with all these people and interviews that she did with these people that came through. She used to do interviews down at Lake Meadows back in those days. And I saw pictures of Cab Calloway, her and Cab Calloway, and her and all these jazz artists. And come to find out, her husband was a jazz musician. And she'd started a charm school, and all this incredible stuff. And then I got to that next to the last page, and there was a letter from Coretta Scott King to her. That was cool. And then I got to the last page, and there was a browning envelope. And it used to be white you could tell, but now it was brown. And at the top of it, it said MLK. And she said to me I want you to take that letter out and read it. And I took that letter out, and when I read it, at the bottom it said yours truly, with love, Martin Luther King, Jr. And my floodgates just opened up, because I realized at that moment that that was what was being sent to me again saying don't give up. I died so you could get where you are. Easy was never an option, so don't give up. Just keep right on going, you're okay. That's my angel. Story_ID: 63324 Speaker 1: So do you think that, that your legacy basically is, is, is this hard work, and, and stick-to-itiveness and determination? Speaker 2: Yeah. My legacy is it does not not matter where you're from. What does matter is where you wanna go. It does not always matter how you're gonna get there, just that you have the faith that you will get there and that you're willing to work hard, work smart to get there. And sometimes you have to give up some stuff in your life. How much are you willing to give up to get the thing that you said you wanted? Speaker 1: Okay, now you are of indeterminate age, but we but I suspect you're still fairly young and got a lot of time left. But, even at that, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: I would like to be remembered as the artist who had enough to give. Story_ID: 63325 Speaker 1: Okay, all right, well, thank you. Oh, is there something we haven't asked you that you, you wanted to relate to us? Speaker 2: Hmm, well, where am I at today in my life? In September I'm starting a television program. I don't know if I mentioned that. It's gonna be "Fashion and Focus," where I'm interviewing other artists. Because I've realized that--and I'm trying to rebuild this industry too, so I'll talk a little bit about that. I realize that there is a need in this industry for artists to have different outlets for selling their product. And so I believe that this is something that I can bring to the table, that I start a TV program. And the TV program will introduce and talk with artists about what it is they're doing. And the second half of it will be selling their product online, so that I'm working with. I'm realizing at this time in my life that as an artist I am--I have greater interests than that of just being a designer. So I've been in contact with Jeep, who is considering me for doing the interiors of Jeep. And I'm in theater, so I love writing. I love poetry. I love that kind of thing, producing movies and whatever else. Speaker 1: Have you been involved in plays in, in ta-- Speaker 2: Mm-hmm, mm-hmm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, and-- Speaker 1: Which ones? That, now that's interesting. We, we need to--'cause I know that you have portrayed numerous staff members on the phone, so--but, but you've actually been on, on stage in, in, in theater and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I've been--not, not professionally, but you know, little theaters around town, in-- Speaker 1: Sure, there's a lot of-- Speaker 2: --Act One Theater. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I've discovered that my, my desire is to direct rather than to, to act, but, but I can do that. And I'm, I also dressed Della Reese in, in "Touched by an Angel," right. And my other mentor that I just love dearly has, who has been very spiritually helpful to me is Reverend Johnnie Colemon. You know, I think that lady has taught me an awful lot. I am so grateful. If, if there are three women in my life that I am grateful for having been in my life, those three women are Dr. Margaret Bur--well, actually there's five, Dr. Margaret Burroughs, Dr. Johnnie Colemon, and Dr.--oh, I should say it's not doctor, but Merri Dee, Merri Dee. Those have been instrumental women. And the other women are Mrs. Faye Edwards. This is a friend of mine. And if I've never known friendship before, and I've never known what friendship--what defines friendship, this lady has taught me what defines friendship, and then my mom, my adoptive mom and my other mom. They're just wind beneath my wings now. So that--these are women that know me and love me no matter what, and I've waited a long time for that. Story_ID: 63326 Speaker 1: But all the guys out there seem to think I'm married --no. So I don't know-- Speaker 2: So you nev--did you ever get married? Speaker 1: No, no, I've never been married. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: No, never been married--have a cat, and a bird, a hamster, a rabbit. Speaker 2: No children? Speaker 1: No children. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I'm a child. I have all these toys around here. Little kids come in and say oh, where are your kids? And I say those are my toys. You're too old. I said you never get too old for toys. You see, I didn't have toys when I was little, but I got toys now. Speaker 2: And you've got that bird. Now speak about the bird briefly-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --you know, we need to talk about the (unclear)--on camera about the bird. Speaker 1: Right, my bird, her name is Feathers. Feathers is an African gray. And I must find someone that I respect enough and love enough to will Feathers to, because Feathers lifespan is 52 years. Feathers came to me in an unusual way, however, Feathers and I are now one. And when Feathers first came to me, I had to learn to cohabitate with this bird because birds, as you know, are very dirty. So I'm looking at this bird one day thinking okay, it's me and you. Now, you're dirty, I'm clean, so how can we work this? How can I keep all your stuff in your cage? Well, many years ago when I was young I had a dog, Lonesome, the dog I had told you I had found. I'd take Lonesome to the doctor, and the doctor bill was $18. That was a lot of money back in those days. So I came home and I called my attorney. I said Ira, excuse me, is there anything called pet insurance? And he said nope. I said good. I'd like to invent it. He said good idea, so he hooked me up with some guy in California. And the guy--I didn't have anyone to help me stick to it or to believe in it, so I just eventually dropped it since nobody else seemed to be interested. Now there's pet insurance. And guess what? It comes out of California. Second thing that happened, when I was going to college, I was going to the Art Institute and the University of Chicago concurrently, which meant--and working on my three jobs, which meant that I had to sit up at night reading a lot, and it would keep my roommate up. So I called the same attorney, Ira. Ira, do you think you could hook me up with a company that would help me create a light that would just shine on my book only? Now we're talking back in the '60s [1960s]. He said I'll get back to you. I'm still waiting. So this time, I'm looking at this birdcage. I'm looking at the cover, and it's not a very small birdcage. It's a big one, and she's a big bird. And I remember that I had some bridal illusion here at work. So I got up 3:00 in the morning and came to the office, and I sewed up this thing that covered, the slip over the cage. And it tore up immediately, so I thought that won't do. But I had done some clothes with some nettings, some dresses, and they didn't tear up. So I took the same expensive netting and I did the same design, just a square design, and I slipped that over the cage. And you could see the bird. The bird could see out. The stuff stayed in the cage. And I'm thinking, how many households out there that women are in that just hate their husbands because they want this dirty bird, and this vacuum cleaner stays by the birdcage all the time? Or how many people would love to have a bird, but they're afraid to go get a bird 'cause they're filthy? Hmm, how many people have little kids who stuck their finger through the birdcage and gotten bit? Called Ira. Ira, do you like birds? Yep. Would you own a bird? Nope, they're dirty. I said ooh, then, Ira, remember the pet insurance? He said mm-hmm. I said remember the book light? He said mm-hmm, I'm not missing another one of your ideas. I said okay, then we're on with the birdcage. So I made these little, tiny samples, which I have over here, and I took them over to Ira's office. And he looked at them, and he said this is good. And I said mm-hm. And then I came and I got an old cage, and I made one for the cage and I took that back over. So he put together a team of people, and we took my bird down to a photographer, and we decided to do some ads in magazines. And we started to get orders from everywhere. Story_ID: 63327 Speaker 1: And this one woman--the one thing that stands out in my head is this one lady called and said I was her an--that God had sent her her answer and that I was it. Her bird had passed away, her original bird. There were two. One of the original birds passed way, and the second bird that she had gotten wasn't getting along with the first bird. So the birds, she explained to my office, had their own room. So Ira said well, why don't you just separate the cages? She said no, you don't understand. The birds have their own room. When she meant their own room, she meant their own wide open room like this. So what she wanted me to do was to figure out how these birds could cohabitate in the same room until they learned to love each other. That meant I had to fly from here to Denver to do it, and I wasn't willing to do that. And I wasn't willing to give her my idea on the telephone, so she flew me there. So what we did was just string the fabric from the ceiling to the bottom 12 inches apart, so that her birds could see each other, play with each other, but they didn't kill each other. And when I got there I discovered how much people really loved their birds. These birds had their own maid and furniture, yes. They had hard plastic furniture. They could fly on the couch; they could fly on the bed; they just had everything in this room. And I'm thinking, you know, I could be a bird here. So I, I like inventing things, you know. Now I've got these other two inventions in, in line that I'm doing. So, it's, it's all about art. And then I do interior designing. All that was a lucky thing. I moved and I could not figure out how I wanted to recover my couches. So I just started to print fabrics, which has always been my strong point in, in design. I started out as a textile designer in school. And when I decided to start my own business, one of the things that I could not do was afford to buy up all the fabric that would say to a buyer, well, if you like this fabric, you've got to go to her and get it. I couldn't do that, so what I did was I bought plain fabrics and designed it myself. Like this is a print, and therefore if you wanted this print, you have to come to me. So when I got ready to move, I thought well, you know, I don't like anybody else's fabrics, so I did my own. And when I gave it to the upholsterer, interior designers started to come in and see the fabrics. And so I get a lot of requests from interior designers to design--[that's the door]--to design fabrics. So I like doing that too. So I'm--if it comes to art, I love doing it. I sculpture; I paint; textile weaving; I blow glass. That hurts, but I do that, yes, all of that. And I put things together. I love taking things apart and putting them together. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I took a lose a car once. The only thing I couldn't do was put the bellhousing on. It was too heavy , but I took it apart. Speaker 2: (Unclear) it's been a pleasure talking to you. Speaker 1: Thank you. Speaker 2: Thank you very much. Speaker 1: All right. That was fun. Story_ID: 63328 Speaker 1: In 1858 my great-grandmother I'm told was born at the end of the 1700s. So her mother had to be born somewhere in the 17--early 1700s. That's what this picture is from. And that's my grandmother on her lap, my great-grandmother on her lap. Speaker 2: Okay, that's my grandmother's mother, so that's about the beginning of the middle-- Speaker 1: Give us the names. Speaker 2: Gussie, it's Gussie Watson. I don't know my great-great-grandmother's name though, but I know her name, Gussie. Speaker 1: What year is this? Speaker 2: That's grandmother's mother, so that's about the beginning--the end of the 1700s, somewhere like 1780, somewhere in there. Speaker 1: No, no, it couldn't be that, because it has (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Okay, wait a minute. Grandmother, so it's either the beginning of the 1800s then, 'cause granny was born 1858. That's right, people-- Speaker 1: Your grandmother was born in 1858? Speaker 2: Eighteen fifty-eight [1858], that's what they told me, yeah. So, and this is my grandmother. But people had babies really early back then, didn't they? I don't know. I just know this is her mom. So we would say 18-something. Speaker 1: Yeah, it had to be--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Or maybe it's 1868. Speaker 1: It could be the turn of the century. Speaker 2: Eighteen sixty-eight [1868]. Speaker 1: She would still have been alive at the turn of the century. Speaker 2: Could have been. I don't know. I know this is her mom. Speaker 1: Okay, this is way ahead. This is way ahead. Well, granny-- Speaker 2: Well, it doesn't have to be in order. Speaker 1: I have a Bible at home with all of this in it.Oh, okay, all right. That's me in graduation from Spalding, which was the school for handicaps, and that's me right there, and my classmates. Speaker 2: What year do you suppose that (unclear)? Speaker 1: That's 1960--oh, I think it was 1962, '63 [1963], somewhere in there, '64 [1964] maybe, '64 [1964] I think. Speaker 2: Oh, me and granny. Oh, that's my granny. Let's see here, her name was Julia Jermicko Watson. And that's Dolly Mae. That was the only doll I had. And that's Jermicko or Shoshannah Jermicko--well, actually then, then I was Jermicko Taliaferro Johnson. And I was--I don't know how old I was there, eight maybe. But that was like back in 19--had to be in the '50s [1950s], had to be in the '50s [1950s]. Speaker 1: That's my--me with my dolly, and that's my father. This is my dad. All right, that's Albert Johnson. That's Albert Johnson. That was my dad. My dad was an entrepreneur. Speaker 2: He was a butcher, right? Speaker 1: Yeah, a butcher. Speaker 2: About what year is that? Speaker 1: I'm not sure, but it looks like, from the dress, the '40s [1940s], just from the hat and the lapels. They were wide back in that day. Speaker 2: All right that's me and my dolly in the South with my granny. I'm probably eight, eight years old or something like that there. And I'm, I'm totally petrified. Speaker 1: That's my mom. Her name was Teary, T-E-A-R-Y, Watson. And I believe she told me she was fifteen on that picture. I know she was a teenager. Speaker 2: That's me. I think I was about nine then. Speaker 1: Okay, that's Grandpa Joe Jackson. He was married to my grandmother. I didn't see him too often. He was a meat man. Speaker 2: I started a fashion program at I believe this was either Olive-Harvey or Chicago State University. I'm not really remembering which one. But I took my students to learn about fur, 'cause black people didn't know how you made fur. So I took the kids down so they could do this. This kid here is still designing. I don't know where the other kids are, or the other adults are. And I don't know if the man whose fur--whose the furrier is still around. Speaker 1: What do you suppose the year was when this was taken? Speaker 2: That was back in the '80s [1980s]. Speaker 1: That's me and my dog, Lonesome. I was in college at the time, and we lived at 7200 South Shore drive. So that had to be in the '70s [1970s], early '70s [1970s]. Speaker 2: And the one at the bottom is my first trip to New York buying fabrics. Speaker 1: That's me on my first--that's me on my buying trip to New York to buy fabrics. I remember after that is when I came up with the two business cards. And that's me in the hotel room thoroughly disgusted. Yep, I was thoroughly put out, determined to win the next battle. Speaker 2: That's grammar school at Coleman. That's 1961. And that is me on the second to the last row in the middle. Speaker 1: High school graduation, prom picture from DuSable [High School]. Speaker 2: Okay, here's granny-- Speaker 1: That's me in my militant days, and I was a member of the Blackstone Rangers there. And Angela Davis was my idol, wow (unclear). Speaker 2: That's my stepfather, Harvey McNeal, and he was a Pullman porter. Speaker 1: And you don't know who those children are? Speaker 2: Mm-mm, they're just some little white kids riding on the train. Story_ID: 63329 Speaker 1: All right, this is from 1997 Designer of the Year, in which I was the first African-American woman to ever--or man--to ever win Designer of the Year anywhere in the world. And at that time, they discovered that I had the largest female African American-owned manufacturing company in the country. That's what I forgot to tell you in the interview. Speaker 2: Ah, that's me presenting one of my garments to the Athenian Museum. One of my garments is in the Athenian Museum. And the other garment is in the Chicago Historical Society, but I don't have a photograph of that. And that's me with my, one of my famous little prints. It's called J's Little Popos (ph.). Speaker 1: Oh, the year for this? Speaker 2: I think that was like 1996 probably. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's Dorothy Fuller. She's the grand dame of the fashion industry. So that's myself and Dorothy the night of my Designer of the Year Award in 1997. And Dorothy Fuller was the head of the Apparel Mart. Now she's a fashion philanthropist for young designers. Speaker 2: That's my angel in the middle. That woman is responsible for getting me into the Art Institute. That's Nena Ivon, the woman who I met at Saks Fifth Avenue who called Shirley Sherman and got me into school. And she was also responsible for me getting this award, and that she would no longer let them ignore me because of my color. Speaker 1: That is when I became professional. The young lady here is Maria, Maria Otara (ph.). She was my very first real employee when I incorporated myself. And she had just as much tenacity as I had, in that she never gave up. She would come every week to see if I had a job for her. And this woman here was my sales rep., and this was my business manager. To the far left is Katie. She's wearing J's Little Popo. She was the business manager. In the center here is Helen Newman. She's my sales rep., and that's myself the night of Designer of the Year. And this young lady is Maria Otara. Maria was a person who worked with me when I first got started professionally incorporated. And that's a friend from church. Speaker 2: Ah, DuSable [High School], that's graduation, 1966, and that's my date, Dorien [ph.] Blakely. Dorien was also a designer. He's deceased now. But that's a gown that I designed. I sat up many nights making that gown, and someone stole it. I had just gotten all my hair cut of that day. Speaker 1: For that, that event? Speaker 2: That's when young ladies looked like young ladies for proms. Now we look like hoochie mamas. Speaker 1: Okay, that's Mr. Stanley Korshak. And that's Judy Ross in the middle. She helped me get my first job professionally designing, and that's me. And this picture had to be like 1972 and--or either 1971. And this is my first interest in suedes. We were given suedes by a suede manufacturer, and we had to be real creative with it. So what I did was cut a group of circles and put them together by studs, and it won, won the Stanley Korshak Award, yeah. Speaker 2: This is from Pat Shelton's column in the "Chicago Sun-Times" on July 26th, 1978. It's the year before I started my business in my apartment with $50, two tree trunks, a home sewing machine, a metal card playing table, three yards of fabric, and a fifteen-pound dog. Speaker 1: No, this--yeah, the second--third cover for "Women's Wear Daily," and that was in 1981. Speaker 2: And that is not you posing. Speaker 1: That is not me posing. No, my Ultra--was it Ultra--didn't work that good. Speaker 2: That is the second cover of the first African-American designer on the cover of "Women's Wear Daily." Speaker 1: Okay, this is a picture with all of the Chicago designers together in 1982. Speaker 2: Which one is you, please? Speaker 1: At the, the, the African American at the bottom. Speaker 2: The African American at the bottom, okay. Speaker 1: That's me. That's me and my Diana Ross look. I had hair then. I cut it all off. Speaker 2: All right, that's some of my early designs in 1974 I believe. Speaker 1: Okay, this is Charmaine Caldwell, and this is on the school of the Art Institute grounds. And this is my award-winning gown that she's wearing. The ones at the top are Mrs. McCormick's house. Speaker 2: Okay, this is a show that the students did for Mrs. McCormick, the McCormick Place McCormicks. This is at her house. Speaker 1: This is a sketch that I did. And this is signed and autographed by Mr. James Whitmore, the actor, who I was a dresser for. He used to pass my dressing room and noticed me sketching, and so he wrote me something on this one. Speaker 2: What was he in a play here or something? Speaker 1: He was in a play here. Speaker 2: What theater? Speaker 1: He was at the Blackstone Theater in a play called "Bully," and I was his reader actually, his cuer and his dresser. Speaker 2: That's my very first design in 1968 from the Art Institute. That's leather, with a leather belt and a wool jumpsuit. And that's Model Frankie Wellfelt (ph.). Frankie's family owned the fur company that used to be on Coopers on Michigan Avenue. Speaker 1: All right, that's my press picture from 1992 I believe. Speaker 2: All right, that's from 1979, a cover story from Designer of the Year. And the fabric is a print that we do here. And the painting behind you--behind it is one of my prints that I--paintings that I do...