 Story_ID: 466508 Speaker 1: I'm Denise Gines with The HistoryMakers, the interviewer and Scott Stearns is the videographer. Would you please state your name and spell it for me, including your middle name? Speaker 2: My name is Shirley Ann Barber James [HistoryMaker Shirley James]; S-H-I-R-L-E-Y, A-N-N, B-A-R-B-E-R, J-A-M-E-S. Speaker 1: Would you tell me your date of birth? Speaker 2: My date of birth is September 5, 1946. Speaker 1: And your place of birth? Speaker 2: Place of birth is Georgetown, South Carolina. Speaker 1: Your occupation? Speaker 2: Currently, I'm retired but by profession, I'm a licensed professional counselor and also editor and publisher of The Savannah Tribune weekly newspaper. Speaker 1: Okay. And the location of this interview? Speaker 2: This interview is taking place in Atlanta, Georgia. Speaker 1: And today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is January 17, 2007. Story_ID: 466509 Speaker 1: I'm gonna start by asking you some People magazine-ish type questions, okay? Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: All right. Do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: I love food in general (laughter) but I suppose my favorite food is bread. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I love bread. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Not necessarily, but if I had to choose, I would probably choose an off-white, winter white. Speaker 1: And, what is your favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: I would say the fall; maybe because I was born in the fall, but the weather is very nice in the fall. It's refreshing and it's crisp and it's almost like a new beginning. That's when school starts and those kinds of things happen, so the fall is a wonderful time of year for me. Speaker 1: And, where do you like to vacation? Speaker 2: I just love traveling. And places that I go to for the first time; for instance, I went to Alaska, to Anchorage, Alaska. I loved Anchorage, Alaska. When I went to Tokyo, Japan, I loved Tokyo. Recently, my husband [HistoryMaker Robert James] and I were in South Africa and Johannesburg [South Africa] and Cape Town [South Africa]. I loved Johannesburg and Cape Town, so it just depends. I mean, there's so much to see, so many places I'd still love to go, so I just love traveling and I think wherever I've gone, I've loved it and wherever I still have to go, I'm going to love being there. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite phrase? Speaker 2: Yes, I do, and I'm not sure who wrote it. I know that it is the subject of a book, and I've seen a lot of sayings from it, but what guides my life now is this phrase; you live, you learn, and you pass it on. Story_ID: 466510 Speaker 1: Now we're gonna begin with talking about your family, and we're gonna start with your mother's [Camille Moses Barber] side of the family. How far back can you remember about your mother's parents or grandparents, or great-grandparents? Speaker 2: Now, my grandmother, my mother's mother, is the person that I remember most. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because she was the only grandparent who really was alive when we were growing up. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In fact, my grandmother lived in the same, well it was her house that my mother and my father [Eli Barber, Jr.] and all of us grew up in, and as a result of that, my grandmother and I, when I was old enough, actually shared a bedroom together, so my grandmother and I were very, very close. Speaker 1: Tell me her name. Speaker 2: Her name was Lula Ellen Commander Moses [Lula Commander Moses]. Speaker 1: And what do you remember most about her? Speaker 2: Oh, she was fun. You know, she could just make you laugh about a lot of things, but very stern and just a nice woman. She was always very gentle and kind and nice to everybody. When I say everybody, kind of growing up around her and around my parents, you never got a feeling that there was any distinction and classes of people. My grandmother and my mother and my father, in reference to people, sharecroppers were in our house, professional people were in our house, ministers, teachers, just everybody came, but everybody was treated as a person and they were respected as a person in who they were, and were just given and elevated like they were special, but they came to see us. So, that was one good thing about my grandmother. She could tell a lot of jokes, and her way of disciplining was a pinch, and you did not want to be pinched by grandmother, and we called her Grandma, because it was one that was felt. You know, she didn't whip with switches or with her hand or anything. It was her pinch, which was really, really famous. I traveled with my grandmother, believe it or not, when I was young before I started kindergarten her youngest daughter [Thelma Moses Rucker], my mother was her oldest child, and there was a second oldest daughter [Ethel Moses Bessellieu] who lived two doors down from us, and a stepson [Thomas Moses], who lived across the street from us, but my youngest aunt, my grandmother's youngest daughter, was married to a serviceman. He was in what they used to call the Army Air Force [U.S. Army Air Corps; U.S. Army Air Forces], Uncle Sid [Sidney Rucker]. So, until the time that I actually started school, my grandmother kept me, so when she would visit with my aunt and uncle, she would have to take me with her, so I remember train rides, and all kinds of things, being up in Hempstead, New York, spending two and three months at a time away from my parents, but with my grandmother. I've been to Texas with my grandmother. I've been out in Kansas with my grandmother, and just remembering those trips and just going along with her and her holding my hand, and just taking me places, you know, maybe that's where I started the love of travel, but it started with me at a very early age and just going with her and watching her every morning and every night. She prayed, you know, so that was something else that was instilled into me in reference to her and in terms of her being a Christian woman. Story_ID: 466511 Speaker 1: She was a midwife, I know that about her, and even after I was old enough to understand what that was, they would still call on my grandmother [Lula Commander Moses] around the neighborhood to come and be with the doctor, be with the mother who was having the baby, and then even she was the one that they wanted to take care of the baby for about two or three weeks after the baby was born. My grandmother, I'm told, was the midwife when I was born and I actually was born in that same house that my mother [Camille Moses Barber] was born in, and the house that belonged to my grandmother, so that was a special kind of feeling, a special thing to know about her. The other thing about my grandmother was that she actually, she taught school and she finished at a normal school at Morris College up in Sumter, South Carolina, and she taught in the county of Georgetown [Georgetown County, South Carolina] before she married my grandfather [Henry Moses]. She was his second wife. He had three children when they were married, and my Uncle Tom [Thomas Moses] was the baby at that time because my grandfather's first wife had died, and so she actually raised Uncle Tom, who lived across the street from us and then she had three daughters with my grandfather. So, it was just interesting to know that in her day that she was able to have completed school to that point where she could actually be a teacher and after my grandfather passed on, then her means of living was to be a midwife, and that's what she did. Speaker 2: Okay. Did she share any stories about her growing up? Speaker 1: Yes. One, in particular. I remember because there were twelve brothers and sisters and she was next to the baby girl, and I think there probably still were a couple younger brothers than her, but she was the daughter that was selected to be the cook, so even at ten and eleven years old, she started. She had to prepare the family meals because she said her mother simply refused to cook and she wasn't gonna cook. So, she was the one that did it. So, just to listen to stories about it, I guess you learned. She didn't learn it from her mother. Maybe she learned to cook from her grandmother (laughter), I don't know. But, she was one of the best cooks as well, and she didn't necessarily do it, you know, like as a profession or anything, but she just had wonderful meals and with her living with us when I was growing up, she was the person that prepared dinner, so when my mother got home from work, when my father [Eli Barber, Jr.] came home, dinner was prepared by my grandmother. But, I thought that that was so funny, and I could imagine, I can't imagine at ten or eleven, preparing the meal for, say, fourteen people. I think about twelve brothers and sisters plus your mom and your dad (laughter). Speaker 2: That is remarkable (laughter). Story_ID: 466512 Speaker 1: Did she [James' maternal grandmother, Lula Commander Moses] talk about how the family acquired the land? They owned the house that they lived in, is that right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. That house was owned, actually it was my grandfather's [Henry Moses] house, but she didn't talk very much about that. Now, her family's land was a different story. She grew up in, on a plantation. It was the Easterlin Plantation out in Okatie, South Carolina, which is in Georgetown County [South Carolina] as well, and there was land that all the sisters and brothers inherited from their grandfather. The grandfather was the son of the plantation owner. His name was Edmund Easterling, and Edmund Easterling never married anyone because he was in love with my great-grandmother [sic. great-great grandmother] and he actually did everything as a father should do for his children. He owned them. When I say owned them, he, not necessarily because they weren't in slavery at that particular time, but he acknowledged them and he did everything for his children, so that was interesting to just find that out, and so, therefore as a result when he died he did will that portion of the land that he owned to those children and so they did have a sizeable amount of land that my grandmother [sic. great-grandmother], Nance Easterling [Nancy Easterling Commander], his daughter, and that her husband, Robert Commander [Samuel Robert Commander, Sr.], were able to have, and that's where they lived and farmed and did all that. That's where my grandfather met my grandmother, up in that area, because he was a Baptist minister and kind of, you know how the itinerant ministers are, and they travelled around in the area. He had more than one church but, in terms of ownership of land, it was in that area of Georgetown County. Once she married my grandfather, then she moved into the city, which was really his home and it's about a little acre-and-a-half plot, but the family home is still there and, like I said, I was born there, so that was, it just means a lot to me and, to go back home and just see the place that's still there where I was born and still being occupied. Speaker 1: What is the address? Speaker 2: The address is 1621 Emanuel Street in Georgetown, South Carolina. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Story_ID: 466513 Speaker 1: Are there any stories about your grandfather? I know you said that he died when you were young, is that right? Speaker 2: He died actually before I was born (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Born, okay. Speaker 2: He died the year that my mother [Camille Moses Barber] graduated from college [Morris College, Sumter, South Carolina], so that was in 1938. So, I didn't know him, but you just knew a lot about him. His name was Henry James Moses [Henry Moses], and his father, actually, was a Jewish merchant in Georgetown [South Carolina], whose name was Marcus Moses [ph.], and his mother was the housekeeper. Her name was Elizabeth [ph.] and, but again, you know, when you go back into those days and times, my great-grandfather, Marcus Moses, did accept his child, Henry. In fact, he worked for him at one of the merchant's stores where my great-grandfather worked, but it was a strange kind of relationship that my grandmother [Lula Commander Moses] told me about. When my great-grandfather was trying to will and give land and different kinds of things to my grandfather, he wouldn't accept it. He would not. He was devoted to his mother, but other than being able to have a means of income by working with his father, he would not accept anything, so a lot of times now my brothers [Eli Barber, III and Brendon Barber, Sr.] and I, and even our children, we just go back and we joke and we say, well, why was he so stubborn? Just think of what we could have had (laughter), you know, had he just not been so stubborn, but that was him. The other thing about him, too, is that he was a very caring person, just like my grandmother was in reference to people. He was a real people person. As far as I can tell, he knew some of everybody in town and, again, in terms of socioeconomic class or something, he made no distinctions. Growing up as a child, persons knowing that I was Henry Moses' granddaughter, they would say just say a lot of nice things about him to me. "Well, I knew your grandfather. He did this for me. You know, he made sure that I had something to eat, or he did that or he did this," so those were the kinds of stories that were told about him. Story_ID: 466514 Speaker 1: So let's now talk about your mother. What kind of mother was she to you? Speaker 2: Just wonderful. Just wonderful. Speaker 1: What was her name? Speaker 2: Her name was Camille Frances (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Can you spell it please? Speaker 2: C-A-M-I-L-L-E, and actually it was Camille Henrietta Frances Moses Barber. She dropped the Henrietta, which was, that was named after her dad [Henry Moses], then she dropped the Frances, after a while, and she just became Camille Moses Barber. She was a schoolteacher. Georgetown [South Carolina] is a small community. When we were growing up, maybe there were about twenty-five thousand people there so, of course, we grew up in a community where the schools were segregated and had one elementary school for blacks and one high school for blacks. She taught sixth grade in the beginning when she graduated from Morris College [Sumter, South Carolina] and she also was a Morris College graduate. I think she went to work in New York [New York] for about one year. That was the year that my grandfather died, and she didn't stay in New York for the full year, but what's interesting is when she went to New York, my grandfather's sister, the half-sister from the Jewish father [Marcus Moses (ph.)] and mother actually were the ones that took her in and that's who she stayed with, so that was interesting. And my grandfather didn't have anything necessarily to do with this family but they still acknowledged, you know, the children. So she stayed there maybe a year, a little less than a year, and then she came on back home and she began teaching at Howard High School [Georgetown, South Carolina], and she taught at Howard High School until she retired forty-four years later. She was an English teacher and actually, in reference to teachers in terms of professional accreditations and things of that nature, she was the only one for a while in Georgetown that had that kind of accreditation, because she even supervised, even though things were segregated she was the one that had to supervise a lot of Caucasian teachers who taught at the other schools in order to have a certified person who was supervising, so that was interesting. But, my mother taught school and as a result of that, she brought home a foster sister, who still, who lives in Washington, D.C. now. Her name is Ann Milton Anderson [ph.], and we called her Annie Mae. That was her name, but she started living with us when she met my mother in sixth grade, and so she grew up just like a sister with us. My aunt [Ethel Moses Bessellieu], who lived next, two doors down, that was the middle sister, she kind of did the same thing. So, my mother and my aunts kind of started what I called the foster care system, and so I had two sisters and a brother that were like just sisters and brothers to me, that between my mother and my aunt they brought to live with them and they grew up with us, with my cousins and my brothers [Eli Barber, III and Brendon Barber, Sr.] and myself. So she was another kind of person that had that same kind of demeanor about herself. There was no distinction in terms of person's class. You respected the person for who they were, and you did what you could to help a person. Before my mother died she used to laugh sometimes and she said, "Shirley [HistoryMaker Shirley James], do you feel that when you were growing up that you got everything that you really wanted?" I said, "Yeah, I don't think that there was anything that I wanted that I didn't get." She said, "Well, you wouldn't believe it, but sometimes I would buy clothes for Annie Mae or get things for her before I would even think about getting anything for you," because Annie Mae needed that for her self-concept and to build herself up because, you know, she had the short hair and she was dark skinned and all that, and people used, she used to be teased a lot. She played basketball in high school, and then she went on into the service after she finished high school, and but grew up to be a very, very just self-confident woman and I look back on it and my mother does to, I think, she did at the time, she just took that and she said, "I would sacrifice things for you and your brothers to make sure that she had what she needed," you know, clothing for school, or a special dress to wear to this place or that place, or if there was a trip going somewhere to make sure that she went, and so that's the kind of mother that I had and there are probably some other stories that I could tell, but those are the kind of things that stick out in my mind, most especially about her. Story_ID: 466515 Speaker 1: Well, let's talk about your father [Eli Barber, Jr.]. Do you know your grandparents on your father's side? Speaker 2: Not as well. My grandmother was, died around 1932 or somewhere around there. She died before I was born. Her name was Amanda Barber. I do faintly remember my step-grandmother. Her name was Georgia [Georgia Barber], but I can't even visualize what she looked like. My grandfather, my fraternal [sic. paternal] grandfather, died when I was about five years old. They lived in Winston-Salem, North Carolina, so my dad would, occasionally we'd go drive to Winston-Salem and go and visit, but my grandfather, his name is Eli Baxter Barber, Sr. [Eli Barber, Sr.], and he was an entrepreneur. He sold ice, he sold wood, you know. He had a horse and wagon kind of thing and so he just kind of did things and I guess you could say he was in business for himself. He didn't work for anyone, but he was able to make it. He had three children. There were two sisters and then my dad. One of the sisters I did not know because she died before I was born. It was the second sister of my dad's, my Aunt Pauline [Pauline Barber], that I knew, but by the time that I was about nine or ten, she had passed on, so then my dad was left alone and then he had a first cousin that he was very close with who lived in Charlotte, North Carolina, whom we called affectionately Aunt, so that was Aunt Grace, Grace Crawford [ph.], so that's kind of the extent of my family on that side other than cousins that were born to my Aunt Pauline and some of them were still in Winston-Salem now. Story_ID: 466516 Speaker 1: Now tell me about your father. What was his name? Speaker 2: His name was Eli Baxter Barber, Jr. [Eli Barber, Jr.] (laughter), okay? He was actually born in Charlotte, North Carolina, but the family moved at some point in time when he was very young to Winston-Salem [North Carolina] and that's where he grew up. He was able to attend Livingstone College [Salisbury, North Carolina] for about two years and then, for some reason, he wasn't able to complete his education there and I'm not sure exactly the reason why, but after he finished and that was, finished those two years, then he came to Myrtle Beach, South Carolina, to work, and that's how he and my mother [Camille Moses Barber] met there, and he worked there and then after probably about two or three years of working on Myrtle Beach, he worked as a, what did you do, you were a waiter, or, you know, something of that nature, in one of the resort areas there, but then he took a job at the International Paper Company in Georgetown [South Carolina], and he worked there until he retired. He was both what you call a mail porter, so he was the one who kind of, I guess, worked in a mail room delivering mail and doing all of that around the company and the company also had a private home resort for their executives that was what they called Black River. They called it Black River House [International Paper Company House, Georgetown, South Carolina]. So, my father and my uncle, Freddy [Fredrick Bessellieu], who was husband to my Aunt Ethel [Ethel Moses Bessellieu], that they lived two doors down from us, they were the two that served as the bartenders and the waiters when the executives came for their retreats for their leisure time or whatever at the Black River House. So, we remember a lot of evenings and a lot of late nights waiting for my dad to come home and both my cousins, Sandra [Sandra Bessellieu Adams] and Connie [Conchita Bessellieu Edens], who were two doors down, and when Uncle Freddy and my dad came, they brought the leftovers. So, we had pheasant, you know, we have eaten almost every kind of food that you can imagine other than just regular soul food. So, you know, asparagus, things that you would not think in 19 late '40s [1940s] and early '50s [1950s], that black people would be exposed to and trying to eat, so we acquired a taste for exquisite foods at early ages (laughter) because we waited up late at night and they would bring, you know, bring all the goodies home from desserts to all kinds of meats and vegetables and salads and things of that nature, and so they did that. That was like a second part of their job, with the International Paper Company. My father was very active in his church. He was a member of the African Methodist Episcopal church at Bethel A.M.E. Church [Georgetown, South Carolina] where he was a class leader and he was also a trustee, and so a lot of things that I remember about church, that was where I went to kindergarten, so my dad took me every morning to kindergarten and we were in kindergarten half days so during his lunch period he would pick me up and the other thing I remember about church is the annual chicken dinners that they had, because my dad was the one who bought the chicken and cleaned it, and then he would take it for the other class leaders or whoever was doing whatever to fry it. Speaker 1: Could he cook, though? Speaker 2: He could cook. My father cooked breakfast every morning. My mother didn't cook breakfast. My dad did. Speaker 1: Do you think your mother was tired of cooking after cooking for her siblings? Speaker 2: No, that was my grandmother [Lula Commander Moses] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, your grandmother, oh, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, my grandmother cooked for the siblings. My mother, my mother actually started cooking probably by the time I got into like seventh or eighth grade, or something like that. Maybe even later than that, but that was one thing that she didn't necessarily have to do was to cook. She was a good cook, but she didn't have to do it until later on. My dad did the breakfast, my dad bought groceries, okay? My mother taught school. My grandmother cooked dinner, and then on Sundays, it was like teamwork between my mom and my grandmother for cooking that Sunday meal, but it was just, it was interesting now that I go back and think about it (laughter). Story_ID: 466517 Speaker 1: Tell me about your siblings. Speaker 2: My siblings, okay. I'm the middle child and the only girl. I have an older brother. He's Eli Baxter Barber, III [Eli Barber, III] (laughter) and I have a younger brother, Brendon Moses Barber [Brendon Barber, Sr.], and growing up was quite interesting with them. My older brother is five years older than I, and I'm told I was born on Thursday, September 5, at about 1:00 in the day, sometime between 1:00 and 1:30. That was his first day of school. So, I was told that when he left school, left for school, Mom [Camille Moses Barber] was, you know, kind of by herself. When he came back from school there I was. So, what happened I'm not sure of, but they said he was really surprised and a little bit upset that there I was. But, with the difference in the years, we kind of, you know, he was five years older, so I guess he looked at me as kind of a little kid or something like that, and so other than seeing him, he played basketball when we were, when he was in high school [Howard High School, Georgetown, South Carolina], he played in the band, he played the saxophone, so I just remember watching him do these things, okay? And I knew his friends. He had his first job when he was twelve years old. He worked on a milk truck, and he actually worked for Coburg Milk [Coburg Dairy]. Now, Coburg now is kind of a nationwide milk chain. When we were growing up, basically Coburg was a South Carolina kind of thing, okay? But he started at twelve. He started driving at twelve. I just remember those kinds of things about him. He went to A and T, Agricultural and Mechanical College [Agricultural and Technical College of North Carolina; North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina]. That's what it was at the time up in Greensboro [North Carolina], and I remember when my mom and dad [Eli Barber, Jr.] took him to school and he actually did the mechanical part of the program and stayed for two years and then he was drafted and he went into the [U.S. military] service. Story_ID: 466518 Speaker 1: He went into the [U.S.] Army and his career in the Army spanned thirty-five years, so he went as high a rank as he could go, which was a command sergeant major, and when he did retire, he had like the full retirement ceremony. We all went up. My mother [Camille Moses Barber] was still alive. We all went up to, in New Jersey, I think it's Fort Bragg [sic.] that's up there, and so he had a full ceremony with all the troops marching along and, you know, that was a wonderful sight to see. My brother served three terms in Vietnam and I remember when I was in college [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] in the '60s [1960s] and just writing to him, and even when I was in high school [Howard High School, Georgetown, South Carolina] when he went the first time and in writing to him while he was there, but he was an excellent marksman in terms of, and so he taught, which we found out later on, that he actually, the second and third tours that he had there, he was actually teaching the Vietnamese; you know, training their armies. Second and third terms were secret ones. The third time he went we didn't know that he was there, but, you know, thanks be to God he came through that safely. And there's a joke that, not a joke but it's a real life kind of thing that we talk about with him, and the fact that he learned to be such an excellent marksman with a gun, and something else. When he was in high school at one point in time, there were a group of guys that he used to, you know, run with and you know, like he would be on the night scene and doing those kinds of things so there was a fight and he actually, I would say was the victim, because he was the one that had gotten hurt the most and had gotten beat up by--you know, these were his friends but these were the guys, okay? So, I think that they thought at that point in time that he was kind of a cowering kind of person and probably not fighting back because, I mean, your mother is the teacher over at the high school and we all had to go to the same high school where our mother taught and, in fact, she taught us because by the time she got to teaching twelfth grade English, she taught everybody including her own children, so we were restricted in certain ways of how we had to deal with other young people that we were associated with because our mother was, you know, she was kind but she was kind of strict on how we would treat anybody else. So, I'm thinking that he probably didn't fight back because of, you know, how he was brought up. So, it's funny after he had served some time in the service and probably maybe even after that first tour in Vietnam, these same guys were kind of hassling and doing something with him, you know, and I guess testing him out maybe to see if he was still the same old Eli [Eli Barber, III] that he used to be, but based on some things that he said, not that he didn't have any weapons with him, but they finally figured out, "No, we don't want to bother him anymore." Okay? But, I'm very proud of my brother. He's like the, he's the head of the family now, you know, because our parents, of course, are all gone on and he has three children and the first child that he had, my parents actually adopted so I kind of have a third brother. His name is Renaldo Dwayne Barber [Renaldo Barber], and he is in the [U.S.] Navy. He's a chief petty officer and has been in the Navy like since he finished Savannah State University [Savannah State College; Savannah State University, Savannah, Georgia] back in 19-about '84 [1984] or '85 [1985]. Story_ID: 466519 Speaker 1: My youngest brother by blood, it's Brendon; Brendon Moses Barber [Brendon Barber, Sr.]. We were closer, even though further apart in age. I'm almost eight years older than he is. He was born in 1954, but I guess maybe being the girl, I had to take him everywhere I went (laughter) so, as a result of that, he became friends with a lot of my friends and we're just closer, I think, because of that. Because he kind of followed me everywhere and he went everywhere and did some of everything that we would do together. My brother, of course, the older brother [Eli Barber, III] probably felt he couldn't take a little girl along, but my being a girl I could take whether it was a sister or a brother, I had to take them along with me. So he finished at Michigan State [Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan], both his undergrad and his master's degree and played football at Michigan State. Brendon was the first of the siblings to attend the integrated high school in Georgetown [South Carolina]. When I finished and my brother finished we were still segregated. It was still Howard High School [Georgetown, South Carolina]. Brendon finished at Winyah [Winyah Indigo School, Georgetown, South Carolina], then he was recruited to Michigan State, and he actually played football for them, and he got his master's degree there as well, and after that then he went to Savannah [Savannah State College; Savannah State University, Savannah, Georgia] and came and worked as a counselor, both at Armstrong Atlantic State University [Armstrong State University, Savannah, Georgia] and at Savannah State, but he's the more adventurous one because even after doing that for a while he went and worked for, I don't know if you remember, probably one of the first low cost airlines that was in existence, called Peoples Express [People Express Airlines]. Well, he was one of the first people working for Peoples Express (laughter) okay? And eventually after he kind of did that and he had two sons and he and his wife divorced and then he got custody of the sons, so I'm really proud of him that he had those sons from the time that they were three years old and about seven, and he and my mother [Camille Moses Barber] raised his sons and the two of them now are, they both were able to go to the Naval Academy [United States Naval Academy, Annapolis, Maryland] and one of them, his oldest son now flies for Jet Blue [Jet Blue Airways], which I think is kind of funny when you think about the low cost airlines, you know, there's a connection there, and the younger son of his, when he finished the Naval Academy and did his stint in the [U.S.] Navy for a while, he's now in construction management right here in Atlanta [Georgia]. Story_ID: 466520 Speaker 1: Let's talk about you at a very early age. Can you think of what your first childhood memory would be? Speaker 2: When I think back, it was when I had my third birthday. I was in Texas with my grandmother [Lula Commander Moses], my Aunt Thelma [Thelma Moses Rucker] and my Uncle Sid [Sidney Rucker], and I remember this birthday cake that was baked in this white enamel pan that had red rims around it and I remember the three candles and icing on that cake, and so I made my third birthday there; now, that was the first thing that I think that I remember, and then for my fourth birthday I was actually in Georgetown [South Carolina] and I remember getting a purple and white tricycle, which there's a picture of me with the tricycle among the family pictures, and so those were the first, some of my first memories that I have. Another thing that I remember when I was very young and before I started kindergarten, I was standing out, we used to call it the stoop, you remember, on your front. You had your front porch and then you had some other kind of a little brick something when you went down the steps and so you called it the stoop. So, I was talking to some of the kids in the neighborhood and they were teasing me because I spoke very well and I didn't sound like everybody else. I didn't have the kind of Geechee Gullah heavy tone at that point, but that goes back to the fact that when I was travelling with my grandmother, when I was actually learning to speak I wasn't in Georgetown. I was either in Texas or New York [New York], or Kansas or somewhere else, so there was a kind of mixture and whatever the tone was, and I remember being teased about that and that hurt my feelings. Something else I remember from a very young age, as I said, was my dad [Eli Barber, Jr.] taking me to kindergarten in this blue and white Buick. I also remember my grandmother had a younger sister in Georgetown, Aunt Wilhelmina [ph.], and when my grandmother had to go to work, because my grandmother was my primary caretaker, but if she had a job, like to do midwifing jobs or something like that, she would take me to my Aunt Wilhelmina, and I would stay with Aunt Wilhelmina until my grandmother picked me up, and the fun thing about staying with Aunt Wilhelmina, is I got to feed the chickens and, you know, I remember the corn and you just go outside and you just throw the corn at the chickens. I was afraid of them, but I wanted to feed 'em. But then when they started coming towards me, I would really get frightened and she would try to, she did something in such a way that I didn't have to, maybe when they came near, she shooed them away or whatever, but she'd let me feed 'em but she knew I was a-, I was afraid. Story_ID: 466521 Speaker 1: Tell me about the community, the neighborhood that you grew up in [in Georgetown, South Carolina]. Speaker 2: Wonderful. I mean, I wish I could recreate that same kind of neighborhood for my children [Robert James, II, Anne James Gennaio, and Rachelle James Gregory]. We call it the block. The older we got, that's what we called it. Where my mother [Camille Moses Barber] and my grandmother's [Lula Commander Moses] house, we were like the second house from the corner, the house on the corner, that's where Aunt Kitty [ph.] and another childhood friend of mine, Bonnie [ph.]. They lived there and Aunt Kitty's mother, Miss Sally [ph.], was actually the sister to my grandfather's [Henry Moses] first wife. Okay? Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay. So then you have our house second, and then the next house over was Ms. Margaret Smith [ph.]. Ms. Margaret was also a sister to my grandfather's first wife. Okay, so here's my grandmother in the center, you know, coming into this community now where these two sisters are, probably not very happy that their brother-in-law married this young woman, you know, and even though their sister had died, okay. So then, as I said before, my grandfather had three children by his first marriage, and the other two children were older, and old enough that they didn't necessarily, they didn't have to stay at home, but the younger brother, Uncle Tom [Thomas Moses], was about two years old, so my grandmother really just raised him from that period of time. So, next door to Ms. Smith's house, Ms. Margaret, then when my Aunt Ethel [Ethel Moses Bessellieu] and her husband were married, they bought that land there, okay? And directly across the street from Aunt Ethel and Uncle Fred [Fredrick Bessellieu] when we were growing up was Uncle Tom, the son that my grandmother raised, and Aunt Vivian [Vivian Moses], okay? And so, we had this, I mean we just grew up with family. Uncle Fred and Aunt Ethel had two daughters, Connie [Conchita Bessellieu Edens] and Sandra [Sandra Bessellieu Adams], my Uncle Tom and his wife did not have children, so Eli [Eli Barber, III], myself, Brendon [Brendon Barber], Connie and Sandra, you know, like we, there were certain nights of the week we went to stay with, not stay with but we would visit with Uncle Tom and Aunt Vivian. He sold insurance for North Carolina Mutual [North Carolina Mutual Life Insurance Company, Durham, North Carolina]. So, he was responsible for, and he took the task on of teaching us our multiplication tables because North Carolina Mutual way back in the day used to have this little card that had all of the multiplication tables on the front of it, from the ones through the twelves, and that was his task. He taught us to multiply, and then across the street from us were four tenant homes that were owned by Mrs. Margaret Smith, and there were actually white people that lived in those houses. The only person I can remember playing with, his name is Donald [ph.]. I don't know where he is to this day. But, they were tenants who were renting from this black woman, okay? But, we kind of grew up there together, and then next to the four tenant houses, back on the corner again was Ms. Blondelle Machs [ph.] (unclear), and she was kind of like an entrepreneur, she and her husband, because they owned a club and, you know, even a liquor store or whatever, but they were great friends of my parents and once Dwayne [Renaldo Barber] came along and my grandmother at that point in time, had to go and live with her younger daughter, Aunt Thelma [Thelma Moses Rucker], because Uncle Sid [Sidney Rucker] had a brain tumor and he had surgery on the brain, so when I was in eleventh grade, my grandmother, that's when she kind of left our house and she went to Nashville, Tennessee to stay, so then Dwayne was on the picture; I call him my nephew/brother, that my mother and dad [Eli Barber, Jr.] adopted when he was about, they took him when he was three months old and then had him, so Ms. Blondell used to babysit for Dwayne, and my grandmother was the midwife for Ms. Blondell's children and grandchildren and that kind of thing, so we just all grew up in this wonderful neighborhood (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Wonderful neighborhood. Speaker 2: We were in and out of everybody's house and we all just grew up like family. Story_ID: 466522 Speaker 1: What was the name of the elementary school that you went to? Speaker 2: I went to J.B. Beck Elementary School [J.B. Beck Middle School, Georgetown, South Carolina]. In the beginning it was Howard [Howard High School, Georgetown, South Carolina], because Howard School was first through twelfth grade, and then by the time I was third grade, that was when they separated the elementary school from what they called the high school. The elementary only went through sixth grade, and then when we went back to Howard, it was seventh through twelfth at Howard High. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Your teachers were black or white? Speaker 2: They were all black. Speaker 1: All black? Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes. In the beginning, and you just might wanna mention this, up until third grade, we went to school half a day. You know, I either had the morning session for part for one semester and then the second semester you went in the afternoon, so first or second grade we did half days. Then once we went to J.B. Beck in third grade, then we were in school for the full day. Speaker 1: Were you classes in the first and second grade in the same classroom or did you have different classrooms and different teachers? Speaker 2: They were different classrooms and different teachers. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Yeah. Speaker 1: Was there a teacher while you were in elementary school that you remember that might have encouraged you or that you just remember for any special reason? Speaker 2: Two of them especially, and that was Mrs. Beck. The school was named for her husband [Joseph Brown Beck]. She was my third grade teacher. Mrs. Leola Beck [Leola Reeder Beck], and I don't know, it's just that I can't imagine anything without her because, you know, she just, you talk about encouraging but she just allowed me to do certain things. If there were any special little projects, like I remember a poster project or something like that. There was a competition on something about litter, you know, in the community and she would encourage me to draw and seemingly I had a little bit of talent there, so even when it was time to do the bulletin boards at school, you know her class was responsible for the bulletin board, then I'd have opportunity to participate because that was a special honor to be selected to help put the bulletin board up in the corridor if your class was selected at that time. The other was my sixth grade teacher, Ms. Keith [ph.], and she was very young. Ms. Beck, all my other teachers were older women and Ms. Keith was single and young, you know, but just such an inspirational person and she helped a lot. I matured very early, okay, so by fifth grade I had started, how do you say, the menstrual cycle and all of that, so by the time I got to sixth grade, though, and then I used to really be ill every month, unfortunately (laughter). But she kind of was the person that kind of helped me through that because early on, as young girls, if you started carrying a purse to school and everybody knew what was going on, because that wasn't supposed to happen until you got to seventh or eighth grade, so she kind of helped me through that in addition to just promoting the scholastic part of it because all of my teachers, though, really from first grade on and even my kindergarten teacher, I remember her too, Mrs. Singleton [ph.], just kind of encouraged and always, you know, just promoted whatever it was that you were doing from the academic side, and just helped me to love to learn, and to excel. Story_ID: 466523 Speaker 1: When you think about growing up, what sounds, sights, and smells come to your mind? Speaker 2: (Laughter) The smells would be the smell of the International Paper Company; (laughter) the odor from that. I don't know if you've grown around, grown up in a town where you get this odor from pulp and from paper being made, so that is a pungent kind of sound, smell, and even to this day if you're driving into Georgetown [South Carolina], you know, even with all the new things with the environment and trying to control the atmosphere and all that, there's still that little thing that's there, so that's one of them. The other is like Christmastime; the kind of smells, you know, from making fruitcake and hog head cheese, turkey and dressing, you know, those kinds of smells, just from the kitchen, are things that I still can relate to or reminisce about and seemingly can still, you know, kind of smell chitlins (laughter), which I do love. Okay. You talk about sights. One of them is the beach, because we went to Pawleys Island [South Carolina] and to Atlantic Beach [South Carolina], but on Pawleys there was a beach called Frank's beach [McKenzie Beach], which was specifically for African Americans, and so it was kind of very well developed for that period of time and in the summers we would go to Frank's Beach for swimming. After we got older my Uncle Freddie [Fredrick Bessellieu], who grew up on Pawleys Island and from that area, would take us crabbing and clam hunting, and whatever we caught, you know, a lot of times we would eat it at the creek, eat a certain amount of it at the creek and then the rest of it we had to take back to the block to the neighborhood, because then we had this crab boil at night. Whatever, you know, we got we shared it with the neighbors, and so just the sight of the beach was one thing, and just the neighborhood, really. You know, just the sight of my neighborhood, really, was a good thing. Sound? That's kind of difficult, but what comes to mind right now that I'm thinking of is high school with the band and the orchestra, because I was able to participate in both; in the marching band, and we also had an orchestra. I played clarinet and I was able to ascend to first clarinet, so I'm listening to some of the things that we played as an orchestra, and going, like to state band competitions and actually winning. You know, a little school in Georgetown, South Carolina, Howard High School, but the band instructor that we had there, Mr. Ephraim [ph.], really just did so much for us and carried us so far and helped us to appreciate a lot of classical music. I still remember some of the symphonies and some of the parts that the clarinet would play in the symphonies and when I hear them now, I said, oh, you know, it's a good thing (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And remember. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Story_ID: 466524 Speaker 1: What year did you go to high school? Was it 1954? Speaker 2: It had to be 1954, yes; I think, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Now that was the year-- Speaker 2: Well, let's think now; 19--it was '57 [1957] or '58 [1958] when I went to high school (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) When you went to high school? Speaker 2: Yeah, let's take it at that because I finished--high school was going to seventh grade, because I finished high school in '64 [1964]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: So I went to, '54 [1954] I was in, what? Second or third grade (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Third grade, okay. And, you said that was it junior high school where, when was the school integrated? You never went to an integrated school. Speaker 2: I never went to integrated schools, no, no. Speaker 1: At all? Speaker 2: At all. No, no. The schools in Georgetown [South Carolina] weren't integrated until, see I finished in '64 [1964]. It was about 1970. Speaker 1: Wow. It took them a long time (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It took a long time, yeah. Speaker 1: Tell me about other activities. Did you go to the movies as a child? What kind of, what (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. We went to the movies. We had the Palace Theater [Georgetown, South Carolina] and we had the Strand Theater [Georgetown, South Carolina], okay? Saturdays at the Palace for the matinee is when you went to see the westerns and, of course, we had to always go to the balcony both times and that happened up until the time I finished high school, okay, and you bought the popcorn at the little window downstairs when you bought your ticket where they had the special window for us over by the stairwell. You know, and they just slipped in with popcorn or whatever you wanted out of the window. There was a drugstore and I can't remember the name of the drugstore that was right next door to the Palace Theater, and that's where we would buy like soda fountain drinks or something like that, and hotdogs that we would take into the, hotdogs with chili that we would take into the movies. But, yeah, we went to the movies and just went to a lot of programs that were at the church; specifically, if any of the college choirs came like Allen University [Columbia, South Carolina], or Benedict [Benedict College, Columbia, South Carolina], or South Carolina State [South Carolina State College; South Carolina State University Orangeburg, South Carolina], if their choirs came to perform and, you know, we looked forward to being there. High school graduations used to be at my church. I grew up in the Baptist church, Bethesda Baptist [Bethesda Missionary Baptist Church, Georgetown, South Carolina], and my [maternal] grandfather [Henry Moses] actually was a minister at Bethesda at one point in time, but he travelled a lot around the county preaching, but the high school graduations used to be at our church and Annie Mae [Ann Milton Anderson (ph.)], you remember the person I referenced earlier, she graduated and her ceremony was held at Bethesda Baptist Church, so every other year it was either at Bethel A.M.E. Church [Georgetown, South Carolina] or Bethesda Baptist. So, if you had the baccalaureate at Bethesda, then the graduation would be at Bethel, or if you had the baccalaureate at Bethel one year, then the graduation would be at Bethesda, because those were the two larger sanctuaries in Georgetown at the time. By the time I graduated, they had built on an auditorium gymnasium to Howard High School [Georgetown, South Carolina], so then we were able to graduate there. But, in high school I probably participated in some of everything. There was band. I didn't do chorus. A lot of clubs and organizations, most of them were honor kinds of things, Honor Society [National Honor Society], I was even elected the school queen, and that was interesting in a way because a lot of times, if you are the daughter of a teacher, everybody kind of looks at you in a different kind of perspective, like maybe you were something special or whatever, but as I said before, my mother [Camille Moses Barber] was the kind of person who was determined that you just, everybody was somebody so I didn't limit my associations to a certain group of people, and as a result of that I was able to be elected the school queen. Story_ID: 466525 Speaker 1: So you were very popular in school [Howard High School, Georgetown, South Carolina] (laughter) and you said you were voted the queen, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: How were you academically? Speaker 2: Academically I was an Honor Society [National Honor Society] student, even served president of the Honor Society and served president of the Alpha Theta [Mu Alpha Theta], which was like the math group, so I was always an honor roll student to the fact that I was able to graduate as valedictorian of my class. Speaker 1: That's great. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Now, let me ask you, the year before you graduated, civil rights was beginning to really gear up and in '63 [1963], President Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was killed. Do you remember that? Speaker 2: I remember exactly. I was sitting in our civics class with Mrs. Patterson [ph.] when we got that word and when we got the announcement. I was probably sitting not front row, but it was the second row and almost like three columns over from the door, and so yes, definitely I remember when we got the word about the assassination of President Kennedy. Speaker 1: And what was, what was going on in the classroom? Was-- Speaker 2: There was shock. I don't know whether anybody necessarily kind of cried, but you know, you could hear the screams and I mean all throughout the school it was almost like there was a lot of turmoil and I think they had to finally come over the PA system and just kind of ask us, you know, ask the teachers to try and get us quieted down. It was about, I know it was between one and two o'clock in the afternoon and I was in civics class in A building; you know, we had A building and B building and C building then, at that time, and Mrs. Patterson was the civics teacher. Story_ID: 466526 Speaker 1: Were your parents [Camille Moses Barber and Eli Barber, Jr.] political at all, or involved in the Civil Rights Movement? Speaker 2: Georgetown [South Carolina] was a funny kind of place. There was not a lot in reference to civil rights. Things just kind of quietly happened. We didn't have protests. There were no marches; even though when I was a little girl I remember the Ku Klux Klan [KKK] marching, you know, a couple of streets over and things like that, so you remembered those kinds of things. We remember hearing about lynchings and things, and there's a certain tree like out in the (unclear) where that was pointed out to us that this is the tree that they used to lynch people and so, when I was smaller, you know, and younger, those kinds of things I do remember vividly seeing, but when it came up to the civil rights era, and to the Civil Rights Movement, there weren't a lot; in fact, I don't remember any protesting going on at all in Georgetown. I do recall it was in my senior year [at Howard High School, Georgetown, South Carolina] and this was in 1963 in the fall semester, and those of us who were working on the yearbook, the editorial committee, you got excused to go into town, to try and sell ads for the yearbook, so we decided to go and sit at the lunch counter at (unclear). Believe it or not, we were served. This was in 1963. Speaker 1: Sixty-three [1963]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. And, I started working part-time. I did play for my Sunday school. I play the piano and there was another church that met about twice a month, and I used to play the music for them for church, but I started working at a five and ten. It was called Edward's five-and-ten [ph.] when I was in ninth grade, and so my first job was kind of in the back in the stock area, and I had enough nerve to go and ask for a job and I was hired, but I was in the back and then eventually after I worked there for about a year-and-a-half, they put me out front where I could, at the candy counter. I don't know if you would recall, but then you could buy candy by the pound or the half pound or whatever, so I was trusted enough to go out and measure the candy and do whatever, and then by the time I was in tenth grade, there was another store, Rose's because at Edward's, the manager there kind of said something, insinuated something one day to me when I was in the back, and it was of such that I knew, and I told my father about it, that my father probably would have gotten, something could have happened to him and so I quit that job. Speaker 1: What did he say? Speaker 2: He didn't necessarily say anything because I used to tag the merchandise, and, well he did kind of say it but he picked up this, there was a piece of underwear and he picked it up, he was coming to the back and he picked it up and he kind of looked at me and said something in reference as to how I would look in it, okay, and I was smart enough, you know, even though I didn't say anything, and back to this day it's almost like I wish I had but I knew that I couldn't, but I also knew I couldn't tell my father that. So, rather than continue to work there, I just quit the job and then I went to another store called Rose's, which was kind of two blocks down and across the street, and got hired, probably based on the fact that I had already worked somewhere and so then I worked on the floor there, which was a big thing, okay? So, I kept that job really even through the summers and college [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] and my mother was funny. She would hold, she said she was holding the job for me during the school year and one year when I came back, I think it was my junior year, I couldn't work because my mother was working all these hours and then she brought my aunt to work, you know, and they had fun because they've been working on Saturdays and, you know, they knew everybody in town so, it was, this was fun to them because they would see everybody they wanted to see and talk and get all the gossip and all the stuff, you know, and find out what was going on, but that particular incident was one which kind of had me to move forward and to move somewhere else, and but it was interesting, you know, that I even got hired when you think about it, but there was no protesting, so things just kind of quietly happened and integration just took place, and you know, they began hiring other young people in other stores and were they gonna put you in the stockroom, you know, or would you be on the front or on the floor. I even got a chance to do the cash register at Rose's, because there was a general cash register area where you checked everybody out so, you know, those kinds of experiences I had. Speaker 1: Did your mother and father vote? Speaker 2: Yes. My grandmother [Lula Commander Moses] voted. My grandmother always took me with her when she went to vote. I remember even when Eisenhower [President Dwight David "Ike" Eisenhower] was being elected, okay? There was a time that if you voted you left your porch light on at night to announce to the black community that you voted and a lot of porch lights used to be on, yeah, yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Be on. Okay, all right. Story_ID: 466527 Speaker 1: You graduate valedictorian in 1964 [from Howard High School, Georgetown, South Carolina] and you always knew that you would go to college, is that right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah. There was no doubt about it. As I said, my father [Eli Barber, Jr.] had finished two years of college [Livingstone College, Salisbury, North Carolina]. My mother [Camille Moses Barber] had finished college. She also did advanced study, like at Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia], University at Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama]. My aunt [Ethel Moses Bessellieu], one of my aunts, the one that lived next door to us, her advanced study was, her master's [degree] was at Cornell [Cornell University, Ithaca, New York] because, if you recall, in those days and times rather than allow blacks to go to state supported universities to get advanced study or get your master's and your Ph.D., the state would pay the black professionals to go out of state to pursue, okay? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: So, you just grew up in this atmosphere. It wasn't a question, I mean, nobody had to prompt you or anything. You just knew you were going. Speaker 1: How did you pick Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] as the school that you would go to? Speaker 2: Believe it or not, my grandmother [Lula Commander Moses] and my mother were instrumental in that. My grandmother used to always talk about the teachers who came to Morris College [Sumter, South Carolina] from Spelman, because Spelman used to provide the teachers that went around in the Southeast at that period of time to different colleges and how much she admired them. When my mother got to Morris College, that was her thing too. She remembered Mary McLeod Bethune and different people, but the Spelman ladies, you know, they were very, very just ladylike. When my mother did Atlanta University in the summers, it was just Spelman and so that's what they talked about. I applied to Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] because my cousins went to Fisk, my girl cousins, but it was like I knew that Spelman, you know, I didn't know a thing about it other than what they had said, but that was where I wanted to go. Story_ID: 466528 Speaker 1: So, tell me about your first days at Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia]. Is this the first time you were away from home? Speaker 2: No. There was another thing (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I mean to stay. Speaker 2: To stay, yes. Speaker 1: I knew you travelled with your grandmother [Lula Commander Moses], but I mean away from home and on your own. Just, just (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) On my own, yeah, yeah, this was it. So my dad [Eli Barber, Jr.], you know my dad is the one who always takes me these places. He drove me up and we got there on a Saturday and my mother [Camille Moses Barber] had befriended a family across the street from the residence halls at Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia], and so I knew this family, and they had a daughter, Linda [ph.], who was my age, and Linda was also attending Spelman, but she wasn't living on campus, but it was like I had somebody that I knew at Atlanta and my parents felt very comfortable and I wouldn't be totally away from home without any contacts with anyone. But, got there and, I mean, it wasn't strange, it wasn't like I felt homesick or anything like that, because a lot of summers my parents used me to send to visit with the sisters that I told you, the foster sisters that I had, so I had spent summers in New York [New York], I had spent summers in Washington, D.C.; sometimes going to my aunt [Thelma Moses Rucker] in Nashville [Tennessee], so there was never a time that you felt that you just had to be homebound all the time, but they did expose us and allow us to go away by ourselves. So, that wasn't a strange kind of feeling. My roommate was from Jackson, Mississippi. Her name is Barbara Bell; Barbara Bell-Robinson now, and she was a fascinating person to have as a roommate, because unlike me in Georgetown [South Carolina], where there was no protesting or anything for civil rights, Barbara was right in it. I mean, you could live her experiences. She had been jailed and she talked about, you know, eating grits out of the garbage cans, and just all of this stuff, so it was just fascinating to listen to her and share her experiences about what she went through in the State of Mississippi and Jackson with civil rights. So, we are dear friends to this day. She introduced me to my husband [HistoryMaker Robert James], but Spelman was a wonderful experience for me. Speaker 1: Who was the president at this time? Speaker 2: Dr. Albert Manley [Albert E. Manley] was president and he was president until I graduated and, in fact, the first Mrs. Manley [Dorothy Shepherd Manley], his wife, died like the first semester that I was there, because I do remember that occurring and kind of the, you know, the time of morning that took place. But, Spelman was a wonderful experience; again, I would think in terms of independence and leadership and self-confidence and all, not that I didn't have some of these things when I went, because I had teachers that had been grooming me in that manner all along, even from high school [Howard High School, Georgetown, South Carolina], but they just kind of helped to put the icing on the cake when I got to Spelman. Story_ID: 466529 Speaker 1: Who were--well what was your course of study? Speaker 2: I studied psychology, but also to be on the cautious side, my mother [Camille Moses Barber] had me to make sure that I got that degree in education, so English and secondary education was the minor, my major was in psychology. Speaker 1: So, who were some of the teachers at Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] that you were talking about that might have encouraged you or someone that you looked up to? Speaker 2: A teacher would have been my first English teacher, Ms. Tumor [ph.]; not that she knew me, you know, personally from anybody else, necessarily, but there was just something about her and, I don't know, maybe, you know, both my mother and my aunt were English teachers and there might have been something about that, but it was just the way that she taught that was very inspirational to me. But, one of the persons who was most inspirational to me while I was at Spelman was actually my residence hall director. She's passed on now, but her name was Edna Johnson. She was a graduate student at Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] at the time and she was the first residence hall director that I had my freshman year, and she was the one, I think, that was probably most influential in terms of, you know, just my maturity in terms of being a college student or being a scholar, things of that nature, because she even, the first semester that I was there, it was almost after she noticed my academics and kinds of ways that I had been succeeding. My first roommate [Barbara Bell-Robinson], we were only roommates for the first semester. She took it upon herself, Edna did, and we affectionately began to call her Edna after we left her residence hall, but she moved me in with another student who she felt was not doing as well academically so that I could help and probably encourage and do all of that with that particular student, so it was those kinds of things, and she just kind of helped you to see that if you have something to give and something to share, then it was your responsibility to do that, whether it was academically or in some other way, and so that just kind of continued the molding and the upbringing that I'd already had; you know, that you share what you have so that it comes back to you and to run into someone like her, it just helped to solidify. Story_ID: 466530 Speaker 1: Well, now you're in Atlanta [Georgia] where civil rights (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm in Savannah [Georgia]. I live in Savannah, now, don't forget (laughter). Speaker 1: No, but when you were at Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, at Spelman, right, right, right. I'm sorry. Speaker 1: Yeah, when you were at Spelman, I'm saying, you were living in Atlanta now. That's different from Georgetown [South Carolina] and civil rights. Was there anything going on, on campus that you were involved in? Any activities? Clubs? Sororities (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. Well, we didn't have sororities then. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because the idea was that we were already sisters and if we had sororities that might cause some division. So, we didn't have sororities when I was at Spelman. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: The thing that I remember most vividly, it was not civil rights so much because that was during the time when [HistoryMaker] Julian Bond, and I was there when Dr. Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated so, you know, we had opportunity to listen to him speak at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] and places like that, but the Vietnam War was also going on. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: And I remember very vividly there was one of the public television stations and there was, they were interviewing students at Spelman and there were a group of us, and I was in the group that was being interviewed talking about our protesting against the Vietnam War, so that was the thing that I remember most vividly in reference to that era (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Well, you wanna talk about that? Speaker 2: Because you know, by then Dr. King had started talking about Vietnam and the fact that we should not be there, and how we needed to, you know, to come home and those kinds of things so more than likely, one of the messages that he had given over at Morehouse, it was that period of time that he had begun talking about that, so I remember now Gracie Hill [Grace Hill Rogers] is the other Spelmanite that I remember seeing in the group, even though there were probably about ten or twelve of us. But, it was televised because the foster sister that I had in New York [New York], she said, "Shirley [HistoryMaker Shirley James], I saw you on television talking about Viet--," you know, but we were disimpassioned about that at that particular time, so that was what I remember more. Speaker 1: Was your brother [Eli Barber, III] in Vietnam at this time (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was in Vietnam, yeah. Speaker 1: At this time while you were in college? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Yes, yes. Speaker 1: So you had a personal, it was personal-- Speaker 2: I had personal kinds of, I had a personal stake in it. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 466531 Speaker 1: One other thing about Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] very quickly, I was able to participate in a student exchange program, so I spent a semester at Cedar Crest College for women in Allentown, Pennsylvania, and that experience was one that I would say helped me to even further appreciate the fact that I was black and that I was African American. Speaker 2: How's that? Speaker 1: I can't explain it. At Cedar Crest, they did have one African American student who was enrolled as a student, and then there were two of us from Spelman who went as exchange students, and so they had, at this college for women, now they had three African Americans there, okay? So some of our culture, of course, they weren't very much aware of. Now, of course, living with an African American was probably a new experience for the young ladies who decided to take us in as roommates. But it was just something about being there, and I don't remember the name of the instructor. There was one instructor that was just seemingly very genuine and tolerant and all of that. That person taught Western Civilization, but there was another instructor that I had, no matter how hard I tried or what I did, I never could get anything better than a C, and when I thought about that and I was taking French there as well at the time, and I said to myself after this experience was over, and I still haven't answered your question but, I made a B in French, you know, and everything is being taught in the language. She's not speaking English. You've got to read and translate and do everything in French and so I'm able to get a B in French and I'm not the best student in French. I made Cs at Spelman, but I did B work there. But, this other class, it was a sociology class, and no matter what I did, and I was the kind of person, I wouldn't call myself a quick learner. I had to study hard and work hard; you know, I had to burn the midnight oil and all that and that was since high school days, okay? But, whatever it was, it was C, C minus, C, C minus the whole time and some of the other grades from Cedar Crest A's and Bs and just that one class that the C was. So then it comes back to what was it? Was it because of the color of my skin or whatever? But, I just felt rather than to become immersed into that culture, it just, I felt proud of who I was and I could be myself and just be me and let them learn who I am. That was the feeling that I had after I got there. Let them know me for who I am and, you know, so it just helped. It did. Speaker 2: Well, that was kind of, it could have been prejudiced on the teacher's part and maybe not. You know, you just really don't know (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah. I don't know. Yeah. Story_ID: 466532 Speaker 1: But is there a time that you know that something was just blatant racism toward you? Speaker 2: That's a hard question to answer (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 2: --it is. Speaker 1: Well you can-- Speaker 2: No, because I probably can't recall. I can't think of it. Speaker 1: Okay. That's fine. Speaker 2: And I'm sure that there probably was, but I said I don't know whether it's a gift or not, but there are certain things that I can forget and just growing up as a child though, in reference to some opportunities--when I say opportunities, places that you could go or places that you couldn't go. Those are probably ones that are most vivid in my mind--taking the Sunday afternoon rides when you were little up to Myrtle Beach [South Carolina] and you knew you couldn't go to the amusement park or you couldn't go to the pizza parlor. You couldn't have ice cream, you know, from these places because you weren't welcome in those kinds of places. It's memories like that, that you would say might be kind of blatant racism. Some things that have happened probably, you know, maybe even since I was an adult, some things that may have happened to me living in Savannah [Georgia] and being a part of the community and sort of being thrust into certain things that I would have to do because of my husband's [HistoryMaker Robert James] position in the community and that kind of thing; probably so, but I just can't think (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Can't think of it. Speaker 2: I can't think of them. Speaker 1: That's fine. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Was there anything that your parents [Camille Moses Barber and Eli Barber, Jr.] told you about dealing with white people? Speaker 2: My father saying it and when I look back at it now, it's probably because being a male, a black male during that period of time, it was always like being respectful, okay? And some of it was just not discussed in a way, because during times of segregation you had means of just kind of staying in your own community and not necessarily having to be, because you couldn't integrate. There were things you couldn't do, so you weren't necessarily exposed to them. So, it's just being--if it was an older person. It didn't have anything to do with the person who was your age or your peer level or anything like that. But if it was an older person, white, black, whatever, you are to be respectful. Story_ID: 466533 Speaker 1: Was there anything else that you remember that comes to mind about Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia]? Speaker 2: I was able to get into leadership positions at Spelman as well. I was able to be elected as treasurer of the student government association, which was, you know, something to say in reference to being known on the campus, even though, you know, I wasn't like one of the most popular. I got to be one of the queens for one of the Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] (laughter) organizations. It was there, there was a ministerial group that they had, young men who were studying to become ministers and theology and all of that, I got to be a queen, you know, so when you go back and look at little things like that, it kind of says that maybe, you know, there was some recognition there. I was elected, too, because you had to be nominated and elected to Who's Who Among Students in American Colleges and Universities [sic. Who's Who Among Students in American Universities and Colleges] at Spelman and it wasn't that some teacher or someone recommended you for that. You had to be elected by the student body to be a part of that, so it just kind of says to me that maybe there was a certain level of respect that I had as a student there. I got to be what you would call a resident assistant, so my senior year I was a resident--selected to do that, to help with freshman orientation, things like that. But Spelman also exposed me again to a lot of the culture and cultural arts that I had not had opportunity to be exposed to before because of living in Georgetown [South Carolina], which was a small town. There was a limited amount of culture and arts that would come there, so Spelman helped me in that manner. It helped me to understand what servant leadership is all about because you had opportunity to do that and there were some people at Spelman that I hold in very high regard. One was the registrar who, at a point in time when I was experiencing some financial difficulty with being able to make sure that I could still pay tuition and whatever, she was instrumental in making sure that not only that I got a job but I also was able to get a scholarship. It was called a half-tuition scholarship but between that half-tuition scholarship and the job, then I was able to stay because my father [Eli Barber, Jr.] had become ill at that point in time and there was some financial difficulty at home, so rather than, you know, it wasn't a question as to whether I was going to leave Spelman or not, no. But I took it upon myself to kind of share some things with a couple of people, one being the resident hall director, Edna [Edna Johnson], who had become a very good friend and role model, and then she directed me over to the registrar, and between those two persons I was able to stay there. Story_ID: 466534 Speaker 1: So 1968, quite a few things happened in '68 [1968]. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So, tell me about that year. Speaker 2: Well, 1968, like I said, that's the year that Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated, on April 4. I remember exactly where I was. Speaker 1: Where were you? Speaker 2: In my room in Manley Hall [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia], and you know, the word just got around on the hall, and then we weren't that far away (unclear) and places like that so you heard some of the commotion going on and in the area and in the streets. Of course, I graduated from college that year. I thought I was going into the, into the [U.S.] Air Force, believe it or not, but I was engaged that year, and also married in August of 1968, and my husband [HistoryMaker Robert James] and I, who is a Morris Brown [Morris Brown College, Atlanta, Georgia] graduate, and that was an unusual thing for a Spelman female to be married to a Morris Brown man, but my roommate [Barbara Bell-Robinson] had introduced him to me my freshman year. So, we kind of had this thing going freshman year all the way through, and he was from Hattiesburg, Mississippi, so, he got accepted at the business school at Harvard [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: At Harvard (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) At Harvard, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, after we were married he had gone there for the summer, and for a summer program, sort of a prep program because he was a part of the class, I think that was the first year that they had admitted as many African Americans into the business school as they did. There were about twenty-five of them, and so they had a special pre-summer program for them and we got married in August and I went directly with him, and so it's kind of history from there. I worked the first year and then I applied to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] to the Graduate School of Education for the next year and we both completed it in 1970. Story_ID: 466535 Speaker 1: Both you and your husband [HistoryMaker Robert James] graduate in 1970 from Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and you moved to Atlanta [Georgia], is that right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. And how long did you stay in Atlanta? Speaker 2: We were in Atlanta approximately a year. Right after graduation in June we moved here and he worked for a year at Citizens and Southern Bank [The Citizens and Southern National Bank of Georgia]. I got to be a housewife and a mom, and then we moved to Savannah [Georgia] in August of '71 [1971]. Speaker 1: Okay. And you took a position, administrative counseling position at Savannah State University [Savannah State College; Savannah State University, Savannah, Georgia] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, I did. Speaker 1: So, tell me about that position. Speaker 2: Well, something that I loved, because that counseling, you know, was my area, my field, and Dr. Prince A. Jackson [HistoryMaker Prince Jackson, Jr.] was president at Savannah State University at the time, and he actually hired me. During that period I was probably the first trained counselor that they had on the campus, and as a result of that, he kind of challenged me within about a year or, within the first year, and it was twofold. One was to look at establishing or getting a grant together to establish a counseling center, because that was not anything that we had had. I worked initially out of what you call a student affairs office with the dean. His name was Nelson Freeman, so student affairs you know, encompasses everything that's outside of the academic area, and, but we didn't have anything specifically to address, like a center for counselors, so that was one of the challenges, and he paired me with Hinton Thomas [ph.], a person who was working in one of the, a federal funded program that had been housed at Savannah State University at the time, and the two of us got together and wrote the grant through Title III, so by 1972, we were able to get the counseling center started, and the second challenge that he had given me was to start an organization where students could be almost like paraprofessional peer counselors, because there was Dr. Lucy Cutlive [ph.]. I'm not sure what her married name is, her name now, but at the time it was Lucy Cutlive, and she was at Tennessee State University [Nashville, Tennessee]. Speaker 1: Cutlive? How do you spell that (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Cutlive. I think it's C-U-T-L-I-V-E. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I'll have to check that to be sure. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But she did an address at Savannah State and talked about the students helping students at Tennessee State, and Dr. Jackson heard and he said, "Oh, this is something I'd like to have happen at Savannah State," so as a result of that, I was able to put together what we call a peer counseling program, which they served as student leaders during orientation, but they also served as peers and student-to-student counselors like throughout the year, so you selected upper classmen and we paired them, well not paired them, they would work with groups of new students coming in, so they may have two or twenty-five students that they were kind of responsible for, assisting through that first year of college to help them become acclimated to what college was about, so they would help him academically from a social side just all the way around. So, to this day and it is now 19--2007, the peer counseling program is still thriving at Savannah State University. Story_ID: 466536 Speaker 1: So for the twenty-five years that I worked in the counseling area, I was able to supervise that program and, in the beginning, all these students were volunteers, and it became a prestigious thing to be a peer counselor. We went through an extensive selection process and all of that, and so it was a wonderful opportunity for them and there were many students who went through that program who, now, are just successful in their own way and in their careers. There's one young lady who currently is a vice provost at the University of Alaska in Anchorage [University of Alaska Anchorage, Anchorage, Alaska] who came through that program. We have, I just can't even begin to name all of them that have come through maybe the ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] programs, General Walter Gaskin [Walter E. Gaskin], who is a Marine that was one of the first to graduate in the ROTC program at Savannah State University [Savannah State College; Savannah State University, Savannah, Georgia]. He is now a general in the Marines [U.S. Marine Corps] and he came through that program and I think of, when I look back at students like that, that we were able to help groom them into, again, the servant leadership kind of role and they did it, you know, without being paid for it but it helped a lot and several employees now at Savannah State, young people who had decided to stay there, those are, I call them my children, they've come through the program to, in fact, one of them supervises the program now. The young man, his name is Gary Oliver [Gary D. Oliver]. He's director of the student activities area at Savannah State and he basically supervises the peer counselors and he was one of my peer counselors when he was an undergraduate student, so that's a very proud moment for me. It's just something that I cherish and am glad that I accepted the challenge from Dr. Prince A. Jackson [HistoryMaker Prince Jackson, Jr.] to do that, and it has just proven to be very well, a worthy program and, as I said before, the students who have come through it have really gained from it and they go back and they talk about it and when they reminisce, they said, "Well, we gonna remember when. Thank you for doing this." So, that's been a pleasure for me. Story_ID: 466537 Speaker 1: So, you stayed at Savannah State [Savannah State College; Savannah State University, Savannah, Georgia] for how long? Speaker 2: Thirty-one years (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Thirty-one years. Speaker 2: Yes. I stayed in counseling for about twenty-five, and then six years I did, well one year, I served in the interim position as vice president for student affairs while they were conducting the search to get a permanent person, and they last five years I directed the testing program at Savannah State. Speaker 1: So, when you decided to leave Savannah State, what happened? How did you happen to leave? Speaker 2: I just retired. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: But, I felt, you know, at that point in time that professionally, especially in the area of counseling, that I had probably exhausted myself and had done, you know, that I had accomplished and done the things that I wanted to do and that I was just ready now to be a little more active in the community because I had already been active in the community anyway, so the Black Heritage Festival [Savannah Black Heritage Festival] is the thing that consumes a lot of my time now. I actually began doing that the last year of employment at Savannah State. That was a challenge that came from another president, who was current at the time, Dr. Carlton Brown [Carlton E. Brown], and I was given that task in October 2001, the Black Heritage Festival took place in February 2002, and I retired from Savannah State in March 2002, but I'm still serving as coordinator of that festival. It is one that is sponsored by the City of Savannah [Georgia] and Savannah State University, and it's a week-long event and all of the activities are open and free to the public and so it's a joy to work with that and to do that, and so I still have some affiliation with the university because our office is still at the university on campus there, and I still have to have a lot of interaction with the university in order to make sure that the festival goes on, so I'm not completely separated from Savannah State. I still work there. Story_ID: 466538 Speaker 1: You become employed, now we're back in 1983, employed with The Savannah Tribune, is that right? Speaker 2: Well, I'm not employed there. Actually I've become the publisher and the president of The Savannah Tribune, yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The publisher and president, okay, all right. Speaker 2: The Tribune actually, in 1973, my husband [HistoryMaker Robert James] revived it. The Savannah Tribune is an old established weekly African American newspaper. It was actually founded in 1875, and so it's one of the oldest African American newspapers (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Do you know who it was founded by? Speaker 2: It was founded by John Deveaux [John H. Deveaux], and at the time it was founded, this was 1875, and really it stayed in publication until the 1960s, but John Deveaux was a very prominent African American in the Savannah [Georgia] area and The Tribune was one of the newspapers, if not the only one, in what they called the colored community that actually spoke out against all kinds of injustices and things that were taking place against coloreds and Negroes and African Americans at that period of time, so that was a courageous kind of stand for the man as well as for the newspaper to take. When Deveaux was asked to serve, and I forget which president of the United States [President William McKinley, Jr.] it was at the time, but he actually became involved with U.S. Customs [U.S. Customs Service; U.S. Customs and Borders Protection] in the Savannah area and then he was moved to Brunswick, Georgia, to deal with customs in that area, and you know, because Savannah is a port city, so we had a lot of shipping and things of that nature going on, so when he went there, then the newspaper became under the ownership of Sol C. Johnson [Solomon C. Johnson], who also worked for Deveaux, and Sol C. Johnson, again, kept the same kind of idealistic way of publishing and speaking out and talking about the different kinds of injustices and things that were facing African Americans in the Savannah area, so it was the spokesperson for the African American community, and then after Sol C. Johnson died, then he passed it on to his goddaughter, who was also working for him, Willa Iris Johnson [Willa Johnson], and then she kept it in publication until the 1960s, okay, and then it kind of ceased publication for probably ten to twelve years and my husband, for some reason, had just always been interested in, in addition to banking and all of these things that he does, had been interested in the newspaper, so when after doing some research and he had one of his classmates from Harvard [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts] to help him conduct the research and they found information about The Tribune and decided to revive it, and so it was revived in 1973, and then it was in 1983 that the ownership of it was transferred to me because it was kind of a conflict of interest with him being in banking and also owning a newspaper at the same time, so he may have to better explain that part of it to you than I. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: But, it was 1983 and then I became the publisher and the owner, but through all of that time, we've always had a general manager and staff, who actually conducted the day to day business of the newspaper. Story_ID: 466539 Speaker 1: Well as the president and the publisher, you also did the editing also? Speaker 2: Well, yeah. I do, you know, you, it's funny, in newspaper language you can be the editor and publisher, you can be the publisher and the president, so I kind of carry all those titles with it. So, from time to time, yes, I do editorials or, you know, I'll write articles or do something but it's not anything that I do on a daily basis. As I said before, we still have staff. Speaker 1: And you were still working at the university [Savannah State College; Savannah State University, Savannah, Georgia] at this time? Right, okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yes, at the same time, yeah, yeah. That was really my passion, was to work in the area where I was trained in counseling. Speaker 1: Well, tell me more about The Tribune [The Savannah Tribune], the types of articles that you cover, what type of information or information for the community, is it for business people, entrepreneurs in the community, I mean who--? Speaker 2: Who is our readership (laughter)? Speaker 1: I'm sorry. Speaker 2: That's okay. Speaker 1: I'm going all around the mulberry bush here (laughter). Speaker 2: Well, I was saying we have a great cross section in the African American community, because that's our target audience, that's our niche; in fact, the newspapers are distributed, we basically give them away even though we had a lot of people subscribe to the paper who live out of town to make sure that they get it. But, almost every African American church in the city gets a paper for free distribution on Sundays. Our distribution boxes are placed around everywhere, so we cover everything. We're a member of the National Newspaper Publishers Association, so a lot of the articles, they come through them which would give you a national perspective on things that are going on with African Americans. We publish that information. We try to be very positive about what we publish locally in reference to what's happening in the African American community, so whereas your daily newspapers are probably publishing all kinds of things about crime, all the negative things and that, we are promoting the positive sides of things, so if organizations are doing something positive, believe me, we're going to publish that. If something is happening in the schools with some students, some positive things, like we even asked the school board to let us know when they have students of the month, or things like that, but we handle health issues, during the political season, yes we do let our views be known, you know, about certain candidates and things of that nature, but it's again, it's to inform and we always are very, very adamant about making sure that the vote, you know, that people vote and they understand the importance of voting and things of that nature, so it's just trying to still be the conscience of the community but in a positive kind of way. We really don't publish negative kinds of things, even if someone would write a letter to the editor and it's something negative, they'll call me and I'll look at it and I'll say no, we're not gonna publish that because that's not, you know, that's not what we should be about. Story_ID: 466540 Speaker 1: One thing I noticed in you talking about your life, there were lots of times where you learned to be a servant leader. I heard you mention that a number of times and I know that you're very active with the Jack and Jill Foundation organization [Jack and Jill of America Foundation, Inc.], and that's what they do. You wanna talk about that? Speaker 2: Sure. That's probably one of the organizations that I would say that I love the most. Jack and Jill of America, Inc. is, basically, a family structured organization, but its purpose is centered around teaching your children to be servant leaders. One of the aims and objectives of Jack and Jill of America, Incorporated, is to provide opportunities not only for your own children, but for all children. When you say all, you're looking at those who have the same kinds of advantages that your children have, but also those who don't. So mothers are very active in the membership level of Jack and Jill of America. They hold the membership but it's structured so that your children are also a part, and your spouses can also participate. Basically children from the ages of two through eighteen or nineteen, are actively involved in Jack and Jill of America, Incorporated. Now, what you are doing is exposing them to opportunities to become servant leaders, so you're teaching your children volunteerism. You're also teaching them how to become leaders, because the way it is structured for the children, they're divided into different age groups, and by the time they get to be teenagers, teenagers have their own conventions in the summer and they're able to preside at the conventions and, you know, make decisions and vote and deal with constitutional matters and things. It's almost like having a little Senate or House of Representatives or something, but you're teaching them, you know, how to make policy, you know, and things of that nature. But on the other hand, you're also having to provide opportunities for them to give service back to the community and basically a lot of the services affecting other young people who are their ages who don't have the same kinds of advantages that they have. So, I became active in Jack and Jill in 1977 in the Savannah [Georgia] chapter, and by 1994, I was the national president; nothing that I ever envisioned, nothing that I expected, but evidently I said it must have been God and by divine order that I was able to do this, because I was what you would call an underdog when I was vying for the position, but ended up becoming and being elected and so I had that opportunity to serve the organization, which has an international population. We have chapters not only throughout the United States, but also in other countries, so it was, that was probably one of the greatest honors that I could say that I've had in my life to this point is to have had the opportunity and that the membership thought enough of me to put me in that position that I can be their leader for that period of time. Story_ID: 466541 Speaker 1: Well, you also belong to a couple of other commissions and boards. Is there another one that you would like to talk about? Speaker 2: Well, in the beginning I guess I got thrust into the Savannah [Georgia] community since 19--we got there in '71 [1971] and by 1972 I was working on the first board and believe it or not, that was the Young Women's Christian Organization, which was a local organization, and they were mandated to become a part of Young Women's Christian Association [YWCA], because they were not integrated, so I was a part of that initial board that was charged with integrating that particular organization, so that's how I got my first taste of service and volunteerism in the Savannah community was with the YWCO being transferred, or transitioned into a YWCA. As a result of that, there were other groups that I was able to serve on, like task force, which started organizations like the Voluntary Action Center [Chatham-Savannah Voluntary Action Center] in Savannah, Safe Shelter [Savannah, Georgia], which is a shelter for battered women and children, and then just kind of moved along in the area but still working, three children, you know, along the way but into the community, and it was just something that just seemed to be natural that I should be a part of the Savannah community. So now, I've been with United Way [United Way of the Coastal Empire, Savannah, Georgia], been with what I called a daycare facility at the Hodge Memorial Daycare Center [Savannah, Georgia], was affiliated with them for about twenty-five years, having served as president of that board, and now I serve on the Savannah Airport Commission, which is an appointed position. You have to be appointed by city council to that, so I'm on a five-year term there. There are five of us on the commission. I'm the only female, and so that's a very interesting position to be in. I also currently serve with the Savannah Convention and Visitors Bureau. In addition to just, you know, I've been a member of the Junior League [Junior League of Savannah, Savannah, Georgia]; in fact, I was the first African American that was taken into membership in the Junior League in Savannah, and that was back in 1983. I'm a sustainer with the Junior League now, but I keep that particular membership status so that I can assist with making sure that we sponsor more and more African Americans into that organization, which has happened over the period of time over the years, and you know, just try to stay involved. I'm a member of Delta Sigma Theta Sorority. Speaker 1: When did you pledge? Speaker 2: Actually in 1977 in the graduate chapter there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: 'Cause remember, I told you some time ago that when I was at Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia], there were not sororities and I had been inclined for the longest time because a lot of the teachers that I admired when I was in high school [Howard High School, Georgetown, South Carolina] and junior high [J.B. Beck Elementary School; J.B. Beck Middle School, Georgetown, South Carolina] were Deltas. My cousin was a Delta. I had a lot of family members who were Deltas, and so I had that opportunity. I pledged in 1977 in the alumnae chapter. Then, I'm also active with The Links [The Links, Incorporated] in the Savannah area as well, and just currently left the position so I'm immediate past president of that, so for some reason I kind of end up being in leadership positions, but in organizations that also provide service, because that's my first criteria; if I'm gonna be a part of something, it has to provide some kind of service to the community and it has to be something that I can see that I know that will happen, and that I can get involved in, because if I try to be involved I'm gonna try to give you 100 percent plus of my time, and not just be a member, but actually work and be a part of and contribute. Story_ID: 466542 Speaker 1: What are your plans for your retirement (laughter)? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Everybody says, I've been retired since 19--since 2002, and even my children [Robert James, II, Anne James Gennaio, and Rachelle James Gregory] say, "You aren't retired." No, I'm doing exactly what I want to do with retirement, and that is to continue to be of service in my community, to be about doing something. Of course, I wanted to spend more time being a grandmother now that I have two grandchildren [Lauren James and Abigail Gregory], but I go back to my mom [Camille Moses Barber] and my grandmother [Lula Commander Moses]. My mother retired after forty-four years of teaching, but then she went right back into teaching in the GED [General Educational Development] program, even after she succumbed to cancer. She continued to work and she worked up until about four months before she died, and so it's that kind of role model that I emulate, because I admired her. My grandmother worked as long as she could, but she, if it was not work, she was doing something for someone, and that's just the way, that's what I grew up in, and that's just me. They're a part of me and I'm a part of them. And, so no, I will not be the kind of person who won't be about doing anything, but I enjoy travelling and I take that opportunity. One of our daughters lives in Tokyo, Japan, so I've made two trips to Tokyo to see her, and I come to Atlanta [Georgia] to see my grandchildren. This young lady in Anchorage, Alaska, who's like a daughter to me, she came to the peer counseling program. I go to Alaska to visit her. If there's a trip coming up to somewhere that I have not gone, like recently we went to South Africa, and that was through the airport commission [Savannah Airport Commission] but we had that opportunity, and so I love to travel, but I still want to be involved in the community and continue as long as I'm able and as long as God gives me breath and gives me strength, because he has blessed me with so much that I just feel that to much is given, that's biblical, then much is required, and I'm going to try my best to do what is required of me and then I go back to my motto now, that I live it and I learn it, and I want to pass it on to someone else. Story_ID: 466543 Speaker 1: Because this material is going to be available for the future generations, what message would you like to send to those future generations? Speaker 2: I would say to take every opportunity that comes to you, and when I say take it, be prepared to take the opportunity, so that means you have some work to do. If it's in school, then do the best that you can and make sure that it's the best that you can do, and not necessarily always measure what you can do against what someone else does, because my best is not the same as someone else's best. Do the best that you can do. Make sure that you surround yourself with persons who can encourage you and persons who will support you, persons who will be truthful with you and will let you know what your strengths and what your weaknesses are, and don't be afraid of your weaknesses. Don't boast on your strengths, just use them. Try to make your weaknesses a little stronger, but there's nothing wrong because you're human. You've gotta have strengths and you have to have weaknesses. By all means, know whose you are, so whether it, you call that person God or whether you call that person Allah, whomever, you are not here because on your own volition and not to yourself. There is a supreme being who is responsible for your being here, and there's an obligation you have to your fellow man. Treat persons how you want to be treated. Don't ever forget that. And, just be loving, appreciate your family and let them know how much you appreciate them and just pray every day and be thankful and live your life like you're thankful and just share and share and share. Speaker 1: I'm gonna thank you so much for taking the time to do this interview, because your information, your story is so important to our history and we know that you're busy even though you're supposed to be retired, but we know that you're busy and we really appreciate you taking the time. Speaker 2: Well thank you very much, too. It was a pleasure and really an honor to have been selected to participate. So, again thank you and I look forward to seeing this but then just sharing in and witnessing HistoryMakers [The HistoryMakers] in general, the ones that you've already interviewed and those who are to be interviewed in the future. Story_ID: 466544 Speaker 1: I know we, we did not talk about your children, so tell me about your children. Tell me their names and their ages. Speaker 2: Okay. Our oldest is our son, Robert Earl James, II [Robert James, II]. He's thirty-six. Then we have Anne Camille James [Anne James Gennaio]. She's thirty-three, and our youngest is Rachelle Elizabeth James Gregory [Rachelle James Gregory]. Speaker 1: Did you want to tell me what they do? Speaker 2: Oh sure. Robert is an attorney by profession. In fact, he finished at Harvard [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] in the law school in 1995, and he's married to Angela Payne James, who is also an attorney and a Harvard grad, Law School, 1996. Currently, I think he did the law practice for about five years with a major law firm here in Atlanta [Georgia], and so now he's an entrepreneur. He said he's gone back to his great-grandfather's, Eli Baxter Barber, Sr. [Eli Barber, Sr.], so, but he's in business for himself now. He's a real estate developer and he's been doing that for the past two and a half years. So, he operates out of Atlanta, and he also has some business in the Savannah [Georgia] area as well. Our daughter, Anne Camille, is a teacher by profession. She taught in Atlanta Public School system [Atlanta Public Schools] for about three years; well, I should say Decatur [Georgia] because she was in Stone Mountain [Georgia]. Then, she received her master's [degree] in education from Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], the Graduate School of Education, exactly thirty years after I received mine, so we had a nice little reunion that year. Then, she began working. She took an alternative to teaching. She was director of a managed, emergency managed care center for children in the Boston [Massachusetts] area; it's Children First, and what they did was the concept behind that was companies would buy in a certain amount of hours each year for employees so that employees who were transitioning in or either during school holiday periods, then there was some place for the children to go so that the employee would not have to take the day off, and so it worked very well. So, she did that for about three years, and she was recruited from there to Tokyo, Japan, to become headmaster of an international preschool, and so she went to Tokyo and she's there into her third year now. She completed the two year contract with that school, Poppins International [Poppins Active Learning International School, Tokyo, Japan], and now she basically is a professional language coach, so she's teaching conversational English to Japanese professionals and it's something that she enjoys and she's about to venture into another something else now, so I better not mention what that is, but it goes back into the teaching arena, which is really what her passion is, so we were happy about that. Our younger daughter, Rachelle, is a marketing analyst, marketing research analyst, so she has her master's in marketing and communications, and she was the one that went to the West Coast, so her master's is from the University of Southern California [Los Angeles, California], and she's worked with Nielsen Entertainment, and currently she's a marketing research analyst with Turner Broadcasting [Turner Broadcasting System, Inc., Atlanta, Georgia], so she loves that and out of the three of them, she's the one that probably did the most international kinds of studies while she was at Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia], so she's my Spelmanite out of the family, and so she participated a lot in exchange programs and study abroad. She's very fluent in Spanish, so she's had opportunities to study in Costa Rica and the Dominican Republic, also Stanford University [Stanford, California] and places like that. So, she's kind of the worldwide one, but then I would go back to Camille and say that she's the most adventurous because not knowing anyone in Tokyo, Japan, and when she got the offer for the job, she went, and she's there and she's enjoying it and liking it very well. Story_ID: 466545 Speaker 1: From the three children we had two granddaughters, and Rob [Robert James, II] and Angela [Angela Payne James], and we have a granddaughter, Lauren [Lauren James], who will be two years old very soon, and a newborn with Rachelle [Rachelle James Gregory] and her husband, Frederick [Frederick Gregory]. That's little Miss Abigail [Abigail Gregory], and she'll soon be three weeks old. And, I must mention that Frederick, Rachelle's husband, is a neurobiologist, so he has his Ph.D. in neurobiology, which is a very unique kind of career for an African American, I think, but that's what he does and he loves it. So, my children are really and truly the blessings that I have, and I'd tell anyone that and I thank God for them daily, and they're kind of what it's all about, so the bread that has been cast back to me on the waters has come through them, and for that I'm most thankful. Speaker 2: Is there anything else that we have not talked about? Speaker 1: Well, my husband [HistoryMaker Robert James], whom I love very dearly and who has been more than a supporter and an encourager and just the most wonderful person, I think, in the world, we've been married for thirty-eight years, so you can't beat that when you think about it. We've just done a lot together, and we're supporting each other a lot and it's just been a wonderful marriage and can't say any more about him other than I'm very proud of the kinds of things that he has accomplished in his life, and I'm glad to have been a part of that as well, and hopefully that we have taught our children the same things that we were taught in reference to giving back and being servant leaders and so far I have not been disappointed in my children with that, and my husband and I still continue as much as we are able to do the same things. And that's it. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay. Speaker 1: Thank you. Speaker 2: Thank you so much...