 Story_ID: 131286 Speaker 1: Mr. HistoryMaker, this interview is with Professor Robert Johnson, Jr, in his home at 63 Highland Avenue, Cambridge, Massachusetts. The date is April 7, 2006, the interviewer is Robert C. Hayden and the videographer is Neculai Burghelea. Mr. HistoryMaker, would you state your full name for me and would you spell your name. Speaker 2: Robert Cecil Johnson Junior, and J-O-H-N-S-O-N, R-O-B-E-R-T, C-E-C-I-L. Speaker 1: I didn't know you had a middle name, you never use it. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: I didn't use mine for a long time either, which is also C. Professor Johnson, would you give us your birthdate and where you were born? Speaker 2: I was born five thirteen forty-eight [May 13, 1948] in a little town right outside of Chattanooga, Tennessee, the town is called Summit, Tennessee. Speaker 1: Um-hum, okay. And what is your occupation, what is your profession, how do you describe yourself in terms of your, your work. Speaker 2: Okay, I describe myself as an attorney, a professor and a playwright. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: And I also do some real estate development. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Story_ID: 131287 Speaker 1: Before we get into exploring your family background, we have a few what we call warm up questions-- Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: --People magazine type questions. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Which will give the viewers of your interview over time, a certain slant on your personality. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And so I'd like to start by asking you, what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: Fried chicken. Speaker 1: Fried chicken, okay, your favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue. Speaker 1: Blue, that comes up an awful lot, I'm surprised -- Speaker 2: --(Laughter). Speaker 1: --Although it's mine too, your favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Summer. Speaker 1: Um-hum. And do you have a kind of favorite vacation destination, one that stands above all others? Speaker 2: Well, I guess two, I have Vermont, I love to go to Vermont in the summer and in the fall, and the second one would be Treasure Beach, Jamaica, which I like to go there in the winter. Speaker 1: Um-hum, okay. And the last warm up question. Do you have a favorite saying or phrase, something philosophical that you use from time to time with your wife or with your colleagues or, or your friends? Speaker 2: Yeah, the power of the people is greater than the man's technology. Yeah, I, I use that a lot in my classes and I think it speaks to my sort of view of the world. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: That if people are organized and united that they're a powerful force to deal with. Story_ID: 131288 Speaker 1: Is there a reason why you have not used, at least in your resume and other publications, your middle name, middle initial? Speaker 2: Well, I--when I was practicing law, I used to use it, Robert C. Johnson, Jr., when I was practicing law full-time. Then when I went to part-time and started teaching full-time, then I figured I'd change my identity somewhat, so then I went to Robert Johnson, Jr. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: Cecil is a name that people, my family, they refer to me as Cecil, my old, old friends, they refer to me as Cecil, so Cecil is a family name, a very dear name, and then Robert is a more formal name. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: When I went to college, people started calling me Robert, but before that, everyone called me Cecil, so after college then it sorta became the name. Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: But, I'm really Cecil. Story_ID: 131289 Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, thank you. You mentioned family, let's start with your mother-- Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: And then we'll talk about your father and your grandparents, so as I said, people will have a context in which to view you, your ongoing work today. Would you give me your mother's full name, the year she was born and where she was born? Speaker 2: Okay, her name is Dorothy Louise Guyton, is her maiden name, Burgan is her maiden name and when she passed, her last name was Guyton, G-U-Y-T-O-N. Speaker 1: But her name was Burton, you say? Speaker 2: Burgan, B-U-R-G-A-N. Speaker 1: Thank you. Speaker 2: Yeah, and she was born in Summit, actually she was born in Spartanburg, South Carolina. Speaker 1: Um-hum, okay and the year? Speaker 2: In May 1, 1920. Speaker 1: 1920, alright. Did your mother share with you when you were a youngster, child, teenager, stories of her growing up years? Speaker 2: Yes, we actually lived with our grandparents for the first thirteen years of my life, we lived in the south. My father died when I was four and after he died my mother came to Boston [Massachusetts] so we lived in the south with my grandparents, Reverend Nathan Burgan, and Hannah Burgan. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: And, so, so the earliest part of my life was in the South, in, in fact when we came to the North, I hated to come to the North because I loved the South, I loved the country and I loved being barefoot and the trees and everything, which just explains why I bought the place in Vermont, because it's country and you know,-- Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: --I can go through the woods and sort of relive my childhood in some ways. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: So, I would say, when I came to Boston we lived in the South End of Boston and-- Speaker 1: And how old were you then, about? Speaker 2: Thirteen Speaker 1: Thirteen. Speaker 2: Yeah, and I remember the shock of being on West Springfield Street and we lived on like 161 West Springfield Street, on the fifth floor and I remember looking up at this tall building and saying, "Oh my God, this building is huge and," and there were, you know, buildings next to each other, across the street and around the corner and I said, "God, we're in this jungle," you know, and then we had to walk up the stairs, you know, I think it was like four or five flights of stairs in there. But, my mother really, she was great, I mean, she worked at J.A. Cigars, which was on Columbus Avenue. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: And then she started to work as a domestic and, and she taught us values. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: We went to church every Sunday, same thing in the South, we went to New Hope Baptist Church, which was on Shawmut Avenue, at that, at that time, the South End at this point was all black. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: Across the street on the corner of Tremont Street and Springfield Street was the Rainbow Lounge-- Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: --Nightclub, and so we were told never to go in there, you know-- Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: --Because that's where all the drinking, the dancing occurred and I remember as a kid, many times, twelve and one o'clock in the morning being awakened and going to the window looking out and seeing all the blacks even-- Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: --With their nice clothes on coming out of the club and-- Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: --Hugging their women and kissing their women and--so I used to say, damn, when I get older, I'm definitely gonna go into Rainbow, they seem to be having a great time in there, you know. Story_ID: 131290 Speaker 1: When you and your family relocated to Boston [Massachusetts], who were the members of your family that came and why did they leave the South? Speaker 2: Okay, yeah, it was my older sister, Olivia Dubose, who's married to Willie Dubose and my other sister Cynthia Israel, who's married to James Israel. So, we were the three that came back here and then when we got here, there was all--also a sister who was born to Noel Guyton, and her name was Noella [ph.]. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: So, it was four of us living at 161 West Springfield Street. Speaker 1: But why to Boston? Speaker 2: Well, we came to Boston because my mother [Louise Guyton] came here because her cousin was in Boston and in Springfield [Massachusetts] and they were living together, her name is sss--we call her Snip, Felicia Ann Nichols is her name. And, so, my mother came here to find work and then, all of a sudden we, my grandparents [Nathan and Hannah Burgan] called us in and said, "You all are going to Boston?" and, you know, we, we had known of Boston, my mother visited us in the South but--so that was a really traumatic experience, that was probably the most traumatic experience of my early life, just uprooting from the South leaving the grandparents. So, I think that they, she came here for job opportunities essentially, you know. Speaker 1: Would you describe your neighborhood and your community in the South during your early teen years, just before you left, what was the nature of your community in which you lived? Speaker 2: It was what I would say a very poor materially, you know, people didn't have a lot of material things but it was very rich in terms of cultures, spirituality and community unity, it was--we had a little house, a little sort of shack, and at the time I didn't realize it was a little shack, but after I graduated from college and went back and took a look at the old house, then you say, damn, this house was pretty run down. Speaker 1: How many rooms in the house? Speaker 2: We had two bedrooms, then there was a living room area, there was an outdoor bathroom, an outhouse-- Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: --And then there was a kitchen. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: And a wood burning stove and we used coal a lot in the stove, stove as well. So, it got sorta chilly in those Tennessee winter nights, but I remember we always had a lot to eat, sometime it wasn't the most nutritious food, sometimes it was just syrup and bread. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: When you take the, it was Karo Syrup and mix butter in it and take the light bread and you'd eat it. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: And then a lot of times it was buttermilk and cornbread, where you take the cornbread and mash it up-- Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: --And put it in a, in a bottle, a glass or a cup of buttermilk and you'd eat that and we thought that was great, you know. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: And then sometimes my grandfather would raise a pig and, you know, kill the pig and we'd have some, some food there. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: We were also, my grandparents also made us aware of the KKK, because the KKK was big during that time, the Ku Klux Klan, so she always told us that whenever we would hear horns blowing, 'cause there was a tarmac road that ran through the town and then these little dirt roads that went off to the side. So, she said whenever you would hear these horns blowing you would get away from the main road, just run into the woods and they always drilled that into us. I remember when it first occurred, you know, I was going over to a friend's house and I heard the horns blow and I said, "Oh shit, Ku Klux Klan." Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: So we ran into the woods, you know, so then I asked my grandmother I said, "Ma, what, what is this thing look like?" 'Cause you know we, we were drilled so much with this we got far into the woods-- Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: --Just kept running into the woods. She said, on the first, the first car has a big cross on it and then you have a whole line of white folks and cars and you know they'll shoot niggers if they see 'em along the road. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Story_ID: 131291 Speaker 1: So we had that side of being in the South, and then on my father's [Robert Cecil Johnson, Sr.'s] side, my people lived in Ooltewah, Tennessee. Speaker 2: How do you spell that please? Speaker 1: O-O-L-E-T-E-W-A-H [sic, Ooltewah]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So a Cherokee name. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: And, and then I learned that my, on my father's side there was Cherokee Indians and that my grandmother mother was a full blooded Cherokee Indian. So, I sorta heard about that, I didn't go to Ooltewah as much as my sister Cynthia [Israel], she would go all the time, but I sorta stayed pretty close to Summit [Tennessee]. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: The towns were probably about six miles away-- Speaker 2: Would you-- Speaker 1: --So I remember that. Speaker 2: Would you give me your, your grandfather's name and your grandmother's name, for the record please? Speaker 1: Okay, my grandfather and grandmother on my mother's [Dorothy Burgan Guyton's] side was Reverend Nathan Burgan and Hannah Burgan. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: And on my father's side it was John Johnson and Icie [ph.] Johnson. Speaker 2: Um-hum. What do you know about the birth and the growing up years for your paternal grandparents, you, did you talk with them at all? Did they share with you their life? Speaker 1: Yeah, although I was closer with the maternal grandparents, I did after I got older, start to see more of my paternal grandparents and actually we were just down in Tennessee, in March 'cause I went to Atlanta [Georgia] to visit my daughter and then we drove up to Chattanooga [Tennessee], which is about a two hour drive and so we visited my paternal family and I took some photographs actually of my son [Gary Weldon Johnson] and my daughter [Anika Ama Johnson] and my cousin and my aunt and uncle, standing in front of, of this little church which my family founded in, in Ooltewah. And our family was the black family in, in Ooltewah. It was on the other side of the tracks, white folks on one side of the track, we were on the other side of track and they were very hard working people, my grandmother was a person who was well respected both in the white community and in the, and in the black community. I don't know a whole lot about my grandfather-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: And I, I have interviewed a number of my aunts on my fa--father's side and they were pretty old, I mean, eighty-nine years old one was, and another was about ninety-two, before they passed. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: And they talked a lot about the Cherokee influence and that their grandmother, you know, being Cherokee, and they're very, very religious people-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: --Outstanding, upright kind of folks. Speaker 2: And they were born in the same area? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Your maternal grandparents? Speaker 1: Yeah, maternal grandparents, yeah. Story_ID: 131292 Speaker 1: What kind of work did they do, do you know what they? Speaker 2: This is the maternal or? Speaker 1: Your maternal. Speaker 2: The maternal, okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So, the maternal is on the Burgan side of the family. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: My grandfather [Nathan Burgan] he was a pastor so he had a church in Cohutta, Georgia, and also he had another church in, in another part of Georgia, so he had two churches. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: He was also a janitor for the white school in Ooltewah [Tennessee], 'cause I remember as a kid, I would go to the white school with him to work at night, so he had this respectability as the moral authority in the community, in the black community. Our family was the family in terms of that, people always looked up to our family, they were very giving, my mother and my grandmother [Hannah Burgan] and my grandfather were very, very giving. I remember I'd come home from school and on the front porch, my grandmother would be sitting with someone who looked like a bum, you know, and he, you know, here's a homeless guy who lived in the woods. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: And my grandmother was feeding him, you know, and I would say, "Mama, why you, why you feed this old dirty, rusty looking guy?" You know? I think his name was Medlock [ph.]. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: And she said, "This is our Christian duty, you know, we don't know if it's an angel in disguise," he was an angel in disguise. So, so we were brought up in that sense to care for people to be giving, and yeah, so and then my grandmother just took care of her kids, my aunt Naomi, was living down there and then she was taking care of us, and she was superintendent of the church that was just up the hill from us, in Sunday school. So, my grandfather worked and, and he worked as a janitor and he was a preacher. Speaker 1: So he was traveling quite a bit too then? Speaker 2: Yeah, he was. And we went to churches with him, quite a bit, you know. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: Which, you know. Speaker 1: Did you assist him in anyway in his ministry, and in the churches at all? Speaker 2: (Laughter), no man, I hated, I hated going to church man. Speaker 1: Oh you did? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. I, I really, I would try to fall asleep and all that, you know. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: And even to this day, my sisters are all deep into the church, whereas I'm sort of like, you know, I, I'd go every once in a while. Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Story_ID: 131293 Speaker 1: How do you remember your mother [Louise Guyton]? What was she like, her personality? Speaker 2: Well, I refer to my mother as a saint. Now, I don't refer to her as a saint loosely, I don't like, because she was my mother and I loved her so much, it's not that, it's really kind of, of course it's part of that because I loved her so deeply, but it grew out of observations of her life and how she related to people and what she did for people. And literally she had the power to pray for people and heal 'em, and, and in fact, when she was, I think she was fourteen, living in Tennessee, my grandmother [Hannah Burgan] wanted her to teach Sunday school class and she said, "No," she wouldn't do and so then she went blind, so then so was blind for about fourteen days, and the Lord came to her and said, "If you do my work, you'll get your sight back." And so, she got her sight back and then so, when she came--the first time I knew or experienced her power to heal, was when I went to college, you know, I was the first one in my family to go to college and I went to Bowdoin College [Brunswick, Maine] starting in 1967, and I got a stomach ulcer and, you know, it was very painful-- Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: --You know, God, and I came home and I said, "Ma, you know, doc said I got a stomach ulcer." And, and I was feeling bad, you know, here I am, I'm gonna be the first in my family to go to college and here I am sick, you know? Speaker 1: Sick (unclear). Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: And she said, she prayed for me and she said that when you go through the line of the cafeteria and you just hum this song that "I am healed by the wound in his side," so I did that and, phew!, healed, never had any problems with my stomach. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: But they're many other stories of, of, like that, where, where I knew about or I witnessed or particularly before she died, she was the mother and the founder, along with Bishop [Joe L.] Smith, of the Holy Tabernacle Church, in Boston [Massachusetts], in Dorchester there. And, and she, I mean she was the one that sort of found the church, and blessed the church and sort of took Bishop Smith along, you know. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: She sort of taught Bishop Smith, so she was a, she was a saint. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: I mean, and when she died, the funeral, all these people came and they testified about how she had prayed for them and, and they'd been healed and, yeah, so. Speaker 1: How much formal education did she have in Tennessee, your mother? Speaker 2: Well she finished high school and then she, when she came to Boston [Massachusetts], she went to a hair dressing school, so she and my aunt, ran a beauty shop on Blue Hill Avenue called Weezie's, [ph.]. My aunt's name is Rose Simms. They called it Weezie's. Then she took some courses I think at Roxbury Community College [Boston, Massachusetts] and then she started working for the council of elders as sort of a social worker type, visiting seniors who were, who were locked up. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: But, I would say her main, not locked up but who were, you know, couldn't get out. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: But her main contribution I think has been in, in the world of religion, you know, I think she was really an extraordinary person-- Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: --And, when you go to Holy Tabernacle Church now, you come in the front door, on the right hand side there's a picture of my mother, on the left hand side is a picture of Bishop [Joe L.] Smith. Speaker 1: Um-hum, what street is Holy Tabernacle on? Speaker 2: Washington Street in Dorchester, right next to [Jeremiah E.] Burke [High] School, around the corner there. Speaker 1: All right, with the blue roof? Speaker 2: Yeah, the blue roof, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: That's how people know it. Speaker 1: Yeah, no we drove by there twice yesterday, going to do, to do interviews and I, I know that building, 'cause I used to go to Burke High School a lot, you know. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 131294 Speaker 1: Tell me about your father, would you give me his full name and where he was born and when he was born? Speaker 2: All right, his name was Robert Cecil Johnson, Sr. and he was born in Ooltewah, Tennessee, and I don't have the precise dates when he was born but, it was about 1921, and then he died about, probably 1956, '56 [1956], yeah. Speaker 1: Um-hum. What do you know about his growing up years in Tennessee? Did he ever tell you stories about his childhood and? Speaker 2: No, I didn't know him because I was four when he died, so the only thing I can get is talking to my aunts. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: And, you know, I talked to my mother [Louise Guyton] to some, some degree, he was from what I can gather, a very good looking guy, somewhat of a womanizer, he, he--so that's about it. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: I don't know a lot about him. Speaker 1: What was his occupation at the time when you were born and during your first four years, you know what (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: I don't really know. Is it the towns that we lived in Summit [Tennessee] and Ooltewah, were very poor towns, you know. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: And there were very limited jobs that the people could, could get down there. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: So, I don't really know and actually, I don't think I've ever asked any of the aunts what, what he did. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: They never volunteered anything so I would assume that he didn't really have a lot in terms of occupation. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: But, you know, the thing is down there, I mean the family had land-- Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: --And so, people would just build a little house on the land and just sort of do their own gardens and so to survive in that sense-- Story_ID: 131295 Speaker 1: Tell me about your family life in Tennessee with your sisters [Olivia Dubose and Cynthia Israel], your mother [Louise Guyton], your grandparents [Nathan and Hannah Burgan], church was a, an important institution in (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --But tell me about other events in your family that you recall, special celebrations, holidays, what did you do as a family that you always anticipated coming every year? Speaker 2: Well the family reunions, we have family reunions now that are both on the, my father's [Robert Cecil Johnson, Sr.'s] side and on my mother's side, that was big. Also, in the summertime the cousins would come down from the North, like I had a cousins Clem [ph.] and Alvin, they would come down from Cleveland [Ohio] and then my uncle would come down from Boston [Massachusetts], so we'd always look forward to them coming down because, you know, when they come down, they're there in the big North, they have nice big cars, nice clothes, they give you a few dollars, you know-- Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: --We feel that they were rich, you know, being in the North, so that was always a great thing and, and I remember this woman came down, she was a young girl, actually came down with my cousins Clem and her last name was Hackett [ph.], I'm trying to remember what her first name was. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: But anyway, she was my first girlfriend and I remember her coming down and just feeling, God, and Lloyd Price's song, 'Just Because,' was out, I don't know if you remember that. (Singing) "Just because we left and said goodbye," boom, boom, boom, "do you think that I would sit and cry, but even if my heart should tell me so, darling I would rather let you go." So that song was out. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: And so, so I remember that very distinctly, just really feeling for this young woman, you know, just like, and then when she left, and went back to Cleveland, whenever I'd hear that song on the radio, it would remind me of her. So, that was, that was a big, a big thing in, in the South for people to come down, down South. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Other than celebrating family, any other kinds of celebrations that your family kind of took to every year? Speaker 2: Well, you know, there was the family reunions, but the family reunions sorta kicked in later on. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: Where there were formal family reunions and those really kicked in after my grandparents died and then everyone felt the need to sort of come together. So those, we look forward to every year. This year we're going to Atlanta [Georgia], last year, we were in Cleveland, year before that we were in Houston [Texas], before that we were in Boston, so we certainly look forward to, to that. Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Story_ID: 130662 Speaker 1: Professor Johnson, you have been working on, on one aspect of your family history, the Burgan family. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: And, you shared with me which looks like a nearly publishable piece of your family history, tell me about this work. The process briefly that you've used to, to talk about the Burgan family and what's in there, what are you telling us? Speaker 2: Well, all right. What I'd--being that I'm a historian, and being that we're having these family reunions, of course, people look to me to sort of pull together the family history. But fortunately enough, before my grandmother [Hannah Burgan] died on the maternal side, I, I spent some time with her because she lived here in Boston [Massachusetts], after the grandfather [Nathan Burgan] died, she moved to Boston and she was living with my mother [Louise Guyton] in Mattapan [Boston, Massachusetts] and I used to go by and talk to her, interview her and I took good notes on what she said about the family history. So I had that to begin with and so then I started to interview my aunts about what they knew about the history, trying to find out who my great-grandfather was, who my great-great-grandfather was, and then I had talked to my cousins who lived in Cleveland [Ohio] and so basically what I'm trying to do is to get a picture of the Burgans and the Scotts, 'cause on my grandmother's side are the Scotts from Spartanburg, South Carolina, and they were very dark, pure Africans, no inter marriage with, with Europeans or with, with native people, and my grandmother told me about her grandfather being a slave and she was pretty vivid about some of the conditions in, in South Carolina, in Spartanburg, in terms of where they lived, the kind of farming they had to do, subsistence farming, so that's pretty clear in terms of going back to--on the Scott side and on the Burgan, I found that my great grandfather was named James Burgan and he's, he's in the census of--1920 census, and he is listed as a person who owned his own home, free and clear of a mortgage and then the census indicated that his father came from North Carolina, and--but it doesn't say what county or what town. And so what I've been trying to do is to find where the great-great-grandfather came from in North Carolina, and I've done some, some research, and looking, and part of it is looking at the maps in that general area, because where Summit [Tennessee] is located it's near the intersection of Georgia, and North Carolina so, you can get to North Carolina (?) about twenty-five, thirty minute drive. So, I did find that there were some Burgans, large slave holders named Burgan in the North Carolina section, Buncombe County [North Carolina], so my guess is that, that's probably where he came from but I haven't found that direct link yet. And so I wanna go down there and spend a lot of time in, in North Carolina going looking at the historical associations there, trying to find out more about those Burgans. The other thing I wanna do is go to [University of] North Carolina [at] Chapel Hill, 'cause apparently they have a slave, a slave collection of materials there. I think it's the largest in the country, and to look at some documents there and see if I can find something that will tie James Burgan into this, this white family that owned, I mean, it was just huge, the whole county was a slaveholding county-- Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: --Big, big plantations-- Story_ID: 130663 Speaker 1: So that's what I've been trying to do with them and of course, you know, when you have the family reunions, you get new information, like the last one, I interviewed my uncle who's now about ninety and he was talking about World War I [sic] and being drafted and, and know what that was like and, I think it was World War I or World War II, if he's ninety, that would, he could be in the World War-- Speaker 2: One [sic]. Speaker 1: --War I, yeah. And so I have to integrate that in, I haven't listened to the tape yet to put it into the document and now I've started to put pictures into it as well. Speaker 2: I noticed. Speaker 1: Yeah, because I figure that's gonna be important, and essentially what I'm trying to do is get as much information as I can on the family so that younger folks in the family-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: --fifty years from now, they'll have this and you know, I've documented it very thoroughly. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: It tells 'em where they could find the sources, so all I need to do is go back to that point and go forward, rather than having to do it all over again. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: But I, I hoped in the next, maybe my next sabbatical I'll spend the time, a good deal of the time just sort of really trying to bring this to some kind of conclusion. Speaker 2: Well, I'm working through a similar process, actually doing that really full time-- Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: --And then The HistoryMakers project, that's it-- Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: --You know? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I gotta get this done because I have all the materials, nobody in my family-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --Has all the materials that I have-- Speaker 1: --Right, right. Speaker 2: --And one of the reasons that I said earlier I've decided to make it more of a historical piece-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --Than a piece of fiction, is that I have fantastic visual material-- Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: So I wanted to make use of that. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: I'm not sure it would fit into the novel if it was a true fiction piece. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: Well I think-- Speaker 1: And, and then the other thing I want to say on the Johnson side, I'm doing the same thing on the Johnson side. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: And, that's where we have the Cherokee Indian connection there and I remember I was going back on my grandmother [Icie Johnson] and trying to find her people and I couldn't find it. I was going through all of the census and nothing, you know, no last name Clay, C-L-A-Y. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: And then I was down there in Ooltewah [Tennessee], maybe twenty minutes from Ooltewah is a little town called Cleveland [Tennessee] and about ten minutes from there is where the Cherokee Indians had their last council at, at [New] Echota [Georgia] and so she said one of the ladies in the library said try the Cherokee rolls, you know, if you can't find Clay, your people-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: --In the regular stuff, try the Cherokee roll, so I looked in the Cherokee rolls and boom and there it was-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: There was the name Clay, just tons of 'em, you know, and, and then I looked at other rolls and, you know th--I mean, there descriptions of, of native people who married African people and so I made some, I took down some information there, I mean, I haven't really explored to make sure that it's us, but at least I have all that material-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: --I just need to sort through it. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: So it's sort of a detective story, you know-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: --Your always trying to find the leads and put it all together and-- Speaker 2: Very good, thank you for sharing that, 'cause I think what you just shared would be useful to other people-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --Who listen to your experience-- Speaker 1: Great. Speaker 2: --And wonder what it's about. Story_ID: 130664 Speaker 1: What are your earliest, farthest-back memories of living in Tennessee--Summit? How far back can you remember? Speaker 2: Well, I, I can remember, I remember when my grandmother [Icie Johnson] died on, on my father's side-- Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: --They called her Mama Icie, and, 'cause I remember being, let's see was it, no actually I think that was when my father [Robert Cecil Johnson, Sr.] died when I was four, it's amazing that I remember a casket and I remember running and jumping in my grandmother's arms-- Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: And, and that's about all I remember of him. I guess that would be the earliest remembrances. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: I remember going to elementary school there that was quite amazing. It was a all-black school. Speaker 1: What was the name of the school? Speaker 2: Oota--Ooohh--Ooo--Summit Elementary School [Summit, Tennessee]. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: And I remember, you know the black principal, professor Raymo--Raymore, they called him, and I remember my two teachers, I think grades maybe three and four, and, and I remember everyone being happy. It was segregated but-- Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: --We didn't think about it that much. Speaker 1: How large was the school? Speaker 2: I would say it was well maybe two hundred students in the whole school. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Did you like school and were you a good student? Speaker 2: Yeah, I think so, I mean it was so far back. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: The only time that I really remember sort of liking school, was when I came to Boston [Massachusetts] and then, then it sort of, it was such a shock to come from an all-black environment to a school that was integrated, you know? Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: And I was at Dwight School [Boston, Massachusetts] on Springfield Street and then having a white teacher for the first time-- Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: You know that was amazing. Speaker 1: In your elementary school in Tennessee, what was the nature of the pedagogy, the teaching process? How do, how do you recall, you know, lessons of what happened each day in the classroom? Speaker 2: I don't remember a whole lot about that? I remember there was a strict discipline. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: And that the teachers could paddle you and, and then if you really were bad, they would send you to Professor Raymore, and he would like give you the switch. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: But in terms of the, what we were learning, I don't remember-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --Much of that at all. Speaker 1: How many years did you spend at the elementary school, this elementary school and-- Speaker 2: I was there until the fourth grade. Speaker 1: --Fourth grade? Speaker 2: Yeah, so from first grade all the way-- Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: --To through fourth grade. Speaker 1: Where did you go from grade four then? Where did you? Speaker 2: Oh, in fourth grade, then we came to Boston. Speaker 1: Boston, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Were there any teachers at the elementary school in Tennessee that stand out in your mind that you remember that were particularly influential as a youngster? Speaker 2: No, I would say at that early point, intellectually, I was not stimulated or turned on or anything, you know, it was just something you had to do to go to school. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: You went there, you played with the kids, you know, it was in the middle of the woods, you run through the woods making tents, playing cowboys and Indians, and, you know, you were having a good time, you know? Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: It, the importance of education was not anything that I thought about at that point. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 130665 Speaker 1: Before we leave Tennessee and we're now into Boston [Massachusetts], are there any sights, sounds or smells that you recall as a youngster growing up in Tennessee? Speaker 2: Well yeah, I guess one thing in terms of sights would be, there was a, in our l--little place we lived in the window in my bedroom was broken and I remember some cat coming through the window and being in my bed and scaring me to death and then my grandparent, [grand]father [Nathan Burgan] never fixed the window. So, he put the cat out, the cat would always come in and jump in the bed with me right? I think it was some kinda ad-, you know, a wild cat-- Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: --It wasn't like our pet cat or anything, so to this day I'm afraid of cats. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: So that's, that's something that's really stayed with me, you mean just nice little house cat, so a cat come close to me-- Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: --I, I just get away from him. The other in terms of smells would be the times when my grandfather would kill a pig and then my grandmother [Hannah Burgan] would clean the chitlins-- Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: --And so, I always remember those smells and seeing my sisters, they'd have to be cleaning 'em and they'd be upset that they were cleaning 'em and all that. We had great Sunday meals, particularly in the morning, on Sunday morning, my grandmother would always cook, fried chicken, rice, and cornbread every Sunday we'd have that. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: Fried chicken, so yeah those are some. Speaker 1: So you come to Boston at grade (unclear) four or five? Speaker 2: Fourth. Speaker 1: Fourth grade? Speaker 2: Fourth grade. Speaker 1: And what school did you enter on arriving here? Speaker 2: Dwight School [Boston, Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: Dwight School was on Springfield Street before you get to Shaw, between Tremont and Charlottetown. Speaker 1: Um-hum. How did you find that school, (unclear) four, five, six, it was, I remember those years? Speaker 2: Well it was just down the road from where we lived and actually we used to play in the school yard, you know, after school it was, it was right next door. I, I found it sort of fascinating because for the first time I had a white teacher and her name was Ms. Mongrande [ph.] and I, I didn't, being from the south I didn't know what was up, you know? Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: I, I'm in a strange place so I sat in the front row and, you know, I listened to everything see said, I kept my hands folded and she would give me little chores to do like, erase the board and to this day, when I'm teaching and I erase the board, sometimes I think of her (laughter), well one thing I remember, the first week at school and I always (unclear) regret this the rest of my life, my mother [Louise Guyton] said okay, I'm gonna bring your lunch to you right? I said okay, cool. So she comes to school with a bag of lunch, I open it at lunch time and it's this nice sandwich made out of wheat bread toasted, tomatoes, you know, nice kinds of meats and stuff and I open it and, see I'd never had anything like that in the South, you know, and I looked around at the other students and they had like potato chips and all that kind of stuff. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: And I said, "Damn," you know, I mean, why my stuff is so different? Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: So I took it and threw it in the trash man, you know? But now I look back on it, I look back later on and I said, "Damn." I mean my mother had given me a very nutritious-- Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: --Lunch because she loved me and wanted me to have the best but I was so silly, I didn't, you know, and so vulnerable in terms of being the new kid on the block that I threw that away. Story_ID: 130666 Speaker 1: But I was in the Dwight School [Boston, Massachusetts] 'til through the seventh grade, and that was, that was a tough situation there because they had, it was very strictly run and they had these de--detention centers, so if you're like walking down the hallway and, and you smile or something, then they, told a student prefect I think they're called, tell you to step outta line and they'll send you to room seven and then you go to room seven and then Mr. Hughes is there with a long rattan and then he would ask the prefect what did you do and you, he says well he smiled in the line or he didn't square the corners as he was walking, then you'd get these whacks in your hand, sometimes you'd get one on each hand, sometimes you'd get two on each hand. And then there was one course in woodworking where the teacher would soak the rattans in vinegar to make 'em like sting more. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: So, but the good thing about that, it was discipline in that sense so the kids tended to not act out because they knew they were gonna get, get some kinda punishment. I th--I don't think, nah, I don't think I would act really been intellectually turned on in the fourth grade, neither the fifth or the sixth or the seventh. Now, and then in the eighth I went to Charles E. Mackey School [Boston, Massachusetts] in the South End, again, I'm not really to the turned on intellectually. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: You know, you're more into looking at the girls, and all that kinda stuff. Speaker 2: So what kinda things did you do outside of school, summers, vacations, after school, what kinda things did you and your friends participate in, in the South End of (unclear). Speaker 1: Okay. Well, what we did was that we started to, we played football every afternoon in the, in the yard there at the school, it was tag football. Then we started to play these white kids who lived further into Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts], and we'd actually have games with them and they'd have full uniforms and we were so poor, that we didn't have uniforms. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Some of us had a helmet and some of us had pads and none of us had cleats or anything and-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: --So we started to play these white kids, and we lost every game but it was, it was a lot of fun, I mean, I'll never forget the courage of some of these, this guy Timothy McCurry [ph.], I--he was one of my buddies I grew up with the South End, small guy, skinny, and he was our full back and Timothy would like run in the middle of, of line and stuff without any equipment, I'd say, "Oh God," I'd look and see if Timothy's gonna get up, he'd get up, he'd come to the huddle, "What's the next play, what's the next play?" So we did that-- Story_ID: 130667 Speaker 1: Also, I started to go to the South End House [Boston, Massachusetts] a lot on Rutland Street and that's where Mel King [HM Melvin King] was the director, this was about the eighth, eighth grade and there was a lady there named Gladys Guson, she was the director of education and she was arranging tutorials for neighborhood kids and so, if I was having--and, and then when I would come in, she would always be sitting on the left hand side of the door when you come in and she'd say, "Robert, how's everything going? How's school?" And then you'd go in and talk with her and then you say, "Well I got a D in this." And then she'd say, "Well let's--why don't you come back on Saturday and we'll have a tutor for you." And so she did those kind of things which was great for all of us in, in the, in the South End. Speaker 2: Backing up with the [Charles E.] Mackey [School, Boston, Massachusetts] you just (unclear). What was the race ethnic composition of the Mackey? Speaker 1: All black. Speaker 2: All black? Speaker 1: Yeah, all black, yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Maybe one or two whites, but predominantly (?) all black. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Were there any other black teachers? Speaker 1: At the Mackey? Speaker 2: Yeah, at the Mackey. Speaker 1: No, there was, I think there was one guy, Mr. Jenkins, I think he taught health education-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: --Everyone else was white. Speaker 2: Um-hum. I remember him. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So, you spend two years at Mackey (unclear)? Speaker 1: Yeah, eighth grade and then I went to ninth grade I went to English, [The] English High School [of Boston, Massachusetts], now in the going back to the, to the South End, another thing we did, is that we, maybe about four or five of us started to form a little science club. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: And, I was interested in astronomy. So, I guess yes, so I think maybe eighth grade I started to get interested in academic things and how I got interested in astronomy, was that I was watching a movie, it was called, 'Invaders From Mars,' and there was this astronomer, and there was this little kid, maybe fourteen in his observatory and he was asking the young kid questions about the universe, about the stars and the distance between, to the moon and-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: --The planets, this kid was like rattling off all this information, I said, "Damn, man that kid is smart, this is what I wanna do." Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: So, then I started to go down to the public library in the South End which is on Blackstone, Blackstone Street near the park, and I read every book in the library on astronomy, every book and then so then I started thinking, well damn, maybe I thought I wanna be an astronomer. So we started this little club and I was teaching astronomy to, you know the, the kids in our group and then there's this other brother, tall brother, I can't think of his name right now, got he was a really smart guy, he was into math, so he did math. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: And then this guy Denny Mar, who was a Chinese guy, who lived down on Dover Street, he taught chemistry, so we'd come together and actually con-concoct all these quizzes-- Speaker 2: Where did you do, where'd you do that, at the South End House (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: No, we were different, in our homes. Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: You know, my mother [Louise Guyton] brought me a telescope and I had it on, on the roof on the fifth floor. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: And then we'd go down to Denny's house and, on--and that was great because at that point, there was no racial animosity, you know, here we are going to a Chinese person's house, his mother was always nice, Denny would come to our house and--so that was really, really great. And then the brother who was teaching the math, ahhhhh, God I can't remember his name. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: I can see his face, he, he went into the Nation of Islam, and I remember maybe, God, I think this was after I'd come from college, my sister Olivia was teaching--a counselor out at [Massachusetts Correctional Institution-Cedar Junction] Walpole [Massachusetts], and she invited us out for Christmas celebration, so I went out. So, I'm sitting in the audience, the brother's up on the stage-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: --Doing the thing in the prison, and I look to my right and I see this guy, David Young was his name, I see this guy and I said, damn, that's David Young, I hadn't seen him since I was a kid, you know, out of eighth grade, and I said, "Damn, I don't remember him coming in with us, maybe he came in before we got here or something," right, to see the, what's up? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: I said, "Hey David, man." He said, "Hey 'T,' what's up man?" And then he comes over, I said, "Man, you, you didn't come in with us did you?" He said, "Nah, man." And I looked and he had on like a white shirt and blue pants, like all the other prisoners, I said, "Damn, man, what you doing in here man?" He said that he was in for manslaughter. I said, what happened? He said that he was like going to [Washington] D.C., he was in the Nation of Islam, he was under a lot of pressure, he came in one day and got in a big beef with his wife, he reached up and grabs his gun, kills her, right? So, he got ten years in the slammer for manslaughter. And then after he finished his time he got out, 'cause I was working at UMass [University of Massachusetts, Amherst, Massachusetts] at the time, as affirmative action officer and he came by UMass and he actually took some classes at UMass, so I think he may have eventually graduated from, from UMass, but he was guy who, as a kid, you know, he was very good in math and he was part of our club and then he went down a path that, that thank God, I never went down and-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: --You know, but it's amazing when you playing with someone as a kid, you never imagined that something-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: --Like that would happen you know? Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Story_ID: 130668 Speaker 1: Was any science being taught at the [Charles E.] Mackey School [Boston, Massachusetts]? You were doing your own thing on the side, was there, were there any formal instruction in science? Speaker 2: Not that I remember. I don't remember anything, 'cause I should remember it, because since I was interested in science-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --Then, you know, I would say, no. Speaker 1: Um-hum. You said you went on to English High School [Boston, Massachusetts]? Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: Um-hum. You spend your entire high school years there? Speaker 2: No, I spent two years there, I went to the ninth grade which was up near Eggleston Station, School Street, then I went to second year to Louis Pasteur Avenue. And that was a real trip because, essentially there was no education going on there. Speaker 1: What year was this now? This would've been your freshman or sophomore? Speaker 2: This would be 1962, '63 [1963]? Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No education going on at all. Teachers not teaching, you know, students not going to class, cutting up in class, the whole thing. But I remember I had this teacher named Mr. Giarputo, he supposedly would, was teaching French, which he never did and he would like leave the classroom and soon as he would leave the classroom, all the kids would start raising hell, you know, and since I was a quiet black, you know, they be like me, beating on me and shit, right? So, so I finally I went to Mr. Giarputo, I said, "Hey Mr. Giarputo man, I know you don't give any tests, I know you give the Chinese kids, As, you give the white kids Bs, you give the quiet blacks like me Cs and you give all the rowdy blacks Ds and Fs." I said, "You know, I think I might wanna go to college, man, can you just give me a B?" Like that, right? He said, "I'll think about it," and then when the grade came, I still had the C. Speaker 1: Um-hum. How would you, how'd you spell his last name, do you recall? Speaker 2: G--yeah, G, G-I-A-R-P-U-T-O, Giarputo. Speaker 1: Thank you. Speaker 2: Yeah. So then I was still going by the South End House, right? A lot and one day, I was coming out of the South End house, Mel King [HM Melvin King] was the director. So, Mel said, "Hey kid, how would you like to go to college?" So, I'll never forget that. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: I was coming down the si--I look up and there's Mel and I go in and he tells me about the ABC Program, A Better Chance. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: So, I said ok cool. So, I went to the ABC Program, I was the first, one of the first fifty, so I was at pioneer class, that first class for the ABC Program. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: Where we went to Dartmouth College [Hanover, New Hampshire] for the summer and then from there, they sent us to private schools. I had choices about the private schools I wanted to go to, that they were gonna send me, but one of the options was Commonwealth School in Boston [Massachusetts], so I said, "I wanna go to the Commonwealth School," 'cause I didn't wanna go away from home, you know, I didn't wanna leave my mother [Louise Guyton]. Speaker 1: You could walk there, you could walk there. Speaker 2: Oh yeah, and take the ss--subway or bus or whatever and at that point we were living in the projects in Orchard Park, we had moved from the South End to the projects which was another major turning point, because I never realized we were that poor. I knew my mother was working various jobs but, you know, you didn't really get a sense of it you know. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: How tough, but then when she said, "We're moving." And then I said, "Moving where, to the projects?" Then I'd been in Boston long enough to know that if you're living in the projects, that ain't cool, you know? Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: I mean, you're like at the bottom of barrel, (laughter) so, so we moved into the projects and some of my buddies from the South End were coming to visit me right? You know, we were just sorta hanging out, meeting the local kids in the projects. So, one day, we were sitting on the steps, me and my boy Timothy McCurry [ph.], and we could hear the, the door at the end of the hallway, the other side open, you know, just bang, your metal doors, you hear the footsteps coming down, so I got ready to scoot over so the person can go by, guy said, "Which one of you is Cecil?" I said, "Right here." He said, "I heard you been fucking with Phyllis." I said, "I ain't been fucking with Phyllis, I been talking to her." He said, "If you fuck with Phyllis, I'll stab you, if I don't stab you, I'll shoot 'cha, if I don't shoot 'cha, I'll break you in two with my bare hands." I said, "Hey man, if Phyllis is your woman, I won't say another word to her," you know, so that was really the initiation into the projects man, you know? Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: At that point, then I said, "Shit, man, I gotta worry about staying alive." Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: And then I had to walk through the projects to get to Dudley Station [Dudley Square Massachusets Bay Transporation Authority (MBTA) bus station]. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: And I'm terrified as I walk through the projects, I don't wanna run into this cat man, he gon' jack me up on "GP", you know? On general principal, so, we were, we moved into the projects, but then Mel, said to me, "Hey kid how about going to college," and so, I went to Dartmouth and I came back and went to Commonwealth School. Story_ID: 130669 Speaker 1: So you were talking about this experience in Orchard Park [housing project, Boston, Massachusetts] and finding your way safely to-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: --Dudley Street Station [Dudley Square Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority (MBTA) bus station]-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: --Other parts of the community [in Boston, Massachusetts], did you want to continue with any of that experience? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Yeah, it was, you know, it was a tough, tough time, living in the projects and particularly Orchard Park Projects, but then when I went to, when I got accepted to Commonwealth School [Boston, Massachusetts], then I had to--I did the first year, I did the tenth grade at Commonwealth School, and then at the end of the first year, I think I had like a C, C+ average, and the headmaster, Charles [E.] Merrill [Jr.], came to me and said, "Hey, you know, you've worked hard b--but, you know, you really haven't really caught up to where the rest of the kids are." Because the school was a school where Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] professors sent their kids, you know, so the [Fred Lawrence] Whipple, an astronomer, in astronomy sent his daughter there, Charles [H.] Towns at MIT invented the laser [sic, invented maser], I mean it was, [historian] Oscar Handlin's daughter was there, I mean it was like the intellectual high school in Boston. Speaker 1: How did you happen to go to Commonwealth, what was the decision process as opposed to another ABC [A Better Chance] school? Speaker 2: Yeah, well they gave me options, they said, well, they gave me three choices, I think one was like, [Phillips] Exeter [Academy, Exeter, New Hampshire], Groton [School, Groton, Massachusetts] and Commonwealth. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: So I said Commonwealth, because I didn't know what Commonwealth was like, but it was in Boston-- Speaker 1: It was home. Speaker 2: --It was home and I didn't wanna leave my mother [Louise Guyton], you know? Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: So, but it turned out that, that was the best thing that could've happened to me. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: Because it meant that I was exposed to a very rigorous academic experience, but I was, continued to be rooted in my community and involved in my community. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: And that really has, really made the difference. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: 'Cause I'd, I've met some of those ABC students who went to Choate and Exeter and places like that and those guys are like chocolate-covered white boys, you know? A lot of 'em, I mean they dress like white boys, you know, they talk like white boys, they're not involved in the black community, and, and that's not me. I mean, I'm living here in Cambridge now, because I'm marring my wife [Amy Merrill]. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: But, I'm still very much involved in, in black community of Boston. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: And, you know, people know me and respect me for my involvement. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And I think that had a lot to do with going to Commonwealth and living in the black community. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: The other important thing was to meet Charles Merrill, who was the founder of the school. He was an extraordinary person, you know, for fifteen years he was chairman of the board at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia], he's given a lot of money to Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia], he, Margaret Walker, and the woman who children's-- Speaker 1: (Unclear) Speaker 2: [HM] Marian Wright Edelman. Speaker 1: Edelman. Speaker 2: All of them, Alice Walker's one, Alice Walker-- Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: --Alice Walker is a good friend of his, he funded her to go to Paris [France] when she was at Spelman-- Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: --Before she went to Sarah Lawrence [College, Yonkers, New York]. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: Marian Wright Edelman, continues to be a good friend, he's a supporter, so you see he's been a great supporter of black education. Speaker 1: Is he still living? Speaker 2: Yeah, he's about eighty to eighty-six years old. Speaker 1: What was the source of his, his wealth, I mean he was? Speaker 2: His father started Merrill Lynch [& Co., Inc., later acquired by Bank of America] Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, so he used--so for me that was great because it, it showed me a guy who had money but he used his money in a-- Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: --Very progressive way, in terms of black education. Speaker 1: Okay, mm-hmm. Story_ID: 130670 Speaker 1: So you had a good ride through Commonwealth [School, Boston, Massachusetts] then? Speaker 2: It was great. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: It was really great. I really met a lot of good white people quote--unquote, first time I met sorta good white people. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: You know, first real exposure to white people. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: I felt as if I was accepted, I would go to their parties in their homes in Cambridge [Massachusetts] and Belmont [Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: I would bring some of my classmates to the projects, you know, I did a play called 'Coffee and Sour Cream' that I wrote and we had Commonwealth-- Speaker 1: While you were at Commonwealth? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So you were playwriting, which we're gonna talk about later. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Actually started in high school. Speaker 2: High School, yeah. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. So I did 'Coffee and Sour Cream,' and they--'Coffee and Sour Cream' was the first high school written play to be produced to the Loeb Theater [American Repertory Theater (A.R.T)] in Cambridge, so my classmates there were involved in the play and so it was a really good experience for me to-- Speaker 1: How did you come into playwriting at this age in high school? Speaker 2: --You know, it was because of, of a organization that we founded in the South End called Teenage Action Group, TAG, and we were a group of kids who just came together to do something positive, you know we were just getting together, you know, talking, having dances, a lot of parties and stuff, and then we started to write one afternoon and, and we started to write this, this idea of this 'Coffee and Sour Cream' and the black struggle that was going on, and so, so I finished that, that was the first play that I did. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: And then that was done at the Loeb Theater. Speaker 1: Mm-- Story_ID: 130671 Speaker 1: Now we're right at the central point so to speak of the modern Civil Rights Movement. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Started in the '50s [1950s], and went through the '60s [1960s], and here you are-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --In high school at a private school-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --During the Civil Rights Movement. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: How did the movement influence and affect you as a young youth? Speaker 2: Well we were in '68 [1968], that's when Dr. [Martin Luther] King was assassinated, there's major riots that were going on in Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts] at the time. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: So I remember we, meaning the members of TAG [Teenage Action Group], by that time, I had gone, I had started at, at Bowdoin [College, Brunswick, Maine], 'til I finished my freshman year and then I'd come back down, 'cause I stayed in touch with Teenage Action Group folks, and I remember we, we all got together, well we all went out into the (unclear), just different places and then later on that evening, we came back down to the Bridge [Fund, Inc.], which is where we had our meetings on, on Mass [Massachusetts] Avenue, the person who ran it then was Alan Clarke, you know Alan Clarke? Speaker 1: I remember him. Speaker 2: Yeah, Alan Clarke ran the Bridge. Speaker 1: It was on the right-hand side. Speaker 2: Right-hand side, yeah. And, so we're talking about our experiences at the riots and then this, this--one of the brothers came in and he was like, you know, knocked on his head and everything, Jimmy McIntyre was his name, Jimmy was a very quiet brother, you know, sorta smart, very quiet, you know, didn't, wasn't very good with the girls, you know but, nice guy, you know? A lot of us we were like fast talking and we could always get the,-- Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: --The best girls, Jimmy he always sorta sat around and couldn't, couldn't rap, you know? Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: So Jimmy, you know he had knots all in his head and stuff, so we said, "Damn Jimmy what happened man?" He said, he was up on Blue Hill Avenue, police officer pushed him and said, "Hey, keep--move on." And so Jimmy said, "Officer I--I was gonna move on but you didn't have to push me, like that right?" And so then the cops took him and put him in the car drove him around the block, kicked his butt-- Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: --And dumped him in the alley, you know? Story_ID: 130672 Speaker 1: So, that was in, that was in '68 [1968], and then, then I went to Bowdoin College [Brunswick, Maine], I started at Bowdoin in '67 [1967], and I applied to two, two colleges, I applied to Bowdoin and I applied to Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey], and when I--I went--actually, I wasn't gonna apply to Bowdoin, I went up there for an interview with another friend from Commonwealth [School, Boston, Massachusetts], and an while there, you know, I, so I decided I'd just have an interview too. So, I had the interview and soon as I got back to Boston, the admissions office had called the headmaster and said they wanted me, then they gave me a full ride in terms of scholarship right? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: So, Mr. Merrill [Charles E. Merrill, Jr.] said, "Well you know Bowdoin's a fine school, you worked hard, they've given you, you know a full ride,"-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: --"You should take it." And I said well, "I wanna--I wanna wait see what's gonna happen with Princeton." And he said, "You know I think you should, you know go to Bowdoin 'cause it's smaller and more nurturing," and-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: --That so, so I said okay, so I accepted Bowdoin and then three weeks later, actually I had an interview at Princeton too. Three weeks later I got the admission to Princeton, but at that point I had decided to go to, to Bowdoin and that was the best thing that I could have done. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: I mean that was a great experience. Story_ID: 130673 Speaker 1: As you graduated from Commonwealth [School, Boston, Massachusetts] entered Bowdoin College [Brunswick, Maine], did you have any notions or clues as to what you wanted to prepare yourself for as an adult? Did you have any professional thoughts about what you wanted to be at that age? Speaker 2: Yeah, I wanted to be an astronomer and I told Mr. Merrill [Charles E. Merrill, Jr.], I said, you know, I wanna study science when I get to Bowdoin. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: And he said to me, he said look here Robert, you know you've taken our science classes here, you, you haven't done very well, you've very good in history and English, you should probably look at history like that so, I always--his, his advice has always been good-- Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: --So I said fine, I did, but when I got to Bowdoin, I took Biology One, too 'cause I wanted to just see-- Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: --You know, but then, the problem was that it was during the Civil Rights Movement and while I didn't mind going to the classes in the day, to go to the labs in the afternoon when everybody else was demonstrating against the [Vietnam] War and everything-- Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: --And I'm in a, and I'm in lab, you know the lab can go on forever you know? Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: So I said, nah, man this ain't my thing, so then I got out, gave up the science stuff and I was--and then the first year I took a class from Professor Rentinbrine [ph.] on African politics and that was great, I mean it just opened my eyes to this world of Africa-- Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: --And African politics, and then I took a class from Professor [Daniel] Levine, in African American history and I said wow. Speaker 1: What are these, new courses? Or had they been there, because we're talking-- Speaker 2: They've been there. Speaker 1: They had been there? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah they've been there. So, Professor Levine and Professor Rentinbrine, and so then I knew that, that's the direction I was gonna go in, there was gonna be some Africa, Afro-American kind of connection to where I was going intellectually. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: But. Speaker 1: Looking back over the four years at Bowdoin, how did you feel when you graduated? You were ab--it was good experience but were there any bumps along the way at Bowdoin? I mean special things that happened to you then that were turning places? Speaker 2: Well we did a lot of organizing. I was the first president of the Afro Am Society, we got the college to give us a building and it was named, we named it the John Brown Russwurm Building, after John Brown Russwurm graduated in 1826 from Bowdoin, African American [Jamaican]. We had some demonstrations because the college had committed itself to having eighty-five blacks on campus by 1970, and at that time it was about nine hundred men on the college, it was all men in the school and then, they, they had started to have a number of blacks come into the college so we had a critical number at the college and I'll never forget we had this meeting at the Afro Am House and Professor, I mean Mr. [Wolcott A.] Hokanson who was the vice p-VP [vice president] for administration finance, he came to sorta explain to us why the college could not financially pay for eighty-five blacks by 1970. And he had this blackboard and he was putting numbers on the board and then there was this brother named Matthew Hunter from South Carolina, it starts with an "S" in South Carolina, what's that place in South Carolina, anyway,-- Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: --So Matthew Hunter he started laughing, Hokenson was on the board, putting some--Matthew started laughing out loud right? And I'm the president of the AAm [Afro Am Society], so I say, "Matt man, you know, what's up man, you know? So I say, give the cat some respect." Matt said, "Bob man, this white boy got a nerve to come in here, a rich college like this and try to tell us that he--they don't have the money to pay to have us here, when they made their commitment, he said that's a insult to my integrity as a man, I ain't gon' listen to bullshit," like that, right? (Laughter) so then, so then Hokanson man, he got his stuff up and left you know? Speaker 1: Um-hum. Did he say anything? Speaker 2: He didn't say nothing. So then we had this demonstration, right? We got these bricks and then we piled them on the front of the student union. Each brother took a brick and marched all the way to the administration building and we piled the bricks up there in a pyramid and then we had a little sign put at the top pyramid and the sign said, "No more water, fire next time," right? That was one thing we did. The other thing we did is that we didn't, we didn't talk in any of the classes, and in the cafeteria, we didn't talk and which was amazing 'cause the cafeteria, everybody's talking right? Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: All the brothers is sitting there, you know and you wanna pass some salt, you say, (gesture) we'd be in class, professors would call on us, we wouldn't say anything, so then the faculty called a faculty meeting and said, you know, "What's up with the black students?" And then they had the administration come in and you know they told 'em that they're upset because it's supposed to have eighty-five blacks by 1970. Faculty voted that they should, administration should live up to its commitment. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: And so, they did and so we had eighty-five blacks by 1970. So that was good in the sense that we didn't really have to take over buildings, but we were able to, because it was a small enough community, we were able to make it clear that we were there and that we, we wanted the college, even though it was in Maine-- Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: --To be responsive to the issues in the urban communities. Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Story_ID: 130674 Speaker 1: Bowdoin College [Brunswick, Maine], you graduated in what year? Speaker 2: I graduated in 1971. Speaker 1: '71 [1971] from Bowdoin College. What came next in your life? Speaker 2: Then I got a Thomas J. Watson Fellowship, and I applied for the fellowship because I wanted to write plays, I wanted to live in England and in Africa and then write plays on the various experiences. Speaker 1: Did you write any plays at Bowdoin by the way? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I wrote a play called 'Mama's Boy'-- Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: --Which was done at Bowdoin, 'Coffee and Sour Cream' was done at Bowdoin and then I wrote a play called 'Scag' which was done at Bowdoin. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: You know, 'Scag' was about heroin coming into the black communities in the '70s [1970s], and its destructive role on the black liberation movement. Speaker 1: Um-hum. So you applied for the fellowship then-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --To have an opportunity to do-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --Some playwriting. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Tell us about that. Was it a one- or two-year fellowship? Speaker 2: It was a one-year fellowship. They give you a chunk of money, at that time it was eight thousand dollars, you make your own arrangements of where you're gonna go, all your travel arrangements, your living arrangements and I had a son at the time with my first wife, and so we went to East Africa, and while in East Africa, I realized that, I ran into a lot of African Americans who had left the United States and gone there to live right? Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: And so I wrote the fellowship, I said, and then when I got there, I went to the Kenya, we were in Kenya the, most of the time and Nairobi [Kenya]. I went to the Kenya National Theater 'cause there was a play by Robert Serumaga, and while there I met Tyrus Gathhtwe, who's the administrator of the theater, you know, I told him I was a playwright and, and there, so anyway he agreed to produce my play, 'Mama's Boy.' So, I wrote the fellowship and said, "Well my play is being done in the Kenya National Theater, I really don't wanna write any plays, what I would like to do is to interview African Americans who had left the United States and are now in East Africa." And I wanted to interview them in Kenya, I wanna go to Tanzania, and I wanna go to Ethiopia and Uganda, so the head of the foundation came through and I met with him and they, they approved that. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: So then I started to shift what I was doing and I really did interview people, and we traveled to the four countries and I used those interviews later on in a book that was called, 'Why Blacks Left America for Africa,' 1971 through, I think it was 2000, 'cause I interviewed some other people. Speaker 1: Now that's a recent publication isn't it, fairly recent? Speaker 2: Yeah, I think so, yeah. Speaker 1: So that was the genesis of that (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, that was the genesis of that book, you know. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: The, the time-- Speaker 1: So, you, so you didn't write any plays then? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: --No plays. But the time in East Africa was great, it was my second in Africa, I was in, in Nigeria in 1968, and I noticed there was some African Americans living there, you know, and so that's when I went to East Africa in '71 [1971], and then I said--wow, African Americans here and they were in West Africa-- Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: --You know, somebody needs to do this, and it's gonna be me you know? Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: To interview them and to write something, so that's, that's what I did-- Story_ID: 130675 Speaker 1: -(Unclear). Speaker 2: How old was your son who, who accompanied you on the trip? Speaker 1: He was about two years old. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Yeah, he was, we carried him around a lot. Speaker 2: Um-hum, what is your son's name? Speaker 1: Gary, Gary Weldon Johnson. Speaker 2: Okay and when was he born? Speaker 1: 1970? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: 1970, August 21, 1970. Speaker 2: That's my birthday. Speaker 1: Oh really? Speaker 2: (Unclear) Speaker 1: (Laughter), Yeah. Speaker 2: And where is Gary today? Speaker 1: He's in Boston [Massachusetts]. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Yeah, he, he lives in Boston, he lives in Hyde Park. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: I bought him a condo and he's, he's there. He's going to school, he's at North Bennett Street School [Boston, Massachusetts]-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: --Studying locksmith. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: Okay, so you had the Watson Fellowship for a year in Africa? Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: What came next in your life, professor? Speaker 1: So when I left, East Africa, what I was gonna do, was go to law school, 'cause I had gotten accepted to Cornell Law School [Ithaca, New York], before I went to Africa, and actually I applied to the pul--the school I wanna go to is Yale [Law School, New Haven, Connecticut], because Yale was small, it was progressive, I got rejected at Yale and got on the waiting list at Harvard [Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and I got accepted at Cornell so, I deferred my admission to Cornell for the year, then after doing the fellowship, having my play produced and doing the work, I figured this would be enough to get me off the waiting list at Harvard. So then I let them know what I was doing, still didn't get to get me off the waiting list. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: I think the problem is that my scores were not very good. Speaker 2: Um-hum. But why did you make the decision that you wanted to go to law school? Speaker 1: Oh, that's a good question. It was at the last minute in, in college, because in college [Bowdoin College, Brunswick, Maine], I really wanted--my senior year I wanted to go to divinity school, because--not because I wanted to be a preacher. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: But because I had taken a lot of religious philosophy courses at Bowdoin, really great professors, you know, and I'd read all the stuff, you know, [Soren] Kierkegaard, and Paul Tillich and [HM] James [H.] Cone, systematic theology. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: And, because I grew up in a religious family, this sort of intellectual approach to religion was very palatable to me, you know, I felt, wow, this is gonna help me to sort of, you understand. And then I'd taken a course in Buddhism and Hinduism and I was really, so that's, that's, but then, at the last minute I said, well, if I get this degree in religion, the only thing I can do is teach. If I go law school, then I'll have a skill that I can use to bring about social change, you know? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: So, I said okay cool, so I'm gonna go to law school. So, when I came back from the Watson Fellowship, I was gonna go to Cornell, get a degree in international law, and I was gonna come back to Africa to live. I was just gonna give up U. S. citizenship. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Because Africa was thoroughly fulfilling to me, you know, I felt great being in the majority. I remember I was in the queue at the post office and this British dude just cut into line right? The whole line of Africans waiting to buy stamps, he just cut in line, in front of me, right? He didn't know I was an African American, so I said, "Motherfucker, if you don't get out in front of me, I'm gon' kick your ass," like that right? He said, "Oh, oh, oh, pardon me sir, pardon me." I said, "Yeah, pardon your ass to the back of the line," you know, like that, right. But it was that such that, okay, you're in the majority-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: --You know, this is African land and this is where I wanted to be, and then I got to Cornell and of course, Cornell was very active in all kinds of demonstrations on campus, taking over buildings and also the [1971] Attica [Prison Riot] defense trials had begun and so I met [W.] Haywood Burns, who was the dean of the law school at Buffalo [sic, City University of New York (CUNY)] and one of the lead council for the Attica defense. So, I started to work on the Attica defense trials with Haywood and [HM] Howard Moore [Jr.] from California, he was coming in to the trials and, and then I started a prison program out at Auburn Prison [Auburn Correctional Facility, Auburn, New York] where we would be going out and teaching African American history to the brothers and H. Rap Brown was out there at the time in Auburn. Speaker 2: But you weren't yet in law school? Speaker 1: It's after I went to law school. Speaker 2: This is after? Speaker 1: Yeah, after I left Africa, then I went to law school. Story_ID: 130676 Speaker 1: Didn't you have some other master's degree work for? Speaker 2: Oh, I did that while I was in law school, it was a joint. Speaker 1: Oh, I see. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I see, I see. Speaker 2: Yeah, I did the joint program of the law degree and the master's in Africana Studies [at Cornell University, Ithaca, New York]. Speaker 1: I see-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Concurrently. Speaker 2: Concurrently, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, I--and it was something I, that I'd organized 'cause I knew James Turner was there. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: I knew I wanted to come back to Africa, so it was a natural for me to tie into the Africana Studies Department. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: So, so once I got involved with all that, you know, with the Attica trials and the prison stuff, then I--and then the students on campus were taking over buildings and then we were trying to get them legal representation. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: And actually man, we, we actually, we won this really important legal battle against Cornell, because the students had taken over the building because Jame--David Knapp [ph.], who was the provost, who later came to Boston [Massachusetts], became the president of the UMass [University of Massachusetts] system, David Knapp. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: Fascist dude, so he's at Cornell, the students take over the building because he's gonna fire the brother who's the assistant director of admission and the brother who's the assistant director of financial aid, these brothers were like good brothers, man they were like if you need financial assistance man, they'd help you out, you know? Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: These were--they were down with the folks, right? So students who go to the building, undergraduates, David Knapp has them arrested, he goes in the court and gets an order that students can't congregate, so many students, no more than five on corners and all this kinda stuff. So then there was this big meeting of students, so I went there with some of the law students and these undergraduates saying, "Yeah man we all should just go downtown and all get arrested," you know, "Let's tear this mother apart," you know. And I stood up and I said, "Hey, look here," you know, "Y'all here to get a degree and you get a degree and you can go back to your communities and do some good things. We just fight this, right? We're gonna fight it legally." So then we went to, I went to some of the brothers in the law school and I said, hey we need to get some legal assistance for these brothers who've been arrested, you know? And they went around to some of the law professors, I was with 'em and I didn't say nothing 'cause I didn't think these law professors was gonna take the case, right? Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: So, the last person said we'll go to someone downtown, so we go to this woman downtown she turns on to this guy, he said, "Okay, I'll do it, but you all gotta do all the research," the legal research, we said fine, so we did all the legal research on liberty issues, you know, standing on corners-- Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: --And violations and all that stuff. But the thing is, there was this huge trial, man the students marched from the campus from on top of the hill all the way downtown, black students, white students, the whole campus came to a standstill and then I was inside of the court with the lawyers right? And our lawyers made their case about the, the order was unconstitutional, the, the judge threw out he order, the prior order, released the students, so then we came outside of the, the court and these steps right? Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: Doors open, we come out, we go like that, all the students go, ahhhhh, ahhhhh, so you know, I was involved in that kind of stuff right? Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: So then, as I increasingly got involved with that, then I started to lose this notion I was gonna leave and go to Africa. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: Because it was clear there was a lot of work here and that I could, you know, be of some help here. Story_ID: 130677 Speaker 1: Would you go back and tell me about the Attica [Prison] riot [Attica, New York] and, and what that was so that the viewers-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Who are young will understand that. Speaker 2: All right. Well, this was a situation where the inmates were protesting the living conditions in, in the prison. I mean the food had roaches-- Speaker 1: This a federal or state prison? Speaker 2: This is state, the state penitentiary. Speaker 1: State penitentiary. Speaker 2: Attica, Attica Prison in upstate New York, Attica, New York. Maximum-security prison, and so they were protesting living conditions there and they decided to seize some hostages, right? To say, "Hey, you know, you all gotta listen to us, you know, we're up here dying, either you're gonna do something" dah, dah, da. And then Nelson Rockefeller was then the governor, and there was a team, a negotiating team that went in, but the negotiating team came out and said to the governor, "These are the demands." And demands were very clear, you know, we want good food, you know, we don't want caviar, but we want food that doesn't have roaches and stuff in it, and instead of addressing the, the, the grievances, he sent in the state police, and so the state police went in, they went in with hunting rifles, Dumdum [expanding] bullets, bullets that had been outlawed by Geneva Convention [sic, outlawed by the Hague Convention of 1899 for use in war] and they literally went in and shot and killed thirty-eight of, thirty-eight of the inmates. And there were a couple of hostages that got killed. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: And then after this happened, Rockefeller decided to indict the inmates for the killing, even though the, the police had done the killing. And so they got indicted and so there was these legal defense that was pulled, pulled together-- Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: --To, to represent them. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: And, [W.] Haywood Burns was the, the head attorney, he was in Buffalo, which was maybe a two hour drive from Cornell [University, Ithaca, New York], and [HM] Howard Moore [Jr.], he was from California-- Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: --He was involved, a sister named Shayna Gilbert [ph.], she was from Syracuse [University College of Law, Syracuse, New York]-- Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: --The law school, she was involved and then, and then we got involved, me and two other brothers and we were helping doing the research. And then some of the guys, Big Black [Frank Smith], he got out, he came to Cornell, and then we had a conference there in Cornell at the law school where we brought Haywood Burns and Howard Moore, and there were not champ--a guy, brother named Champ, he was out, brought him there. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: So, some of the trials, some of, some of the trials, most of 'em resulted in not guilty against the, the inmates. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And there was a civil lawsuit brought as well-- Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: --And Big Black, maybe five years ago, his case was finally resolved and I think he got something like three million dollars, or something. Story_ID: 130678 Speaker 1: So professor you were awarded your Doctor of Laws [J.D.] degree from Cornell Law School [Ithaca, New York] in 1977? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And what came next? Speaker 2: Well I, I got my master's in 1975, so I got the master's in '75 [1975], and '77 [1977], I got the law degree and then I moved to Boston [Massachusetts]. We moved to Mattapan in Boston, we bought a house there for $28 thousand, nice old Victorian house, huge yard, about fifteen fruit trees, and started to raise a family. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: In, in terms of--I was married to Renda [ph.] Johnson, or Renda Harriston [ph.] was her maiden name and we had two children, my daughter was born in Ithaca, New York, Anika Johnson, so, two kids, Gary and Anika. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: One of the first things I had to decide is their schooling and I did not want them to go to the public schools, 'cause the public schools were terrible and I saw what education had meant for me and so I sent them to private schools. My daughter went to the Advent School [Boston, Massachusetts] and then the Beaver Country Day School [Chestnut Hill, Massachusetts] and then my son went to Chestnut Hill School [Chestnut Hill, Massachusetts], and I forgot the other school he went to. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: And then I started to work at Massachusetts Board of Regional Community Colleges as affirmative action officer, and, and I wanted a job that would have an influence in the black community and bring about some kinda social change. So, I met Alan Jackson, I knew Alan Jackson, Alan Jackson put me in touch with Betty Johnson, Betty Johnson was on the board of directors for the Mass Board of Regional Community Colleges [Massachusetts Board of Regional Community Colleges], there was a brother who was chairman of the board, I can't recall his name, Pat--Patrick Jones from Lena Park [Boston, Massachusetts], he was on the board, he was head of the committee, personnel committee but he was head of the affirmative action committee. So I met with Betty, and Betty said, "Robert, with your legal background, we can do some really good stuff in the community colleges," so I said fine, so I came and, and worked there which was great because we set up the policies for the community colleges, and the policies were very explicit. Everyone, every professional position had to be signed off in the, in the central office, I reviewed all--everything that came through and I remember in Massasoit Community College--no, at Mass Bay Community College [Massachusetts Bay Community College, Wellesley, Framingham, and Ashland, Massachusetts] they were looking for a dean of faculty and there was a brother who had applied, he was from some community college in New Jersey and they didn't recommend him, they recommended a white person, now we'd, we'd setup these procedures where they had to set forth the reason why a black person was not give- being recommended. So, the reason they put was that he couldn't communicate well, so I went to Betty, I called Betty, I said, "Betty, you know I got this thing here, you know this position and there's a brother who applied and, you know, they say he can't communicate, I said I wanna hold it up." And she said, "Yeah Bob, I'm with you, you know tell the president that, you know you're gonna hold it up." So we held it up and we said to them, brought 'em in the president of the college came into the central office, and we said, "What's this here, you know, about this guy can't communicate?" I mean here's a guy who was the dean of the faculty and of a school in New Jersey. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: He did well, all of his references are well, no problem with communication, he has a Ph.D. [degree], from a major university, he had to defend his dissertation, he's been teaching, excellent teaching records, and you're saying he can't communicate. So, we said, we're not gonna sign off on it. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: And the president told the president of the college you better go back and bring the brother in, which is what he did, so we did that kinda stuff-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --As a result, we integrated the community colleges-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --In the state. Story_ID: 130679 Speaker 1: And then I was there [Massachusetts Board of Regional Community Colleges] for about a year and a half and then from there I went to UMass Boston [University of Massachusetts, Boston, Massachusetts], where I was the affirmative action officer there under Robert Corrigan, and, and there we developed affirmative action policies again and rigorously im--implemented these, these polices. As a result, we brought in more black professors then the history, in the history of UMass Boston. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Do you, are UMass Boston that was Columbia Point--Harbor Point-- Speaker 1: Yeah, they left Harbor-- Speaker 2: Harbor Point? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Harbor Point? Speaker 1: That's right, yeah [sic. Columbia Point]. Speaker 2: Um-hm, okay. Speaker 1: So I did that. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And then I left and went to Bentley College [Waltham, Massachusetts, later Bentley University] and taught two years full-time business law and then after teaching there for two years, then I left and started to practice full time with, with [HM] Eddie Jenkins [Jr.] as my, as my law partner. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Yeah, I think we did that for maybe about ten years or so. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Until I had a heart attack in, let's see, I had the heart attack in 1990, I think it was '92 [1992]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. What type of law did you practice, or what special areas of law? Speaker 1: I did-- Speaker 2: Or were you a generalist? Speaker 1: --I did employment discrimination and criminal law. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: You know, I did a lot of criminal trials, I did major felonies, Eddie did sort of district court felonies, I did superior court felonies that involved, you know, jail time in the, in the state penitentiaries and stuff. Speaker 2: Um-hm. So you practiced for about ten years roughly? Speaker 1: Yeah, full-time. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And then I started, after I had the heart attack, then I started practicing part-time. Speaker 2: Um-hm, and because of your health did you cut back the (unclear)? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Did you enjoy the law practice? Speaker 1: I loved it. I, I loved it, I loved particularly the trial work, you know,-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --I mean, because it was all sort of dramatic, you know, especially with being a playwright, you know-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --And all the various characters and-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --And I loved the juries and I remember I used to, I used to buy all my suites at Martini and Carl [Martini Carl] on Newbury Street because I figured, you know if you're a black lawyer, when you walk into the joint, you gotta disadvantage being black, you know, they figure you're not as good as everybody else. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So I wanted to at least look good, you know, I wanted to look great. I, I knew that I was well trained and I knew I was smart, you know, but I wanted to sort of minimize those negative factors that, that jurors and everyone else would, woul--that would come to play in the whole process so, I always had these immaculate suits,-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --You know, and I was always well prepared, you know because I found that it was me, my black client-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --And the white world in the court room. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And I was the difference between the brother walking or going to the penitentiary. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So I enjoyed that, that challenge (simultaneous). Speaker 2: Now who-- Story_ID: 130680 Speaker 1: Who was [HM] Eddie Jenkins [Jr.]? Speaker 2: Oh, Eddie was my law partner, he went to Holy Cross [College, Notre Dame, Indiana] undergraduate and then he went to law school at Suffolk [University Law School, Boston, Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: And actually he was in law school with the Supreme Court Justice, Clarence Thomas, and he said Clarence Thomas at the time was an alright dude, you know, he was-- Speaker 1: I didn't know he studied here. Speaker 2: Yeah, he was at Holy Cross. Speaker 1: Oh, Holy Cross, right. Speaker 2: Holy Cross, yeah. Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: He was at Holy Cross with-- Speaker 1: Not law school. Speaker 2: Yeah, and, and then Eddie ran for district attorney twice, Suffolk County [Massachusetts], District Attorney, and I think he may have run for some other public office too. In fact, I ran for public office in 1982, ran against Tommy Finneran [Thomas M. Finneran, D-Suffolk], in Mattapan [Boston, Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: For what position were you? Speaker 2: State representative. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Yeah, and that was the only, I was the only person who ever ran against Tommy Finneran, he subsequently as you know, became Speaker of the House and in a district that was changing. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: And when I ran, I think the district was about 30 percent black, or maybe close to forty percent black-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --But, Tommy still had that Irish group solid league behind him. Speaker 1: Who holds that seat now, is that (unclear)? Speaker 2: Yeah, there's a young woman named Dorsey [sic. Linda Dorcena Forry], Haitian woman she just recently got elected. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Oh so you were living in Matta--Mattapan. Speaker 2: Mattapan, yep. Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause that's where she-- Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: --Okay. As you were practicing law with Eddie Jenkins, what are some of the community organizations and activist positions that you were involved in the community outside of your legal work? Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: What kinds of things were you doing? Speaker 2: All right. I was involved with the Harriet Tubman House [Boston, Massachusetts], which is the oldest social service agency in New England, it's been in existence for about 104 years, 105 years now, and I was involved in youth activities, sort of on committees that supported youth activities. I was also involved with the Citizens Advisory Committee for the redevelopment of the Boston State Hospital site, the Boston State Hospital site is an old hospital site of 175 acres, right in the middle of the black community, and I was appointed to the committee by the Governor [Michael] Dukakis, and our role was to meet with the community to find out what the community, how the community wanted the land to be developed, what kinds of projects they'd like to see there, to--we had to, once the RFPs [requests for proposal] were issued, we had to review the RFPs we had to develop guidelines that developers had to follow and then ultimately we would make recommendations to the state for the disposition of the land. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: So, twenty-five years, I was on that committee and I was chair of the committee, after Frank Bispham passed, and I was elected the chair of the committee and I was involved in a lot of affirmative action organizations, I was president of the Region One of the American Association for Affirmative Action, so all the affirmative action groups in both business, government, local government, non-profits,-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --We were all members of this organization. I was involved in the Black United Front, early on when, Chuck Turner [HM Charles "Chuck" Turner] was the head of it. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: And we were doing a lot of work around police brutality within the Boston area and we were working closely with the Black Panther Party to set up a mechanism for us to monitor po--police encounters with individuals in the community. There was a young brother named Levi Hart, who had been murdered by the police, this is in around '75 [1975], '70 [1970], let's see no it was around let's see I went to law school '67 [1967], so no it was a lot earlier, try '67 [1967], when Levi Hart had been murdered by, by the police which prompted us to setup this community monitoring process. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: And so I was working very closely with the Black Panther Party, some of my good buddies, brother named Eugene was Lieutenant Minister of Information, and lu--Eugene and I always used to have these debates about whether it was revolution that was occurring or whether it was a revolt, and my position was that it was a revolt, he was, it's a revolution and that we had to seize the time and off the pigs and all that. And unfortunately, Gene got, he's in Walpole, now, he got arrested 'cause the police were vamping on the Black Panther Party like every week, you know, they'd just come in and bust it, you know, didn't have any probable cause or anything they just went in, you know to try to disrupt it and-- Story_ID: 130681 Speaker 1: During the time that you were practicing law fulltime-- Speaker 2: --Yeah. Speaker 1: --And all these community activities, were you doing any playwriting that went to the stage during those years? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I was writing. I've always been consistently writing, let's see, I did a play called, 'Coffee and Sour Cream,' no excuse me, 'Stop and Frisk.' Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: And, 'Stop and Frisk' was really an important play for me to do, because on the one hand it was based upon the Boston [Massachusetts] police policy of stopping young black men and searching them, but in a more profound sense it was a very personal kind of thing because my, my son got stopped and beaten up by the police and, and it also led to, he got arrested and led to me getting arrested and, I--so writing the play was very therapeutic. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: What had happened was that in 1991, my son developed a mental illness and which was a very traumatic thing for me 'cause he was living here in Boston with me, his mother [Renda Johnson] was living in California, and no one in our family had ever had mental illness, so when he developed the mental illness, I didn't know what had hap--what was happening, I didn't know if he was on drugs or what, you know. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: But, I--once it was clear, he working at, at the Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], when he had his break and I was in a trial in Boston and the child--trial broke, I called my office to check in with my secretary and she said that we've been trying to reach you, Gary is in Cambridge Hospital and he's had some kinda break down, or something, so then I go to the judge and I say to the judge, "I can't continue the trial, 'cause my son is in the hospital," and as, as I was explaining to the judge what was happening, then I just broke down and start crying in front of the court and then the other lawyer who was my adversary then drove me to Cambridge Hospital right? Which was really nice of him. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: And so I go into Cambridge Hospital and there's my son, you know on a gurney strapped down and, and they said, they told me that he, what his diagnosis was and he needed to be admitted to a mental hospital. So I called Amy [Merrill] and I said, you know, Amy--we weren't married at that point, she was my girlfriend--I said, hey you know, I need that hospital, what do you think, and where should? She said, to McLean's [McLean Hospital, Belmont, Massachusetts] you know, because that's where all the rich kids send, parents send their kids, I said, "If it's good enough for rich folks it's good enough for my son," so we take him out there. But, anyway, which is a mistake. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Because they didn't have much experience or any experience with African American men-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: So all they did was medicated him heavily, right? So, ultimately we found this place in Jamaica Plain called the Arbour Hospital [Arbour Health System, Boston, Massachusetts], they had a lot of people of color there and it was perfect. But anyway, as I was saying, my son got arrested, I had called, I had hired a woman from my mother's [Dorothy Guyton] church [Holy Tabernacle Church, Boston, Massachusetts] to look after him when I was working and I came home, I was in the South End, I came home one evening and there's a police car at the end of the street and I was on the crime committee in my community so I figured okay, let me go see what the cops are up to now, you know? 'Cause I figured some shit had gone down. So, I go down and I look in the back of the car and there's my son so I say to the officer, I say, "What's up? This is my son." They said h--he's arrested and I said, "I wanna talk to him." And he said, "Well you can see him at the police station at South End." I said, "Okay, cool." So, I go back to the house, I tell Martha McClellan [ph.], I said, "Hey, Gary is arrested." She said, "What? He just went to take a walk around the block." I said, "I'm going to the police station." She said, "I'm going with you." So we go to the police station, I go to the cop, I say, "I'm Robert Johnson, I'm a lawyer and I'd like to see my son." He said, "Okay have a seat, and, and you can go see him." I said fine, so I'm walking to the waiting room, I pass a door,-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --I can hear him yelling on the other side of the door. So, I knock on the door, cop opens the door, look in there and there's my son, standing up yelling, ahhhhh, so then I step in to try and calm him down, the cops grab me, throw me through the door on the floor, starts punching me, kicking me, and they jumped me up, take me into, into the place right? And then they start going through my wallet and they find a condom, they throw the condom on the ground, stomps it into the ground, say, "You ain't gonna be needing this were you're going," like that right? So, I said, "What y'all talking about, I come to check on my son" and (unclear) Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Then they find my bar card, and then the cop says to the sergeant, "This guys a lawyer," and then, "What're we gonna charge him with?" And the sergeant says, "We're gonna charge him with two counts of assault and battery of a police officer and trying to rescue a prisoner." So, I said, "Rescue a prisoner? I come here and you all kick my ass and you"--I--re-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: So, th--they arrest me right? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: And I'm locked up for four hours, the first I've ever been arrested, and I'll never forget this, but it was cool, I was down there, I said, and this is how [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] and other folks in the South felt, you know, being locked up. But the thing that was really dehumanizing about it, for the four hours I was down there, the cop had to pass by my cell seems like every fifteen minutes, I guess he was seeing if I was suicidal or some shit, maybe they got some policy, whatever. Every time he'd pass by me I'd say, "How is my son doing?" Motherfucker wouldn't say shit, and I'm sitting there, I'm saying now here I am a father wanna know how my son is doing, taxpayer, a lawyer and he can't even give me the courtesy to say your son is okay or he, he had a breakdown he's now in the hospital. So, for four hours, I didn't know what the hell was happening. Anyway, the next morning we're arraigned in court on these charges and, so I go to trial, I hire Margaret Burnham, who is a former judge, she was on the [HM] Angela Davis trial, she's a first rate lawyer, she's now a professor of law at Northeastern [University, Boston, Massachusetts], she was my lawyer. So we went to trial two days, all of my law partners, friends in the court came, 'cause they knew. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: You know, they knew me from my experience in the court room, but anyway, I was found not guilty, of course, you know, and the judge said to the prosecution that they never should've brought the case, you know? Speaker 1: Um-hm, right. Speaker 2: But anyway, because of that, I, I decided I was gonna write this play, 'Stop and Frisk'-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Which was really therapeutic for me because I was able to sorta put a lot of this in that piece-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: And, that was produced here in Boston and it did quite well. Speaker 1: I think that's the one play of yours that I've seen. Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Speaker 1: Over at the Strand Theater. Speaker 2: At the Strand, right. Speaker 1: I do remember that. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 130682 Speaker 1: -I was gonna ask you, and you started to answer the question, I wanted you to tell me a little bit more about some of your other plays, but before that, where do you get the ideas and the themes for your plays? You explained 'Stop and Frisk.' Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --What about some of the others, you have 'Freedom's Journeyman,' 'Sugar Hill,' 'The Train Ride.' Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Where do you get the ideas-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --For these plays? Speaker 2: Well, 'Freedom's Journeyman,' I was asked by Bowdoin College [Brunswick, Maine] to write an original play on John Brown Russwurm who graduated from Bowdoin, that's part of the bicentennial celebration. So I asked Amy [Merrill] who's also a playwright, she's my wife, to work with me on that and so we researched it and wrote it together, that was 'Freedom's Journeyman,' the other play we wrote together is 'Sugar Hill.' Speaker 1: 'Sugar Hill' Speaker 2: Yeah, we did, yeah. In that one I wanted to write something about the '20s [1920s] and Marcus Garvey and the Harlem Renaissance, and sort of the conflicts between those movements and individuals was in those movements. Most of my plays have some kind of historical base, and some-'The Train Ride,' for example was based upon a real incident in the life of Frank Bispham. Speaker 1: Who was Frank Bispham? Speaker 2: Frank Bispham was the first black from Cambridge [Massachusetts] to be inducted into the [U.S.] Marines in 1943, and he was also the chair of the Citizens Advisory Committee for a long time, and that's how I got the idea for the play. It was in November and we were sitting around waiting for the meeting to start in Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts] and Frank started to talk about Veterans Day and he started to talk about 1943, and, and we all said, wow, that's an amazing story and I asked Frank, I said, hey, can I write this story in a play, play form? He said sure, and so I did that and it was done in Boston. Speaker 1: What happened to him? (Unclear). Speaker 2: Oh what happened? Oh, I see. He was-- Speaker 1: Particularly what happened to Frank? Speaker 2: Yeah. He had been, he was actually drafted into the [U.S.] Navy and he said doc, I don't wanna go to navy 'cause if I go to the navy, I'm only gonna be a cook and I don't wanna be a cook, 'cause they only let black people cook in the navy, he said I wanna go into the marines, and they said nah, you can't go in the marines, they don't let black folks in the marines and, and he insisted and then the guy came back the next day and so okay you can go to the marines so he gets on the train going south with other white marines from Boston and from Cambridge and he's having a good time with them, you know, and then when the train goes below the Mason-Dixon Line, he's told that he has to go into the colored section of the train, and so he of course says, "Colored section of the train? I been with my white buddies all this time, going to fight this war and you say I gotta be segregated on the train?" So, he was forced to go do-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --To go into the colored section of the train, so that's the story that he told, and then I sort of added new characters, I created a love interest, for him, an African-American woman, an elderly woman in the colored section and just sort of developed the play around that. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Do you have another play coming along in the near future? Speaker 2: Yeah, I have two actually. I have one called 'Patience of Nantucket,' which is based upon a real incident in the life of a woman named Patience Cooper, black woman in Nantucket [Massachusetts] in 1860, who was wrongfully convicted of a crime and ultimately goes insane in the asylum in Nantucket, that's gonna be done in Boston, Up You Mighty Race Theater Company, it's gonna produce it, it's gonna be at the Boston Center for the Arts, that's in October. The other play is called 'Mother G,' which is based upon an incident in my mother's [Dorothy Burgan Guyton's] life where a pastor in a church, very charismatic pastor, the church is jumping with membership, he knocks up the choir director, young woman and then the, the older women under the leadership of my mother tried to get him removed from, from his position, so that's what that play's about, it's called mother's, 'Mother G,' and that's gonna have a reading in Boston end of this month. Story_ID: 130683 Speaker 1: I understand that you've spent a lot of time doing photography, as a photographer and indeed a lot of your work has been published. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Tell us about your life as a photographer, is that still going on? Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I take pictures, you know, it's just something I do and I, I like to do and, you know, I've had photographs published in various magazines, in the Boston Globe, Bay State Banner, at the Ithaca New Times [Ithaca, New York], I've had shows here in Boston [Massachusetts], so it's a, it's a real hobby, you know, I don't really, I don't see myself as a professional photographer. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: But, I, I enjoy it. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Restoring old cars, is that still going on? Speaker 2: Yeah. (Laughter), yeah, one is sitting right in front of the house, that, that 1976 BMW, the model number is 2002. Speaker 1: When do you restore these cars? Where do you have-- Speaker 2: Well, I don't actually do the work-- Speaker 1: --Oh, okay. Speaker 2: --I just buy the cars and then I take 'em to-- Speaker 1: --(Unclear) Speaker 2: Nah, I don't do it myself, then I take 'em shops and, and the shops do it, you know, you find people who can do good work. Speaker 1: How many do you have? Speaker 2: Two. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: Yeah, I have the, the, the '76 [1976], BMW and I have a '87 [1987], BMW 325 convertible. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Which has been repainted and now the leather seats are being restored now. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You like to travel also right? And suddenly your trip to Africa with the Watson Fellowship was--and you'd been to Africa once before that-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --But talk about the places, you, do you travel for relaxation but also in conjunction with your academic interest in writing? Tell me about some of your traveling, most exciting things you've done, besides the Africa work. Speaker 2: Well, I think at this point, the most exciting travel stuff, I mean, I've been to Europe many times, and been to Africa, the Caribbean, the most exciting places right now are Vermont, and Jamaica. And, Vermont is really important to me because there's an old farm house, 1830s farmhouse that I own, that I renovated and I also have a 117 acres of land-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --And these incredible views of the White Mountains from the house. So it's a great place to write and to get away, from the stress and strain of the, of the city. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Jamaica is my compromise with Africa. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: You know, rather than going all the way back to Africa, and taking all those shots, and you know, Jamaica is a four-hour flight, it's, it's black, it's--has a lot of the cultural amenities of Africa and I feel very comfortable there. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: You know, I, I fit in, I, I'm a part of the community, I'm engaged in the community, my whole community of Treasure Beach [Jamaica]. Speaker 1: What--I was gonna ask you, what part of, of Jamaica do you have your, your home in where you can stay? Speaker 2: Yeah, it's a little town called Treasure Beach, which is in the southwestern part of the island, it's very quiet, very local, you can really get to know the people, there are not a lot of tourists there, I mean it's alright to have tourists there, but that's not the mainstay of it, the mainstay is that there's just a community of people and it's a very beautiful part, it's nestled between the Caribbean Sea and the [Santa Cruz] Mountains, I can't recall the name of the mountains at this point but, and you know, I, I've been involved in the community. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: I've given money to help put crack addicts in programs where they go to Kingston [Jamaica] and get treatment, I've given money to help rebuild houses, after the hurricanes, I've given money for food, for local people, you know, who need extra money for food and that's been distributed through the churches. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: So, so I have a good reputation in the town. Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Story_ID: 130684 Speaker 1: Mr. HistoryMaker, at the outset of the interview, I asked you to describe your occupation, what you do, you said you were an attorney, you're a playwright, you work in real estate and you said that you are a professor. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And so let's talk about your entree, full time entree into academia. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: That is what you've been doing now for at least ten years. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah at least ten years and it's been very, very satisfying. I've been teaching at the University of Massachusetts-Boston and the University of Massachusetts of Boston is an urban university, the student population is extremely diverse, people from Caribbean, Africa, Eastern Europe, from Western Europe, from South America, it's the most diverse student population in New England. So that was consistent with my commitment to the urban environment, I could never see myself working full-time at other places, I mean I've worked at Wellesley [College, Wellesley, Massachusetts] part-time and I've worked at Brandeis University [Waltham, Massachusetts] part-time, so I have a sense of the kind of students there and then I went to Cornell [Law School, Ithaca, New York] and Bowdoin [College, Brunswick, Maine], so I know the kind of well-prepared students that those institutions--but it was clear to me that wasn't what I wanted to do. I wanted to apply my skills in the urban environment. I wanted to teach students from my background, first-generation college kids, kids who grew up poor and not--I use the term kids, but the average age of students at UMass Boston is something like twenty-eight years old, so these are older students, not traditional students. To work in Africana Studies was pr--great, you know, because that's where my interest is, my interest in Africa and, and in Afro-America, you know, I had taught part-time at Roxbury Community College [Boston, Massachusetts], I'd taught full time at, at Bentley College [Waltham, Massachusetts] and when I decided to come to UMass which, I really wasn't ready to come to UMass because I had--a year before I had, had the heart attack and I was recuperating, but there was a professor in the department at UMass who had a heart attack and died and they asked me to come in and teach his classes, and at first I said, "Well, I'm recuperating, you know, from a heart attack"-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --But then I said, "Well, this is an opportunity," you know? So, I went in and I took over his classes and taught them and then there was a search for the position and I applied, 'cause I did well, I mean I had a lot of teaching experience, and then I had published a lot too. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: I'd published maybe four or five articles before this started, so it wasn't like I was just a, a neophyte in, in, in teaching. And actually when I was in graduate school, I was teaching African History at Ithaca College [Ithaca, New York], part-time, while I was in grad school. So, I mean, I felt comfortable in the, in the classroom. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: So, I went there and as an assistant professor, and went through the processes of evaluation and, and because I had the law degree, that was the appropriate terminal degree for a lawyer, and so I didn't really need a Ph.D. because, you know, I had the master's and I had the appropriate terminal degree of, for, for my profession, and I got evaluated for tenure and I published two books I think before tenure and a number of articles, maybe eight plays-- Story_ID: 130685 Speaker 1: --And-- Speaker 2: What were the two books? Speaker 1: The first one was called 'Shona' and it was, I--I was the second author, I actually did all the, most of the research on the book and I should've been listed as the primary author but I was lit-listed as the secondary author [with Gary van Wyk] on that and that was a historical piece on the Shona people in Zimbabwe. Speaker 2: Would you spell that for us? Speaker 1: S-H-O-N-A Speaker 2: Thank you. Speaker 1: Shona. And that was an important book, it was designed primarily for high school students and it was part of a national anthology of, on African people and they hired scholars to write different books about African people, these very colorful books and so that was the first thing that I coauthored and then the second book was, 'Why Blacks Left America for Africa,' based upon the interviews that I had done in East Africa and in, in West Africa and that was published by Praeger press [Praeger Publishers, division of Greenwood Publishing Group]. So those two books were, were published and so I, they evaluate you for tenure on three levels: teaching, service and scholarship and you have to get excellence in two and strength in the third, and I got excellence in all three, and in fact every level of review from promotion to associate professor to promotion to full professor, I got excellence in all three, I've never gotten anything less than, than an excellent in, in all three. So now I am a full professor and after I got promoted to associate professor, I took a sabbatical and I went to Vanderbilt University in, in Nashville [Tennessee], and I went to Vanderbilt for several reasons, one I wanted to be in Tennessee because where my family is, I figured it'd give me time to go down and visit them and--but while there, I got, I gave two lectures at Vanderbilt, I was attached to the Afro-American Studies department there and I gave two lectures and then I had access to the entire university, computers and libraries and when my wife and I were on our way there, her father Charles [E.] Merrill [Jr.] said that I should contact a man named Reverend Joe Ingle, so he got in contact with Joe Ingle and Joe Ingle has been a pastor on death row in Tennessee, so he invited me to go to death row with him to visit two of the inmates, and he actually wanted me to get involved in the legal part, but I said, "Nah, I don't know Tennessee law," and then, you know, sabbatical and it's just been a lot of work to try to, you know, emotionally to get involved-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --With these cases and, and I just didn't think I was qualified to do it. But anyway, I met these two guys Phillip Workman and a brother named Ndume [Olatushani], or Erskine Johnson and they'd both been on death row, Ndume had been on death row for eighteen years for a crime he didn't commit and so I met with both of them and then I decided I was gonna continue to meet with Ndume and, and I did, I went to see him like every other week on death row, and turned out he was a painter and that's one of his paintings on the wall there and he, he's been painting in order to keep his hope alive and so when I came back to Boston [Massachusetts] I brought about twenty of his paintings to Boston and we had an exhibit at the Harriet Tubman House in the South End, we invited a lot of people, we were raising money for his defense to fund. And we had Joe Ingle come and talk and Ndume's niece came and talked and as a result of all that, a big law firm in New York [New York] got involved in his case, a huge law firm and they've been very successful in finding information that the police had that would have shown that Ndume didn't do the shooting. So the Supreme Court of Tennessee ruled that this information had been withheld and so now, Ndume is off death row, he's in the general population and the lawyers have found motion, filed motions in the state and federal courts to get his conviction thrown out. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So ultimately this brother is gonna be free after spending twenty-two years or so on death row for a crime he didn't commit. So that took up all of my time in Nashville and, but I thought it was very appropriate, you know, given that I'm an Africana Studies professor slash attorney, because what I tell my students is that Africana Studies is not just an academic discipline it is an involvement with community-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --That you can't separate the academic involvement from community activity in activism and for me to be involved with Ndume has been a real honor and my, my wife has gone to visit him as well and, and so she thinks he's extraordinary and he is extraordinary, he's an extraordinary young man-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: He not young anymore,-- Speaker 2: HUm-hm. Speaker 1: --He went in at like eighteen, now he's like forty-five or something. Speaker 2: How does he spell Ndume? Speaker 1: N-D-U-M-E, Ndume. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And his last name is Olatushani, Olatushani, so when he gets out, we're gonna have a big party for him here in Boston and we're gonna invite all of our friends to come and to hear his story. Story_ID: 130686 Speaker 1: So, I did that in my sabbatical, and of course I did a lot of research on my family history while I was down there [Tennessee] and then came back to Boston [Massachusetts] and then went up for my promotion to full professor. When I went up for full professor, I had published two additional books, one book was called 'Race, Law and Public Policy,' first and second edition, and then I had another book called, 'Returning Home: a Century of African-American Repatriation,' that one was with publishers, I had a contract and, and was subsequently published in November of last year. Then I have a book that's with University of the West Indies Press [University of the West Indies, Mona, Jamaica], called 'Fighting for Africa,' and that's based about interviews I did with Dudley Thompson, who is a Jamaican attorney, whose is now close to ninety, but he was the lawyer for Jomo Kenyatta, when, in the Mau Mau Rebellion, and his descriptions of going to visit Jomo up in the Hinterlands of Kenya, and seeing him in a cell that's underground and just hearing his voice it's just amazing, I mean, it's just--firsthand interviews that I did with Dudley Thompson, so he represented Jomo, he also represented Julius Nyerere with the founding of Tanzania, he drafted the constitution for Julius Nyerere, so and then the other person is Bill Sutherland, I interviewed Bill Sutherland who is the brother of Murial [S.] Snowden, and he's lived in Africa for like thirty-five years or so. Speaker 2: I've met, I've met him. Speaker 1: Yeah. So that book hopefully will come out within the next year, this is University of West Indies Press. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And then I have one other book-- Speaker 2: Go head. Speaker 1: --That's ca--supposed to come out in June and that's the one where I'm editing 'Nantucket's People of Color,' and that was a result of the James Bradford Ames Fellowship, the program and Bob Hayden [Robert C. Hayden] was our first James Bradford Ames scholar and the scholars go to Nantucket [Massachusetts] and do research on the history of blacks and Cape Verdeans, so we have ten essays in the book, I wrote the introduction and I have an article in there on Patience Cooper, and that's coming out this June [2006]. Story_ID: 130687 Speaker 1: Tell me about your current work as chairperson of the Africana Studies Department at UMass Boston [University of Massachusetts, Boston, Massachusetts]? What is your day-to-day life like as a professor and head of the department? Speaker 2: Yeah, it's--being the chairman of the department I really don't like because it takes me away from my teaching and from my research, I really love researching, I love going into libraries and archives and pulling stuff together that hasn't been pulled together. So it takes me away from that so I don't like it and I'd rather be writing plays too, then doing the administrative stuff like going to meetings, etc. But, nevertheless, you know it's all enjoyable, the students are, are really great, a lot of our courses are required courses, the students have to take them as a diversity requirement, so we have students coming into our classes who never had any exposure to African-American history or African history so they're totally thrilled to be exposed to these new points of view and so that's important. We have an excellent faculty, it's a small faculty we have three, five full-time faculty members, we have Professor [Chukwuma] Azuonye who is an expert in African Literature from Nigeria, we have Professor Mark Prou who is an expert on Haiti and the Caribbean, Executive Director of the Haitian Studies Association, we have [HM] Jemadari Kamara who is a leading figure in community development issues, both in Afro-America and in, in, in Africa, and then we have Aminah Pilgrim, who is a young professor who is engaged in the research on Cape Verdean communities and in Hip Hop and cultural kinds of activities in the urban environment. So we have a very fine small but very qualified and dedicated, all of us committed to community service and community development in some ways, we get along together quite well, so it's, it's great and it's great to be at UMass Boston which is this really important urban university in New England. Speaker 1: Um-hm. You were a member of the, I think it's the right label, The National Planning Committee for The HistoryMakers, is that right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, since we're talking history and your history, tell me about your early involvement with The HistoryMakers, what was your role as one of the planning persons, do you remember that (unclear) (simultaneously)? Speaker 2: Yeah, I remember. But I must say, I mean I, I, I went to a number of meetings and, I met with, you know key people in, in the organization, including the executive director [Julieanna Richardson], or president and, and I know we had a big meeting where all the scholars came together and we had a lot of discussions and we, you know gave direction where we thought the organization should go and it was--I think it was well received in terms of our, our advice and there were a number of faculty members from across the country in Chicago [Illinois] for a two-day period where we gave the organization our-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --advice. Speaker 1: Who were some of the other members of this planning committee? Do you remember? Speaker 2: Yeah, Ch-[HM] Charles Willie from, from Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], he was there, [HM Iva] Carruthers-what's the first name from Washington, D.C., educational leader, what's her first name? I can't recall her name. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: But there, there were a number of people, people there substantial academics. Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 130688 Speaker 1: Well I think we're down to what we call our wrap-up questions. Speaker 2: Good, good. Speaker 1: The first one is, is there anything else that you'd like to add to this interview that I've not sa--I've not asked you about? Speaker 2: No, I think, I think you've covered the main points, oh I know, the whole issue of marrying someone out of my race. I mean that, that, that was a major kind of decision on my part, you know-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --Because I came from, you know the urban community, I'm committed to the, my people and so that was an important kind of turning point in my life and I told her I had to intellectually come sort of come to grips with it as well as emotionally and, my conclusion is that you fall in love with someone and, and that's it. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: You know? And you, you sort of had to, I had to sort of understand, and sort of protect her, you know-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --And-- Speaker 1: Your wife's name is? Speaker 2: --Is Amy Merrill. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: And she is the daughter of Charles [E.] Merrill [Jr.]. So she, she is quite different from me in the sense, she comes from privilege, you know, I'm, I'm very poor, although she, although she comes from privilege she is v--been very active in progressive kind of activities, she's also a playwright. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: And she was a nurse for many years. Speaker 1: How did you two meet? Where? Speaker 2: Well her father was talking at Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts], he was giving a talk on how the Merrill Foundation distributed two hundred million dollars over a certain period of time so I was invited to the talk and I went to the talk, nah, I went to the dinner and then I was on my way to the talk, Amy was at the dinner but I crossed her in the hallway and I say, our eyes catch and I said, "You're Amy." She says, "Yeah, you're Robert." And we sit together during the talk and then we talk and we say we're both playwrights and so we get together to share our plays and then the rest just, just happened, you know? You just fall in love. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: So going back to the protection thing, is that so, the way we sort of work it is that we know that there's some places where she shouldn't be because it's gonna make her uncomfortable, so I know that a lot of black women feel very pissed off that an African-American man is with a white woman, so I don't, if I'm going someplace where I know there's gonna be a lot of sisters who are not gonna receive it too well, she doesn't go and she accepts that, you know. So we make those kinds of adjustments. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Now, but we also have friends who know us and accept us and there's no problem, but you--we, we try to be intelligent about all these things. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: So that people don't--so that our lives are not, not complicated. Story_ID: 130689 Speaker 1: Anything else you want to add or? Speaker 2: Well the other thing is that, you know I miss my mother [Louise Guyton] tremendously and after she died I went down to Jamaica by myself and--which was great because I remember getting up at three in the morning leaning over the porch and just sort of crying very, very deeply and as a result of that, you know I, I felt better. But the play that I'm writing 'Mother G,' my wife and other people think it's the best thing I've ever written. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Which is based upon my mother, and so I'm really looking forward to that. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Because that's really helps me to sort of come to grips with, with her loss, and so writing is a way of coming to grips with, for me, with difficult situations in life. And the same way I could identify, identify with Ndume, Ndume is a great painter dealing with those kinda tremendous problems. Speaker 1: Next wrap-up question. How do you feel about the way you've lived your life? Speaker 2: I, I love the way I've lived my life, I, I loved the way I treat people, I, I love the fact that I'm a progressive, as I believe in socialism, I believe that we should move away from capitalism and more towards socialism. I think a country as rich as this should be able to give its citizens healthcare, no one should be homeless. So, and I, I feel good about the balance with the religious stuff you know? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Intellectually like you can see all my religious books here, you know a lot of 'em look at issues of Africa and Egypt and influence of ancient Egypt on Christianity and Islam. So in terms of understanding religion and how it fits into the African paradigm, I'm comfortable with that. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: I'm comfortable with my teaching, I'm comfortable with doing part-time work as a lawyer representing people in discrimination cases, that's all I do is discrimination cases and employment. I'm happy with my kids and how they're developing, I would say that I am a happy guy at this point. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Is there anything that you have not yet done that you would like to do? Speaker 2: Not really. I'm very fulfilled in a lot of ways. You know, I think Amy's a playwright and I think that for her, if she was more well-known as a playwright, she'd be happy, you know, if--but for me that doesn't matter to me, you know. I mean, I--for the work I've done, you know, I've enjoyed the people who've done--I don't wanna have my names--I don't wanna be the next August Wilson or anything like that, I'm, I'm very happy with who I am and where I am and how I feel and my health is great. Speaker 1: Good. In retrospect is there anything that you've done in the past that you might have done differently? Speaker 2: Let's see, done differently. Well, you know when you look at the first marriages and stuff, you know, you you're young sorta silly and you know, I, I was sort of a womanizer when I was younger, when I came out of law school, it was that period of being young, gifted and black. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: You know, and you just felt that you could walk on water-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --You know and, so if I could do that differently, I would have done that differently-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --Because, you know, I think I caused my first wife unnecessary pain-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --As a result of being a jive dude, and I try to teach my son now to respect women and not to be a jive dude, you know? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --So I'm trying to catch up on it by working with him and he's do--he's doing quite well in his relations with women and stuff. Story_ID: 130690 Speaker 1: What are your hopes and concerns for the African American community or African American communities today, your hopes and concerns for the future? Speaker 2: Well, I think that one of the things I've been working on, this African Diaspora Project, and I've been working on that for four years, five years and we work with a school in Dorchester [Boston, Massachusetts] and we have a Saturday class for them on, in Africana Studies and one of the things we try to do is show that there's a relationship between self-esteem and academic achievement. And so you--we expose these students to literature showing people of African descent or we're coming seemingly insurmountable obstacles. For example one semester they, they read Nelson Mandela's book, 'Long Walk To Freedom,' whole semester, we took them for three weeks to Jamaica where they did the philosophy and opinions of Marcus Garvey. Now we're getting ready to expand the program to Rindge and Latin School in Cambridge [Massachusetts] and also to Dorchester High [School] in Boston. I would say that what I'd like to see is the, the educational system within the inner cities become more progressive, more enlightened, the, designed to motivate students to achieve despite tremendous odds that will motivate--helps students to understand their history and their cultures, they can have pride in that and understand that they are great people, they come from great source, that Africa is the beginning, so I would love to see some fundamental changes within the educational systems to impact the students. Part of this would mean enlightened black control of these systems or influence in these systems. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: And as I said, I'd like to see the country move towards socialism so that the people are--there's a safety net for everyone, not--I'm not a Communist, I, I believe in private enterprise, but I think that those of us who have more can give more, and those who have, who've had it historically in this country-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --Should be giving more so that there's nobody homeless, I mean I think it's totally outrageous for a country like this to have people homeless and have people hungry. Speaker 1: Last question, how do you want to be remembered, what do you want people to say about you? Speaker 2: Well in Tennessee, in the colored cemetery where my father, my grandmother, and my uncles are buried, I bought my headstone, my kids are really, think I'm crazy, but on the headstone it has Robert C. Johnson, Jr., playwright, professor, attorney at the bottom. So that's how I'd like to be remembered, you know as a playwright, and you know, as a nice guy, who treated people fairly, who loved his wife and children and family and friends very deeply. A generous person, you know. Story_ID: 130691 Speaker 1: Oh that's my mother, Louise Guyton, it is the cover of the brochure for her service, her funeral service and it was presented in February of 2001. Speaker 2: Thank you. Speaker 1: This is a photograph of my father, Robert Cecil Johnson, Sr., done--taken in 1940, when he was in high school. On the right is my son Gary Johnson, and on the left is Domingo Guyton, my nephew and they're standing in my apartment in the South End [Boston, Massachusetts]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: This is a photograph of my daughter Anika Ama Johnson, as she graduates from Boston College Law School [Boston, Massachusetts] in 2002, and that's me standing next to her. Speaker 2: This is a photograph of my grandmother on my father's side, her name is Icie [ph.] Johnson, and this was taken about 1959. Speaker 1: This is a photograph of my wife, Amy Merrill on the right and, and me. This is was taken as part of our play, 'Sugar Hill' and this was in 1990. On the left in the red is my mother, Louise Guyton, we refer to her as "Mother G" and in the middle is my aunt Addie Burgan, married to my mother's brother George and to her right is Addie's mother. Speaker 2: This is my grandparents on my mother's side, Reverend Nathan Burgan and Hannah Burgan, they are the grandparents who raised us in Tennessee, we lived in their home for the first thirteen years or so of our lives, of my life. Speaker 1: This is [HM] Professor Yosef Ben-Jochannan who is my mentor, a person who influenced me more than any other scholar. I met him when I was at Cornell [University, Ithaca, New York] as a graduate student and this picture was taken last year at a conference. Speaker 2: This is me at a conference at University of Massachusetts of Boston, a conference on affirmative action and I'm waiting to give a presentation. Speaker 1: This is a photograph of me, Prof--Professor [HM] Jemadari Kamara, on the right who was in our department of Africana Studies and in the middle is Professor James Turner, who is the director and founder of the Africana Studies and Research Center at Cornell, another one of my important mentors, academic mentors, this photograph was taken last year, 2005. Speaker 2: This is me standing with Dr. Kenneth Eland [ph.] on the right, Ken and I worked together in the community of Boston on the board of the Roxbury Comprehensive Community Health Center, on the left is David Lee, who is an architect in the Boston area, and also an individual very much involved in community development issues. (Pause) Okay. This is me at the--campaigning for state representative in 1982, and to my left is John O'Brien who was the school committee member and also a very, very active person within Boston's Black community, John O'Brien. Speaker 1: This is my son and I, my son Gary Johnson, we're in Jamaica in front of a friend's house, this is really one of my favorite photographs, it shows father and son relaxing, enjoying the beautiful Jamaican sun and, and feeling irie. Speaker 2: This is a poster advertising my most recent book, 'Returning Home,' it's advertisement for a book party that was held March 27, 2006, at the University of Massachusetts. Speaker 1: This is part of a poster that was part of a conference that was held at UMass [University of Massachusetts] on New England writers and some of my works were presented. Two plays of initiation which contains two of my plays, 'Stop and Frisk' and 'the Train Ride,' we also have a picture of Frank Bispham, whose life 'the Train Ride' is based upon. Speaker 2: This is me sitting with the trustees of the Framingham State College [Framingham, Massachusetts]. I was on that trustee board for five years and I was on the executive committee of, of that board and this photograph was taken in 1989...