 Story_ID: 9019 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I am the interviewer for the History Makers. Our videographer is Mathew Hickey. Ma'am could you please state your name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: My name is Ella Jenkins and I'd Ella L. Jenkins cause the L. is for Louise. It is E-L-L-A and it's Louise, L-O-U-I-S-E and Jenkins, J-E-N-K-I-N-S, and on St. Patrick's Day I put an "O" to it, so I am O'Jenkins. (Laughter) Speaker 1: All right. Did you give us your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: I was born in St. Louis, Missouri, and it was on August 6, 1924. Speaker 1: All right, and what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I am a self-employed folk singer and music educator, yes. That--when you, when you state that don't ever go somewhere to-- say, if you want something, to get a credit card, because they say, "Folk singer? What?" (Laughter). That seems very erratic, (unclear) (laughter), but anyway for the years since 19-actually since 1956 I decided to be what they say "freelance", that's the, it--and someone asked me, "Ella, what do you mean you freelance?" I said, "Well, you know that's feast or famine." Sometimes you might work and sometimes a little bit and sometimes not at all but-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --that's-- Speaker 1: Now is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date? This is August the 5th, 2002. Speaker 1: Okay, and where are we at the present time. Speaker 2: We are in--we are the HistoryMakers office. My first visit here, and, and I think cataloging all of us who are trying to make some history in life. I think it's a great idea. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But, but, it's--I think your address is Nineteen Hundred--. Speaker 1: Yes, South Michigan. Speaker 2: Nineteen Hundred South Michigan, yes. Speaker 1: Chicago. Speaker 2: I just noticed the great changes on--on the street. That's all. (laughter). It doesn't look like anything that I remembered years ago. Story_ID: 9020 Speaker 1: What is your favorite food". Speaker 2: (Laughter) my favorite food? (Laughter). Actually, (laughter), I like pasta (laughter). I didn't grow up with pasta, although my mother cooked some spaghetti quite a lot. But, she, she would put all the vegetables in it you know, and it was a little different than the--when going to the Italian restaurants, but I do like pasta. I think it's easy to eat, it's easy to digest and I love the tomato may taste, and, but I like pizza, and, and I forget to put the other one that--but there are just numerous things in the pasta family that I do. Speaker 1: Okay. What's your favorite color? Speaker 2: My favorite color (chuckles), is red. Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: I think my favorite time of the year is springtime, because, I tell you, spring time seems like everything became--becomes renewed and it's--I'm more conscious of birds and the flowers coming up and, and people in good mood--and I like the nice change from the winter. It's a very noticeable change. Sometimes in Chicago things are--our weather is changing so much that you don't notice the distinct changes, but I think it's like renewing a spirit--it's almost--oh, it's, I kinda think of it as being like a new birthday. It's like when birthdays come. I always feel like it's refreshing, starting anew. Speaker 1: Okay now, do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Most times, I like to go out to California. California has been--in the States. But--and abroad, I'd say Switzerland, I, I went to Africa. I visited East Africa one time, and I certainly liked it. I've never been back but it's another favorite place, but, I, but Switzerland was a place I would go again and again, you know. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: (Laughter). Oh, that's (laughter) that's kind of, that's kind of funny. Well, I have to think about that for (laughter). It's--'cause I'm always thinking about what other people are saying, you know, 'cause there was an era when people said "Right on!", but I don't--I never use that expression (laugher), and I am just trying to--I have to really think about that because I can't really--I never knew if I used any particular expression more than others. That's the fairest way I can answer that. Story_ID: 9021 Speaker 1: Let's talk about your beginnings, and can, can you give us the names of your parents and spell them for us, and give us their date and place of birth. Speaker 2: Well, I'll be as specific as I can. My father was named "Obadiah", as a capital O-B-A-D-I-A-H, Obadiah Jenkins and I don't know if maybe he had a middle name or not. But, I was--became very much interested in that name because it was one of the Biblical names and so--and, I found it, you know. That was a pretty short chapter, but anyway--but that was--and my mother--. Speaker 1: Short chapter of the Bible? Speaker 2: (Laughter). Yes, and it didn't seem--I didn't seem to understand it as much. It wasn't as colorful as some of the others, but anyway, but I thought "Obadiah"--course, people always called him "Obie" ), so, that's kind of short and that. My mother's name--"Annabelle" A-N-N-A-B-E-L-L-E, "Annabelle", it was Walker but then she--Skinner was the last, but Walker was her maiden name. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that's, you know, W-A-L-K-E-R, but, but Skinner is what her--when she re-married, yeah. Speaker 1: Where was your mother born at and when? Speaker 2: Oh, she was born in--I think it is Grenada, is a place--Grenada, Mississippi that they call it the Delta area of the Mississippi area, and she was born in 1903, because I know she was twenty years older than my brother, (laughter), so, yeah, and my, my father was actually born (laughter) I didn't have--had really--really known that much but 'til I looked at my birth certificate today and I hadn't looked at that in a long time, and he was born in 1896. So that was--I had, I hadn't realized that, you know, 'cause I always think of other people being born in the 1800s (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah, oh, where was he born? Speaker 2: He was born in Huntsville, Huntsville, Alabama. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes, yes, and Huntsville was a place that from time-to-time because--I was born, I was born in St. Louis and so was my brother, and--but when we finally--but then we moved to Chicago, but we had relatives down in Mississippi, and some in St. Louis, but when going to Alabama--we were--I remember Huntsville then. I am sure it's totally different today. You could just step outside your house, the house, and someone walkin' is going to wave to you and say, "Hello, daughter", they'll just, you know, that wasn't--you were even related to the people but they were very friendly. It was a warm community, and if I can share a little bit about my cousins. Oh, this was I think during the early '60s [1960s] or late '50s [1950s] that we--when we visited my cousin--and I went to visit my grandmother, and in--down in Huntsville, and it was during the week where they went to church every night, and so, it was really--it was kind of interesting because she was very religious and, and I remember down in the South (laughter), I had an opportunity to be baptized (laugher), and so, I still don't know how to swim, but anyway (laughter). But that was quite, quite an experience you know, 'cause people actually went to the river. Speaker 1: Okay, now this is in Huntsville, or--? Speaker 2: Huntsville, yeah, um-hum. Speaker 1: Okay, let's see. Did your parents have a story about how they met? Speaker 2: Uh, see, these are things that I really don't know that much (laughter), all I know that (laughter)--suddenly, I'm born (laughter). No, I don't--I'm sure that they must've--I'm not sure if they met in--they must've met in St. Louis, they probably did, but I am not sure how she wandered to--well, she had to go to St. Louis, you know, he did. Speaker 1: Okay, so you are not sure how they got to St. Louis? Speaker 2: No, no, but it just--you know--people are always traveling, you know, and--so, I'm not sure. I didn't--I never thought I'd ever have to (laughter) say anything about it. I don't really know. Speaker 1: Okay, do you remember your grandparents at all? Speaker 2: Well,--the only vision I have of my grandmother, my mother's mother, is just--I can just see a form. And I remember my brother and I went when we were probably six or seven--we went to visit down and, and I don't remember even her first name. Um-hum, but, I mean, she was down in Grenada, but what I remember they had people picking cotton down there and we were--my brother and I were just really thrilled about seeing these people--with, you know this agility picking this cotton, and we were just making comments on it and--but the next day she had some little cotton bags. Some little bags that she hooked on my brother and on me, and we did a little picking of cotton, too. But, anyway, but I remember that she had a big stove and had her kitchen, and it was one of the old metal stoves, and she cooked a lot of bread, you know, some good--and pies and what not, but as far--I don't remember her name, but--except--I just told you my father's mother was named Ellen, and I think I was probably named after her. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: E-L-L-E-N. Yeah, um-hum. Speaker 1: So, you remember your father's mother? Did you--? Speaker 2: That was my father's mother, yeah--Ellen, Ellen, um-hum, yeah (unclear). Story_ID: 9022 Speaker 1: Are there any stories about--Reconstruction or slavery that--or the Civil Rights Movement that have passed--been passed down through your family? Speaker 2: You know, (laughter), we'll be talking about reparation--I mean of today, you know how people are speaking of how one group is getting money for this, and another group is getting money for that, for one part of history, and I said, "Well, you know, when I was in high school that's when--when I was in high school that's when we really talked--there was a lot of talk about slavery, because that was a part of the history in our history books, and then--but that wasn't mentioned. It wasn't anything that was mentioned at home or anything, I as--when I--going to DuSable High School [Chicago, Illinois], it was a black high school. We had mixed backgrounds of teachers, but--and, when even in my grade school--they were mixed--but, I didn't really get to know people to be friends and know where I stood--I mean, I always thought--we talked about slavery so much in school, I--sometimes I used to get tired of it. I thought, "Isn't there anything more interesting about black people?" You know, you know, because at the time they used to say "Negroes" or we were just the term "colored". But not until I got into--actually junior college did I become more aware of where, black people--where they stood in the midst of history, and what, what kind of rights or--no--rights that we didn't have. That was when--but, we didn't--we didn't do too much talking even like around the home about it. So--but when I got into a, into a, to, junior college then there were more people who were involved in groups. And then in high school there was a Negro history club that met outside of school. So there was a man, who I think his name was Mr. Harris, Harrison and he would on his own, he would, at one of the libraries, I think. and I know the library was on like--forty-eighth (48th) and Michigan. Speaker 1: (Unclear) The Hall branch? Speaker 2: The [Chicago Public Library George Cleveland] Hall branch. Yeah, the Hall branch library. And he took it upon himself to--if anybody wanted to learn about Negro history, well you could come--so, I would go to the library and come in each week to find out, you know, about--we heard Haiti and Toussaint L'Ouverture and all these people, that you know, I never felt, you know, as you start, coming up--where do we stand--where do we stand in history? What--How important are we? And, then he also--but, I did not take this course, he also taught Swahili. I had never heard Swahili, until I went to--but Swahili--in reality hearing it spoken until I visited Kenya and Tanzania and that was in 1973, but this man was--he said, "If anybody wants to learn, this is the language that is being spoken in East Africa." And of course, at the time, you know, growing up as a black person in a black community, people didn't like to be attaching themselves to Africa. Africa was something you kinda--a lot of people looked down on because they felt--because of other people's attitudes about--some people are used to thinking in terms of ins--about not being civilized and all this and that, and even people made comments about people who came from the South. So you, sometimes you became ashamed of where your parents came from, because attitudes and saying that, these people were not as alert. Really it's the same thing when many people who are of European background with--many times at PTA meetings, many children who are opposed to something or whatnot, they don't want their grandparents or their parents to come down to the meeting, 'cause they have accents or dialects. But, well the same thing was what happened. So, but, we didn't talk too much about that. Story_ID: 9023 Speaker 1: Can you remember, um-hum, and tell us about some of the sights, sounds and smells of growing up in--I think for--you were born in St. Louis, but you, you grew up in Chicago, basically? Speaker 2: Yes. I grew up on the South Side of Chicago. All over the (laughter) South Side. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. And what, what were some of the neighborhoods and--they were all in the Bronzeville area, right? Speaker 2: Yes, it's--it's so funny, and I for--I didn't bring that--but I wrote a--one time wrote a poem about Bronzeville, because a lot of people, I know there is a "new Bronzeville" that is opening up now. But, say that when my memories of growing up on the South Side of Chicago, there was an attitude that the further north you were, um-hum, for blacks, the poorer you were, and if you were headed south, and the further south, and if you got all the way to Morgan Park and Beverly, then you were really had homes and what-not. But, we said we-- Speaker 1: They, they, they still use it sometimes called the "low end", you lived on the low end. Speaker 2: Right. In fact the "Chicago Defender" wasn't too far from there. It was, it was right across the street. Well, think it was at 35th Street 'cause, I can still remember the actually the address, 131 East 35th Street, and across the street from that was a theater called "The Louis Theater". It was named after Joe Louis. And from--so, moving day was a day, and sometimes when I'm talking to children, I say, "Well, we had moving day. It was sort of once a year, and you, you might--you'd see trucks full of all kinds of furniture. Some going north, some going south, and so you hoped that as you moved, you were going to a better community, and things would look better for you. So, we went--I know we went from 35th to 39th Street. I remember 3948 South Indiana, you know, and then we went--and that was near the--what they used to call the "South Side Boys Club," 'cause you'd always remembered its unique little community, places that you could go either play table tennis or you know, ping-pong or what-not, and then from 39th to 4135, I think, wait, 4135 [South] Indiana or Prairie, one of those, and then from there to 56th--340 East 56th Street. That was right across from Washington Park. That's where I really learned to play ping pong, or table tennis, and I'd get--and when many of the newspapers supported the Park District children who, who really wanted to play this game, and they'd have tournaments and they would sponsor us in tournaments. Then from '56 [1956]--and I know they had a--remember they had a swimming pool in there and they still have that swimming pool there. Then from there 6031 South Prairie, and from there--then as in--I went out to California, and then when I actually moved to Prairie Shores, which is going back north, but a different way of looking at the north (laughter), 'cause they can see--. Speaker 1: Yeah, those are, were relatively I guess new apartments then. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: New high rises. Speaker 2: Yes, so, so, but anyway the South Side--so I always say that--like when I travel places--when I--like if its--abroad and to other cities and what not, I always carry in my, my little travel pack, I always--some of the growing up songs and rhythms, rhymes and games that--that was a part of my growing up on the South Side of Chicago, and-- Speaker 1: Okay, so what--? Speaker 2: But some of the--you also asked about--well--some of the smells and sounds and what not. Well, one of the things that I remember, and this was a place on, around, I think it was around 59th Street, where the, the elevated [train] turned, and there was a man who had a barbecue store--stand down there, and there was an aroma that you--if you--once you took it in, you never forgot that, and it's a kind of thing that you would get that same aroma when the Bud Billiken, Bud Billiken's Parade and when the people--just after the parade was over, they would go into Washington Park and many people put out their, you know, their little grills and that same kind of--and many people grilled barbecue, and I--and I, when--in the last maybe six or seven years, I decided to go out to Washington Park and, boy, and so I bought barbecue from different people, and I had them wrap it up. I said, "Wrap it up real well, 'cause, I am going to take this back to the North Side where in live in Lincoln Park and I want, I want to show them how real barbecue tastes and smells." (Laughter). You know, those are things that you--and, of course, I do remember, there was what they use to call "the policy people". You ever heard of that? (Chuckles) Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: The (laughter)-- Speaker 1: Explain what is it for people. Speaker 2: Well, you know, it was, it was a, it was a, they have the lottery today, okay?. But, this was something, where, I guess poor people would--to see if they could better their finances, there was a group of little papers. They were very colorful. I remember all these colorful papers, and they had numbers, and you'd select certain numbers, and if they appeared somewhere, then, that means that you won, and you would--I guess, put a certain amount of money on it and, then many times children were sent there to place it for them, and then they'd come and so, that meant you could really get a little bit more money to your income, but--it--I remember there were people who drove, these men who drove these cars (laughter) and they would toss, these--you know, I thought you had to have a good arm, 'cause they would toss these, and they would roll down into the basement, and then somebody comes and picks them up, you know, but anyway that was--it was one of the things that I remembered on the South Side growing up and some of the--no matter which neighborhood, black neighborhood I was in, always could always smelled Chinese cooking, because they always had Chinese restaurants. Yeah, many--I think black people do love--at least at that the time we loved Chinese food, and so we went-- I think that's when I got introduced to chopsticks (laughter), although taking home, you just use your fork, but that was-- But I--parades--I always liked parades, and I remember the Bud Billiken Parade, 'cause it was each year and it was always--'cause my birthday is August 6th, and--but it was always during August--and it was really hot when they march down the, you know, the street. And so, I think that was in August, 'cause that when they usually have it, yes. But anyway, so everyone just came out. All the people came out of their houses and lined up--because it went for blocks and blocks, and blocks, and when--then it disbanded into Washington Park, and this is, a sort of a community spirit. Well--another thing that I remember, the Bronzeville area, included like the Regal Theater. That was a theater where I saw many of the great bands and singers and tap dancers. Tap dancing was very, very popular in those days, and--and then on--'cause most of this was around 47th Street and King Drive [formerly South Parkway Boulevard] and around--. There was a place called the "South Center". There was a department store, and they had prices that were very, very extremely low, and up to very expensive outfits that you could buy, and people they would send their buyers from the South Center all around Europe bringing back interesting styles. They had these so-called "soul restaurants". On two or three of them that were right there in the same community. And, then near the Regal Theater, which was the biggest one, and then on the other side--on the next--across the street was called the [Ascher's] Metropolitan [Theater], we called it the Met, and so--. And then I remember somewhere along the way, there was a theater called the "Indiana Theatre". And that's where I use to see a lot tap dancers, and there they had amateur hours. There were a lot of amatuer hours and so I saw a lot of vaudeville. I loved going to the Regal, especially--that's where I first saw Cab Calloway, the "Hi-De-Ho" man, you know. And so--you--but, in those days, you could see a film, and then you'd see a stage show, and then, unless you had to go home, like your mother said come back home, well then you could just--if you could try to go and see the film over again so you could go see another stage show. But it was--so, those were some of the--. And then the other thing was that--you know, girls and boys today they have the video games, all the kinds of little--we are constantly viewing, you know, something, on TV creating some new games. But we were of the time when shooting marbles, you know, playing jacks and balls--that was--I remember jumping rope. I never mastered double Dutch, but I did jump rope, the single rope, and, and so, there was a lot of outdoor playing. They were playing, you know, the "one, potato, two potato, three potato, four, you know, with your fist and the then the "head and shoulder baby, one, two, three"--rhythmic games and chants, and so all these were learned in the outdoor--we use to call it "recess", during the recreation time at schools and this was the kinds of things were exchanged, and as you moved from one neighborhood to the other, you found some of the same songs and chants, just sung in a different way, and then other rhythms were created. Um-hum. Story_ID: 9024 Speaker 1: Tell me about school? Where did you go to school on the South Side [of Chicago]? Probably a number of schools--. Speaker 2: Well, yeah, because as you go from one neighborhood to another--but I remember, the school that--grade school that I graduated from was Phillips, Wendell Phillips. Now, they had a high school there and they had a grade school. But, I, I went to--it seems to me that I went to summer school at Brook School, that was a school--Brook School on the South Side. But, and, I'm not sure. It seems to me somewhere along the line it was a school called Kozminski but I don't think I went there. But I distinctly remember Wendell Phillips Grade School, and from, from Wendell School, Grade-, Wendell Phillips Grade School, I went, I went to DuSable High School. And--. Speaker 1: Well, tell me about school. Did-were there any--did you like school? Did you do--? Speaker 2: Oh, I liked school and I liked--spelling was one of my favorite--'course, when I was in kindergarten, I was one of those children who just--I am not sure why, but crayons was one of my favorite things to chew on (laughter), and chalk (laughter)--and they seemed to be very tasty and paste and, or course, my teachers didn't think that that was a very good thing to do, and, um-hum, during those time, um-hum, the teachers had a lot more control over the children, so--and then I seemed to like to talk a great deal, too, and so I remember one time being put in a corner and the teacher put a piece of tape across my mouth, which I did not think was very--today would be child abuse and I think it was child abuse then, but we didn't know that term (chuckle). But, anyway--but I--that was--but I liked trying to draw, when I got up to the older--upper grades, I liked English a great deal. I liked poetry. I always liked poetry, and I remember--there was a poem that I didn't know--I think the teacher's name was Miss Walsh. I can still remember that, and she was trying to give us an imagination--trying to--for us to imagine going across to other lands. Now, I couldn't even imagine--'cause I hadn't gone out of Chicago for, you know, beside St. Louis, and Mississippi and Alabama. But, this is to imagine--Japan. So she had something about "Far over the sea, in the land of tea, where the cherry blossoms grow," so you know, all as she was saying all these things, then I was trying to imagine, then I used to write little bits of poetry. Just to write--first of all, you would start out with poetry, with rhyming. And then as you get into high school, then you-- (End of tape.) Story_ID: 9025 Speaker 1: Another thing I forgot to tell you about like at [Jean Baptiste Point] DuSable [High School], they had something called the Hi-Jinks [talent shows]. Now, at that time, I wasn't interested in performing. I did not even know I was going to go into music. But, we did have a lot of performers there. We were talking about also Bronzeville, that's--because some of these people, 'cause there was Walter [Henri] Dyett. He had a--he taught band and orchestra at DuSable, and there were many people who actually--and, then he even had a, an outside band that performed in ballrooms, and many of these people actually beca--got into the music world, like Dorothy Donegan. She was one of the people that we admired because she was--. And, of course, he was--graduated before I did--but Harold Washington attended there too. And we had somebody now, who was--our top basketball hero, was "Sweetwater." I believed they called him "Sweetwater." (Laughter). (Unclear). Speaker 2: Clifton-Nat [Nathaniel 'Sweetwater'] Clifton-- Speaker 1: That's right.! Yeah, so we just called him Sweetwater, and, so--. But these are--when people talk about Bronzeville. I haven't seen the new Bronzeville, so I am very curious about what it looks like, I mean, because the image that I have was like--there was, another ballroom--it was a ballroom called the Warwick [Hall], Warrick ballroom, and I think it was on East, on [543] East 47th--but then there was the "Savoy Ballroom", that's another part I, that I remember in Bronzeville, and, on, at the Savoy Ballroom one night was boxing. There were all oriented to families coming to there, just right on 47th and King Drive--well, they called it "South Parkway" then. So, at the Savoy you had one night for boxing, one night for wrestling, one night for dancing, one night for--I remember roller skating. It was, it was really--so, you could choose when you wanted to go, and I remember liking to, to skate, but because there were some fancy skaters, you'd kind of wind up in the little ring on the side. But, it was quite a--but that, I can always remember that. I can just see the roller skaters going back and forth and some of them very--became very, very fancy skaters. Skating backwards, that was a feat (laughter). But, now, of course, they have the new--these new skates that they have on that look like ice skates on rollers (laughter). So--but, but, so Bronzeville, I should say, to me was the Bud Billiken Parade, and, you know, the sm--aroma of barbecue, and, of course, people doing--you know we had the big thing for New Year's, you know, cookin', what they call em--as some say "chitterlings" but we said "chitlins" and then I remember, people had this feeling about good luck and black-eyed peas. So every New Year's Day, you must get your black-eyed peas, and so, everyone would be scampering around to the various stores and you--but, they, they did smell good, too. But, I think the new Bronzeville is going to be different, you know. Speaker 2: Yeah, it seems to be much--it's, it's an upper scale, 'cause they're rehabbing these graystones-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: I think the poor people are not going to be there. So, it not going to be as dense, and it's not going to be as poor, and of course when you grew up there it was diverse, you had the well-to-do living alongside the, the poor-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Yes. But, anyway, it's something that you didn't really feel that poor when--even though you--because you had such rich culture and rich, you know, the foods and everything, and, and it's a funny thing that if you have enough interesting--if you have enough interesting things to do like all, we children have so many games, you didn't have to a lot of toys, because there were a lot of things that we could do, you know, together and share. I mean, I got--maybe I got a--maybe from time-to-time I got a doll for Christmas, and I didn't get too many other things. Story_ID: 9026 Speaker 1: My uncle played the harmonica, you know, he came from the Louisiana area and his name was Floyd Johnson, and we called him Uncle Flood. I called him Uncle Flood, but he--and I, often times when I share a story, like storytelling to children, I bring in some of my own you know, background, and I was saying, "Well he came from Louisiana, he migrated--", I said, I say, "he migrated", and I'll say--if they are young children, I'll say to them "That means moved to Chicago, Illinois" and this is--the children learning states, so they got from Louisiana to Illinois, and then I'll say, "But he worked at a job in a steel mill in Gary, Indiana." So we got another state, and I said, "He worked for many long hours, and but, after his long hours of work, he'd come back, take a bath, put on some fresh clothes, he'd go in the kitchen and eat a hearty dinner, then after that, he'd come back in the dining room where there were comfortable chairs, and he'd--we would have a coat rack there, and that coat rack, that's where--it held his vest. It was very stylish, and--during one time to have these pin-striped vests with four pockets, but he kept his harmonicas in there and he wasn't a professional, but he, I guess when he was in the South some of his family played, you know, banjo, and harmonica and guitars. So he would come and he would take one of his harmonicas, he'd sit on the comfortable seat, and then I would sit on the floor and I would just look at him and listen to him, and he played, you know, he would play for over a hour. And this--it all came to me just by listening, and he also, during that time, you could buy your own juke box, so he had a box--a juke box there, and he was very fond of blues. That's what he played on the harmonica, blues. And, so I use to hear like Sunnyland Slim [Albert Luandrew] and T-Bone Walker [Aaron Thibeaux Walker] and all these people that, you know I finally got a chance to--some, some of 'em, hear in person as I grew up--but it was, it was a great sound. He use to bend the notes, you know, but he didn't think about bending the notes, but he just did. And, so it made me feel good after a long day's work. But, he--everyday he would always come. So, I--my mother [Annabelle Walker Jenkins Skinner] saw that I was so fond of this harmonica. She said, "Well, I gonna put in"--she was doing day work in many of the suburban areas, and so she said, "I'm gonna put in some extra time, and so I can buy you a harmonica." Well, that was great. So for Christmas she gave me--she bought me this harmonica. It was actually a chromatic one with a button that you push back and forth. It was pretty fancy. So, I just couldn't wait to share it with my uncle, to show him that I had a harmonica, too. But, we took a taxi that day because it was during the holiday so we could afford a taxi. Got in this taxi and when I got out I was so anxious to show it to him, I left it on the seat of the taxi (laughter). When I got up there I just crying. I think I cried for days and days, mother said, "You will one day get another harmonica", and for some reason or another, thinking about my uncle sharing his talent, my listening, and my mother making such a sacrifice for me to have one, I said, I vowed that I would one day learn to play the harmonica. I will be--buy myself one and I will learn and it's been--I--I don't how it came, but just from that memory and listening and all of a sudden I play lots and lots of songs. I played for and for children and then I can come play some songs--songs from other areas, you know, like Greek songs, and--. Speaker 2: So how old were you when you started playing the harmonica? Speaker 1: I think it must have been about, maybe--I think it was in high school. Speaker 2: High school? Speaker 1: Yeah, about high school, yeah. I've--I taste just a little. Speaker 2: You--Oh, okay. Speaker 1: All right, not that's all right. I think it powdered my nose a little bit (laughter). That's all right. Yes, and--but, you know, but blowing on a harmonica, but I think I was an adult when I really learned to play it well, and I just, I just enjoy it. So now, I go many places and buy--I've got hundreds of harmonicas now, and then when I was going to Europe, I found that they specialized a lot in the minor key, so I got A minor, D minor, D sharp minor, all these, so and now, and I can play songs, like of the Middle East and songs like that, or I can play "Summertime" or what-not, you know. So, but anyway, I always, I even give God thanks for enriching my life, because it is really--it's helped me a great deal. But it's one of the instruments that is part of my package. I play the baritone ukulele, it's a four-string instrument, and a lot of the percussion instruments, like the congas and the bongo drums, and I like all the Latin and, you know, the African drums. Story_ID: 9027 Speaker 1: Now, when you were in school--now, you were at Phillips Grade School, and then Phillips High School (simultaneously)-- Speaker 2: No, no, Phillips Grade School, but I went to DuSable High School. Speaker 1: DuSable High School, okay. Oh, okay. (Simultaneously). So you were, you were taught by Captain Walter [Henri] Dyett, then, right? Speaker 2: Well, see--but, I wasn't--I didn't study music then. I wasn't, I wasn't doing it. I've never--I'm not a formal musician, but I used to follow his band, 'cause like, 'cause they did lots of presentations at school assemblies, and, we--as I said the Hi-Jinks [school variety shows] was a really--it was a really trained--there were many, many young people who were enter--wanted to go into the entertainment field and this was a ground for them to get started in, and then he--and from time-to-time I'd see Walter [H.] Dyett's band, you know, at some of the local ballrooms--. Speaker 1: Oh, you didn't, you didn't study music at all? Speaker 2: No, and I just--but when I started like in junior college and going (unclear), but I use to volunteer at recreation centers and going to--I used to work at children's camps, and just something--just like I started singing, I mean because we use--you know, they have all the rap today, but we use to chant all the time and making up rhymes and had--and did to rhythm, too, but--and also about what--whatever happened in your community, you would put into rhyme, and lot of children were doing that in the early days. But, no--but, in DuSable--one of the things, I liked English real well. I liked civics and I like, and I liked Spanish. My Spanish teacher--she was one, she said, if anyone want to learn beside Spanish, I can teach you Portuguese too, but I didn't learn that (laughter), I just--but I did stick with Spanish. I enjoyed it, and I today, I'm really happy, because Spanish is used so much everywhere, and I think Chicago is becoming more and more a Spanish-speaking city, and--so I--and I can sing some songs in Spanish and--but I--I like--in the course of it I became very much--learned about Cuba and Afro-Cuban music--it's a blend of African and Spanish together, so I, I listened to a lot--Celia Cruz [Ursula Hilaria Celia Caridad Cruz Alfonso] is a woman who comes here quite often, and I-- Speaker 1: Yeah, she's the "Queen of Salsa." Speaker 2: (Laughter). That's right. There are some queen of souls, and she's the Queen of Salsa (laughter). Yeah, that's right. So, really when you hear--if you ever go to any her concerts, whether it is indoor or outdoor, you just find yourself, not matter what age, you just get up and you just feel like dancing. You're dancing with someone, or by yourself. It's just--it's, --. Speaker 1: Yeah, we better spell her name. Celia Cruz. Speaker 2: Celia. Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. How do you spell it? Speaker 2: That's C-E-L-I-A and it's C-R-U-Z. Speaker 1: All right. Okay. When you were in school, like who--are there any teachers that stood out as mentors or favorite teachers of yours? Speaker 2: There was a Mrs. [Mary] Herrick. She was the civics person, and, yes, H-E-R-R-I-C-K. And the Spanish teacher, who was--I don't think she was from Cuba or anywhere, but she was a black woman, and her name was Mrs. Rojas, and I remember she always insisted whatever you say in the language, you say it, enunciate correctly and if you only--you could only count to three, don't try to get to ten unless you say the one to three correctly in Spanish, and then she would tell us, "Maybe you can try go and read the Bible and see if you can find some words in, in English and then put it into Spanish", and take some of the words of the Bible and put it--and then the salute to the flag, she had us learning that, and I tell you (unclear) I can remember a little bit," Juro fidelita la mi bandera" that's not, not "I pledge to my flag", you know, but anyway it was , so--but, I am learning to speak it and to say it and I don't speak it as fluently, but I, I get by when I am with Spanish speaking people. Story_ID: 9028 Speaker 1: Mr. Harris, who taught Negro history and--and--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) He taught this in the--at the [George] Cleveland Hall branch library, right? Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) But he--he--but--. That's right, Hall Branch, and you know, and Hall Branch library, it was great. I mean, I know libraries are changed a great deal now, you know, I know they're getting away from the Dewey decimal system and all that and now everything's computer, but I used to love to go there and thumb through all those card files, because you could see--you, and the books that you liked especially, and you could see how many other people were, were wanting to use those (unclear) (unclear) you could tell that some of the cards got so worn out because they'd been used over and over again, but--. They had ;ott;ediscussion groups at the library too, and--but there was a woman named Miss Hart? [Vivian Harsh?]. I can't remember how to spell her name, but she was--but, --I know--Miss [Charlemae Hill] Rollins--what was--Rollins. Oh, no, I can't think of her first name. I--'cause I wrote a song about her, but it's--that someone wrote--she's a--she wrote "The Christmas Gif'" --G-I--not just "Gift", she said, "Christmas Gif'". But-- Speaker 2: Another story--. Speaker 1: Yes, but she was a librarian who was very, very popular, and she'd go--she went around to other libraries giving talks and also creating--and read a little bit from her own books and also creating poetry. But you know when I found that Gwendolyn Brooks was the person who stood out and--you always want to know if any of the black people were writing some of this or--I started becoming acquainted in high school and in junior college, especially, with people like [James] Baldwin, you know, and then Paul Laurence Dunbar. Story_ID: 9029 Speaker 1: I will remember, when I was taking a course in public speaking, and, and creative writing at a junior college, Wilson Junior College [Chicago, Ilinois], and--so, I was the only black student in the class and so they were--the teacher was making her assignment about what piece of literature a person was going to read in poetry, and then she assigned me to Paul Laurence Dunbar.Well, he wrote in what they called "Negro dialect". I said, "I can't read--" because I couldn't--you know--you, it's a skill that you have--I mean you have--to write it as well as to read it, so I (laughter) but she just decided--she assigned me that because she felt, well, I should be--maybe that's the way I speak, but I--but anyway. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) It does take a lot of skill to read it and understand it--. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Exactly, it's like reading Chaucer or something like that, yes, yes--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Right. 'Cause you got--and people that write in dialect, they use different ways of describing the dialect. So, Dunbar, once you learn his, his, his way, and then it may fit another one. Speaker 1: Well, you know, , but, that, as I say, that's an art to write in that style. But, I read-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Do you--you think it's important-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) My bro-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) --for people to write that kind of-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) You--do what? Speaker 2: Do you think it's important for people to write in dialect? Speaker 1: If, they are writing from experience. If they are writing from experience having heard this--you're putting down exactly. You don't have to--it's like, you don't have to butter it up or make it so it sounds (unclear). If that's--but a lot of things we cannot really write down because--you'll say, or someone'll ask you,"who do you think so and so, did such, and such a thing?" and you say, you'd say, "I don't know," and a lot of the kids say, "I'uh'no", now if you try to write that, I don't think I could--"I own' no", that's something that's--but there are people who like Laurence Dunbar, who will capture, he must have heard people speaking, because he wrote this thing about this about--this story about--a party, my brother introduced me to that, and he said, "Oh, chile I went to a party--." Well, this is the way people who spoke and, and, the people, common people. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Do you know a little bit of it? Can you-- Speaker 1: "Yeah, you know something, I went to a party." "Oh, you--honey, you should have been there." Well, you know, and then--goes she goes on and describes, "Well, so and so, Lucy Somebody, with her--" you know, went into how she was dressed. "Oh, well, you know chile, she just (unclear)" but you could really, you could--the way he described it, you could just feel that you were at that party too. I have been--so you go, first of all,--I've been to a party, you should have been there. You know, so it makes feel like, "Well, since you were there, what happened?" So these people came and then, and then when they start describing all the foods and all the food that you had--so--but--a--lot of people like to say "Y'all" when, you know, just because they think this is something they're being "in" by saying, "What y'all want?" and many times it's directed to, to blacks (unclear) because, they'll think that, "This is how Southern people talk." I said "But, but not just black Southern people. I said, you know when you go over and visit the South, the people speak, they eat, you know they'll say 'soul food' here [Chicago] (unclear) you go to the South, everybody is eating the same thing. You know what I mean. (laughter), Okay. And they serve you with, in plentiful abundance of the food, really abundance of the food so you, you don't have to worry, and they--when you go out to like a restaurant with people and sometimes you will have a Reverend along, and if you are not keen on what's happening there, and you'll start like I did. One time I had a piece of chicken in my mouth because I was hungry. I had been to a workshop, and this man said, there were about twelve of us there, he says, "Daughter, we pray before we eat down here" (laughter). So, the chicken leg went down. But, anyway, so this is--but, it's always an abundance of food and cooked well, and they--I love to go to the cafeterias because you can go to these low-cost cafeterias, and a lot of people who are in their senior years who are--or retirees, they can get anything, everything, buy cornbread. I love cornbread, and see when I was growing up we had cornbread--we had--my mother cooked real well. We drank buttermilk. I never hear people talk about buttermilk anymore, but we--and sometimes I put a glass of buttermilk and then I put some cornbread in it and stir it up, it would, tasted very good, and then we'd have chicken, fried chicken and then we'd eat cake along with it. You know, so there are just a lot of--and with black-eyed peas, and we--and then another thing I never hear, if you didn't have too much in the way of money--well you ate neck bones a lot. There was a (unclear) (laughter) you never hear people goin' say, buy neck bones, unless they pickle them in a certain way now, they'll get something real fancy. But, a lot of people--so when they'll say, "I want to go to a soul restaurant", but, its, but it's--black people can capitalize on that, because they say, "Okay you wanna goi in--they think this is way--this is only how black people eat. That's a Southern--that's really a Southern way of eating and cooking and you go anywhere in the South and, of course, New Orleans had their own special, you know, lots of Creole cooking and all kinds of all--but anyway it's--so--. When I came up we like--my mother and her sister--my mother's sister's name "Willie Mae Johnson" and we called her "Big Mama", my brother [Thomas H. Jenkins] and I called her "Big Mama", and sometimes she used a, a kind of dialect and I remember walking down the street and we saw a man, and this is on the South side of Chicago, there was a man that went in a uniform and he was going along and he was rattling the doorknobs a lot and what-not, and I said, "Oh, look at that policeman, he must be checking on things." She says--now she says something, "Dat ain't no policeman, he ain't nothin' but a do' shaker." Now, can you understand what I said?- Speaker 2: (Simultaneously). Yeah. Speaker 1: He's not a policeman. He's nothing but a joke--but she minimizes his role, he's not a real policeman, he just shakes doors (laughter). Speaker 2: "--nothing but a door shaker." . Speaker 1: "He ain't nothing but a do'-shaker." (Laughter). So, these things like that, these are very important to me to keep, you know, going, but--I don't use a dialect because that isn't how I speak. When we were kids--'cause of most of our parents came from the South. Most black kids' parents came from the South and their grandparents. So, you would be playing "One potato, two potato, three potato, four, five potato, six potato, seven potato, more. Well, we didn't say that, we did the dialect, we said, "One buhtata, two buhtata, three buhtata, fo'," --say "fo'"--"five buhtata, six buhtata, seven buhtata, mo'" instead of "more", so, and sometimes I'll have a workshop with teachers now, and say "Now if you are not too fancy, maybe you can do this is in dialect, you know, and we can--so we can show the dialect from--." But a lot of people think that all Southern people talk the same way, but if you get a North Carolinian who says, "I don't talk like this in the South Carolinians" and the South Carolinians don't talk like the Georgians, and you know, and so the West Virginians speak--so, they all have their different sounds, just like the people in the East, the New Yorkers and the New Jersey people and they all have a different sound. Speaker 2: (Unclear) Boston is different. Speaker 1: See, you are from the east (unclear) when you say Boston, you almost said it like the Bostons. See, I say Boston, you say Boston, see (laughter), but most people when they think of Boston, they always think of Boston, the Bostonians. But anyway, I just think it makes the world much more colorful that people do speak in different sounds. Now, some of the young people, high school kids today, they have their own way. I don't know what you call it, but sometimes they're--they will be walking past the house, and they are having a great conversation, it would be--it's just like they're speaking another language, because they have devised a language today where they can understand what they are talking about. It's not just like the straight-out dialect, it's something else. I'm not sure what it is, but--. Speaker 2: Yeah, it defines their generation. Speaker 1: Exactly. Speaker 2: And they want to separate themselves (unclear). Speaker 1: And they can do it very well. So I'll be talk-, I'll be walking with someone and I'll say, "Did you understand what they said?" "Uh-uh. No, not at all." But they're having the greatest time. Story_ID: 9030 Speaker 1: Back to high school, I guess. When you were in high school again, did--you were exposed to [Paul Laurence] Dunbar and other--at DuSable (unclear) a lot of times now you talk to young people, they don't know who Paul Laurence Dunbar is, and if you are not black you almost certainly--you are certain not to know. Speaker 2: And--and there is something that I saw on television recently, , about DuSable. No, it wasn't--that was a separate incident but there was something--a great thing about Chicago. They had all the people mentioned, but they did not mention Du Sable. (Unclear). Yeah, and , I thought that was kind of--somebody overlooked that, you know, because he was certainly one--. Speaker 1: yeah, that's been going on for years, the overlooking of DuSable (unclear). Speaker 2: Jean--I always would say "Jean Baptiste Pointe DuSable." And I think that he is the one who originally wrote this--they have a--in DuSable High School they still have this on the, the wall in the assembly hall and almost anyone who's ever attended there will know. But I als- I can start it out and I say, "Can you finish this?" "Peace if possible, but justice at any rate." And that's still, that's still on the walls of DuSable, but I think that was DuSable. Jean Baptiste Pointe DuSable, of course, the kids used to say, "Where do you go to school?" "I go to Disable." (Laughter). Yeah--you know--I know they just, you know. But, what I hear, I said, (unclear). I graduated 1942. That is when I graduated and I thought, "Well, this [2002] would be a good year for me to go back and visit." I should go back there and just see how DuSable is. Two oh two. That's goin' a few years. Story_ID: 9031 Speaker 1: Yeah, do, have you--do you perform much on the South Side [of Chicago, where Jenkins grew up], at all? I mean-- Speaker 2: I, I perform everywhere there are children. Yes, I--the South Side, all--far south, (unclear) south, I just--wherever people invite me, and, and I always, when--I'm on the South side and especially if I'm with a lot of you know, African American people, (unclear) use to have a group on the South side, they just with 'cause they are in tune to this--that you're representing me--I was--I think, you know, when 'Sue', the dinosaur came to the Field Museum, well that same day it came to the Field Museum, I was entertaining some children at the Museum of Science and Industry, and so they were mostly four and five year olds, and mostly African American children, and I said, "Girls and boys we have a new resident in Chicago, who is sixty seven million years old. I wonder if anyone can tell me who that might be? Cause there had been a lot of talk about it you know, on t.v. A little girl said, she raised her hand, she says, "Yes, Barney! (television dinosaur character)" (Laughter). So anyway, I said, "She's on the right track." (Laughter). That's so--(Laughter) Story_ID: 9032 Speaker 1: You know we, we were talking about--I was talking about the libraries, how they've changed and some of the people who--and I was saying "Miss Rollins", but I want to say her full name because I remember, "Charlemae' and Charlemae [Hill] Rollins, and she was one of the noted librarians in the Chicago area, and I use to see her a lot at [George Hall Branch?], but she--. Speaker 2: Can you spell her first name for us, and her spell her last name too. Speaker 1: I know the last name is Rollins, R-O-L-L-I-N-S, and I think it's C-H-A-R-L, C-H-A-R-L-A-M-A-E. [sic] I think Charlemae, all together. Charlemae Rollins. Yeah. cause I had--she had received an award for a book that she wrote. I think the "Christmas Gif'" and they asked me for this particular meeting that she was going to be receiving it, to write a song for her. So, I wrote a song for her. as being a great librarian, you know, and that she reads a lot of books, but she writes them too. I said, "Charlemae Rollins, we're awfully proud of you," you know." So the children could get a good idea. Story_ID: 9033 Speaker 1: You're talking about your [interviewer Larry Crowe]--your son, and being a muralist (laughter) (simultaneously), I know but I like (unclear) because one of the highlights in life was, it was photographer who became a good friend, Bernadelle Richter, is "B-E-R-N-A-D-E-L-L-E and the last name is "R-I-C-H-T-E-R, and she, she got a grant, to do mural painting--I mean photography around different part--first around Chicago, where they started out with that wall that, that--on Forty-Third Street. Speaker 2: The Wall of Respect? Speaker 1: The Wall of Respect. That was the first one, yeah, and then the people liked what she was doing, so then they--she got a grant to do this mural photographing around the country. Speaker 2: She photographed all the murals that (unclear)--some of the murals--. Speaker 1: Yes, around--on the South Side, and then around different parts of the country, and you really got to know neighborhoods and people and sometimes we even ran into gang members who were very curious about our being there, but yet, sometimes the head of the gangs said, "Well, well", you're doing something that's gonna include us well, fine, you know, so, photographing is fine, you know". So, but anyway, that's another way of telling a story of a community, and its too bad that there isn't more done around the Bronzeville area. Because, but, murals are pretty good, because I know, I think, Bill Walker, [William] Walker, yeah, he was one of the muralists, but, and I think they have some at Malcolm X College, they have some murals, and it's--it gets away from doing the graffiti, doing something more constructive. Story_ID: 9034 Speaker 1: I always think, of course, as an adult, I just realize how much richness we have in our culture. You know, sometimes people try to tell you well, well, they've studied the blues, so they gonna--they will tell you, "this is what the blues is"--and, but I'll remember, see the sounds like I said, you cannot do dialect unless you've heard it a lot, and but, I remember hearing people hum, just hum in a way that it is so soulful and so mournful that it's very--unless you tape them, which you can record it, I mean to be able to really hold onto it and I--once I was living at the YWCA on the North Side [of Chicago, Illinois], McCormick YWCA, and there was a maid who was tending the rooms, but when she was in the hallway, she would be humming. She hummin' in a way that reminded me of like down in Alabama, but when I went to, to the church with my grandmother went, y'know-- it was just something that you just don't hear all the time, and--. But the blues, the real blues and--in the way that some of the blues players--like even B.B. King and some of the other people, but, who--they sing, of course, there it's mostly in dialect when they--they are telling stories in their songs. But, a lot of people they try to break it down to a point where you, I mean, you know, that it's sort of like clean, cleansing it, you know, that, that's not how the blues was written. You shouldn't try to, to analyze it too much, and there a lot of--why you see a lot good blues players and singers, and they are creating sometimes--they'll sing one verse over three or four times, and it's always different. You know, it's a--it's, y'know--'cause it's capturing--they've got the spirit and how they feel, what they are thinking about at the time, so--but, but I know that as, as I say, as a teenager in, in high school you never--you used to hear about blacks being slaves and you--they talked so much about the slavery and not so much about what any of the slaves had done and how there was a great movement then--going and when they escaped it wasn't ever portrayed like it was a great movement going from the, from the South to the North to Canada and to freedom and what-not. So--but, when you become more sophisticated when you get in college and then you, you can start reading. You can read history books and you really know more about it. Not that you are just going to carry a perpetual tag on your shoulders or anything, but it's good to--I always feel that it's good to know background because this is how you can go forward. You have to know where you've been and what's happening today and then we can focus--this is how I with, with even with children, I just feel that there is a lot of things, you know, that you can learn from them and then you can share with them, like when I would go down to work in New Orleans [Louisiana], and I was asking some of the children, "Would you share some of your songs with me?", and there was one boy who sang, he was saying, "We sing a song called 'Black Children Was Bo'n." I said, "What? Would you say that again?" He said, "Black children was bo'n." I said, "Oh, you mean black children were born." He says, "No, black children was bo'n." And, so when he--so when I recorded it I just--and it's (singing) "Black children was bo'n, bo'n in America," you know, "b'on"--but he says, not "born", it's "bo'n", and so you have to capture it, you can't change it around because-- Speaker 2: You really can't sing the song if you change the dialect. Story_ID: 9035 Speaker 1: One time someone criticized me for not--it was at the time (laughter) 'cause I hadn't had my hair natural, so they say, "Ella, you are not black enough" and then when (laughter)--when I would speak, when I was speaking, "You don't speak"--I said "What's(unclear) what's--?", "You don't speak like you're black." You know, like on a recording. I said "Listen, I've been around lots and lots of people, and I know my background, and I know and, I, I don't, I'm not afraid of looking back. I am always sharing part of my family with people." But one's--as you--(unclear) people ask me, "What country are you from?", sometimes, because I'm always asking when I ride in the taxicabs, I tell to children, I say, "I go around the world in taxicabs." Because you can, you always meet somebody from Nigeria, you meet somebody from Pakistan, or from India, and from, sometimes from Jordan and what-not. And, so I always try to--"Can you share how you just 'Hello'? How do you say, 'How are you?'" And, many times, I'll get into these cabs and I'll say, "You sound like you are from a distant, a long distance away." And one man said, "I'm from Nigeria", and then, 'cause they always feel that we don't know our, our, his--geography (laughter) --in the States, he says, "I'm from Nigeria, West Africa". So, he was letting me know where--I said, "Oh." So, I know that there was a man, a Mr. Williams who use to teach. He was an anthropologist at Roosevelt University. It was a college at the time, and he did a, he did a big book on--a book--it was a black professor, on the Gullah dialect, and how it's very much like some of the African sounds and languages. So he said it's very much like Yoruba and Hausa. So, I got--when I read his book I said, "oh, boy." So, when I knew the Nigeria in the west, I said, " Do you speak", I said to this man, "Do you speak Hausa?" And he says, "No." I say, "Do you speak Yoruba?" He says, "No." Then, I thought, I've run out. I don't know what else to say. I said, "Well, what language do you speak?" He says, "I speak Ibo." So I got myself another language, you know, Ibo. I said, "Well, how do you say 'How are you?' in Ibo?' He said, "Kaydu?" (ph.). I remember cause you go up the scale, "Kaydu?", and so when I, I finally met another Nigerian, and he says, "I speak--" --a lot of them speak Yoruba--and they say "No, we don't--" said "I speak Yoruba." I said, "But you, you probably know a little Ibo." " I don't speak Ibo." I said, "Well I am going to try some on you." I said, "Kaydu?" He says, "Adumah (ph.)", and he answers me right away (laughter) He says, "Well, I do know a few--(laughter). So, I, I, so this is what I do. I try to, you know, travel in this way, but in children, first to learn about themselves. You know where you're from. Growing up on the South Side of Chicago and then I can go to many different parts of the world from--but learning who you are first, you--when you go there, don't try to be something that you are not, you know? And the people will appreciate--cause you are going there and you are going to embrace some of their culture. Share some of yours, embrace some of theirs and when you come back, you, you have something to share. Story_ID: 9036 Speaker 1: I just want to go back to high school for a minute, cause we never really got out of there (laughter). Speaker 2: I did (laughter). I graduated. Speaker 1: Yeah, 1942 (unclear). Upon graduation from [DuSable] High School did, did you--what, what--did you take art courses in high school? Speaker 2: Well, art was--see, all these (unclear) see, we took art, and art and music. All these things were required subjects, you know, yeah--and the language, at least four years. Speaker 1: Was Dr. [Margaret] Burroughs there when you--? Speaker 2: Dr.--oh, yes, oh, yes, I, yeah, Marg and I go back a long way. She was there young, she's the one who started the South Side--well, you know what she--the art center. Speaker 1: The South Side Community Art Center. Speaker 2: Yes, oh, yes, and now got the DuSable, y'know, Museum which is really great. but you know when I graduated from high school, well, as I said, I was going to try to look for a job, and there were not a lot of openings for black teens. Black people, period. So, I went a lot of different places, and one of the reasons I still--I mentioned I still use, chew Doublemint gum is because, I went to all these places and I finally went to Wrigley Gum Company, and I went there, because I had filled out so many forms, and it was always rejected. They only hired whites, you know. Speaker 1: Now when you graduated from high school, did you have any idea of career, or did you just think I-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) No, I was thinking about going to college, but mother [Annabelle Walker Jenkins Skinner] at that time felt the boys go to--my brother [Thomas H. Jenkins] went to college and then I was supposed to work. So I worked, you know, they said that because, "you know, eventually, you'll get married and someone will take care of you." (laughter) Speaker 1: So you just had the one brother? Speaker 2: One brother, yes. And so, so when I--when--I finally went to Wrigley Gum Company, I said--so there were about seven or eight white girls out there filling out these applications and going in--so the next thing they disappeared. They had gone into the factory, I guess, and here I am out there. I had my application. The lady says, "May I have yours?" I said, "I wanna know if you have--" --I didn't fill out mine--I said, "I wanna know if you have any work for people like me. For my color?" She says, "You have to fill out your application. You have to follow the rules like everybody else." So, I filled it on out. Then she came back and she says, "I think we have a spot for you?" "You do?" I was so surprised, I said--she says, "Can you work today?" I said, "Oh, I have to go home and ask my mother." She says, "Don't you have a telephone?" I said, "Oh, sure." She phoned my mother, and she said, "She can start right now." (Laughter), because see, this was gonna be helping--adding a little bit to our home, you know, because we were not a very--I mean we were a poor family, and so I did work there, and so I thought work--so now, I said I'm going to chew Wrigley Gum for a long time because they did--. "But (unclear) what I was doing, it was rather interesting, because it was during the war [World War Two]--start of the war making K-rations for the service--I mean for the servicemen. So, we were--they had--it was something like little the little boxes, something like Cracker Jack boxes, a little bigger, a little longer, and I was a waxer, and so you'd pin these boxes on a line, and then they would travel and then a big wax pot, and they would be lowered in there and they'd come out and then you'd fill them with--I think (were) they filled them with what they called--stuff they called "dog biscuits," you know they are hard. I got introduced to "Spam" a little round can of "Spam". A miniature package of cigarettes, a package of Doublemint--Doublemint gum, and a chocolate bar, and then that was sealed up and was sent to men across the seas who were in trenches. So that when it rained or if there was water, they would still--these would still be protected. So, I worked there for a while. Then I worked at the University of Chicago delivering--I was a mail--I was delivering classified mail to, I guess these were physicists and chemists, but I didn't know. Speaker 1: And, oh, so you were (unclear)--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah, the metallurgical laboratory. I didn't even know what metallurgy was or anything, but yes, that was the, the beginning, before the bomb was created. Speaker 1: They were developed (unclear) the bombs--. Speaker 2: Yeah, and, I know there was a very famous mathematician. He was a--I think he was a mulatto, and his father worked in the government. But, it was J. Ernest Wilkins [Jr.] I felt he was, he was very, very famous and he had graduated, got into university. He had graduated from the University at--I think at when he was twenty-one. You know, from the University of Chicago, and he was--he did a lot of the math work on the bomb, but anyway, but his pastime he would--he spent, reading funny books, you know, cartoon books, that is what he spent his time (laughter). So, but anyway, so, but, from there I, I was doing this--(unclear)--there were three girls who worked for the various scientists, you know. I saw names like Oppenheimer, Enrico Fermi (ph.) all these people, and she said, "oh, why aren't you in school? Why aren't you in college? Why are you delivering this mail?" I said, "well, cause I need to add to our income at the, the home. I need to"--. So, she said, "well, listen, you can go to junior college. Junior college, she said is free. You just have to pay for the textbooks." I said, "I'll talk it over with my mother, and finally, I really--my mother said if you can have this and work part-time and--so, I did that. Story_ID: 9037 Speaker 1: I was twenty-one when I entered junior college. [Wilson Junior College, Chicago Illinois] That was in 1945, I think, you know. Let me see now, let's see, forty five to forty seven [1947], yeah, '45, yeah. And, of course all the kids seemed so young, cause, you know, cause, I mean I was--twenty one seemed old at that time, you know. That's how they are. And so, I went there, and I went and I really--it was--you became an adult, real adult, because the language that the people spoke was different. The subject matter was different. they were more intellectual. They had different programs, and so you got your real, studying of, about museums and the--all the artists, the great artists in the world. So, with--humanities was a great subject, and social science, and psychology, and all these things. And, then--and so I gradu--you know went there and then I graduated. My brother [Thomas H. Jenkins] had to go into service. He was in service over in Europe, you know. And, so, but then I--after graduating in 1947, then Roosevelt College [later Roosevelt University] was downtown. It was a new school opening up because there had been so much prejudice shown by a school over--though I won't name the school, but it was a downtown college where the black kids were not being treated very well. So this new group was very, very open, many different nationalities, and all kinds of subjects that you could take and what-not, and even, they even had table tennis there on the first floor for one while. And, so then I--I went there, you know, and that--but I didn't graduate from there. I went there and then I decided to go--some friends of mine talked me into going out to the west coast. So, I--but I was always working and going to school. Working and going to school. Didn't go right from one--. So, I finally wound up graduating [1951] from the San Francisco State College, now which is a big university. Speaker 2: Were your parents upset that you, you left Chicago for the west coast (unclear). Speaker 1: My, my, my mother [Annabelle Walker Jenkins Skinner], no, she just--she had said, "If you are looking--", I said, "I'm looking for something, I am not sure what I'm looking for" you know. And, I was upset myself, because I took a train ride and I cried all the way to the, to the west coast. But, anyway, it was--but it was great because all of a sudden I see mountains. I see, you know, something new and different people and, and I decided--well, I had to try to get a job first, and then go to school, and I think how I first (laughter) got my first job was--I was on a picket line of some sort for some, some rights of--. So there was a man who worked in a recreation center in Albany, California, and he said--and I said--and he said, "and we have table tennis in this (unclear)," and I said, "You have table tennis? Oh, I think I'll go to your--go over there" and so I went over there to play. Well when I was over there, I saw teenagers playing, and they were playing table tennis, but they were hitting, striking the table with their paddle, you know, if they would miss the ball. I said, "You know, that's not good for the table. I said, you know, you'll make a dent and then when your ball comes over you are going to miss it." So, they--"That's a good idea." Then I said, "And if you had--show you--if you handle your paddle a certain way, maybe you could probably strike the ball more successfully." So, a man came over to me, he said, "I like the way you are working with those young people." He says, "Would, would you like a job?" I said, "Yes!" (Laughter) He said, you can be a recreation director, okay? So, you know--and so it's, you know, part-time and,--and, I said, "Oh, that's just great." He said, "Well, we can only--"--at this time they said, "We can only pay you seventy-five cents an hour." I said, "I'll take it." (Laughter). And, so, finally it worked up to more hours and I--well it was--the thing about it that actually led me to my working in the area of group work, I finally--after I went in--I finally went to school, San Francisco State--moved over to, to San Francisco, and then they, they offered me a job on a full-time basis at the recreation center. "Why don't you stay here after college?" I said, "No, I want to go back to Chicago, and see what challenges I can meet there." Story_ID: 9038 Speaker 1: When you were in San Francisco State [College, later San Francisco State University], what did you study then? Did you study any music there or--or--at all? Speaker 2: No, still, still--it was a funny thing, you know, 'cause, I say that I am a natural musician. I just (laughter), I always liked folk music. I liked Latin music, I liked, you know, I like the blues. You know, it's just the kind of things that came to me and I--I had a good--I had a good ear. I hummed. I whistled. It is during the time that you were not supposed to whistle--the girls weren't supposed to be whistling, but I, and so, that just--but, but, but in San Francisco--because I had been singing a little bit, folk music in little coffee houses, back even in Chicago. So, out on the West Coast--. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Were you doing the same thing in Chicago, singing in coffee houses? Speaker 2: Mmm-hmm. Speaker 1: Be-be-be-before you left? Speaker 2: Ah, let's see. I know I was working at the camp. Let's see, I think I--let see. I am trying to think when I did that with the coffee houses. Maybe, maybe I did the coffee--I know on the west coast I did. But, I know I did some back here in Chicago. Oh, I know back--when I was doing in the coffees houses, because--I was working for the YW--I got a job at the YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association] as a teenage program director. And I was let's see. I know '52 [1952], I think '52 to '56 [1956] but all while I was being a program director, I was also singing--apart--in the evening at the coffee houses. Story_ID: 9039 Speaker 1: I just wanted to meet Chicago as a challenge, and--but my brother [Thomas H. Jenkins] said "Don't take a job on--in the suburbs or outside of Chicago. You've been away for four years, you know, you, you're gonna be losing your friends if they don't know where you are." But anyway,--so--. My brother taught for, oh, I guess for twenty-five years at the University of Cincinnati [Ohio] and he attended the University of Chicago under the G.I. Bill that he got from the G.I. Bill when he got out of the service. And he's-- he majored in sociology and--and then he took a while because he did--it was, he got his masters in the University of Chicago, and instead of a doctorate he wanted, he was very much interested in city planning so he, he got a fellowship to go to, to, Harvard [University] and he was there for, for a while, and then he took a job as a city planner, and I said, "Oh, why don't you come to Chicago." He says, "Well, no, he said, I think that smaller city might be better." So he was there for twenty-five years and then when he, he retired a few years ago, he retired emeritus, so he had--still had his, I guess his office and he still belonged to the faculty club, place to park on campus and a secretary, so, you know (laughter), goes with emeritus status. Speaker 2: That's great. So he did pretty well-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) But, my brother and I used to play table tennis a lot together and he, he's a tennis buff and so am I, but we--sometimes we met over in Wimbledon [England] or the French Open and what-not. Story_ID: 9040 Speaker 1: I didn't start actually flying until about 1965. I never--I just always, you know, train or something like that, and so, the--I guess they were having the exposition over in--the New York World's Fair, and they were going at a lot of the folk singers to go over there and sing--. Speaker 2: Was that the one they had in '64 [1964]? Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) I think it was '64 [1964] -- well yeah, so--but anyway, they wanted some of us cause it was gonna be 'Stevenson Day' and they wanted all of us--so many of us--I went down to the place where they were going to give the tickets. I said, "Could you give me the money so I could buy a train ticket?" They said, "We're not, we're not doing anything by train, we're doing it all by plane." So, that's when this friend of mine who is, is now my manager [Bernadelle Richter] and who is the one who stimulated my really traveling more and making my career a little wider and more international--got me on my first plane (laugher). And so I got on this plane, you know, I didn't understand anything about it, but when--all of a sudden when I got up in the air, I thought how much I had missed all my life, because it was--and I--you know, I believe in God very thoroughly, and and--by the creativeness that this world, and this universe we have so much and so much and so many trees, and the oceans and the flowers and what-not, but those clouds, I've never saw so many changes--the formation of clouds and the sunsets and sun- You know, I could not believe that all that happened up there and--(accidentally taps her wireless mic), Oh--did I do something? (unclear) And so I felt, boy this is a lot of beauty. And, I--many times I think of over the years I have written many meaning my poetry by being up in the air, you know, sometimes I am counting stars coming from areas where you can see stars, and then you know when, I mean when really see just numerous stars. Story_ID: 9041 Speaker 1: People, you know, oftentimes call me and ask me, they say "Well, Ella we want you 'cause you are a storyteller. I said, but, I said, "I am a singer, I am a folk singer, I'm a chil-, a children's entertainer," and he said, "But, Ella, before you ever sing any song, you tell all kinds of stories prior to the song." And, that is true, and, because I always feel--well, it's the kind of thing you learn when you are singing in folk clubs, and at coffee houses, you always added a little something about your song that you are going to sing. If you were singing about chain gangs, you talked about 'Leadbelly' and all kinds of people like that. And then I am always talking about, you know, I try to keep the history of black people alive with, not only just African Americans but with people, period--children, especially--by introducing them to personalities like, Mahalia Jackson, and, and sometimes--it depends on what the age group--I would ask them, "Does anyone know who Mahalia Jackson is?" And some--every so often someone would come up and--"It's a gospel singer," but all the other children can listen, and, like I was telling you about Cab Calloway, and, because he did the 'Hi-De-Ho' so much and I, I wrote a song about the 'Hi-De-Ho' man, and I said, "I know a man, the man that I knew they call him the king of the 'Hi-De-Ho', then have the kids doin' "Hi-De-Hi-De-Hi-De Hi" they say--but they like to imitate--"Ho-De-Ho-De-Ho-De-Ho", you know, it was really, you know, but, its--but this--they can grasp it and some of them have seen the movie, "The Blues Brothers" and I said, "Well, that, that was Cab [Cabell] Calloway in that movie," you know, so. But, music is something that has been a part of me for a long time, as I say, I used to--and it was just--and, as I say, my mother didn't want me to whistle because it's--there was an old theory about "a whistling girl and a crowing hen will come to no good end." That was something--(laughter). Story_ID: 9042 Speaker 1: You were going to whistle for us. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right. But first I want to say something. There was a time, you know, when the--they'd have that little poem that I mentioned [on the previous tape] about girls not whistling and women not whistling, and yet I remember on the radio they always had these whistling contests, and most times women won the contests so. But, anyway, so, I said now I am--, of late I've been whistling to babies, for children and for dogs and cats, and I always say, they all smiled. So let me, I'm going to see if I can whistle for you. Speaker 1: Dogs smile? (laughter) Speaker 2: (Whistling bird calls. Now, when the children see this they keep looking at my hands. They think I, I'm holding something. But, anyway, so, I said, "Well, you've heard the yellow bird probably, well my name is Ella and this is the 'Ella Bird.' This is what the Ella Bird sounds like." But, that except that one time I was--I always ask permission to parents if I can whistle for your child, and that's, see that's another one of my aspect of my musical training (laughter), my musical growing- up. And, so, so I did this music with children who were about seven and eight and I whistled for them, and then they came back to the restaurant, they left--had left the restaurant and then I said, "Oh, did you leave something?" She says, "No, but could you show or explain it that you don't swallow birds?" So, I had to take my hands away and just show and whistle, with much more difficult to whistle without putting my hands up, but I showed them that I--. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Now what does the hand movement do for you when you whistle? Speaker 2: It--It's something like when I play the harmonica. I--it gets me into it. Speaker 1: It get you into it? Speaker 2: Yes. (Laughter), and then it's almost like the magician who does certain things and it gets your eye focused, so you're focus, you hear the whistle and then, then, but you hear the fingers, and then you think, "Maybe she has something in there". So, it's, it's--I don't know, its just a ploy, I guess. Speaker 1: Probably a magical thing, for the children who are watching. Speaker 2: Oh, yes, and, but, but babies--but some dogs don't appreciate it. (Laugher). Certain dogs will, they may react negatively (laughter), but most of them--but, but it gets their attention. It's a funny thing. I've gone into, you know, the veterinarian, in the waiting--the turn for my dog. I have a long-haired dachshund, whose name is "Louie", yes. Story_ID: 9043 Speaker 1: Sometimes on the weekend I would be in these folk, folk clubs, you know. It was during the time when people really listened to you. Like a coffee house, you could have reams of verses and no one gets bored or anything and they are only drinking coffee or tea or juices or what-not. Speaker 2: There is a folk--kind of a folk revival was going on during the late '50s [1950s] and early '60s [1960s]. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) That's, that's exactly, during that time, and it was really--there were just numerous places you just--so, I would like--I always enjoying listening to people, as well as performing, but I--so you, you could--you learn a lot about history, you learn a lot about geography, you learn about people through these songs, you know, 'cause is it like 'Long John', who was--it was about 'Long John'--he was a man who was on the, you know, chain gang, you know. You've read about--'cause I--traveling, I saw a couple of chain gangs in motion, you know, and so these are real things and, and then the rhythm and the rhyme and then you find out about "Leadbelly" [Huddie William Ledbetter] , you know Lead--he had been on them, and so, there are lot of things in the folk music that you can learn a great deal about this history, instead of just reading history books, you can--and--. Speaker 2: And, the folk movement was also sort of parallel to the civil rights movement (unclear), the revival of folk music and the civil rights activities. Speaker 1: Well, I was, I'm, I was a person who, one of those persons who was always signing, you know, any kind of paper that says, you are gonna help, yes, help, better man and woman's kind--but, I was, way before the real so-called "Civil Rights Movement" came about. I was--I was picketing, sitting on at counters--because there were some downtown restaurants that did not cater to black people. Speaker 2: Here, in Chicago? Speaker 1: In Chicago, yes, and I don't wanna--'cause somtimes people are still around. But, anyway--so sometimes we'd go, especially during their lunchtime so that we're--this would really do something related to their business, because if they--if you had too much going on, people wouldn't want to sit and eat there, but I--there were sometimes two white friends would go in. They'd be served right away, and then, then we'd come in and then they'd say, "We don't have this." or "We don't have that," and then they just let you know that they were not serving, and then I said, "Well, you served them." Then they said they wanted all of us to go out, and then sometimes you had to call the police, and then sometimes the police would come and said "Well whatever, what, what are they doing? Are they, they causing any difficulty?" "No, they just want to be served." He said, "Well, why don't you serve them?" (unclear) But, there is--but I have been doing--for years and years, before it became so popular that civil rights--where, where I felt the need to be on a picket line to go down, like one time it was down at the University of Illinois, where one of the places was serving everything for whites, they could sit down and eat there but when they--when blacks came in--these are students--they said "to go", they just--they didn't, they said "to go." The person ordering it didn't say "to go," they just said "to go" so you, they automatically wrapped yours up(simultaneously)-- Speaker 2: So you didn't stay. Speaker 1: Yep, yeah. Story_ID: 9044 Speaker 1: Were you part of an organization, or did, did someone organize these, these--sit-ins? Speaker 2: Yeah, there, there, there, there were a lot of groups, there were a lot of groups organized like "CORE" I think, the Committee on Racial Equality, that was--. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Were you a part of CORE? Speaker 2: I was a, yeah, the Committee on Racial Equality [sic, Congress of Racial Equality]. It was a good group, and boy, could I think what was the name, it was a man who played, played a guitar and he sang, passed away some years ago, but--. Speaker 1: Did you--did you work with Milton, with Milton Davis in town while you worked (unclear)? Speaker 2: No, but you know who I did meet (unclear) when you think about the civil rights movement? The, the man who's--he's--he's--I think he is a senator now--. Can you name any of the ones that's in the Washington now? Speaker 1: --. Speaker 2: He was a, he was a, --. Speaker 1: Durbin? Speaker 2: No, he was a somebody who was--he still's working, but he--. Speaker 1: An Illinois Senator? Speaker 2: No, (unclear). Speaker 1: State Senator? Speaker 2: From--he's from--he's from, the--I think he's from the East, but--his first name may be John [Lewis?], but anyway, he was one of the Freedom Riders. He was a Freedom Rider. He and another fellow [James Zwerg?] use to go around together and they were constantly in and out of jail, and I was working with a group of teenagers up in, somewhere in Wisconsin, and they came and, told, telling us about what the Freedom Riders do, and what, what it was important for them to carry on their activities, and they told us this--they said, this song about, (singing) "You'd better leave segregation alone. You'd better leave segregation alone, because they love segregation like a hound dog loves a bone", and they, they, the two of them together--there was one black and one was white, and they, you know, and then they taught us another song, freedom and (unclear), I thought, boy, I wanna do more, you know, and, you know, but you, what--so, I would go on--I would go different places--what you call?--restaurant testing, with a group or not, because--and when I was starting to tour, singing, when I first went on my, one of my big tours for the School Assembly Service, there was a young--you had to drive. I didn't--I don't drive and so, I hired a young man who was a flautist, as well as a drummer, and so, I worked him into my act and everything, but we ran into such prejudice along the way, and, some good things happened, and some bad things. I said, "But we're here for a specific purpose, to entertain." But we would go in places where it's a--somewhere right near in Illinois, and said, went into a restaurant because we were going to have to do a program at 8:30 that morning," and the people said, "Sorry, but this is a private club." I said, "A private club?" I mean, it just looked like a regular restaurant. I said, "I don't know what you mean." and he said, "It's a private club." Then, then the mailman came in. I said, "Well, is he a member of your club?" "Miss, all I can say, it's a private club." So, I wrote a big sign that says, "Does not serve colored here", and then, 'cause we were still using the term "colored" at that time, I put it in his window, you know, so that people could see it, and then he was very angry, 'cause then when we walked a few paces he came and he took it out, you know. But--ashamed of having that there, yet he wouldn't serve. And, so, when places--. Speaker 1: That's the kind of conflict that I think that finally made it--that turned the tide, that people were doing things but that they were actually ashamed of. Speaker 2: Exactly! Speaker 1: That if it was known to the general public they'd be ashamed. Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly! So--went to a place--I remember it was a place called Wakarusa, Indiana. I liked that name--(unclear). Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) (Unclear) Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Do you know how to spell it? Speaker 2: (Laughter), yeah. I think it's W-A-K-A-R-U-S-A, I think, Wakarusa, Indiana. But I was fascinated by that name and it's a place-- well, when we first arrived there, it's a small community, small. We were in this car and right at the--the lights turned red. We were there, there was somebody next to us peeking in this window, and looking at us because I don't think they had any blacks or in that area. Then, I can almost still see that barber pole across the street from us, and there is a man with--had been, had been shaved, but didn't--he was looking out from under his sheet, and all of them were looking out the window, and then all the people on this side looking, cause we were there. I said, "Well, we're, boy, we're really popular, I said, Harold." And so, anyway, then we finally went on and on trying to find a place to stay. We finally--no one would say--" No. Everyone, said, "No, no, no". So, there were two women, two sisters, they said, "This is our place, we can rent rooms if we want to. Nobody tells us what to do." So, these were white people, too, and they said, "But you stay upstairs and he stays downstairs." "Okay, bye." and so, then I said, "is there a place to eat around here?" They said, "well you go down the street there"--now, there--the accent's there, the dialect was what they called the "Hoosier", so, they had a Southern sound. (Laughter), but anyway, so we went on down, we went to the--I don't know if you've ever been discriminated against, if you've--if anyone had any prejudices against you--there is something in your stomach that curls up. A knot gets into your stomach, and in your throat and you can hardly swallow, cause you don't know what to expect, so you wanna go in there cause you're hungry and wanna eat, but you don't know if it's gonna be "yes" or "no", "We do not serve colored--do not serve Negroes." So, we went in there, nothing but white people were there, then we sat at a table at the other end, and we sat there for a while. Then a woman came and she said, "Do you know what y'all want?" You know, she said, "What would you like?" She gave us the menus and so, so I was real happy just reading and so we ordered and had very good food and the best apple pie I've ever tasted, and you know, and, like it was (unclear) and, you know, "Y'all come back", you know. Um-hum and so, but before we left the restaurant, Harold was looking out, peering out at the window. I said, "What are you staring at, Harold?" He said, "well, I see some strange looking people in black. Got black hats, they're in a black buggy." These were Amish people. I said, "Harold, you are doing the same thing that those people are doing. You are staring because you don't know about them, they didn't know about us." I said. So, we finally find out about these Amish people--have beautiful farms, and some of them were in my program in the audience and, you know, some of the children--and that they made furniture, they made wonderful breads and what-not. I said--but, then it got to me, a lot of things happen when people are just--they don't know about one another. Maybe this is why people are prejudiced, because they don't--and they are afraid to know. Speaker 1: For fear of the unknown? Speaker 2: Yes, and sometimes, and so, but then--I said--and, one time was in a place where we were around two o'clock in the morning--no place and we are going to have to do a program early that same day. So, I called--I went to the school, and the lady says, "we don't serve colored here." I said, "Have you ever?" She says, "Well, I don't know," she said. I said, "Can I speak to the manager?" "The manager is not in." I said, "Well, may I use your phone?" I phoned the principal at two-o'clock in the morning. I said, "Sir, I am sorry to bother you, but we are supposed to be at your school in about a few hours, and we can't find a place to stay." "Where are you now?" I say, "At this motel, but she said she doesn't accept--". She said, "Let me talk--" He said, "Let me talk to her." So, everybody knows everyone in the town, so anyway, next thing we had rooms. So we stayed. Yeah, yeah. But, this kind of thing, but yet we went to some communities where people just--the farming communities especially, very nice, you know, just open, and so, but I finally had to say to the people who were hiring me [the School Assembly Service], cause it was a year's work--I said, "Unless you can tell me where we can stay along the way, I will have to discontinue this contract." I said, I said, "It's too embarrassing. It's not worth it." And so they checked everywhere, where you could--and so we had no more problems then. Story_ID: 9045 Speaker 1: Did you ever have a chance to attend the Highlander Folk School in Tennessee? Speaker 2: I didn't get there. I know that's, I know it's Monteagle. Monteagle, Tennessee, I think it is. I remember when you are going--like if you are going to Florida, when you happen to go through there, there is always a snowstorm or something going in that way. I got an invitation, but at the time, a lot of disruption came about. There was somebody, set fire to it or somebody--remember some people bothered them down there. They were trying-- Speaker 1: 'Cause they were doing this, to set this up as a Highlander folk school, there's folk singing being taught there? Speaker 2: "Oh, sure, yes, I know a guy (unclear). I know a lot of the people went there, and I was planning on going too. But, then it was so much disturbance there--. Speaker 1: It was more, though, I mean famous for civil rights organizing (unclear)--. Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: And a lot of them--everybody from Dr. King and Rosa Parks, everybody went to school there to learn, you know, about community organizing and how to organize (unclear). Speaker 2: But they did a lot of folk, cause I know the folk singers, yeah, yeah, oh, yes. But, yeah, oh boy, that's a--I am surprised that you know about the Highlander Folk School 'cause--yeah, yes. Speaker 1: I think they are building some kind of a (unclear) memorial or something (unclear). Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Memor-? Oh, is that right? Yes. Well, you know, it's too bad that some of the, more young people today, who come from African American backgrounds who don't take people like King and Rosa Parks, and seriously, you know, because so many young people are getting jobs and especially in the sports field they're becoming millionaires by the time they are eighteen or nineteen. And they say, "Well, you know, I don't have to have any cause, you know. I've got my money, you know. And so, you know--and so--you--but we, I think--I don't anybody should forget where they are from and where they're--I was just recently in Ireland and I was seeing, it had something, it said "Irish Town". I said, "Why is this Irish Town? Because, at that time they were not allowed--they could only work in this particular community, and they had to only go and so they labelled where they could live and stay and called it "Irish Town". I mean, They're people that have prejudice everywhere but I get concerned, 'cause, when I asked you if you've ever been discriminated against, that's an awful feeling. It's, its--I've had it so many times because working the South, using those fountains where--and then, when--even when I was on this tour with Jimmy Payne and we had to go and people wouldn't Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Tell us about (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, people wouldn't even serve us with, when we were with Jimmy Payne. You know he was the great instructor for dance. He was a dancer. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) You got to say it on tapes 'cause people need to know who Jimmy Payne is. Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah--Jimmy Payne--I-- Speaker 1: He was with Katherine Dunham a long time. Speaker 2: Right, he worked with her and--. Speaker 1: And he was a was a docent at the DuSable Museum--just for the sake of people listening. Speaker 2: Well, Jimmy just passed away two or three year ago, and that was the first real commercial group that I worked with, and so, he, he formed nine--a group of nine--all of us, nine--two cars, and so we were just going to go and entertain in universities and colleges for black colleges and universities in the South, and he said, "We're not going down there to start any, any problems. We are not there to work out any problems, or any other causes. We're just going there to entertain. So we, we went and--but we got to a point, we went into a, a drive-in, and the person said, "We--you, you are supposed to flash your light, your, your lights to let 'em know you're out there." So, it's coming out, they say, "Oh, nothing but a bunch of 'niggers'". That's what she said. So,--. Speaker 1: Those are the days when they had car hops right, when you pull up--. Speaker 2: That's right, so you got to-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) They'd come out to you. Speaker 2: That's right. So, she says, "Oh." So, then she finally said, "Well, if you really--." He said, "We've been--" somebody said, "We've been driving a long time, all the way from Chicago." She said, "Well, why don't you go back there. There're some--" You know, there were some black people making sandwiches in the back of the restaurant. "Why don't you do that, and maybe they'll fix you something." So everybody was collecting all the money. I said, "I don't, don't want anything from that restaurant. I said, "If I can't eat there, if I can't be served, I don't want to pay in that fashion." I said, "No, I can't, that's against my--my feelings, you know." So, you know, course I know they were driving and what-not, they were hungry. But, I said, "No." I'll wait until go somewhere that I can eat." Well we had a Puerto Rican fellow, and a Mexican fellow, who, you know, one of our people, who was a part of our company and they were very fair-skinned, and so there was a lot of (laughter) problems there, because black people thought they were white, and white people thought they were white, and they used to wonder why they were with us, and they didn't--they couldn't go into the restaurant because (laughter)--. Speaker 1: Because they were with you, right? Speaker 2: That's right, and so they learned a great deal about race relations and what-not, you know, and--but, we just went on and tried not to get into any big, big, problems. I think, we came by a place--I think at one time, Martin Luther King use to live somewhere--was it in Birmingham, or somewhere? He lived in another place--. Speaker 1: Montgomery [Alabama]. Speaker 2: Montgomery, and then his--his house was all lit up, you know, it just showed where he was--but--so we, we went, we had done some work there in that area too, but we just--the, the leader, you know, Jimmy, didn't want us to get involved in any conflicts and what-not, but we were very aware where we were, and--. Speaker 1: That wasn't during the '60's [1960s] (unclear)? Speaker 2: Yeah, '58 [1958], I think it was about '58 [1958]. Yeah, and so, um-hum--. Speaker 1: This was before you, you--went to the World's Fair and all that? Speaker 2: That's right, right. Speaker 1: Now, now, tell me this now, what is the sequence? Now, after your tour with Jimmy Payne, did you--? Speaker 2: See, that was just about, I don't know, was it about two weeks or something like that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, then, I was with--so, but then the--it was a year with the School Assembly Service, and that was in the early-middle '50's [1950s]. Story_ID: 9046 Speaker 1: When were you invited to this television show that kinda launched your--? Speaker 2: Oh, that was called the "Totem Club", and I said that was over at the Museum of Science and Industry [Chicago, Illinois]. That's where Channel Eleven was located at the time. Yes, that was the first, that's where they first were--right over there, and you-- Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Is it Science and Industry, or (unclear)? Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] No, Museum of Science and Industry, on the South Side fifty and--and so that's where it emanated from. And so--as I've at times said, there's this one little--we were just playing bongos and singing on the sidewalk, and this man came up and approached us and said, "Like what you do. Could you come over and be a guest at the 'Totem Club'?" Well, the 'Totem Club' was with Joe Kelly. He had been a person who was with the 'Quiz Kids' years ago, and he had a five-day week program, but--and he wore a--although he wasn't a Native American, but he wore a Native American headdress. And, but, and, so, dpeople were always saying, "I saw you on the Totem Pole." I said, I wasn't on that Totem Pole." I said, I wasn't on a Totem Pole, it was a called the 'Totem Club,' anyway. But anyway, so we did it and--. But anyway, I started learning about the gestures that engineers make on TV, 'cause I had finished saying whatever I was going to say, and we did our drumming in ten minutes. It was a half-hour show. The man kept saying, like (makes hand gestures)--I guess it meant expand. (laughter). Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: (Laughter) So after that he told me. So then, I started talking about drums. Oh, all kinds of drums and how many different people use drums, etc., to try make it up there. But, anyway people seemed to like it. They wrote in, they had all in again, and then, next time, he said, "I wonder if you would have a--on Thursday we have an opening spot. If you--we don't have money to pay you, but we'll give you if you have any guests, we'll pay for their union, this and that and what-not, their fee and their travel fee, and so, anyway, so I came on and I had made this album called "This is Rhythm". So, I called my show "This is Rhythm," and and so this way I--instead of--I had people from all over coming. I went to the universities and tried to find people from different backgrounds to come, and I had children in the communities from, you know, some, some, some of the playgrounds and what-not, and they came and we, we did some work there, but I--but a lot of people heard the show, and they would write in, and had a good responses. Story_ID: 9047 Speaker 1: Some people said, "You know, Ella, you should really--I had Josh White on, had Big Bill [William Lee Conley] Broonzy, I had a lot of people on, you know, as guests [on her television program]. They said, "You should really record some of the things that you, you know, that you perform." So, someone suggested that I go to New York, take a--four songs or chants into this man, Mr. Moses Asch, who was the head of Folkways Records, and a man who directed me was Kenny [Kenneth S.] Goldstein , and he wrote liner notes for blues albums, and he said, "Well, we can't use you, you know, in our album, cause we just do the blues." But, this man in New York, take that and tell him I sent you." (laughter) And I went there and that was how I really in 1956, and this man listened to these four little chants--which--my first album was released in 1957, cause he--he--I talked to him, he listened, he says, "You know, you, I think you are going to make--do a nice job, I can see you focused in the recording field, he said, but look--you should have a little bit more instrumentation," 'cause I was just playing the conga drums, you know with the--and, "--and a little more variety," he said, "but in the meantime, let's sign a contract." So, he signed me right then and there. He said, "And if we can knock material together, we can at least come up with a ten inch LP for you. So, that's when they had their "long playings" [LP phonograph records], and so, in 1957 my first album 'Call and Response: Rhythmic Group Singing'. I decided that's what I was doing, you know. Story_ID: 9048 Speaker 1: The title [of her first record album, released in 1957], let's talk about the title, "Call and Response." Speaker 2: Because, you know, the call and response was a system that was used in African music and it certainly, and--if you hear the music of India, you hear music of the Middle East, you'll hear this--but as almost also, if you go to the some of the churches where the gospel singing you will hear this preacher chanting out one thing. Then the congregation chants back something else, or chants back the same thing. It's a, a kind of a community spirit where you're focused upon--there's a caller and there's a re-, --your response is the other people--. Speaker 1: Can you give us an example, just a brief example? Speaker 2: Okay, well, I'll just do a little bit of it, and this is one that Charlemae [Hill] Rollins use to do this a lot. I'll say, "Dd you feed my cow?" And your answer is, "Yes, ma'am." Okay, did you feed my cow? Speaker 1: Yes, ma'am. Speaker 2: Could you tell me how? Speaker 1: Yes, ma'am. Speaker 2: I say, "what did you feed her?" You say, "corn and hay." What did you feed her? Speaker 1: Corn and hay. Speaker 2: What did you feed her? Speaker 1: Corn and hay. Speaker 2: Did you milk her good? Speaker 1: Yes, ma'am. Speaker 2: Did you milk her like you should? Speaker 1: Yes, ma'am. Speaker 2: Say, how did you milk her? Say, "squish, squish, squish." Speaker 1: How did you milk her? Speaker 2: Squish, squish, squish. Speaker 1: How did you milk her? Speaker 2: Squish, squish, squish. Speaker 1: Did the cow get sick? Speaker 2: Yes, ma'am. Speaker 1: Was she covered with tick? Speaker 2: Yes, ma'am. Speaker 1: How did she die? Mm--mm--mm. Speaker 2: How did she die? Speaker 1: Mm--mm--mm. Speaker 2: How did she die? Speaker 1: Mm--mm--mm. Speaker 2: Did the buzzards come? Speaker 1: Yes, ma'am. Speaker 2: Did the buzzards come? Speaker 1: Yes, ma'am. Speaker 2: Well, how did they come? You say "Flop, flop, flop." How did they come? Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Flop, flop, flop. Speaker 2: How did they come? Speaker 1: Flop, flop, flop. Speaker 2: But you see, after you--but then the next time you do it, you just say it by yourself, so, "Did ya feed my cow?" Speaker 1: Yes, ma'am. Speaker 2: Could you tell me how? Speaker 1: Yes, ma'am. Speaker 2: Well, what did you feed her? Speaker 1: Corn and hay. Speaker 2: Well, what did you feed her? Speaker 1: Corn and hay. Speaker 2: Did you milk her good? Speaker 1: Yes, ma'am. Speaker 2: Did you milk her like you should? Speaker 1: Yes, ma'am. Speaker 2: How did you milk her? Speaker 1: Squish, squish, squish. Speaker 2: How did you milk her? Speaker 1: Squish, squish, squish. Speaker 2: Did the cow get sick? Speaker 1: Yes, ma'am. Speaker 2: Was she covered with tick? Speaker 1: Yes, ma'am. Speaker 2: Well, how did she die? Mm--mm--mm. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Mm--mm--mm. Speaker 2: How did she die? Speaker 1: Mm--mm--mm. Speaker 2: And did the buzzards come? Speaker 1: Yes, ma'am. Speaker 2: Did the buzzards come? Speaker 1: Yes, ma'am. Speaker 2: Well, how did they come? Flop, flop, flop. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Flop, flop, flop. Speaker 2: How did they come? Speaker 1: Flop, flop, flop. Speaker 2: Okay, so, you know, (unclear) but you see, you're going back and forth, and you, you're really in tune to one another, and this is one way that I've been able to share songs, rhythms and rhymes with girls and boys and having them learn by--because we are feeding them information, and to have them listen, they have to--and--for them--to pay attention--they really have to listen--and then they play a game and they--it's a game of concentration. You can do it with--using other languages and what-not, so it, but-- Speaker 1: It's a learning process. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: I mean, it's really interactive, and, so you--what you do is, by using these traditional musical forms you're able to--create an interactive learning experience for the children, which is-- Speaker 2: Exactly. Story_ID: 9049 Speaker 1: I was very happy, you know, with Mr. Asch--Moses Asch--of Folkways, he was the director of Folkways and the creator of Folkways Records. Now, it's Smithsonian Folkways, 'cause after Mr. Asch passed away, the Smithsonian Institution purchased our company, so, they're still providing an area for me to record in and carry on and then all of our music is still being carried by them. You know, that people can come in and if they want to learn more about what all of us do, but and what I do with children so--but--and I know I'm--I have a website--and now, I'm a member of the dot com family, I always tell the children (laughter). Speaker 2: Yeah, I've been to your website. Speaker 1: Well, well, you will see a lot of things (laughter), yeah, but anyway, I think it is very, very important for--as I said, I am very conscious of the disturbances that we are having in the world today, and, and I think, and I look at children, and I think of them, like you [interviewer Larry Crowe] have a three-year old and you have a twenty-year old, and these are our future, and we want to have a better world for them, and let's hope that they're gonna create an even a better--much better world, and so, I--if we can put it--we don't have to preach to children, we don't have to be on a platform and we--like in some of the songs that I sing and some of the rhymes and what-not, but I try to inject some of that just so that they are going to be aware just like, like Mahalia Jackson--that she's a gospel singer, and, well, remember, she--I--and-and--I say this, and something, you know, like eighth and ninth year-old--grade--ninth--grade--eight--young people, they think, "Well, I don't need to hear this or--. But, history, the, the, they shouldn't be afraid of history, and I always said, "Well, Mahalia Jackson, she had a great voice and if you haven't heard her records, you should really hear a tape, you should really hear them. But she had a very, very fine pianist, Mildred Falls--and sometimes when Mahalia might just forget how the song begins, she'd would always give a little interlude with the piano, and she'd say, "Oh, that's where I want (unclear) Mildred." But I remember on the radio, I heard her sing a song, that I said one of the verses I try to let children--latch onto it. It's a song called "I'm On My Way"--but this is all about the freedom that the Canaan Land, it didn't say Canada, the Canaan Land. (Singing:) "I'm on my way to Canaan Land, I'm on my way to Canaan Land", Then you should go up. [Singing:] "I'm on my way to Canaan Land, Glory hallelujah, I'm on my way.' --this is Tubman leading people and then, then I always felt, latch onto this verse if you don't latch onto anything else. (Singing:) "If you can't go, don't you hinder me. Now, if you can't go, don't you hinder me, if you can't go, don't you hinder me, glory, hallelujah. I'm on my way--you can be on your--think about a goal, there could have been a journey and then somebody tries to deter you--I said, "Some of us can go to our goal immediately. We know where we're going to go and nothing disturbs us, but others, most of us, there is something along the way that might keep us back a little but, if you have your goal in mind go on towards it, and if it's trying to make the world a better place, and understand it, you know, like and if you can learn other languages, you don't have to always just speak the language--your native language. Learn some songs. Do--Arabic, now, I think people are gonna--need to learn, Spanish, you know, now Russian, a lot of people studying Russian, and, I think, I always think of--like just learning to count in languages. Little children, you can go down in nursery schools and they are counting from one to ten in Spanish, you know, saying "Adios" and "Buenos dias" and what-not, so, but I think we--getting a better world is going to need--all of us are going to have to work together, and, but it starts, I think learning about ourselves, and I said to the children, "If you have respect for yourself first, then you can have respect for other people", and you appreciate who you are, then maybe you can appreciate who other people are. It's very important, I think this is a serious stage that we are going through now, and it's not a, a playground, not like, you know, you can't things for granted, and so, we don't wanna frighten children, we don't wanna to have them afraid--but I think you need to give them some assurance that we are out there with them, and I think, slandering other nationalities--bad things, you know. Story_ID: 9050 Speaker 1: Children are going to pick up certain things on the street. They will--they'll get the rhymes. You, know there was a time that I couldn't--and I even think now, I can't stand for anybody to say when they are trying to work out something, "Eenee, meenie, miney, mo" I grew up with that when I was a child, because it was a slander against black people, the beginning, and then of course black people decided their own against others, but I, I still today, when somebody says, "Well, let me see, where should we go? Eenee, meenie, miney, mo--". And I just--it's something about that, just goes through--because the thing was "Eenee, meenie, miney, mo, catch a nigger by the toe, if he hollers let him go, eenee, meenie, miney, mo. Now, I grew up with that, that was hearing whites saying that, but then the black people got theirs, "Eenee, meenie,(laughter) miney, mo, catch a white man by the toe, if he hollers make him pay twenty dollars every day." (Laughter). Now, they--this is how things (laughter), you know what I mean? (Laughter) People have a way of getting back, you know, but I just say--I can't, I can't share that, I might write a book and have those how-- because to show what goes--how people start. Children--a lot of people start when they are children--. Speaker 2: These, these--. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) These are rhymes. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) --street rhymes evolve don't they? They change. Speaker 1: Oh, yes. Speaker 2: I remember in the late '60's [1960s] early '70's [1970], there use to be a piece on the street they would used to say, "Ungawa, Ungawa, It means Black Power." Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Oh! (Laughter). Speaker 2: Which is something that--they took "Ungawa"-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Yes, yes. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) --from theTarzan movies, which actually means "hotel" in Kiswahili. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Oh my goodness. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) --then they made it (unclear) Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Yeah but--but-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) you know the They, they, mold it for what they mean at the time. People constantly change these, and, you hear kids in the neighborhoods, you know, in Roseland, you know. I've been in that neighborhood a long time. Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, Roseland, that's far South, that's where the good houses are (laughter). Speaker 2: And the little--remember the little kids on the street, a lot of them from Mississippi and they, the way they pronounced "four" is "fo'". Speaker 1: Yeah, that's what I, that's what I was talking about, "one potato, two potato, three potato"--yeah. Speaker 2: But they make up--they have rhymes about Michael Jordan-- Speaker 1: Is that right? Speaker 2: Almost any contemporary--they evolve these old rhymes into new ones constantly. Speaker 1: Sure. Speaker 2: And, it is just a living--you know. Speaker 1: You are talking about the changes like that. I remember that 'Wall of Respect' [1967 mural]. They would--they would put--they would always change that wall, because if there were people who they didn't think made--enough--enough of a input, you know they took you off that wall (laughter) they would write you out and they put somebody else--oh, yeah there were al--they were constantly changing that wall. Wall of--yeah, but I thought it was a great name for it "The Wall of Respect," but I've seen people around, even in the Lincoln Park area where lots of the old murals but the--have been coming--they are coming down because people--new people buy the buildings like, then they want to have something else over them. They don't know anything about what these--symbol--they don't know what they symbolize so, they just, just--they could paint over it and that's it. So, the cause--but the cause should never be the lost. Once working at a university, in the summer, I was in Indi-, Indiana, and there was a--for my-- I gave an examination for the people and--they--and it was to let me know how, why they joined it--and the early childhood field and what is the first rhyme they ever came across in their home that they were taught? And, boy, some of them boy, I mean some of them were not very nice--the first rhyme, but this, they learned in the neighborhood in their community, yeah, and so, some of--many of them were similar, but some of them were something that (unclear). But I said I could never share that with children, but in a book it would be rather interesting to analyze why people--. Speaker 2: I don't think anyone has ever written a book about rhymes and--about street rhymes and (unclear). Speaker 1: Yeah, it's--I mean that kind of thing, yeah, it's so--but anyway, but you know, many people growing up because in the community it was called the "dozens." You've heard of that, the "dozens"? and boy, I tell you--and there was rhyming in that, but they were, but they were, but then there was storytelling, because you know, that--when you could talk, when you about different members of different people's family and you just make up, you know, and one tries to outdo the other. So, okay you said this, now I'm gone tell you I saw you--something tell you I saw your cousin doing this, this and that, and she was this and that, you know, so. It's making up and creating but sometimes it's negative, and you want to get a little more positive thinking. I don't--for the children coming up they should have something really to look forward to, look up to. Story_ID: 9051 Speaker 1: Rap music now, now reflects--people's hostility, I guess towards one another and--. Speaker 2: Who does? Speaker 1: A lot of the rap music (unclear). Speaker 2: Oh, oh, yes, yes. Speaker 1: Rap reflects (unclear), it's, it doesn't all do that, but there's certainly, I mean the way people are referred to and--. Speaker 2: And the children, sometimes the younger children, they get caught up with the rhyme and the rhythm and they, sometimes they don't really know the depth of what they're really hearing and what, you know, cause I--a little boy was saying to me, I was out there--it was in his classroom, I was visiting and this little kid said, "I got up a rap I want you to hear," and this thing starts out like, "and when you walking down the street," something, "you grab some old woman's purse and this, this and that." I said, "Do you hear, hear what's--? (laughter). I mean, you know, it was showing you how you can stay ahead of the game, but by doing something against somebody else. So, anyway, but I always, you know, some of the highlights, you know, in my life has been progressing from one area to another, from grade school to, to high school and then to college and all the time I am seeing new things happening. I'm learning and not only just book learning, it's rel-, relating to other people and from other places, and then with traveling--that I was mentioning that Miss [Bernadelle] Richter had encouraged me to do, because you, you suddenly go places and you find, a little like working with the Chinese children, they have a little more stylized movement, but then I brought the blues to them, I--you know what I'm sayin', and had them snapping their fingers (laughter), you know, so this is--but, and then we--even one of the tours I was with the Kennedy Center, there was a blues--y'know, a couple of blues people came over and, so this is hitting other cultures with your own and bouncing back and so, and so, like the children, the little children in China would clap their hands, very just softly like that (clapping hands) when they meet a new person, some new--and I, I wrote a little song--I just--I said, "Every time I stopped singing you, you clap your hands like the Chinese people, "In the People's Republic of China. Little children clapped their hands. To welcome all the visitors. From many different lands." But it's a little rhyming and then telling you, showing, sharing a little bit of their culture at the same time. Yeah, and then over there, "Neehow, neehow" (ph.), you know, they also have a tonal--up in their language--it's tonal, and they say "Neehow" (ph.), you know that's "How are you?" And then they say "Hoow" (ph.) --that's "Fine", "Shay-shay" (ph.) --"Thank you." So, but--you--so I listen, as I say I have a good ear and what I do, I don't speak Mandarin fluently, but I can, I can say "hello", you know, and "thank you," some very important things and then, I learned something, talking about the Great Wall, going to the Great Wall. All these--sometimes children get bored with geography and history, but you can do it in a col-, colorful and creative way, that they will just--you know, they'll like it and I think this is what is happening in the new libraries, the new library system. You don't just have a place where you just sit and be quiet and what-not and read a book or two. But, now you have a lot of things. You have story telling, you have creating images and even some of the children are working on computers and what-not, so--. So, I, I, I like keeping a lot of traditional things. I like writing songs, of things that are happening today, but I, I like--and to focus ahead on the future, like I--things about space, and that--it seems to me I am always writing songs that--then something happens like I--when I wrote "Let's Go Up In Space," well then the Challenger went--went, you know, that was (unclear) because it was "Let's Go Up In Space" and let's see what we can find. Let's not leave a trace behind," something like that, but anyway--. And then when--Princess Diana passed away, this is--but I had written my song before, I said, "My Papa is a paparazzo", well now the paparazzi are the ones who--they were the ones who they thought caused the accident Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) The photographers? Speaker 2: Yeah, and so--so, but--there is a little five-year old girl on this record singing, and she is repeating after me. She can say that "My Papa is a paparazzo. He, he takes pictures everyday, he chases movie stars in their fancy cars before they drive away," you know (laughter) so, but--they--latch on like, people like to--like personalities like, Cab Calloway. Story_ID: 9052 Speaker 1: Another highlight is growing up on the South Side of Chicago, meeting Big Bill [William Lee Conley] Broonzy and he introduced me to the Musician's Union. Speaker 2: Can you--give me, spell his name for us. Speaker 1: It's, I call him "Big Bill", B-I-G, B-I-L-L, B-R-O-N-- (sic) B-R-O-O-N-Z-- I think "Z-Y", it could be "E-Y", but I think it's "Z-Y". Yeah, "Z-Y." Big Bill Broonzy and he was a Mississippian, he came from Mississippi. But, he felt since I was singing a lot, and he said I should join the musicians'--since I was making a recording I should join the Musician's Union. When I there it was around Forty-Third Street, the Forum Hall, wherever the Forum Hall--I don't know if it's still there anymore, and--the--down where there were all these musicians who--but at that time that I joined, it was a--two oh eight, it was Union 208 and the--down where the white--it was a segregated union--. Speaker 2: A black musician's union. Speaker 1: Yeah, it was two oh eight, but on up--Ten was up in the downtown, and they had the better jobs, and they could get the better jobs, you know. But--and so where was I? But, anyway, so--I had an opportunity to meet Louie--Louie [Louis] Armstrong's former while, Lil Armstrong and she had been living in Paris. She had come back, and she was playing and singing in French, as well as, in English, and--and I, I have a book called "The Pictorial History of Jazz," and it has a lot of the jazz musicians of, of the past, and, you know, of today, and so what I do, is when I go to concerts (laughter), I look and see if they are in my book, and I go up and ask if they'll autograph it. So, I've got one from Duke Ellington (laughter), and I've got one from Billie Holiday, and, it's so funny about Billie Holiday, I met her first out in San Francisco, and, so a friend of mine, and--we were in college and I said, "Well, listen, if we go up and see her, I am going to order a tall Coke, and you order something tall and lots of ice, so I can stay and see the whole show. You know, cause the people coming back to your, to your--table, but--the thing about it--. So, we, we had--Billie Holiday had just finished her set, and then she was gonna come out, and she was getting ready to walk over to the bar, and then she saw--I said, I said, "Hello, Billie." I didn't know her from Adam, you know, I just said "Hello, Billie." I just liked her music. She said, "Oh, can I come and sit with you girls?" So, (unclear) said, "Oh, fine," and then someone said, " "And what would you have?" and so, I said, "Would you--?" and so she said, "Don't worry girls," I have a tab here, so, it's--" (unclear) 'cause--we didn't have much money, we were students, and anyway, so everything was going fine, and then a lady came with her camera, and she said, "Would you girls like to have your pictures taken with Billie Holiday?" and I thought, "Oh, oh, we don't have any money for"--. She says, Billie Holiday said, "We'll have three taken, each one of us will have one and she pulled out a wad of bills, and she said, "I'll pay for all of them," and she wrote on my co--I still have that picture at home, "Always be happy, Ella." You know, but it was so strange, because her life was very unhappy during that time. So, I hadn't seen her for many, many years, then all of a sudden she is appearing in Chicago on the South Side, near 63rd [Street] around there, and Cottage [Grove Avenue], and, she doesn't remember me, but I saw her, and I saw she's in my book. So, I said, "Billie, could you give me your autograph on here?" She says--I could tell what she had been through, cause she says, I said, "Would you just sign this over here?" She says, "Let's go down to the light, cause I want to see what I'm signing." You know, I thought, that tells me a lot about what's happened to her, you know. So anyway, I've got that, and--so, it was kind of nice, so I just go around--but, Duke Ellington, I saw him at the University of Kansas. I went to a graduation there and he was the band. He was the, you know the band for the dance, you know, the prom, and he had his white tux and tails on, you know, and, I said, "I hate to bother you Mr. Ellington, but," I said, "Could you?"--he was taking his break, I said, "Could you--you could just write here," I said, "could you give me your autograph?" He said, "Sure." Then he says, "Well, listen, there's [William] 'Cat' Anderson, there's Johnny Hodges, (laughter). He pointed out all these guys (laughter) and so I went up there and got all of their signatures, yeah. So, but, you know, 'cause he was pretty proud that, you know what I'm saying? (Unclear), but he said, but they should know they're in that book too. Yeah--so, but anyway, that's all--teaching history, keeping history alive. For me, people say, "Ella, did you ever think about, like a big book and this and that? I said, "Listen--" "Has anyone ever written anything about you?" I said, but, I just like to keep things alive everyday, and sharing history and collecting history from other people, 'cause you learn a great deal, and not try to get it all at one time, but then whatever I think that I can share but especially with the children, it's, you know, so that they could know the difference between blues and gospels, and jubilee, and all these things. Story_ID: 9053 Speaker 1: I read something that you wrote. You said that children have a natural curiosity, and, and they ask a lot of questions as they-- Speaker 2: And they love, they love adventure, they love adventure. It's like that song, "Miss Mary Mack", you know, they want to know what happened, you know. Dressed in back, silver buttons down her back, she asked her mother for fifteen cents, and all these things, and they jumped so high, touched the sky, they just wanted to know because they got rhythm, there's rhyme, and then there's--what happens to all the--they're concerned. But, they are curious and we have to have answers for them, that, you know. They will ask questions, and all you can do is just be honest and some people who entertain, want to go out and entertain children, or serve children. I said, "Frst of all you got to like children, and don't ever take them for granted. And I said, "And I let the children be my strongest critics." I said, "When they criticize something, then I'll take it and use it, you know," and, but they can tell a phony, they can tell if you're not sincere, and I said, "One of the things I do like, especially about children, is their handshakes are sincere, their smiles, their embraces, all these things are just very genuine, and we can learn a great deal from them." I said, "But let's not exploit them, and you know, and if a child isn't--you know a lot of parents want their child to perform every time somebody, if they have 'em sing or tap dance or something, but when some company comes over, this child has to be on stage--but, only if the child really wants to. You know. But, the children are curious and they know, this is a world where I think a five or six-year old, thinks that going to the moon is "old hat". (Laughter), you know what I mean, they're looking for the next venture. Speaker 1: Well they'e not quite as excited about it. Speaker 2: Yeah--no (Laughter) Because people are always going. Story_ID: 9054 Speaker 1: You've made many, many albums, you've done a whole lot of--(unclear). Speaker 2: I think over thirty-some. Yes, because now they're, say from the ten-inch LP went to the twelve-inch LP, from the twelve-inch LP went to a cassette, cassette to CD and then some of it's in video, as well as. It's a funny thing, I can't remember this man, his name, but he was a, he was a person working years ago when my first album ['Call and Response', 1957] came out, my ten-incher, I was so proud of it, I went downtown to one of the record stores and I said, "Could--I wonder if you could put this in your window, or somewhere?" He said, "Well, it's not a good product, the ten inchee--the twelve inches are much better," he says, "but we'll see what we can do. I'll--(build) something around it." He said, "You know, I'm a musician myself." He said, "I play string bass," and he said, "and I just have new album out." He said, "We can work out something." He said, "Now I want--here--" --he gave me some (laughter) names of stores. He said, "I want you to call these stores, and ask for my album." And, then he says, (laughter) "and I'm gonna call these other stores to ask for yours." (Laughter), And so the people, when you called them, they said, "My goodness, this is about the second call I've had for this album." (laughter). So, anyway, I said, "That was a good start." (Laughter). Story_ID: 9055 Speaker 1: Who are some of your favorite musicians? Speaker 2: Well, you say--well,--'cause you know you can't, it's hard to pinpoint. I'm glad you didn't say who is my favorite, because--you--some of my--because, well there are numerous, but I like people in the folk field--you know, like I've, I've liked Odetta for many, many years, and I used to like Josh White, you know, he, and his son is doing very, very well, and then there is a woman named Bonnie Kolac, and she's--she sings a combination of folk and, you know, kind of rock, but, but I like the (unclear), mostly all the gospels, and just like, the rock--I, if--I actually went down to Memphis this--and, I went where Elvis Presley's Graceland because I felt that Elvis had absorbed a lot of music of black people, and he performed it well, because when I used to be a teenage program director the YWCA, I had to kind of scan the, the records that the children were going to dance to, you know. There were too rugged, you know, too rough., and, so, I remember this woman, "Big Mama Thornton"--is that her--? Speaker 1: Yeah, Big Mama Thornton. Speaker 2: (Unclear), yeah, Thornton, yeah, she--she wrote "Hound Dog", okay, and so, but that was just one of many songs she's written, and you know they use to have what they call "black radio", and, so we had all these people, these songs that were being produced, and so many of the people would come and say, "Boy, you know the white kids are dancing to this music." So, this one--I think Elvis Presley's--Colonel whoever he is, came over and said, "I'd better have him sing some of these songs,"--and, -but, I--you know, it's hard for me to say--with--because I love jazz, just like "Round Midnight" is one of my favorite ones, you know, like, what's his name? (Singing:) "Da, da, de, de, de, de". Speaker 1: Miles Davis. Speaker 2: Miles Davis, yeah. (Laughter), and then just certain songs, and I could hear them over and over again, and it's like I was telling you about (unclear) Spanish, Celia Cruz, she's just one of the people--but it's in the--there are just so many people that I, I hardly ever like to say who my favorites are, because there are so many that I do like, and I--it's a wide range. I care for--I like opera, and what not, but it's just--but, when I'm at home I'll play certain ones, I'll play it over, like the Buena Vista Social Club, like, and Afro-Cuban music. I've played that for, I thinks weeks upon weeks, because it was something so special. If you didn't understand or didn't know Cuban music, and that rendition you could really--you could understand it. You could feel it. You could feel something for the people for everything. So, but, but they just--I know too many people for me to point out-- if leave out some names, it--I become the bad guy (laughter) You understand? But there are a--there are m- I, I have a-- I'm just fond of music, and I always think, like you say you have children and young people, and I'm sure that you, you'd like to expose them to a variety of music and then they make selections pretty soon. You try to expose them, but one of the things I'm really off is people who make too louds of sound, because I don't think it's good for anybody's ears, and I always work with the children, say "Anybody can make sounds--noise, but, let's try to make some music and the music" --and something that is pleasant to listen to or to make or to create themselves, yeah. Story_ID: 9056 Speaker 1: One of the songs, my children both attended schools that are very culturally oriented, they love the song "Jambo". Speaker 2: Oh, "Jambo", oh. Speaker 1: I think they went on a bus they came down either to the Art Institute or somewhere-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Is that right? Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) --where you were performing "Jambo". Speaker 2: Yes, well--. Speaker 1: When, when my son was small--that would have been over twenty years go, but Speaker 2: (Simultaneously)Well, 1973 (simultaneously). Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) (Unclear), was so thrilled to hear you singing "Jambo." Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Oh, that's wonderful! Well, 'cause 1973, I wen-, I had my visit to East Africa (unclear) and that's how they greeted us. "Hello", "Jambo," so, I just made up a little song. It's a funny thing, you know--they--at--when I was there--where they--if you are a senior woman, they will call your "Mama", and it's a "Mama" out of respect, you know, and, I--I remember going on a safari, and I always tell the children about the safaris, you know, and they love animals so you can identify right away, (and?) I say, what have you got there, and look at the animals, and they, they have--I wrote this song on the same album, "Pole Pole, it says go slowly," because they said, that's what the guide says, because there--the animals are there. Go slow enough so you can watch their beauty all (unclear) and you can really see the shapes and get a feeling of the country , and so, so we went on safari, and came back one morn--and we were all tired and so we hadn't had breakfast yet, and so one lady came in and she said, the first person she saw was an African, and she says, "Where is, (unclear), wherever, I'm so tired. I want some water. Could you give me this and this? He says, "Perhaps, if we started with "Jambo" then we could proceed to business. (Laughter). But he always felt that politeness, "Good Morning" and what's more important than "hellos" . So, but anyway, I am glad that you liked "Jambo," yeah. Story_ID: 9057 Speaker 1: I actually got a, a invitation to go down to Clinton, Tennessee, because they were having a big conference and they were going to have meetings where people got panels and one of the people I was going to be on the panel was, was Tom Feelings, and I was looking forward to it because I admired his book so much, and I--you were talking about getting children interested in culture and then your, your children like [her recording] "Jambo". Speaker 2: Just for the record, I mean he wrote (unclear) books than-- Speaker 1: The book--one book was--he--and I think his wife's name was Muriel, and he wrote--it was--and--they, they collaborated one--and, the words and the--someone did the illustration. "Moja means one, "M-O--J-A" means one and "Jambo" means hello. Yeah. J-A-M-B-O. And so these are wonderful books, and I--anytime I sing that song, I always--if I am in a school or a library, I always said, "Maybe if you are in the library, you may have this in your library. If not, it's one of two books that you should have there." And, but anyway, down there in Clinton, Tennessee, they have--I was mentioning that Alex Haley had owned all of this property, but he was running into some financial difficulties, so they were getting ready to make a park out it. The Children's Defense Fund, which is a great organization, came down and said, "We will purchase this land." Well, I went down there and they were going to have a dedication to a new library that they had just built there, and the library was being dedicated to Langston Hughes, and the person who had done the architectural work is the one who had done the Vietnam Wall, and the Asian woman [Maya Lin], and so, she was there and she was very young (laughter) looking, so, I was trying to figure out--I thought this teenager who's here--and asked her if she was going to be a part of this and she said, I said, "And what do you do?" And she said, "Oh, well, I'm a--" and she said, "I'm a sculptor and I am an artist. She said, "I did the Vietnam Wall" (laughter). "--in Washington." So she was doing that and (unclear), but they had lots of people speaking. Hillary Clinton came, and she spoke, and then, oh, have you heard of Dorothy Height? Yeah, Dorothy Height was there. Speaker 2: Yeah, she's the head of the National Council of Negro Women. Speaker 1: Good, well I'm glad you know her (laughter), that's right and she, I met her on the plane, when I was coming--going out there and she, yeah, she's really pretty good. in fact, I first met her years ago when I became a teenage program director for the YWCA. All these people came from all around the world, who were going to be prospective teenage directors, and she was the person who was going to speaking to us all because she was very high in the YWCA. And, so there were people who had came from--a lot of Southern people, and a lot of Southern whites and blacks, and so (unclear) (laughter) there was a word that was going around, "nigra" (laughter) and so people (laughter) and they were meaning "Negro" but they (unclear), and so there was a big hostility being created, so Dorothy Height got all of us together and she said, "Well, you know we come from different places and we pronounce things differently. Now the word, N-E-G-R-O is 'Negro'. All together, now." (laughter), and--. Speaker 2: Some call and response in there (laughter). Speaker 1: As one, one of the black sisters said, "Well, they been sayin' 'nigger' for so long, they can't say anything but 'nigra'.". (Laughter), That's, that, you know, but they were all gonna be working with teenagers. So, but, anyway--but, that's--now that place down in Clinton, Tennessee, I think they have many meetings, they have many group directors and they direct action, nonviolent direct action. They are doing some of the things that King used to, you know, avow. So, but, anyway, I was glad--I was able to get there. Well, I knew somebody presidential was coming, because that's when they [laughter] they saw the dogs start coming (laughter) for protection. But it was--and, it was very, very nice. So, I was glad that they were able to save it. It's a beautiful place, if you can ever get out there. It's in Clinton, Tennessee. Story_ID: 9058 Speaker 1: What would you consider the, oh, the, the highlight or highlights of your career so far? Speaker 2: I, I think one was learning about the harmonica from my uncle [Floyd Johnson]. My brother [Thomas H. Jenkins] and I, even at one while cause my dad [Obadiah Jenkins] and my mother [Annabelle Walker Jenkins Skinner] weren't together for a while, a long time, and so we--'cause my mother had to work hard, and she was a domestic worker. She had come from Mississippi, just only two years (unclear) education and she came up to Chicago [Illinois], and she--when she came to Chicago, she actually put herself through school, and at least got up to eighth grade, and--but we were in a home for just a short period of time. It was called the "Sunshine Home". You talk about the kind of smells you remember and--then, I remember the smell--the aroma of sweet rolls, that I remember those used to come down some kind of chute, and they had the most wonderful aroma. But, I'll leaving that home was a big, it was a highlight, 'cause you wondered, I don't know how children feel today, if you were temporary left in a foster home or what not, (unclear) say is somebody gonna come back and get me? So, getting there and then my mother also introducing my brother and me--my brother is still is--to Christian Science, you know, so, it gave me the real spirit uplift because I had been introduced to the Go-, -you know, to Baptist people and what-not, but this was a different way of thinking, of really knowing about right and wrong. Loving the neighbor, that was very important to me and so that was a big challenge and then getting from high school, going from high school and getting a job, getting jobs and being able to, the others, and being able to travel to the west coast. Traveling to find out who I am and what I'm going to do, and then wanting to come back to Chicago. Another highlight is to meet a challenge--can I get a job, and can I serve? I just wanted to get a job in, group work to work with young people and, and--being able to have a recording field, to be able to really think about doing something like that, and being able to continue and all of a sudden there was a whole new life for me, you know, also meeting Miss Richter, Bernadelle Richter, who did a lot of--she worked for the company, Folkways, photographing for them, but then she, because I, I never was able to do my--the business part of my work, so she was very good at that--and then stimulating me to travel, and and so, that part of--and my--one time I can remember (unclear) meaning, at least going to a live [Chicago] Bulls [basketball] game and seeing Michael Jackson--Michael, Michael Jordan, in person, and there was something--the--feeling the warmth, going to outside the stadium, waiting in line, the doors open, it's live music, jazz music playing, giving you a free cap that says the "Bulls" on it, and then I was being treated to this game, and I didn't realize that I was gonna be at least (lanes?) away from the floor, so (laughter), and, so that was--but the feeling that erupted, and of course, all the people, the girls and boys and some of their parents, all look like they had Bulls' outfits on themselves. You know how everybody dresses like they are players. So, I went there, but there was such a warmth, a feeling for this team. There was a spirit of a family, a feeling of support, it was just so, I couldn't believe it and then I got in the seat, and usually I have to go--at least to go to the rest room or something. I didn't move from that seat, I was so enthralled about the whole atmosphere of, oh, how they were feeling about this team, and how--and the people were wonderful to one another. No one pushed no one, and so that was, that was a very exhilarating experience for me, and my one time ride in the Concord. Well, there and back, (laughter) and that, that was an experience. That was you know, then when you say highlights, and, and you see--I can--what you see when you talk to children about it, and then "how fast did you go?" How long--for what--like what, three hours and seventeen to twenty-one minutes. (It's up one way?), and then (unclear), I was the only one with luggage. People traveling always had luggage, but the other people didn't. They were just going on a business flight. This--we go back and forth (laughter). (Unclear), they (unclear), because they just go away for the meeting, they come back. Just like that. Well, anyway, it was an adventure for me, and I think being in this singing when Martin Luther King came into Chicago, and at Soldier's Field he was there and, I was with a group and we were singing, "We Shall Overcome," and, yes, yes, and so, that was very, very lovely, but, I've been a rebel and people will say, "Well, people are a rebel when you are teenagers and when you are young adults, and then all get so conservative." I said, "I never want to feel that kind of conservatism." I--there are certain things I am not going to try to behave like a kid, but, there is something I feel very strongly about, making peace and love in the world. You notice my little necklace with the people representing from different parts of the world, because I feel that's the only way until we can commune with one another. We've--it's nothing, you know, and then it's not fair to the children for us not to work out some kind of a peaceful arrangement--we've got--because we are supposed with you, you know, the adults and, and we're the intellectual community, but if we are not going to do anything, we've just all gotta--so, cause these are going to be the new little leaders, and they have to have something to focus, but too many of the children have certainly focused upon nine eleven. They know about it, you know and they, and, they so, it's what we do, how we go beyond all that, you know, but, I think history--very impressed with just the name of your group--HistoryMakers, because and if we are doing something worthwhile, I mean, and something that we think that we are doing and sharing, like for me, it's serving children, and I feel I want to serve them in the best way possible, and if it's through my songs, rhythms, rhymes, games and chants, I've been very, very happy to have a recording company who believes in me, Smithsonian Folkways, you know, that I can carry on this legacy or whatever it is. Story_ID: 9059 Speaker 1: We always ask a question about legacy, so, I guess you kind of raised it so, what do you see really as your legacy? I know you've got--you still got some other songs to write and some other things to do. Speaker 2: Well, you know, you see, because, everyday, every time I experience something's, it's been very difficult for me to write anything about what's happened, you know, this big thing 9-11, but I write--I have little books that I have random thoughts--I write down something almost everyday, and it's not to be spectacular, but it's something I feel--but when it gets too--when the world gets so negative, then sometimes I don't want to write anything because--but I just hope that songs that I write, songs that I arrange, they are going to be songs, even some of those additional songs, are gonna be something that's going to be embraced for many years. It's not something that's gonna be just for now, and--but we can focus ahead, and some of the songs, that--that I had created years ago, are still being sung. The first album is still being sold--"Call and Response: Rhythmic Group Singing." I was trying to decide where I got that--I was trying to figure out what am I going to classify myself as? What am I doing? So, that's, I said, that's because when I first heard a lot of call and response chanting besides in churches--it was, you know what, when years ago, they use to have in record shops, they had the booth, the booth, the record booth. You could go in there and listen to your records before you bought them. When I use to go there, they said, "Ella, just don't go on Saturday, because you stay too long, "But, come one day during the middle of the week." So, I would go around the world with--listening to these records, you know, and so, I thought, you know, carrying this, carrying culture and letting me share it, (unclear) if I could document it on records, or on books or wherever, it's where the people can get to it and where people--and like as they say that first album, when you wind up with a new teacher, say, "I just found me a new album and it's "Call and Response: Rhythmic Group Singing.", and here it is it was created in 1957 and, but, it's--and I always say, you don't--when I conduct workshops from time-to-time for teachers, I said, "Don't try to emulate me, don't copy me, but take some of the methods and approaches, and ideas and implement in your--with your own group, with the children that you identify with, that identify they with you, and then you build in your own way, cause as you are an individual, remember all the children--how they grasp it. How they grasp it, that's also--always respect their individuality because we--none of us are the same, that's, and and so some children, they do handclap and they do rhythm better than they do carrying a melody. Some children like can skip better than they can walk. They can walk. Some children run better than they can do this. So, they shouldn't make, don't compare them too much, except for a good reason, and and don't always says, "You can do this, but why don't you--but--you--you--they'll sing, but you just, you just keep the rhythm," and when you say "but", that "but" means, he or she is not as good, what, it's not as important what you do. We are all--whatever we do, it's--we mesh it together, and that's why, that's, so I think children are my bag and I respect them and, and that's how, and I want them to respect me, but, that's how--but if you have to respect them, respect their individuality. Some children are in wheelchairs, some children--others, one young woman that I've been talking to for years, she's blind and she has a lot of other handicaps, but we, we, we talk a lot, a lot. We share many experiences and she has gotten the Bell Award. Her name is Inam, I-N-A-M. Her father is from the Middle East, and when they--when he goes to the Middle East,they always bring me something back, you know, it's--but it's so, it's just wonderful that we have exchange in the bank, you can have an exchange of cultures and if we feel that we have something to share. Story_ID: 9060 Speaker 1: There is an album that is supposed to come out, coming from the Poverty Law Center from the South. Speaker 2: The Southern Poverty Law Center-- Speaker 1: Yes, and, there is going to be a an album, "Larry Long" (unclear) is when he asked me to be a part of it (unclear) record companies together and I was hoping they would include Louie [Louis] Armstrong's song, which was about teaching tolerance, they are going to send it free to all the schools, all the grade schools, and that is his "Wonderful World," and I think that song says so much. When he says that--when he sings that song, I just feel it could be a wonderful world, and so, that's going one of the songs, but they've yos--they've chosen my part as using Arabic. I am teaching children how to say "welcome" in Arabic, and "eh-he-lam-a-se-a-lam" can you say it? Speaker 2: "Eh-he-lam-a-se-a-lam" Speaker 1: "Eh-he-lam-a-se-a-lam" Okay, and that means "welcome" in Arabic--I met at this meeting through the YWCA groups. I met a young woman named Lamese Matteney and she was from Lebannon, Beruit, Lebannon, and she said her father was a professor at the University there, the American University in Beruit. And, she said, "Ella, some day you should come to Lebannon." I said, "Yes, but how would I, I don't speak Arabic. She said, "They will greet you, eh-he-lam-a-se-a-lam, welcome--they will welcome you," and I kept saying, "Say it again, say it again." She said, "Ella, just pretend that you have a slight cold, --"Eh-he-lam-a-se-a-lam" (laughter). So, but, anyway, and so I made a song, I just made a song of it, you know, and put a little rhythm to it, but teaching--but that's what they chosen to use on this particular album, and they have something in other languages too. Story_ID: 9061 Speaker 1: What are your hopes and aspirations for the black community? Speaker 2: Well, I just feel that it would, I'm thinking about, not just musically, I think, you know, I--a lot of--there's a lot of goals, so called "black power" in the world--in magazines like the "Ebony" and the "Jets" and all this, and there are a lot of vehicles through which we can speak. I think that we should try to get responsible jobs, and respect what every job a person has and if we are in the position where we can employ someone, then we should do that. I don't mean that you are not supposed to employ someone who isn't black, but I think, I think there should be more unity like you see--a lot more unity now among the Latinos, and I think we should follow--get, if they want people in office, responsible people from the community in office, then you vote the right way and respect your vote, and then pursue, if, if these people that you've elected are not doing their jobs, pursue them, just like you would any other cause, then--take--write, phone or take a trip, you know, and see that these things are being done, and, and respect, you know, there's, there's a lot richness in the culture, and, we should not way with it totally, but see what's there and, if we could--see what's there and see what we can share, I think, you know, and, so-- I think that--we can rise up to all kinds of positions. There are many positions that are open. There is, you know--so, if it's in politics, if it's in music, if it's in art, if it's in dance, if it's, you know, become the great chef, you know and what-not. There are just opportunities, but, and the ones who are in position to direct, to give direction, don't forget about the young people. Give them some direction. There are many young people who would not be where they are today--in the drug programs, and I know--they, if we had good direction from people who are together, you know, so, and you don't have to be out there again, preaching to--about it. But, being as a friend, as an understanding human and brother, sister, whoever, and, but this is--but, I--feel enriched growing up the way I did, and growing up around the South Side [of Chicago], and--knowing all the things, and being able to then move around a little bit and feel that you know, but, um-hum this is still a part of me, you know. Speaker 1: Okay, just briefly, how, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: How--just, as a, as--probably as a good person who loves children...