 Story_ID: 177867 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Porter Versfelt. Observing is Scott Stearns. Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Vernon Jones, V-E-R-N-O-N, J-O-N-E-S. Speaker 1: Do you have a middle name? Speaker 2: Angus, A-N-G-U-S. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Give us your date of birth and place of birth please. Speaker 2: October 31, 1960, Laurel Hill, North Carolina. Speaker 1: And what is your occupation? Speaker 2: County executive, DeKalb County, Georgia. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date? Speaker 2: Gosh, you know, I really don't know what today's date is. Is it August 14th? Oh, that was live. I wasn't supposed to say that, was I? August 14th, 19-- Speaker 1: Two thousand-- Speaker 2: August 14th, 2003. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're in downtown Decatur, 1300 Commerce Drive, Decatur, Georgia. Speaker 1: Okay, DeKalb County. Speaker 2: DeKalb County. Story_ID: 177868 Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five kind of People magazine-ish type questions that I have to ask you. They're lightweight questions. They don't, they don't require much of an answer, well, a short answer. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: The first one is, sir, what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: You caught me off--'cause I don't like to eat (laughter). Blackened chicken. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue. Speaker 1: A favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Fall. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Stone Mountain, Georgia. Speaker 1: Okay, and sir, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: The feathers come with the chicken. Story_ID: 177869 Speaker 1: All right, let, let me ask you about your family history. I'm gonna ask you about your mother's side and then your father's side. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Ruth Hicks; her maiden name was Hicks, but Ruth Jones, R-U-T-H, J-O-N-E-S. Speaker 1: And what, what, what, what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: She was born in South Carolina, Marlboro County, 1929. Speaker 1: Okay, now what do you know about her side of the family? How far back can you trace her family? Speaker 2: I know that her mother was from South Carolina and so was her father. I'm not familiar with my great-grandparents on her side. My mother's mother was one of many children. And it's my understanding, due to the number of them and their family's current condition at that time, many of the children were given to other people to raise. And my grandmother was one of those that was given to a different family to raise. Speaker 1: Okay, and this, this is the same general area of-- Speaker 2: In the same general area in South Carolina, yes. Speaker 1: Okay, all right-- Speaker 2: Around Bennettsville, South Carolina. Speaker 1: Okay, what was your grandmother's name? Speaker 2: Phyllis Hicks. Speaker 1: Okay, are there any stories that, that she tells about, about the family, any, any stories or songs or anything passed down about the family history? Speaker 2: Well, there was always talk and discussions about, like a lot of black families in rural North [Carolina] and South Carolina, very, very limited education, primarily sharecroppers, taking the hand-me-downs, if you will, not having full access to all the rights and privileges that U.S. citizens should have rights and privileges to, whether it was job access, whether it was have an opportunity to exercise his or her right to vote, how they would have to enter many of the white families' homes from the rear of the house, how many of them felt that they depended on white families as if they were God. You didn't say anything bad about them. You didn't look them in the eye. You weren't sassy, if you will, if you've heard that term before, because they depended on those white families because of their financial and economic status. They did not bite the hand that fed them, if you will. But many of them talked about how they couldn't wait to become an adult, where they could leave home, move to the North, and get out from under those adverse circumstances of being in the South. Speaker 1: Okay, were, were, were there members of the family that went north? Speaker 2: Yeah, there were, there were generations that went north, family members that went north. And they provided--once they got settled in, then they were sent back for others to come up. And then there were some that was just afraid of the unknown; they never left. They didn't know that there was a whole new world out there, just the uncertainty, and they felt that what they had was, in some of them's mind, it couldn't have gotten any better. They just didn't know any better, and they just cast down where they were. They never left, and they just worked hard on the farms. And when they got up some money, they were able to buy their own land or able to send their kids to school. They just, based on their income from working and farming, they just, they just sort of settled in and, and didn't move north-- Story_ID: 177870 Speaker 1: Now what part of the North? Did they go to New York [New York] or Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They were going primarily to New York. My family, my mom's [Ruth Hicks Jones] side, had a trail directly to New York City. That was the place to go. Many families were either going to Chicago [Illinois], New York, or Detroit [Michigan], but our family was primarily migrating to New York. Speaker 1: Okay, that seemed to be a pattern for the Carolinas and New York, you know. Were there any stories about the Civil Rights Movement or that your family tells? Speaker 2: You know, they didn't, they didn't talk a lot about demonstrating and protesting. But it was obvious that there were separate accommodations. I can remember this little place we used to go where we had to order food from outside, from the window. And we would sit and eat on the bench. I didn't know at the time the reason why we never went on the inside was because blacks were not allowed to go in. But my family never really talked about how bad white people were treating black people, in the sense that it, it created some type of animosity within us. But they did say that there is certainly--they told us about how we were treated differently, but if we just worked hard and got educated, the doors would open for us. And so I'm glad that, that they didn't plant that seed of, of hatred against white people. They just said they--as a matter of fact, on many occasions they talked about how good a lot of white people were, how they helped them along the way. But I also can recall my father [Robert Lee Jones] coming back from World War II [World War Two, WWII]. Although he was injured and he was recouping from that, but I can recall him, when he started to work, saying that there were jobs at the local mill where he was working that he just couldn't even apply for. It was just understood those jobs were set aside for others. He didn't have the opportunity to get those civil service jobs that a lot of folks came back home had. And, and the political climate or the politicians in our community, they were black. They were primarily the ministers or the funeral home director. Those were, when, when there were issues, that's where people went to. They were sort of the community leaders. I can also remember when I was young, this, this white man would come along, and he would pay two dollars, a dollar, two dollars--I can't remember--to get black people to go to the polls and vote, and he would give them a card on who to vote for. But there were never any demonstrations I can remember in my little small town, major demonstrations, as it relates to the Civil Rights Movement. But me being born in 1960, voters right of '64 [1964] [sic, Civil Rights Act of 1964 and Voting Rights Act of 1965], I was a little too young to really probably know, not to say that it wasn't happening, but I was a little too young to know. And then as I got older where I can really see what was going on around the late '60s [1960s], being ten, eleven years old, things had started to open up; things had started to break. But still, growing up in that little small town, you didn't have access or exposure to a, a very well educated black community. Story_ID: 177871 Speaker 1: I was just wondering if your grandmother [Phyllis Hicks] and her generation though could see the change or, or--'cause I know she was alive when a lot of, you know--she may still be alive--but the, the changes that were going on were, were going on in her generation pretty much in your mother's [Ruth Hicks Jones] generation, yeah. Speaker 2: It's an interesting thing. As I recall, my grandparents, none of them saw a school wall on both sides, my mom or my dad's [Robert Lee Jones] side. They never went to school. They measured success on having food on the table to feed the kids and a roof over the house. That's how they measured success. My parents' generation, my mom and dad both made it to the third grade. But they talked about how, even then, they had to take turns to go to school because they were primarily a labor force, so that work was needed. The, the white families that they worked for, their kids could go to school, but my families, their kids could not go to school because they were a labor force. And so when they did go, they were taking turns. But they measured success off of maybe having that farmer sharecrop if their kids can get some schooling where they can at least read and write and they had food on the table. And if they got a factory job, again, that, that was a measurement of success for them. Then my generation, it was automatically assumed that you were gonna at least get a college--I mean get a high school education and to go on to college. To my parents, that was major to see their kids go to college. One generation before them, their parents, they never saw a school door. And then a generation after them, their children, they had college graduates. That was significant. They never, never even dreamed--they were just hoping that we would just get a high school diploma. But surely, my mom would talk about how hard things were for my parents and how, how hard it was for them. And they would tell us you guys got it made. You know, you can go to school. You, you, you weren't held from school because we had to work around the house. You have access to public accommodations. You don't have to drink from a separate water fountain. I can recall my grandfather on my father's side being ill. He was Native American--he looked white--was at a hospital, and when some of the family members went to visit him, the darker ones, they had him in a white-only side, and they didn't wanna let them in because they didn't realize they were family members for one, but that was the white section of the hospital. So clearly there was a, their time there was major segregation. And just as I was coming along, schools started to integrate, so by the time I got in high school, high school had integrated. My older brother went to a totally separate high school, so. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 177872 Speaker 1: I just wanted to go back to your father's side of the family, and--but I was just wondering, you know, what kind of stories were passed down. Can, can, can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My father's full name is Robert Lee Jones, R-O-B-E-R-T, L-E-E, J-O-N-E-S. Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: My father was born November the 11th, 1923, in North Carolina--I'm sorry, South, South Carolina. Speaker 1: Okay, and what about his side of the family? Do you know much about them--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: My father, my father's father was Native American, Lumbee Indian from-- Speaker 1: You said-- Speaker 2: --Lumbee-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --Indian from the Pembroke-- Speaker 1: L--how, how do you spell that? Speaker 2: L-U-M-B-E-E. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: From the Pembroke area of North Carolina, eastern North Carolina, southeastern North Carolina. When my grandfather was small, they moved to, his parents moved to a black neighborhood in Dillon, South Carolina. And growing up in a black neighborhood, all the kids married--the boys married black females. The, the, the, the girls married black males. That was the crossover from my father's side. Again, my, my grandfather had ten kids, my father being the second to the youngest. My father was drafted in, in, in World War II [World War Two, WWII] at nineteen. He was injured, spent about three years in the hospital. He had an injury to the neck, to the spine. And afterwards, after the [U.S.] Military and being on disability, my daddy pretty much sort of traveled as a young man. Then he met my mom [Ruth Hicks Jones] and got married and settled down. Speaker 1: Is, is there a story about how they met? Speaker 2: My dad was just visiting the hometown, and he was visiting one of his friends. And my mom was a ways down the road, and he went down with his friend to visit where my mom was and met her. And they liked each other, and, and they started seeing each other privately. My dad was only supposed to be there for three days and ended up not ever leaving. But he met my mom, and my mom and him fell in love, and they, and they went from there. But he was just home visiting and just ran into her, didn't know her prior to that. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 177873 Speaker 1: --All right, now, now, what was your father [Robert Lee Jones] like and what are your memories of your father? Speaker 2: My father was very even-tempered. He never showed emotions. He was a praying man. He was reli- he was raised very religiously. He worked hard, worked in, in a factory. Sometimes he works--he, one time he worked for seven days a week for about four years, working seven days a week. And-- Speaker 1: This is with a disability--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, what had happened, after he had gotten out of the [U.S.] Military, and as, as his health had come back over the years, he was able to go back to work. He was only about 10 percent service connected at that point, so he went to work at this factory. I can remember him working sometimes sixteen hours a day. And at the end of the week, he still didn't make a hundred dollars, and he had five kids. But you know, he, he was just committed to taking care of his family, being the head of the family. He always talked or taught us to do what's right, not to get in trouble, not to embarrass the family, the family's name, to, to love your brothers and your sisters, and keep family--family was real important to him. Family reunions were, were real important to him. Family history was important to him. My father was actually named after Robert E. Lee. As you came in my office, there's a picture on the wall of Robert E. Lee. All of my siblings, except myself, has Lee as their middle name. And my youngest brother's name is Leroy. But my grandparents, my dad's dad, though that or they held Robert E. Lee up to high esteem, and my father was named after him. Speaker 1: Well, well, it seems kind of odd in some senses that Robert E. Lee would be held in high esteem, even in the South by--but black people usually don't hold Robert E. Lee in high esteem because of, of him being the commander of the forces-- Speaker 2: Yeah-- Speaker 1: --that-- Speaker 2: --that's kind of ironic. Speaker 1: --were trying to preserve slavery, you know. Speaker 2: Well, my grandfather was not African American. My grandfather was Native American. And still Southerners, they had something in common. And Robert E. Lee, although he fought for the South, and you can get into the politics of why the war [Civil War] started and all of that, but he had an opportunity to fight for the North, but he came back to his native land, and he stood up for what he thought was right. So I guess maybe it was his principles. I never read that Robert E. Lee stood for slavery. Speaker 1: Well, he was a slave owner. Speaker 2: But, well, in spite of that, maybe they weren't told all those bad things about Robert E. Lee. And, and so maybe they felt that he was, he was held to high esteem. So, nevertheless, they felt that they would--should name my father after Robert E. Lee. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So it's kind of passed down through the family. Everybody's named after Robert E. Lee. Speaker 2: They got that Lee in there. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 177874 Speaker 1: My dad [Robert Lee Jones] talked a lot about his [U.S.] military career. He served in the Third Army. That was a unit attached to General [George] Patton. He, he loved history, he loved politics. He always talked about national politics, more so than local or, or, or state politics, loved the military. Four of my brothers were in the military. I can remember a lot of young men who were getting prepared to go to [the] Vietnam [War]. When they would finish basic training and come back home for those few days before they shipped out, I can recall they all wanted to stop by my father's house and talk to him about what the experience would have been like, with him having been in World War II [World War Two, WWII]. And he always would tell them all--I can always remember we used to laugh as a kid about it, as kids about it, but he would always tell those guys stay on your toes at all times. In other words, stay alert. You have to if you, if you want to make it back home. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And he, he understood what war was about. He understood how a young man--'cause he was nineteen going over there. Young people don't fear or have as much fear as older people. And my dad, having gone through that experience, he knew that those young men may have seen that it's something very exciting. It certainly was exciting, but at the same time, there had been a, a big possibility that they would be shipped back in a body bag. And he didn't want them to get lax. He wanted to remain alert, be aware, do everything they can do to make sure they returned home safely. And so, I guess that's one of the reasons why, being passed onto me, I never went in the military. But knowing how strong my dad was in support of the military, coming into the county, elected in this job, I created the first veteran's commission. And since then we have done a number of not only ceremonial events to honor veterans, but also we're in the process of constructing a pavilion to honor veterans. But that was because of my experience and that my dad had-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --in terms of being in support of the military-- Story_ID: 177875 Speaker 1: How, how many siblings do you have? Speaker 2: It's six of--it's five of us. Well, I have five. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It's six of us total. Speaker 1: And where do you fall in the order? Speaker 2: I'm number five of the six. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and so some, some of your brothers actually served in Vietnam? Speaker 2: Yeah, my oldest brother served in [the] Vietnam [War]. He was injured in Vietnam. And I can remember when my mom [Ruth Hicks Jones] was notified that my brother had been injured, my younger brother and I, we were--I think I was, I was maybe five and he was two. And, and my mother just fell down on the ground crying. We were little kids. We were crying too, and the neighbors started coming up. They could hear it from--hear my mom crying from, from up the street. And it was a very dramatic experience and traumatic experience for me 'cause I'm yelling and screaming. And all, all I could hear is she's, she kept calling my brother's name. And it was--at that time, that was the hype of Vietnam, '64 [1964], '65 [1965]. And a lot of families were losing their sons, and some of their--many of their sons were, were being injured. So that whole experience is probably why I, I, although never served in the [U.S.] military, but I have a strong appreciation and, and an understanding that what families are experiencing, even those now who are hoping their, their, their, their sons, and daughters, and husbands, and wives return home safely. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 177876 Speaker 1: Now what's your first childhood memory, your earliest memory? Speaker 2: I think my earliest memory was during the time my grandfather--no, I, I, no, I would take--my earliest memory I would say is when, when my younger brother was brought home from the hospital around '63 [1963]. I could remember riding in the back of the car, and I can remember my mom [Ruth Hicks Jones] being in the front seat holding him. And I was trying to lean over the seat to see this little baby. And I remember when we brought him home, I can remember going to the carriage and trying to get in and try to touch this little baby. I think that's my earliest, and that was about '63 [1963], so I was about three years old. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 177877 Speaker 1: What, what were some of the sights, and--sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Can you kind of reflect back for us? Speaker 2: You know, growing up in rural North Carolina, growing up on a farm, waking up in the morning, the morning smell of the dew, the wet grass, the smell of the livestock, because we had horses, we had cows, we had chickens. The smell of honeysuckle vines, those flowers, primarily nature, primarily outdoors types of smells, then inside my mother [Ruth Hicks Jones] cooking the ham, the smell of biscuits, the smell of collard greens, the smell of, of those Southern dishes. Those, those were the things that, that I can, I can reflect on and, and, and recall easily. Speaker 1: Okay, those are pretty happy smells (laughter). Speaker 2: Oh, ab--absolutely, absolutely. There's, there's nothing like, there's nothing like growing up in, in rural anywhere and, and walking outside that morning just the fresh air, the birds chirping, you know, hearing the roosters crowing, the ducks cackling, which, which even now, again, that being a part of my childhood and reflecting on being a farmer's son, one of the reasons why the biggest and the, and the first initiatives I took was to preserve and green, to preserve green space was because of, of my experiences of what it's like to protect the outdoors, the, the natural areas, streams, buffers, rivers, wildlife. And one of our biggest initiatives that we have going on right now is to, to buy, and save, and preserve green space in DeKalb County [Georgia] because of all the urban sprawl and, and all of the development. But that was because of, of my upbringing and having appreciation from--for soil and how it fed our family, how we actually would plant a seed and ultimately harvest that crop until it was on our dinner table, and to be able as a young boy--I spent most of my time not on the basketball courts, but actually in the woods playing with bugs, climbing trees, even hunting and fishing. I mean that was a big experience for me. Story_ID: 177878 Speaker 1: Okay, what would you hunt? Speaker 2: Rabbit, squirrel, raccoon, doves, possums, hawks, deer, just anything, any animal, any wild animal out there; a couple of times, got some shots off at, at some bobcats. Of course we had foxes running around. Just, just it's, it, it, it was almost like in the earlier years people truly depended on, on nature to live, I mean whether it was from plants or meat, wildlife. And so I saw that part. I saw my family prepare meals around me coming home and bringing some rabbits. And it was, it was a big thing. Oh, he just brought us three rabbits. Let's get the, get the pots ready. It was--and squirrel--I mean it was just a big, it was a big thing. It, it was--to see when we would go to our freezer to get food, it was the corn that we grew, it was the tomatoes, it was the, the, the butter beans, the sweet peas that we took right out of the ground and put in our freezer then prepared it for our dinner table. The wildlife--went into the woods, shot some rabbits or squirrels, and then put it on the dinner table. I mean it was, it was an awesome experience. Speaker 1: It's different. I think even in the South now many people have a big freezer and, and a barn or a shed or someplace adjacent to the house filled with stuff that they grow themselves. Speaker 2: Our, our, our steaks, we grew the, the cows; our hams, we grew the, the, the hogs; that whole experience of, of butchering the hog. My nephews right now, they have no idea what it's like to butcher a hog, the process. Another amazing thing that we did--and a lot of traditions are lost, like sweet potatoes, for example, when we would take the vine or a plant and plant those sweet potatoes, and then it grows during the summer months. And then in the fall when the, when the frost would come and kill the vine, that was a sign that the potatoes had matured underneath the ground, so we would dig the potatoes out. But to preserve them through the winter, we would dig a round hole about this big, maybe wider, may about this deep, and stick a stick right down in the center of, of that circle in that, that hole. And then we would pour the potatoes, our buckets, around the stick, and it would just sort of mound up to like a hill. Then we would take straw and pack straw on top of it. And then we would take dirt and pack dirt on top of the straw, so you have this mound hill there. And then we'll dig a hole on the side, and throughout the winter months we'll pull those potatoes out when we're ready to cook them and covered the hole back up. But that preserved them through the entire winter months. In the springtime, it's time, of course, to plant them again. Story_ID: 177879 Speaker 1: What were you like when you were little, when, when, when you were a little kid? Speaker 2: Bad, just bad, man, just bad, just bad; went around looking for snakes so I can grab 'em and pop them and snap their heads off; fighting my sister; talking back, gosh, just talked all the time, had to get the last word in. Although I, I did well in school, and I was academically inclined, but I was just active, just like a lot of little boys, just active. But my parents [Ruth Hicks Jones and Robert Lee Jones], man, they never, they didn't spare the rod, though. They--every time I, every time I stepped out of line, boy, they, they put it on me, they did. Speaker 1: So they, they believed in corporal punishment then I guess? Speaker 2: Oh my God, they would have been charged with child abuse in these days and time, but, but it was the right thing. It was just, it was about discipline; it was about structure; it was about respect for authority; it was about having some sense of, of discipline and being supervised. My parents, they were definitely disciplinarians, which was good, which was good. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 177880 Speaker 1: Now, was the church a big part of your life? Speaker 2: The church I think was always a big part of any southern community. I mean that's the one day, Sundays, was the one day, okay, you got a break. You had to go to church. Now maybe later on that Sunday evening, maybe you still had to shell a few beans and butter beans and peas, but that was church day. That was, that was definitely church day. And when my parents [Ruth Hicks Jones and Robert Lee Jones] didn't go to church--to our church, was a little farther than walking distance--there was another church that we could go to in walking distance, and they would send us there. But we hated to go to that particular church. It was a holiness church, and gosh, they were staying all afternoons. We hated that. But that was where family gathered, communities gathered. I can see now, the old choir, just people who, they couldn't sing, but you know, they were, they were the church choir. You thought at the time they could sing. Looking back now, man, they were horrible. But, but those old hymns and the deacons, man, if you were a deacon, that was something. I mean you, you didn't see many young deacons it seems like at that time. It seemed like they were much older. And I don't know if that was a criteria or what, but, but you had so much respect for those deacons, and certainly the pastor. And at that time, my little church, the pastor-- Speaker 1: What was the name of your church? Speaker 2: Livingston Chapel [Missionary Baptist Church, Hamlet, North Carolina]. And we would have-- Speaker 1: Was it--I'm sorry--Baptist or-- Speaker 2: It was a Baptist. Speaker 1: --A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal]? Speaker 2: It was a Baptist church. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And we had preaching every other Sunday. The Sundays that we didn't have preaching, we had Sunday school, but that, that gave the, the preacher an opportunity to preach at another church. Because our church couldn't sustain him, so he would preach at two churches. He would preach at our church twice a month and then at this other church twice a month. So that was his schedule. Speaker 1: Now how do you spell Livingston? Speaker 2: L-I-V-I-N-G-S-T-O-N, Livington. Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause I know there's a Livingston College in North Carolina [sic.]. I was just wondered if it was-- Speaker 2: There's a-- Speaker 1: --if it was-- Speaker 2: --a Livingstone [College, Salisbury, North Carolina]. Speaker 1: Livingstone, right, okay. Yeah, it's spelled with an "e." Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Right, so I just wanted to--I know. Speaker 2: That's in Salisbury [North Carolina]. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: But at that time, too, whatever family challenge you had going on, you, you--the preacher, you would see the preacher come. And also at that time, it was big, it was a big deal to have the preacher over to your house for dinner. On Sundays, that, that was a, that was a big deal, especially to the, the women of the church. They liked to host the pastor at their house for dinner. And I can remember one time being at my, my, my aunt's house, who, gosh, boy, she, she loved the preacher, and she was--she had fixed dinner. We were over there, and there was a, a widower, a man named Mr. Ted Quick [ph.], great American, World War I [World War One, WWI] veteran. The preacher was there, he was there, and they were talking. They were about to eat. And they were talking about cornbread. And the preacher was talking about how much he loves cornbread, and old man, Mr. Ted Quick, was saying that he loved it, but he was talking about how much he ate when he was a kid. He said that I'd eaten so much cornbread, you could have shucked my shit. And, and I--my aunt got so furious for him cursing in front of the, the preacher like that. And she cleaned that house; she cleared everybody out. And it was, it was because it was so--and I'm saying all that to say it was so much respect for the minister, and you'd better not say anything out of line. And for him to just--he was just saying, you know, two men sitting there, they were just talking. And you know, if anybody know about shucking corn, and then he was talking about cornbread and eating so much cornbread you could have shucked, you know, and I didn't mean to--I know I'm on the air here. But, but I can remember that just as clear, and gosh, that was talked about around that town for, for, for years and years and years, but any rate, just thought about that. Speaker 1: That's a great story (laughter). Story_ID: 177881 Speaker 1: Yeah the preacher coming in. I mean, this all seems--yeah-- Speaker 2: It was a big deal for the, it was a big deal for the minister to come. I mean you felt, you felt, one, that your house was blessed because he was there too. And you know, many people, they didn't have money to give. You know, they would give what little they had. But food was a major gift. You know, when the wise men went when Christ was born and they brought gifts, in the South because black families and white families too, many of them, who didn't really have money to go out and buy gifts, their biggest gift and what they had was food, whether it was some pork meat, or, or whether it was vegetables, or chicken eggs. They, they just--if they--when you come over, their, their deal was let me feed you, you know. That was a big deal in southern families. Let, let's cook a big dinner for you; let, let me, let me serve you. And in, in that tradition, although it's not like it used to be because everyone wants to go out now, but back then there was a lot of cooking going on. And you weren't running to the grocery store to go cook. You would run to your freezer and--or to the smokehouse, and make one of the most fabulous, fulfilling meals that, that, that you can ever have. But, but now, let's go to dinner, let's take you out, 'cause we've got money. Story_ID: 177882 Speaker 1: Now where you lived, did you have like neighbors close by, or were you, or were there- Speaker 2: Our closest neighbor was probably, maybe four, maybe three or four football fields away, maybe four hundred yards away, our closest neighbor. We could see the house. Speaker 1: That's different from what most people experience today. And I'm sure in the future, when people watch this biography on--I mean this interview, they're gonna wonder--he lived-- Speaker 2: Well, the thing about it-- Speaker 1: --four football fields away as a neighbor, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --a lot of families over the years, they may have acquired land, you know. And if you had five to twenty acres of land--and that's what, see, that's what the Southerners had that the Northerners didn't have. You know, they, they worked, and the sharecropped, and they bought their land, or it was passed down from their fathers. But, but owning land was a big deal. If you didn't own anything else, and you had a little shack on a piece of property, I mean you, you, you felt like you were, you had something at stake, and your, you, had some stock. And, and that was your stock. And so because people had land, you didn't live right up under one another, unless you were in town, a little town. But that's why we didn't have streets; we had roads. And what I mean by that, in the country you--it, it was country roads. And it was amazing--my mom [Ruth Hicks Jones] she comes and visits me sometimes, and she says it's just too much traffic, not from traffic gridlock; there's too many cars passing her. In the country you're sitting there, you're on the porch, maybe every five minutes, maybe sometimes ten minutes, a car pass by. But she was just amazed of how many cars constantly passing. She never gets a break, and it's just out--if you're used to it or you're not used to that much traffic, it's a noticeable difference. But those country roads, primarily people who travel those roads were the people who lived on there, and you didn't have a whole lot of, whole lot of repeated traffic, so it was quieter. And it was very common, 'cause everybody knew their neighbors, to go and, and borrow coffee, borrow sugar, those things that you didn't grow and you ran out. When my family went, went grocery shopping, we bought what we couldn't grow, primarily, and that was coffee, sugar, flour; we didn't grow syrup, so we'd buy some syrup. Speaker 1: Now did you grow up in Laurel [Hill, North Carolina], or was it in-- Speaker 2: I grew up-- Speaker 1: --near, near, near-- Speaker 2: --I grew up in Laurel Hill-- Speaker 1: --Fayetteville [North Carolina]? Yeah. Speaker 2: --which is about forty miles from Fayetteville. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Fayetteville was the biggest town, and as you know, most people, they claim the next largest town if, if nobody's never heard of their town. My little, my little community, though, was called Green Pond. And it's amazing, those little small towns, they're so small, everybody knows whose check is good and whose husband ain't, you know, real small towns. Everybody knows everyone. But that's what made it--that's what shaped my personality, because you never met strangers. You didn't walk past anyone without speaking. If you walked past an adult, they'll say wait a minute. Were--did you spend the night at my house last night? You don't have to speak to me this morning? I mean it was, it was that kind of family thing. And family, families looked out for families' children. When we would go to our neighbor's house and play, if we didn't do things right, or if we got out of line, they had the right to discipline us. And then they'll call home and, and--or they would go home with us and say, well, let me tell you what, what Vernon did, and then that created the second whipping. So, but it was just, it's, that's the great thing about growing, for me, growing up in rural North Carolina or in a rural small community, was the camaraderie, the, the, the unity, and how we looked out for one another. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 177883 Speaker 1: Now tell me about school. Now, what, what was the name of your grade school, and-- Speaker 2: I went to Pate Gardner-- Speaker 1: --how did you like it? Speaker 2: --Elementary School [Pate Gardner Elementary School, Gibson, North Carolina]. Speaker 1: Pate Gardner? Speaker 2: Pate Gardner. Speaker 1: How do you-- Speaker 2: P-A-T-E, G-A, G-A-R-D-N-E-R. It was named after two families, white families, who were very well known and, and well-to-do. And I, I assume that somewhere down the line they donated the land or some way contributed, and they named the school, my elementary school after them. Speaker 1: Okay, now how did you like the school, and how did you do? Speaker 2: You know, I, I really never liked school. And that may be strange to some, but I never really liked school. But when I got to the first grade, my, my first grade teacher name was Ms. Robinson and--Shirley Robinson [ph.]. She was a very beautiful woman. She was a young teacher. I guess maybe she had been teaching maybe three or four years. And I can recall just having a deep affection for her, major crush, and every time I got a chance to put a tack in her seat, I would. I just loved her just that much. I, I, I just it was amazing. And I was a class clown, although I was a fast learner, and she recognized my academic skills. But I just, I would cut up. And so, I think she found a way to channel my ener- to channel my energy, but at the same time allowed me to get that attention. And she created a student council, and she made me the president of student council. Speaker 1: Now, about how old are you at this, this point? Speaker 2: Seven, I was in first grade. Speaker 1: Seven? They, they had a student council at seven? Speaker 2: So she created a little student council, you know, president and vice president, and, and treasurer. And she did that I guess to--she transformed me to, from being a class clown and getting attention, to being a model student and getting attention, but having to set example. I couldn't cut up. I mean she gave me some responsibilities, so it made me feel like, okay, I can't do these things anymore. And it's kind of amazing how she did that, how--it was just--I--it was a superb move, because it took me out of that clowning and made me focus more on why I was there. And at the same time, she and I developed a very special relationship. And there were times when she'd come over and pick me up, and I spent the weekends over at her house. And it was a traumatic blow for me, because the next year when I got promoted to the second grade she moved. Ironic thing about it, I used to take notes from, from her to another teacher down the hallway. He was an eighth grade teacher. And little did I know, they had something going on, and they were married. And I can remember, though, taking the note. And one time I just looked at the note, and I saw my name--I recognized my name, you know, but obviously what they were passing back and forth, the vocabulary I couldn't comprehend. But I can remember one time looking at the note, and there was something there with my name on it, and they had referred something regarding me I guess. But anyhow, I used to take notes back and forth. And the amazing thing about it, I never saw--when she left at the end of that year, I never saw her again. That was around '60--I wanna say '68 [1968], '69 [1969]. I never saw her again until '94 [1994]. I tracked her down in Maryland. She was a counselor in Prince George's County, Maryland. And when I walked in, I had a, a dozen roses, and I, and I said, "How are you Ms. Robinson?" And she said, "Fine." And I said, "I'm Vernon Jones," and she didn't have a clue. And I said, "Well, didn't you used to teach at Pate Gardner Elementary School in Gibson, North Carolina?" She said, "Yes." I said, "Well, I was in your first grade, back in"--and I think maybe I said '68 [1968], '69 [1969]. And then all of a stud--sudden--it started to jog her memory. Now, you can see the number of years from '68 [1968] to '94 [1994], and by that time I had been elected to the Georgia House of Representatives. But my thing was to thank her because she introduced me to an education which helped me to achieve a subsequent life, but she also introduced me to a career path, where I ended up being in politics-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --because of what she did back then. Speaker 1: She got you involved in government. Speaker 2: She got me involved in government. So, and when she realized who I was, she, of course she burst into tears. And by that time, her husband appears. And he was just so happened to stop by there to bring some keys to a car or something, and then we went into this, this three-way conversation, what have you been doing and catching up. And it was, it was, gosh, it was incredible. But, but I--she is--she played a major role in who I am today. Story_ID: 177884 Speaker 1: What about the second grade, well, the rest of-- Speaker 2: Well, the rest--my second grade-- Speaker 1: --elementary school [at Pate Gardner Elementary School, Gibson, North Carolina]. Speaker 2: --it's kind of funny. My second grade teacher was the opposite from my first grade teacher. Boy, I didn't like her, and she didn't like me. She was mean, Ms. Kaleb [ph.], big Republican. I remember when [President Richard] Nixon was elected, and she was talking about the elections, and she was supportive of Nixon. And so, anyhow, but from that point on, I, I really didn't, I really didn't care a lot for school. I mean I was--I made good grades, and--but I, I just, I didn't have--I just wanted to get through school. I, I, I didn't like, I did not like going to school, didn't like it--had good friends. As a matter of fact, I remember one time, I, I, I tried to pretend I was sick, and I didn't get on the--I was walking out to the bus and tried to pretend that I was throwing up, and ran back in the house, but my mom [Ruth Hicks Jones] knew what was going on. And my mom said, "You are going to school. Get out there and walk to school." So the school was about three miles away, so here I am walking. And then she comes up, and she starts wearing me out. I mean she'd take the switch, and she put something on me and that--and I, I'd get a little faster walking down that road. And so she's in the car just riding as I'm walking, and finally she picks me up. And then when I get in the car, she tears me up again, and she drops me off at the front of that school door. And I never did that again, but I just didn't like school. I just, I just didn't like school. Story_ID: 177885 Speaker 1: High school, I, I was certainly ready to get out of there too. Speaker 2: What, what was the name of your high school? Speaker 1: Scotland High School [Laurinburg, North Carolina]. The county I grew up in was Scotland County. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And the school was named after-- Speaker 2: Now-- Speaker 1: --the county. Speaker 2: --by this time, when you're, when you start high school-- Speaker 1: I got to high school-- Speaker 2: --this is in '70-- Speaker 1: --in '77 [1977]. Speaker 2: --yeah. Now, is, is the high school integrated by, by this time? Speaker 1: Yeah, and, and one of my, one of my brothers was a part of the initial integration of the high school. But, yeah, that was the one big county school. Everybody was consolidated, but it was, it was integrated by the time I got there. I was in a separate school. Actually, actually, let me back up. I, I never, I never went to a, a, a separate school. I went to an integrated school-- Speaker 2: Okay, even-- Speaker 1: --even when I got to the first grade. Speaker 2: --even Pate Gardner [Elementary School, Gibson, North Carolina] was-- Speaker 1: Pate Gardner, but-- Speaker 2: --was, was integrated? Speaker 1: --this was, again, when school--during the, the time of integration of, of, of, of schools. I mean I'd--it had started to take place, so I came in just as it had integrated, yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 177886 Speaker 1: Did you have any sense or did your parents [Ruth Hicks Jones and Robert Lee Jones], I know they told you to always work hard and all that, but, but did they have any sense that there was a struggle that had to take place for them to--for the things to improve or-- Speaker 2: You know, it's kind of amazing. My parents just worked hard, and they took day by day. They were not trying to, they were not trying to be all this and all that. They were just regular hardworking folks. They prayed, and they just said Lord, I'll leave it up to you. I know you'll take care of me and my family. And I mean that's just the way they conducted themselves. Sure, we had hard times. There were times I can remember several Christmases where we as kids, we didn't get anything. They just didn't have any money. And they said when we get some money, we'll make it up to you. That was, that was very hard as a kid, on Christmas day you see your neighbors riding their new bicycle, showing that new BB gun. And you gotta tell them, well, we didn't get anything, but they're gonna get ours next month, you know. And I'm sure that that was so hard for my parents. I'm sure that was hard for them. And I can remember my, my dad saying, well, you know, Christmas is just one day. It'll work out. But when they did deliver, I mean they, they made it a joyous occasion for us. But you know, they didn't emphasize--they, they didn't tell us, look, you, you know, you wanna make a lot of, you need to make a lot of money, you need to this, you wanted to have the biggest car and all. They just said, you know, just get educated; doors will open for you; we want you to have more than what we had; at the same time we want you to appreciate what you do have; don't, don't try to be more or try to compete against somebody else; just, just be yourself, just do your thing, just enjoy your life, and, and pray and God will look out for you. And so, they were just very, very humble, very modest people. They're just, just regular folks. You never saw their name in print. They didn't want their name in print, if it could have been in print. That didn't mean anything to them. They didn't, they didn't wanna be the, the, the big man on the block. They, they were just regular people, just regular people. Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause I--well, the question I had was in regard--they, they don't sound like they were involved in like political kind of stuff-- Speaker 2: No, they weren't. Speaker 1: --at all. Speaker 2: They, they, they weren't. You know, they were involved in just work. They were not involved--in, in my town, my hometown [Laurel Hill, North Carolina], you didn't see demonstrations or anything like that. It was a little, small community, and, and for the most part, blacks and whites got along. Story_ID: 177887 Speaker 1: I guess I was wondering if they [Jones' parents, Ruth Hicks Jones and Robert Lee Jones] had a sense that the changes that came about, that they certainly were part--ex- you know, experienced those changes as they came about, were the result of the struggle of other black people against, you know, racism and against-- Speaker 2: Well, let me tell you, they talked about how things were when they were growing up. And they saw the big difference between when they were growing up and them being as adults because they, they received less discrimination. They were able, in some cases, to have more things than their parents had, just the big transition between having no electricity and electricity. You know, when they were growing up they had no electricity in the house. They had no indoor plumbing in the house. Luckily, as a matter of fact my earlier years--it wasn't until I was about seven when we got indoor plumbing. And my younger brother, it's kind of amazing, he was afraid to use a toilet inside because he was afraid when you flushed it that current would take him down. So we had to go outside with him in the middle of the night when he had to use the restroom. He was much more comfortable using the outside toilet. Just, just--but my parents, that was big to have indoor plumbing, when they grew up all their lives in, in, in--without having indoor plumbing. Also, as times went on, my dad was able to get, to, to get better jobs, if you will, that he couldn't have gotten in the past. They did get to the point where they can go and register and vote, where they couldn't in the past. Speaker 1: Yeah, now I just--the question I still, I'm still just wondering if, if people in your community [Laurel Hill, North Carolina], and your parents I guess in, included in--people you were close to ever gave you a sense that these gains were the result of someone's actual-- Speaker 2: Struggle. Speaker 1: --struggle against-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: --and not just the result of praying or just waiting, you know. Speaker 2: I can remember like some of the, the, the soldiers and some of the young, younger people would come by the house. And, and they were bragging that they bought this car, or they were bragging that they got a job over here, or they were bragging about this or that. And I can remember my folks putting them in check, saying, you know, look, we paved the way for you guys, so you know, here you are, you think you, you're this and you're that. You just don't know you would not have gotten there had not been for, for your parents and us. But, but they didn't, they didn't talk a lot about the struggle. I mean every--I mean the struggle was there. Everybody was aware of the struggle. Every, everyone was aware that things got better, but, but they didn't spend a lot of time harping on that. And I can remember when, when [President] John [Fitzgerald] Kennedy was, was killed, and, and watching the funeral, and, and knowing how sad they were. And they felt that it could, they felt like something could happen 'cause he wasn't there anymore. Are we getting ready to go back into time? Is the clock being turned back? I remember when Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was, was murdered, and, and I can remember them watching the funeral and them crying, and again, feeling like, okay, is the movement [Civil Rights Movement] dead now? What is this gonna mean to us? How is this gonna have an impact on our lives? Isn't it amazing, they're sitting there, they're sitting there watching funerals, and, and that's what they're discussing: what kind of impact is this gonna have on us, you know. Because obviously they were aware that there has been, there had been some improvements in their lives, but was this gonna take 'em back in the opposite direction? Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 177888 Speaker 1: So now in high school [at Scotland High School, Laurinburg, North Carolina], you were--now did you get involved in sports in high school at all? Speaker 2: No, I, I didn't play sports, and primarily because playing sports required you staying over after school. Well, we had to come home. We had staked the cows out that morning before we went to work--before we went to school I should say, so when we got home, we had get, we had to get them, bring 'em back in the house, up to the house, give them some water, feed the, the, the, the hogs and et cetera. So, so we didn't have that leisure time. And I can remember coming home, we were riding the bus, and the bus was bringing us home that evening. And as we're approaching my house, all of a sudden one of our big hogs went running across the road. And there, there, there was my daddy [Robert Lee Jones] running behind and chasing him. And all the kids just started saying look at your daddy chasing that hog. And when my dad saw the bus, my dad came to a halt, because he knew we were on the bus. And he, he just started providing directions, come on, let's go get him. And so here we are, getting off the bus, running behind, chasing the hogs. And man, you know kids are cruel. Boy, they picked at us for the next month on that issue. But, but we had to come home. We had chores. You know, unlike a kid in the city, I guess the primary chore in the city was, okay, if you didn't clean your room that morning, come home and clean your room that evening. But we had to come home. There, there was work to be done, and we all knew exactly what had to be done, and we just, we did it accordingly. So, and then, too, I never, I never swam into a public pool until I was about sixteen, seventeen. We were doing all our swimmings in the creeks and what we had, what we called a swimming hole; that's where we were. So, so all my recreation was really geared more towards--whether it was hunting, fishing, or swimming in the creeks. We'd, we'd have some pickup baseball games. But our basketball goal was basically a rim from a bicycle tire attached to a piece of plywood attached to a tree. We didn't have a concrete court or any kind of court. If we bounced the ball, we were bouncing the ball on dirt, so. But that wasn't as, that wasn't as--we didn't, we didn't get into that, primarily because, again, we were, we were farm, farm boys. Story_ID: 177889 Speaker 1: How important was, was music or television and that sort of thing? Speaker 2: Man, that was, that was major. Me having older brothers, all the '60s [1960s] music. Because they're playing it and singing it, then I'm introduced to it. Although I'm not going out to the parties, but I hear the music, and that's major. So that's why I have an affection for, whether it's Marvin Gaye, the Four Tops, The Supremes, the--going back to those, those, that Detroit [Michigan] sound, Motown sound, that was important. I can remember the song 'Bring the Boys Home,' [Freda Payne] bring 'em back to life, that was made during the '60s [1960s]. They were talking about the Vietnam War. We would have a reflection of Vietnam. Then TV, our TV would only get one channel. We had rabbit ears on it at first, and then we got an antenna that we installed on top of the house. Somebody would go outside and turn it, and then we would say okay stop; we got a picture here. That was--the most amazing thing was when 'Ed Sullivan Show' was gonna come on, and they were gonna have maybe Marvin Gaye or The Supremes or somebody. And all around the community those who didn't have a TV, would either pile at our house, or if our TV wasn't working, we were piling at somebody else's house. That was huge, because we saw, we saw black entertainment on TV. Story_ID: 177890 Speaker 1: --I mean watching 'The Ed Sullivan Show' was, was incredible. And then I remember when 'The Flip Wilson Show' came on, I mean that was incredible. That was a major breakthrough. It was, it was exposure not only for the talent, but it also inspired probably a lot of us who were viewers who had dreams and ideas and ambitions to want to be in the entertainment business. Gosh, I'd love to be on 'The Flip Wilson Show.' Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And it was, it was a--'The Flip Wilson Show' was so family oriented. And then I can remember watching Walt Disney. Oh, man, that was so family oriented. The whole family would sit on Sunday afternoons, I'd--Walt Disney would come on, on Sunday, Sunday evenings, and man, we couldn't wait to finish dinner and get around the TV because we knew there was gonna be a good family show on Walt Disney. Nobody had to be tuned out, didn't have to be edited out. I mean it was a good quality, wholesome show. And it, it, it just capped our Sunday evenings, getting us ready to go to bed and getting ready to go to school the next day. Story_ID: 177891 Speaker 1: So did you, were you involved in any high school activities [at Scotland High School, Laurinburg, North Carolina] because of-- Speaker 2: In high school, you know, it was just, again, I wasn't, I, I didn't really like school that much. I was just trying to get through it. Speaker 1: Was it-- Speaker 2: I drove, I drove the school bus, which at that time, in North Carolina if you were sixteen and you had your driver's license, you can drive a school bus. So that, that afforded me to make some money a month. I think I would make about $160 a month. That was a big deal. And, and that also taught me--well, actually with my parents [Ruth Hicks Jones and Robert Lee Jones] making sure that we had to get up early, but having to get up early to start that bus and, and take on my route, I, I never, I never used an alarm clock, clock. I used to have a, a clock then, and I would just, I just sort of like trained myself to wake up and look at the clock and just gauged the time, but I never used an alarm clock. And so, now, again, I never use an alarm clock, but I've just been trained to get myself up-- Story_ID: 177892 Speaker 1: It's amazing thing, though, when I graduated from high school [Scotland High School, Laurinburg, North Carolina]--as I was approaching high school, I remember my dad [Robert Lee Jones] saying something to me about college about the tenth grade year. And I was like, I don't wanna go to college. I am ready to get out of high school now. We kind of got in this big argument. And then my sister graduated. My sister graduated in '77 [1977], and I had to go with my mom [Ruth Hicks Jones]. At that time I was driving too. We would take her back to college. And then as I would go and visit the campus-- Speaker 2: Where did she go? Speaker 1: North Carolina Central University in Durham [North Carolina]. So as I would visit the campus, I would see, gosh, I would see all these pretty girls and everybody hanging out. And gosh, it was in Durham, so it was a much bigger city than where I was [in Laurel Hill, North Carolina]. And my sister would tell me about this and tell me about that. So, all of a sudden I started thinking this college thing may not be so bad. It doesn't look like high school. You know, you're on your own; you don't have to stay at home, dah, dah, dah. And then the transformation came, and I remember participating in a, in a, what they call a career day in high school about my junior year. And they were talking about the future careers. And one of the things they talked about was a career in something called computer programming, and it kind of peaked my interest. So then I took the SAT, and next thing I knew, graduated from high school. That summer I graduated from high school, gosh, I, I think I sold more watermelons than Kroger's. And when I left, I can--well, I can remember that summer selling watermelons and on weekends I would go to some of our little country clubs and kind of hang out. And some of my friends would say oh, here he comes, the watermelon man, the watermelon man, so I actually stopped eating watermelons. I have not eaten a watermelon since 1979, true story. And so, when I got ready to go to college--like when my sister went to college, it was, it was me, my, my mom, and one of our neighbors, who was taking one of their daughters, so we all went up there together. But when I got ready to go, my mom or--no dad, nobody went with me. My sister and I went. She took me up to college. Story_ID: 177893 Speaker 1: And so I went to the same school she [Jones' sister] went to, North Carolina Central [University, Durham, North Carolina]. And gosh, when I got to college, it was, it was a different experience for me. It was major exposure. It was exposure in the sense that I was away from home, and I didn't have to come home every night if I didn't want to. It was major exposure in terms of meeting people from all over the world. It was major exposure to be in a town where you walk in these fine stores, or you see businesses, and you see black people working these business, or you see black bankers, or black lawyers, and black doctors. I'd never been exposed to that before. That was, that was major for me. And I can also remember just being there in college and the lecturers or those guest speakers that would come through. I remember my freshmen year seeing [HM] Benjamin Hooks, at that time was the, was the executive director of NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. I had only read about this man, and to see him, that was a big deal for me to see him. And I can remember my freshman year just hanging out. A friend of mine who was from Washington, D.C., we were going downtown just to hang out a little bit, and he said, "Let's stop by the library and, and register to vote." And I was like, "Huh, register to vote? Man, that takes too much time. Let's, let's go on where we're going." He said, "You're not registered?" I said, "No." He said, "You need to be registered." His name, his last name was McCray [ph.]. I cannot think of his first, first name now. He didn't come back after his freshman year. But we went on and we registered to vote. First time I had ever registered, and didn't realize what I was doing at that time--got registered. As I started to go through college, started to be introduced to politics and discussions of what's happening politically and what's happening around us, I just started, just started--things just started happening and transforming. And all of a sudden, I became active in school and organizations. And my fraternity, I pledged Kappa Alpha Psi fraternity. They stressed achievement. They stressed pulling myself up by my bootstraps and helping others through guide, guide right services. I started working on local, state, and national campaigns. Man, it's just things had started to change for me. Then I would go home, and I would notice certain little things in my hometown [Laurel Hill, North Carolina]. I would say well, why is the mayor white? Has there ever been a black mayor? Are there any black city councilpersons? Why is there a public cemetery, or private cemetery? But only white people can be buried in the cemetery, but they use county or city dollars to maintain it. And those city dollars are being paid by black people too. And so things just start, started changing. Then I just started encouraging my mom [Ruth Hicks Jones] and my dad [Robert Lee Jones] and everybody I knew to register and how important it was to vote. Story_ID: 177894 Speaker 1: In my sophomore year [at North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina], I remember meeting a young state senator from Georgia. We were on campus, and there had been a--over in Greensboro [North Carolina] some months earlier there had been a shootout between some [Ku Klux] Klansmen [KKK] and a group called the CWPs, I think the Communist Workers' Party, I believe is what they were called. And it was a demonstration and a counterdemonstration, and the Klan shot and killed one of the CDPs--CWPs. And that day on campus, the ruling came down where the Klan was acquitted. Speaker 2: I think it's the Socialist Workers' Party. Speaker 1: Socialist--maybe it was-- Speaker 2: Yeah, SWP, yeah. Speaker 1: --Socialist Workers'--okay, SWPs, okay [sic., Communist Workers' Party]. And the verdict came down, and the campus exploded of, of, wait a minute, we can't believe this Klan was acquitted. Well, by that time, somebody said well, [HM] Julian Bond is on campus. He was there lecturing at a class that day. And we went and got him out of class, and he came and addressed the whole campus. And all of a sudden, he led this demonstration downtown to city hall denouncing the acquittal. And he was a state senator from the Georgia Legislature [Georgia General Assembly] at that time, and that was in 1980. Well, little did I know, ten years from that exact date, or during that, ten years from that, I'll say from that time, 1990, I ran for the House of Representatives in Georgia myself. I had no idea, but, but that meeting him--and, and the next day in the newspaper there was a picture of him, and me, and the lady who, who her husband was, was killed. I mean, gosh, something hit me right then. I, I--politics, I'm, I'm interested in politics. That was another interest, and, and meeting Julian Bond. So that whole experience, so that's when I really started to get my house in order in terms of focus, where I wanted to go, although my business--my major was in business, and my minor was in computers and information systems. But that's when I got--I really started to see things kind of line up politically. And so I went on through college and enjoyed college, developed some lifelong relationships, met some of the most educated and some of the most bright, and some of the brightest people I've ever met in my life, had some ups and downs, like we all have, struggling. Thank God, going back to my father [Robert Lee Jones], which is another reason why I always pay tribute to veterans, my father, because of his--he had been a disabled veteran, gotten better with his health, and then the mid-'70s [1970s] he started to have a decline in his health. And he had to have surgery, and he, he became almost paralyzed. But I went to college on VA [Veterans Affairs] benefits, and those VA benefits got me through there. So, that's why it's so important for veterans' families and for veterans to maintain as much support as possible. But anyhow, so coming out of college, I, I wasn't recruited by some big corporation-- Story_ID: 177895 Speaker 1: Let me go back-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --to college for a minute, just--did you run for class office in, in college [at North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina]? Speaker 2: No, I didn't. I was just involved, never ran for office. I ran for, I ran for the president of my fraternity [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity]--vice president of my fraternity--and lost that, but, but it wasn't at that time so important to, to be an officeholder. It was more important just to be active, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, now, who were some of the--were there any professors, or, or teachers, administrators on the campus that took a particular interest in your development, growth, or-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: --or who you admired? Speaker 2: There was a Dean Bryant [ph.], who was the dean of student affairs, who was very influential in my life there. He was, he was a very nice man, and he just took a liking to me because maybe he saw something in me that I didn't see in myself. And he constantly talked to me about me remaining focused, achieving, and that one day I'd come back to the institution, and they all would be proud of me. And so him and Dean Richmond, the dean of the school of business, who, who was a--'cause he was tough as a professor, but I remember not graduating on time. I needed an additional class. I had to go back for a semester, and I was so down, so depressed about that. And I remember him saying, look, it doesn't matter whether you graduate on time or not. It matters that you graduate. And so, although I graduated a semester later, I never forgot that. And there were people who graduated on time, but it didn't necessarily mean that they achieved in subsequent life. The fact of it was, I needed to graduate, and I needed to, to finish the course. And, and then, you know, when he said that and then reflecting back when I would go home for the weekends and all of the people in my community who had absolutely no education, they were saying, boy, Vernon's in college, he's gonna be somebody, we're behind you, I mean that--I felt I had to do it too, because they were, they were counting on me. I mean I had opportunities that they didn't have. And so, but that professor put things in perspective for me. And then, I can remember my, my freshman seminar teacher, Mrs. Merritt [ph.], who introduced me to college, and what, what my purpose for college was, and how important it was that I didn't waste my family's mon--money, and that I took advantage that there were so many people who wanted to be in college, but couldn't be in college. I, I should consider myself lurk--lucky, and I should take full advantage of it. And she followed me throughout the entire time; and then over in, even in registration, where you know, you had to register for class, and you get the run around, and you get to know those people. They're there every year when you go back and register, that, that, that group; the security that was on campus, [William] Grimsley, Sergeant Grimsley, just a lot of people, lot of supporting staff and professors that was instrumental in getting me through and, and had a lifelong impact on, on my, on my career. Story_ID: 177896 Speaker 1: After college [North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina] you said that it was hard to find a position. Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, after college, gosh, I was working, I got a job working in Research Triangle Park, which is in the Durham [North Carolina] area, and I was on an assembly line. We were manufacturing wafers for computer chips. And I can remember having to have a job, didn't have one, so I took that job. And I'm thinking, here I am with a college degree, but I'm, here I am dressing up in this space suit, and I'm doing manual labor on this assembly line. And I can recall not being happy about that, that. I said I can't do this. This is not what I went to college for. Speaker 1: Now, now why did you have to dress up in a space suit--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, what happens, when you--when there are mac--mic--when they're manufacturing these chips, it's so important that it doesn't get infected with dust or particles or anything like that, so you go into this room, but before you go into this room you have to suit up, and you put on this, this bunny rabbit or space suit, we would call it, to, to keep the, the process uninfected. And it was, it was very--you had to have a very clean area. Or if there's, if there was one instance of any particle on that chip, that whole chip can be infected, so, so I had to wear that suit, and I can remember, I can remember saying, man, this is not what I wanna do, but I had to have a job. And there was, there was a guy there--several of us who were educated, who had college degrees, we were on the assembly line. And, and I can remember having some discussions with an older guy, and I was saying I can't take this. And he was saying, look, young buck, just, you know, make this man's money. You got--you have a job, don't you? Don't worry about it. You know, settle yourself down. You're gonna be fine. At least you have a job, you know. And I'm saying well, yeah, but I'm not happy. And I didn't say that to him, but I was saying that to myself. So, finally, I talked to someone in personnel, the personnel director, and I said listen, I have a college degree. My degree is in information systems, and there is a job that I want to apply for, a computer operator job. And he said well, you know, you, you signed on for this. You said you wanted to do this. You know, you went through the training, dah, dah, dah. I said but still, you know, I'm sorry. I know I've only been here a few weeks, but I think you can better utilize me somewhere else. So he said well, let's have an agreement. If there is a job, you apply for the job. If you don't get the job, then you go back, and we don't have any more discussions and be done with it. Or if you get the job, then okay, fine. Well, I had a week. He gave me a week, and I didn't get the interview for the job until that Thursday, at the end of that week, and of course I didn't get the job. So I had to make a decision, stay there or quit, so I quit. Story_ID: 177897 Speaker 1: While I was there [Research Triangle Park], there was a young lady there whose mom lived here in Georgia, in DeKalb County. And she was saying, my mom works for IBM. Why don't you go down to Atlanta [Georgia] and see if you can find a job, and you can stay with her a few days. And so I did, and came down and was doing some interviewing. And I was over at Atlanta University [later, Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia]. They had a career seminar, and I met a recruiter from IBM. And she said that they were recruiting some students to go and work in Poughkeepsie [New York], and for those who were going to be going on to graduate school, so I applied for it. A few days later I was back in North Carolina. I got notified, and I went up to Poughkeepsie, New York to do a summer intern. Ironic thing about it, here I am twenty-two, had never been on a plane. They sent me a plane ticket. And so, it was my first experience, too, getting on an airplane. So, I fly up and, and do the intern that summer, finished up, came back to Georgia. And then I was fortunate enough to get a job with Coca-Cola [Company, Atlanta, Georgia], and that kind of started from there. Speaker 2: Okay, now, had you ever really been to New York or anyplace outside of the general area of the South before. Speaker 1: I had been to [Washington] D.C. It was my first time going to New York [New York], and then I went to Poughkeepsie, New York, which was just about an hour and a half north of the city. I had a brother in New York, and so I would come down on the weekends and visit him. That's when I really got a chance to, to see New York. So I was up there from about, what, about June to September. Speaker 2: Did that make a big impression on you, I mean New York? Speaker 1: It was, it was, it was incredible. Here I am working in corporate America. Man, I was making a lot of money. I think I was making about sixteen dollars an hour, intern, making more than, than my family had ever made an hour, met other interns from all around the, the country. I developed a very good friendship with a young man who, who, from, from Stevens Engineering School [Stevens Institute of Technology, Hoboken, New Jersey]. And he was politically inclined, so we had a lot in common, and, and--but then I hadn't, hadn't seen him since I left from up there. But he was supposed to go on and write a book, and I was supposed to go on to run for public office. I don't know if he wrote the book. I ran for public office, so. His name was Montsuer Khan [ph.]; he was an engineer. So, but that experience, yeah, being up there in New York, making some money for the first time, making some real money, it was, it was different. It was very different. And I got--that was more exposure for me too. And I--that's when I knew also that corporate America was for me, that I was given good skills. I was in, in, in an environment where you were trained and educated to think outside of the box, a lot of emphasis on employee development, and first in my family, my, my family, my immediate family to have even worked in corporate America. Story_ID: 177898 Speaker 1: Well, tell us about Coca-Cola [Company, Atlanta, Georgia]. How did you find out about Coca-Cola? Speaker 2: Through a friend. And I, I got a job with them as a trade examiner. And a trade examiner is, is simply this: they'll give you a car, an allowance, and some tubes, and a little computer, and you go all over the country stopping at businesses, and hotels, and, and fast foods ordering Cokes. And when you order that Coke, you make sure that you get a description of that person, and their name, and where they get the Coke from and all this. And you, you key this information in, send it on the modem back to the main office, and you, you ship that sample back. The reason being is there are a lot of organizations out there that sell Coke under Coke advertisement, but they're actually buying the product, a byproduct, a cola product. So you, you you're advertising Coca-Cola, but you're selling somebody else's cheaper brand where you get it. You know, your cost is cheaper. And there were actually sometimes, I understand there were convictions, where they actually convicted people who were selling under the Coca-Cola name brand, but was selling a different cola. And so they gave me a car, and that was the first time I went up to Vermont, my first area, territory was, was Vermont. I spent some time in Rutland [Vermont], Montpelier [Vermont], South Burlington [Vermont]. Speaker 1: You probably really stuck out in Vermont. There aren't many- Speaker 2: Let me tell you-- Speaker 1: --black people in Vermont, so-- Speaker 2: --at that time, I understand there was about three hundred black people in the entire state. This was around '80--'84 [1984], '85 [1985], '84 [1984], but I've never been treated better by any people than in Vermont. Those, those were the greatest people. I mean, if they saw color, I didn't know it. As a matter of fact, I was probably a, a rarity, and, and, and I guess somewhat fascinated to see somebody black. The interesting thing, my, my first stop in, in Montpelier I was at a, a bar, and at the other end of the bar I saw this white guy who kept staring at me. And I'm just out of college [at North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina]. I'm twenty-two, little radical, in the sense that, you know, just cocky, ready to take on the world. And after a while I just said wait a minute, I'm tired of this guy looking at me. So I walk over to where he is, and I say, "Hey, bud, why you keep staring at me?" And he says, and he hesitates, "Well, I've never seen a black person in person. I've only seen them on TV." And all of a sudden, I felt like a fool, because I thought he was staring at me for prejudiced reasons or racial reasons because I was black in that bar. When in fact, he'd just never seen one. He said the only time he'd ever seen a black person was on TV. So we ended up spending the next two hours together. And everything he wanted to know about black people, I tried to answer it for him, you know. I mean it was, it, it turned out to be a, a great experience for, for both of us, because I had never met anybody who'd never met a black person, and he had never met a black person. So we ended up just having a terrific conversation. And again, I, I--it was a beautiful country, beautiful people, and, and I'd love to, I'd love to go back and visit sometimes. Speaker 1: But if you stayed you'd be the only one of three hundred, right (laughter)? Speaker 2: You know, but it, it was just--but the, the lifestyle there, I mean the quality of life, and, and the people, and, and normally the people really determine whether or not you like a place or not. If you got good people, you, you, you'd get settled in. But it was definitely way up there and again, very few, very few people of color, but everybody was just in open arms. It was a great experience. Speaker 1: Okay, so, so your, your job is to travel around the country and sat--the countryside and sample Cokes? Speaker 2: Yep, yep. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: So then, the second phase of my training, after the Christmas holiday, was to come to Nashville [Tennessee]. So, I, I came down to Nashville to meet the second person I was gonna train with. And I said okay, while I'm here in Nashville, I may as well just run to Atlanta [Georgia], back to Atlanta for the weekend. Well, I ran back to Atlanta, and I'm still in Atlanta. I ended up quitting. I, I kind of like, you know, again, I got a college degree, here I'm going around taking Coke samples. Is that what I wanna do? Story_ID: 177899 Speaker 1: --So I quit [Coca-Cola Company, Atlanta, Georgia], turned the car in, and went back in the job market looking for a job, and started telemarketing. I got my first job telemarketing, first job here, stationed here [Atlanta, Georgia]. And then that led into me meeting a, a young man named Steve Whipple, who had told me that there was a, there were some positions open at MCI [Communications], to go and see if I could apply for one. I went over there and applied for the job. I was--by the way, I was making six dollars an hour doing the telemarketing, and I was doing it part time. They only had evening hours. So, I go over there and apply for a job, interview, and you know, one of those things, we'll call you, and if you hadn't heard anything, give us a call. So I called for maybe two months. Finally the guy told me that they hired somebody else, fine. So then I'm still working the telemarketing job, and a young lady comes in town who's a friend of a friend of mine, and she's looking for a job. And I said well, I hear they, they're interviewing over at MCI. You may want to go over there. So she calls them, and sure enough, they're interviewing. And she said well, they're interviewing at this place in Cobb County [Georgia]. I don't know where it is. Can you take me over there? So I said okay, fine, I'll take you over there. So I take her there that night. They're holding interviews that night. And I'm sitting out there. I said shoot, I may as well just fill out another application, just to do it. So, funny thing about it, that night I got hired and she didn't. And you know, when I, I had no--I, I wasn't even thinking about it. I just said okay, I'll just do it. I'm sitting here waiting for her. So I got hired, and that was my first break, my first major break with a permanent job in corporate America, with MCI. And that's where I developed a lot of certain leadership skills, organizational skills, management skills, and got a lot of exposure, spent a lot of time in [Washington] D.C., got a chance to see the legendary [William] Bill McGowan, Bert Roberts, those guys who used to be the head of MCI. And so things took off from there. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I never looked back. Speaker 2: Okay, all right, so how long did you stay with MCI? Speaker 1: I, I spent about two years with them, about almost three years, then I went to work for a short time for GTE [General Telephone & Electric Corporation] back up in North Carolina, in Durham [North Carolina], and then left GTE and came back to Atlanta and worked for, for BellSouth. I worked for BellSouth Cellular for about almost ten years. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And while I was at BellSouth, I got elected to the Georgia House of Representatives-- Story_ID: 177900 Speaker 1: Okay, now, how did you get involved in local politics here [Georgia]? Speaker 2: Well, through my fraternity [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity] here, through other organizations that I had belonged to, National Council of Negro Women and others. And one thing led to another, and then finally, some of my close friends, my two best friends said you know what, you should run for public office. You know a lot; you should run for public office. And the first time I ran, I, I lost in a runoff. I ran for the state legislature [Georgia General Assembly] in 1990, and then I came back two years later and won and beat five other people. Speaker 1: Now, now did, did you get involved in party politics in the beginning? Speaker 2: You know what, I really didn't get involved that much in the Democratic Party politics. I mean, I wasn't as active there. I think my springboard was from just the other basic community groups and me just wanting to just, you know, hey, I, I just think it's time. So I--in other words, how some people say well, okay, I gotta go and work through the Democratic Party before I can get elected, I didn't take that route. I just took the route, you know, if it's something that you're interested in, you wanna be a part of the solution, run, and I ran. Story_ID: 173553 Speaker 1: Okay, what was the political climate like in, in DeKalb County [Georgia] when--in those days? Speaker 2: Well, up until, up until the mid-'70s [1970s], it was pretty much dominated by the Republican Party, and then you started to see a shift, where Democrats and more, more Democrats were not only active in voting, but the county just--the people who moved here tend to be more Democratic, Democratically inclined and so, up until-- Speaker 1: Was it-- Speaker 2: --where it is now. Speaker 1: Was it because of the major influx of black people into DeKalb County? Speaker 2: Well, I think it was a combination. You had a very liberal white population to move here. And then certainly you had a significant number of people of color to move here. And people of color normally vote Democrat. Speaker 1: Okay, so this whole--Atlanta [Georgia] experienced the big boom during the, you know, mid-'70s [1970s], early '80s [1980s] in terms of population and people coming in-- Speaker 2: The, the metro area-- Speaker 1: --from all over the country. Speaker 2: --when you look at the ten metro counties, certainly DeKalb, Fulton [County, Georgia], Cobb [County, Georgia], you saw a huge population shift. As a matter of fact, Georgia is one of the fastest growing states. And just in the past two years, since the last census count, you had eighty thousand people just to move in this little immediate area, DeKalb, Fulton, Gwinnett [County, Georgia], Cobb, so. And it's, it's just been on an incline since the '70s [1970s]. Story_ID: 173554 Speaker 1: Now, you said you weren't really involved in party politics [Democratic Party] very much, but what did you, what did you do, or how did you set the stage for, for running for office here [DeKalb County, Georgia]? Speaker 2: Well, you know, my, my fraternity [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity] was just very active community wise. And I think it was--I think I used my fraternity as the springboard more so I guess than any of the others because I had a lot of--I was the president of my fraternity. I was the founder of, of the alumni chapter. I had a lot of support and people who encouraged me from that to run, knew some elected officials. And they never said well, in order for you to run, you need to go and join the Democratic Party, or you need to be active in the Democratic Party. They felt it was though, look, we're looking for young people like yourself. You have a different experience. You, you come from corporate America. You don't see as many people in our--among, among our ranks coming from corporate America. That's something that's good. And so, we decided to kick our campaign off. We ran for the Georgia Legislature [Georgia General Assembly] in 1990, not knowing many people, not having as much money as my, my opponent did, but we still did well and put a lot of sweat, equity in it, and I lost in the runoff. At that time, the district was about, probably about 90 percent white. And--but, but we, we just worked hard, got a tremendous amount of crossover vote, but the other guy just outspent me five to one. I think I spent, at that time I spent like five thousand dollars, and I think he spent like forty thousand [dollars]. Speaker 1: What kind of campaign staff did you have? Did they--were, were they veterans of-- Speaker 2: You know, I had-- Speaker 1: --of this kind of thing or-- Speaker 2: You know I had just-- Speaker 1: --were they-- Speaker 2: --good friends. I had good friends who believed in me, good friends who wanted to help me achieve my dream. And they got out there and they knocked on doors, and they held signs up, and they passed out literature. They, they saw it in me. They, they thought that, that I would be good for it, and, and they were willing to make some sacrifices. And what few pennies they had to help out and contribute, they did that too. And, and even after I lost the first time, the very next day I started campaigning again. I, I remember my father [Robert Lee Jones] the night of the election. My father was down here the night before the election. And I said to my dad, I said, you know, I have--"I've put all my all in there, and tomorrow's Election Day." And I asked him, I said, "Will you pray that I win?" And he said, "I, I'm not gonna pray that you win. I'll pray that His will be done and let Him decide." And so, consequently, the next day, I lost the election. And I said I'm, I'm gonna run again, didn't waste any time. And two years later I was on the ballot again, and I won. And the guy who had beat me--'cause reapportionment took place. They redrew a lot of districts. They drew a district was opened seat I won, and the guy that had beat me a year before, he lost. And he ran a couple of times after that and didn't get reelected, and I continued to serve. So, it was kind of amazing, my dad having the foresight, to say it's not about what I want; it was about His will, and he put God first. And, and so, God did what He thought was right. And His, His way was, was the right way, not mine. Speaker 1: Well, the, the voters had a lot to do with it (laughter) too, in terms of at the-- Speaker 2: Well, well-- Speaker 1: You had to get out there and convince those voters to vote for you, you know. Speaker 2: Yeah, but, but, you know, where did I get the health and strength from? You know, it came from above, and, and it worked out. And, and again, we've never looked back. Here it is thirteen years later, and we're still here. Story_ID: 173555 Speaker 1: What are the issues and what were, were the issues when you were in the Georgia state legislature [Georgia General Assembly]? And, and how did you, you know, retain that popularity, you know-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: --among the voters? Speaker 2: You know, when I was in the legislature, I found out that most of the votes that I cast did not really have a profound impact on the quality of life of the average citizen in my district [District 71]. Most people are more impacted by local government. Do they have policemen in their community, books in the library? Is the trash being picked up? Do we have adequate parks and green space? Do we have good roads? Those are the things more, have more of an impact. But the issues that were certainly important during that time was getting tough on crime, making sure that people who, who had access, or young people, children, having access to health care. Because there were so many families, although they were not Medicaid eligible, but they didn't have any insurance on the jobs that they worked, and they were--and their wages were low, and they couldn't afford insurance. And so there was a big issue in the '90s [1990s] on getting health care for, for children whose families that were not Medicaid eligible or couldn't afford it. The other you--we saw a huge shift in the budget, as it relates to education, the HOPE Scholarship. At that time when the HOPE Scholarship, which is where the state, through the lottery proceeds, used those dollars to, to offset or help pay for tuition, when the HOPE first started, due to the lottery, it was very limited. Your family income had to be one amount, and it would only pay for two years of college. Well, during that time, and more families started to want to take advantage of it, and the revenues were coming in, you saw a shift where we, we changed the family income, and removed the cap from it, and then eventually we, we shifted to a full four years. And so that was important during that time. And so when you look at those three issues, getting tough on crime, health care coverage, and education, that's what dominated the, the '90s [1990s] for me. Speaker 1: Now, when you mean getting tough on crime, what, what do you mean? I mean you-- Speaker 2: For example, those deadly sins, armed robbery, rape, murder, kidnapping, two strikes you're out, requiring that prisoners spend longer jail terms. Although now, there are those who are saying that our prisons are overcrowded, but it became a very political issue to, to require that prisoners spend more time in jail. And so that, that was a, a part of the crime package. And the other part of it, believe or not, dealt with trying juveniles as adults for certain crimes. So the whole tough on crime umbrella, those were some of the topics or some of the issues that fell on the tough--being tough on crime. Story_ID: 173556 Speaker 1: You said that in the 1980s, especially, and the early '90s [1990s] there was discussion about how to prevent crime. And I think [HM] Lee P. Brown, who used to be the police commissioner [sic., public safety commissioner] here in Atlanta [Georgia]. He's one of the advocates of community policing and other ideas to try to prevent crime or you know, stop crimes before they happen by changing conditions in the neighborhoods-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: --and the conditions that people live under rather than the punitive approach and just-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: --trying fill up the jails and keep 'em in longer. Is there--do you have any thoughts on that, I mean when you-- Speaker 2: Well, first of all, when you start talking about community policing, those issues are dealt with by local governments. When you're in the state legislature [Georgia General Assembly], you don't have a police department. The one law enforcement agency you have, if it's gonna be any enforcing on the streets, was primarily state patrol. But they're primarily enforcing traffic violations, and, and occasionally there may be some drug busts due to traffic stops. But in terms of community policing, you don't see community policing being conducted by the general assembly. The other issue is, although you talk about what can we do to reduce the crime, again, that's done by local governments. But in the legislature, when one politician's out trying to out, trying to out-politic the other, or when one party trying to appear to be more tough on crime than the other, and it's all to garner votes, that whole debate shifts and it's about okay, who's the toughest on crime? Who's the tough--in other--the other thing, too, DUI [Driving Under the Influence]. It's popular to run on DUIs. And every year you saw a whole new DUI law come on the books, when they never gave the ones on the books an opportunity to work and see if it, it's making a difference. So, in a state legislature, the politics are different on a state level, as opposed to the local level, because you're dealing with, you're dealing with primarily the, the, the overall--I, I should say you, you--I won't say overall, but you're dealing with crime as a, as, okay, what's the punitive route? How can we be tough? Not so much on what can we do to reduce the cycle, recidivism? You know, they're not concentrating on that; that's not popular when they run for office. When they run for office, I want that criminal to stay in there longer. If that criminal rapes you, and it's second time, we don't wanna see him on the streets anymore. That's popular. Let's take more discretion away from the judges. That's popular. Although I'm not saying that's the best route, but, but that's the way the politics were played on the state level. Speaker 1: Yeah, I know that people at the, at the crime/victim level also, you know, often call for more-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: --for harsher punishment or laws that--you know, even in cases of murder. If you shoot a cop, you're supposed to get more time than if you killed your immediate--you know, you or I. Speaker 2: Sure, sure. Speaker 1: But-- Speaker 2: That's exactly right. Speaker 1: --I mean it's really hard to give anybody more time than life-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --you know, after--or, or the death penalties or-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --I mean unless you torture them or something, which we can't do-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --anymore. But, but people call for these, for more, for a harder crackdown. And, and I guess politicians feel the need to, to do that, but at the same time, you know, you know, there's a better (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But it gets them elected. Speaker 1: Yeah, right. Speaker 2: It gets them elected. When people talk about we wanna have--we want criminals to stay in jail longer, they don't realize now there's a cost to that, all right, but it sounds popular. And you know what, what do politicians wanna do? Speaker 1: Get elected. Speaker 2: They wanna get elected. And if the people are asking for it--you know, it's hard to rationale, okay, we can put them in there longer. But you know what, it's gonna cost you more. We may not be able to fund, you know, as much money over in here over there; you know, it's less money going towards education now. You know, we, we can, we can do it, but why, why even get into those discussions and, and then, and lose, possibly lose their vote. Okay, you wanna be tough on crime, I'm with you. We're gonna require they do 80 percent of their jail time. Speaker 1: Yeah, but it--well, we've got a like a-- Speaker 2: So that's a whole nother debate. Speaker 1: Yeah, I know. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: It's a growing crisis though with all these young black men in jail. I mean they, they are over populating the jail. They all--they also represent the poorest people in the, in the country with the least amount of opportunity, the least education. And it seems like--I don't, it's a-- Speaker 2: But you, you know, your preaching to the choir. The fact of it is, when you're running for office, and it's something that people like to hear, you do it. Speaker 1: That's the pragmatic approach to it. Speaker 2: Yeah, you do it. You know the difference between a politician and a statesman is remaining a politician long enough to be a statesman. Story_ID: 173557 Speaker 1: How can you actually do something or do you find that difficult to actually do some things that you would consider progressive for your own philosophy, as opposed to something that is, is just, you know, ear candy for the voters, you know? Speaker 2: Well, you know, I, I say this a lot: people say they want honest politicians. But if politicians became honest, they wouldn't get elected. For example, you may feel a certain way on a particular issue. I don't think we need to put people in jail for life. I think they should have a second chance. Well, if I'm, if I feel differently, and I'm a voter, and you want my vote, I want you to be honest with me and tell me your opinion. But if your opinion differs from mine, you just lost me; you just lost my vote. But you said you want me to be honest with you. Here's how I feel. Here's where I think the solution is. Oh, I don't agree with that. And then Joe Blow comes over, and Joe Blow says what this person wants to hear, and Joe Blow gets elected. Now you and Joe Blow may feel the same way in terms of how your--what your solution is, and, and, and you just articulated yours, and he didn't. Well, but this person said what this person wanted to hear. You--that's what, that's what gets me when people say they want honest politicians. Politicians are not gonna be honest when they know that if they're being honest, they're gonna be penalized. Speaker 1: But there's an aspect of leadership I think that people expect from politicians, or don't--I don't know-- Speaker 2: You know what-- Speaker 1: --if they expect it-- Speaker 2: --people have-- Speaker 1: --but they would like to have it, they say. Speaker 2: You know what, people-- Speaker 1: They like to have-- Speaker 2: Here's what I found out, people have more expectation of others than they have of themselves. They really do. They have more expectations of others than, than they have of themselves. In other words, I can come in, I can--if I'm cam--when I start to campaign this year--I'm up for reelection '04 [2004]--I'm gonna camp--oh, we're gonna bring X amount of jobs here. We're gonna bring jobs. We're gonna, we're gonna increase this. We're gonna do this. We're gonna do that. But I can't bring in all these jobs. I can't hold a gun over that private investor and say, look, you'd better have me X amount of jobs here. Sounds good though, doesn't it? But at the end of the day, tax cuts, for example, President [George W.] Bush. I wanna give everybody a check back. You deserve your tax dollars back. That sounds good, doesn't it? Everybody gets a check. But guess what? Look at the deficit. We went from over three hundred billion dollar deficit--I mean a surplus--to a deficit. Well, who's gonna pay for that? You know who's gonna pay for that? It's gonna be passed down to, to you, to me, your children. But wait a minute, he just--you got a check. You're getting your money back, but you don't realize you're gonna have to pay it back and triple it. All right, so it sounds good to say I'm, I'm cutting taxes. I wanna cut taxes. Yeah, it sounds good. Everybody wants to hear, yeah, cut my taxes. But you know what how you gonna pay for these other programs if you give all the money away? Now, people are always saying cut spending, cut spending. But if I'm a Medicaid patient, don't cut my Medicaid. Or if I'm a, if I'm a, a nature or conservationist, don't, don't cut the budget back on the parks. Or, or if I earn a living based on who goes to jail, don't cut back on, on the prison spending, you know. They want you to cut, but don't cut anything that they like. People want more services, not less services. But they wanna say oh, we--you should cut; you need to cut. Cut what? It's fine to cut until there's something that they want. When you cut what they want, then they're mad at you. So my point is they don't want--people say they want honest politicians, but they don't, and that's a frustrating thing for me. It's very frustrating. And people tend to blame--the county's [DeKalb County, Georgia] been around 182 years. I've been here for two and a half. Now in two and a half years, I didn't create any problems, but I get blamed for stuff that happened before I got here. Now common sense would say, well, that's not Vernon's fault. The economy is bad now. Did I, did I, did I take the economy down? But people wanna blame. So, I, I didn't mean to get off into all that, but it just, you know it gets me when, when people say they want honest politicians. Story_ID: 173558 Speaker 1: That's the core of what you--I mean the philosophy of what you do though. I mean that's what--that's, that's why we ask these kind of questions, you know, to try to get a sense of what, you know, what your political philosophy is and your-- Speaker 2: Gosh, my-- Speaker 1: So that's good it's not a, it's not a superfluous conversation 'cause it's--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, you know, you can't be in this business and, and commit suicide. I mean, you know, I, I just can't come out and just say you know what, what you just said does not make any sense. That's the craziest thing I've ever heard. You have to respect what people feel and what they think. And what I try to do, though, is strike a balance. I try to strike a balance between what's reasonable and what people's expectations are. And all I can do is my best and let people judge me on my record. But it's kind of funny, most--when the economy is doing well, government can be screwing up. But if a person got a job and making money, they don't think about it. When the economy is doing bad, and you've got politicians who're making good, sound decisions, they get blamed. It's just, that's just how it works. It's just, just the nature of the beast. It's how, it's how it works. You, you, you can't, you can't, you can't get around it. This administration, [President George W.] Bush Administration, could be criticizing a lot of things about the [President William Jefferson "Bill"] Clinton Administration. But a lot of things that's going good for the Bush Administration was based on decisions made by the Clinton Administration. There's gonna be things based on Bush's Administration for the next president that come in that may work to his advantage or not to his advantage, I mean just how thing--it's just being in the right place at the right time I think is what helps a lot of people, and perception. It's not what you do. It's what people think you're doing. It's what people think you're doing. Speaker 1: Tell me, do you consciously try to use your position, I guess, as an elected official to educate the public around issues that, that they would, they would think better on if they knew more, you know, 'cause they really don't-- Speaker 2: Well, see-- Speaker 1: It's hard for people to understand sometimes how things work. Speaker 2: If I can get in front of a crowd, which I do, I can explain things then. But the press can write an article that would reach literally thousands of people, and they can get it wrong, like they always do, and all of a sudden they got that person. And all of a sudden you got to play catch-up. And a lot of those people you're not gonna ever reach. And that's already in their mind. They heard one side of the story. I, I can't go around explaining to everybody. The, the press doesn't write about good things or things that are done right. They don't wanna--that doesn't sell newspapers. They wanna write controversial stuff. That sells newspapers for them. When you look at all the time that they spent on Monica Lewinsky, all the news reports, versus programs where families were actually being impacted and was making a difference, whether it was environment, whether it was Medicare, whether it was education. But there was no--look how much time was spent on Monica Lewinsky and Bill Clinton versus-- Speaker 1: And money too. Speaker 2: --and money. Speaker 1: Lots of money. Speaker 2: Lots of money. Speaker 1: Billions of dollars. Speaker 2: Fifty-five million dollars spent on, on the, the, the Kenneth Starr investigation alone. In the final analysis, what happened? He lied about having an intimate moment with an intern. That's what it came down to. Look how much money we spent? But guess what, it was all over the news, public just--that fifty-five million dollars could have been spent somewhere else. But anyhow (laughter). Story_ID: 173559 Speaker 1: Your philosophy is to get elected I guess first, then-- Speaker 2: You know what, first of all, every politician's number one issue, whether they admit or not, is to get reelected. When a politician does not care about getting elected anymore, he's ready to step down. He, he says what he wants to say. I look at Zell Miller. Zell Miller knew he's on--he was, he was only gonna be there one term. Zell Miller says what he says and does what he wants to do, because he doesn't have to answer to anybody. But you take those who're trying to get reelected, they're not as candid; they're not as open. My philosophy is this, you know, sure, I wanna get elected and sure, I try to walk these line--land mines. And we don't wanna do anything to alienate our electorate, but I try to keep it simple. I try to stay on the issues. I try to not be all over the place, but just pick out two or three issues and campaign on those issues. But in my campaigning, that also gives me an opportunity to educate, so as many people I can get in front of, the better it is for me. And, and--but you know, people tend to vote many times on whether or not they just like you. Arnold Schwarzenegger, now are people ready to vote for him because of all of his experience? I mean, let's, let's think about this now. Speaker 1: No, we don't--it's hard to imagine. Speaker 2: They're saying right now he's the number one vote getter. And they wanna vote for him because of his experience, or what is it? Or is it hype? Rock star. Gray Davis, he can't help--because the economy's been the way that it is--he's having to make some tough decisions, but who's, who are they blaming? Now, I don't know Gray Davis, never met the man. But as an elected official, I'm, I'm, I, I can assure you California, like other governments, are having a hard time because of the economy. So you go in and wanna take a guy that has absolutely no, no, no experience at all, and then you wanna put him in this body. He's gonna be up for a rude awakening, because he's never had to get an agenda through a legislative body. It's not based on likes. It's based on politics. And if he doesn't understand that game, they're gonna eat him up. And Jesse Ventura, prime example, Jesse thought--they elected him. He got in there. It's no fun. He didn't seek reelection. If it was fun, he would have seeked [ph.] reelection. It's no fun. Speaker 1: It's more fun than being, being a critic then actually, I guess. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. It's more fun being a critic, 'cause you don't get criticized. You get a chance to criticize everybody else. But he told Arnold don't, don't run; you shouldn't run. I mean because Arnold's walking around right now with the smiles and all this on his face, but wait until responsibility fall on his shoulders. Wait until that responsibility falls on his shoulders, and he's gonna have to answer to people. What does he know about that legislative body? Does he know any member in that legislative body? Does he know the first two people he needs to call in his office are the speaker and, and, and chairman of, of both houses' appropriations committees? Does he understand that process? I doubt it. It's gonna be a huge learning curve. Now you know what, but it's a funny thing. If he goes in there, and the economy jumps back up, they'll think he solved all their problems. (Laughter) Isn't that something? They'll think he solved all of their problems. Speaker 1: The Terminator, right. Story_ID: 173560 Speaker 1: So what, what was your initial motivation for running for office in the first place? Speaker 2: Thought I could make a difference, want to get in the game, stop being on the sideline, stop saying we should do this or do that, get in there. That's the only way you can change it. For me, for me--people have different roads. Some people want to be on the sideline, maybe advise or, or work the crowd. Some wanna get in and be a player. I wanted to get in. I wanted to get in and be a player. I, I thought and I still believe my experiences bring a lot, one, coming up on the other side of the track; two, my corporate experience; three, the fact that I know there are people out there that, they're getting the shaft. There're some serious problems. I'm a solution, I'm a solutionist [ph.], not, not someone who just want to point the finger all the time. J.C. Watts is one of my good friends. J.C., he left [U.S.] Congress because J.C. was frustrated. You know, we're here to really do something, or we're here because my party, I'm gon' do this; your party, you do that. And because you happen to be of a different party, even if you got a good idea, I'm not gonna work with you. I'm not gonna agree with you. Ah, that's not right. Do what makes sense. But you don't have that. Speaker 1: Yeah, J.C. Watts seemed to have relationships across the, across party lines. Now, but he's considered like a, you know, conservative black Republican. Do, do those labels have a lot of meaning for you, Democrat, Republican, liberal, conservative? Speaker 2: You know what, I am--I've seen some of the, the most liberal conservatives and some of the most conservative liberals. I, I like to think that I, I am, some call it a centrist. Maybe I am, because I'm, I'm not way over here to the, to the right. I'm not all the way over here to the left. I just believe in, in just being reasonable and sensible. I think most American people are in the middle. The conservatives, the most, the most conservative person in some, in some settings, being conservative means the government shouldn't tell a woman what to do when she make a decision between her and her doctor. That's being conservative, all right. Then that liberal, there are some liberals out there who actually believe in a, in, in, in, in not having an abortion. But it's the rhetoric. What gets me is when you have these people who wanna say oh, family values and this, and I'm that, and I'm this, when in fact, if you look in their closet, they have no family values; it's hype, and they play to people's fears. Let's not play to people's fears. Story_ID: 173561 Speaker 1: How did you make the transition from state legislature [Georgia General Assembly] to county government [DeKalb County, Georgia]? Speaker 2: Well, serving in the legislature, I served on a legislative branch of government. We wrote the law. And you're one of many. As a matter of fact, in Georgia, you have 180 house members. I was one of 180. You have 56 senators, so when you look at the whole body, I'm one of many. This position that I'm in now, county executive [chief executive officer, DeKalb County, Georgia], this is the executive branch of government. And all county agencies, and departments, and employees, and the day-to-day operation of county government is delivered through this office. So, it puts you in a position where as you can have more of a direct impact. And you can be certainly much more part of the decision-making process. DeKalb County [Georgia] is about seven hundred thousand people. Our operating budget is about $490 million, overall budget and assets about $2.6 billion. That's more people than several states, as well as a budget larger than several states. So actually, being in this position, we are managing and operating a government that's larger than some states. The experience is incredible for me. Being from the private sector and having experience in management and coming from the legislative body serving in a general assembly, putting those two together is basically what I do now. For one in this role, I have to have legislative experience because I have to get my agenda through the board of commissioners. So the political experience is very important there. On the other hand, because I'm responsible for managing the day-to-day operations of this government, my management experience in the private sector has helped me do that. And so, I want to have much more of an impact on DeKalb County. When I served in legislature, that legislature was there to serve 159 counties. Where I am now, I'm only concerned about my county, and I don't have to compete with other counties, as I did in the legislature. And so it's given me an opportunity to improve the quality of life, whether it's preserving green space, and, and, and expanding our parks, making sure our sanitation department is doing a good job, outstanding job of its delivery of, of sanitation services, or making sure that through our road improvement projects, building more sidewalks, paving streets, that those issues are attended to, and policing, and fire, public safety. I have much more of an impact because of those agencies being under the umbrella of the CO's office. So we're able to make much more of a difference, have more of an immediate impact on DeKalb County being in this position. And that was why I wanted to go from being one of many, where I didn't have as much of an impact on my county, to being the primary executive of the county, to make sure my county is being taken care of. Story_ID: 173562 Speaker 1: Since you've, you've been the CEO [chief executive officer] of DeKalb County [Georgia], what have been the major issues here, or the major issues you had to deal with? Speaker 2: Well, for once, when I came into office, I came in at the beginning of a recession. And so my first two and a half years have been operating under a recession, operating under 9/11 [September 11, 2001], which has had a profound impact on, on, on tourism and other, other traveling aspects. And my number one challenge has been revenues were down. Well, when revenues are down, you have to make some tough decisions, cut taxes in some cases, raise in the other. But if my predecessors didn't do a good job of preserving and having revenue available so I don't have to raise taxes, then you have to raise taxes, and that's unfortunate. But you can only spend a dollar once. And on, on that dollar, you have to make sure that you spend it wisely. People want quality services. My job is to make sure I strike a balance between continuing to invest in this infrastructure, improving roads, streets, parks, all those amenities that people pay for, but at the same time to try to keep taxes as low as possible. Speaker 1: Okay, have there been any issues that have created controversy in, in DeKalb County since you've been in office? Speaker 2: Well, when you look at revenues being down, we use a one cents sales tax to reduce property taxes and to invest in our infrastructure. Well, that one cents sales tax has been reduced, so people aren't receiving the tax credit--as much of a tax credit they've, they have in the past. That, certainly has been a concern, but on the other hand, job loss. A lot of people lost their jobs. Although we've done, done a good job of bringing more jobs here, but still, people are impacted by that. When you look at transportation with the gridlock, more and more people are dissatisfied with the gridlock. More and more people are moving here, thus, clogging our, our byways and highways. And, and trying to have the dollars available, 'cause we, we certainly have to get, draw down federal and state fundings, but as their budgets are cut, then that's less money for us to have. As our revenue, revenues decline, that's less money we have to invest in our infrastructure. So, that's why this recession is certainly having a profound impact, so much in some areas, specifically in one state, there's a recall for the highest executive of that state. So, those, those can always be issues. There can always be some issues when, when there's a, there's a, a recession, and that's what we're experiencing right now. We hope we see some indicators that things may be turning around, but we still have a long ways to go. Story_ID: 173563 Speaker 1: Okay now you're the youngest county CEO [chief executive officer] for DeKalb County [Georgia] ever. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And I mean has it been tough for you trying to get on the inside of things here? Speaker 2: Well, I got elected at thirty-nine, but remember, although I may have been the youngest, I'm the only one of, of, of the, the two--'cause we went to this form of government in the early '70s [1970s]. I'm the only one that has had legislative experience before coming to this office, in, in other words, from the [Georgia] House of Representatives. The other two served as local county commissioners, but it wasn't that I came here without any government experience. And at the same time, because this position is a manager's position too, my experience in the private sector, and believe it or not, of the three county execs [executives], I'm the only one that has had--that's received a college degree, not to say that, that means that I'm more qualified, but it shows that my experiences are different. And there are a number of things that, that, that I have that may differ from my predecessors. But I come to government running it based on business principles. That's when I reflect upon my experience in the private sector. Although I recognize that it's government, but applying business principles help me run the day-to-day operation of this government. Speaker 1: Now, I've read in your literature that you, that you were, when you were elected you said that we have to, you know, think outside the box. We have to be aggressive. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: I mean what, what, what, what examples of some things you've done down here? Speaker 2: Well, I've been trained and educated to, again, think outside of the box, look for ways to streamline operations, look for new ways to create revenue. For example, we, when we merged fire and EMS [emergency medical services], those two, fire, fire and EMS were two separate agencies, the firemen here, the paramedics over there. Well, that has been done because going back years and years ago, they didn't hire female firefighters. And the female EMS employees could not stay overnight at the fire stations because they wanted to keep men and women separate. But over the years, we've hired female firefighters. They're already residing there, but we were still operating under the old regime. So when we merged the two, we saved $5.6 million over the next seven years; we have better trained individuals; we've cut our response time, going to that call, responding to that call; we reduced overtime significantly, but that difference, the way of streamlining that operation. We are also, because my background of being in information technology, we're updating all of our financial systems with a Windows-based client-server operations. We're, we have the capability, or will have the capability once it's completely implemented, of doing e-business. We've been operating on a twenty-two year-old mainframe. You cannot do e-business. I want customers from the comforts of their home to be able to log in and pay for certain services, or gain, gain access to certain county information without having to leave the comforts of their home. Our inspectors, when we finish with our new system, their inspector can take a little semi-laptop out to a particular location, do whatever he needs to do, key that information in from the field, go to the next house and not have to worry about coming back here and downloading the information. Just using technology to improve government and deliver government services is making a difference. But we're looking at every county department on how we can streamline, how we can save money, and again, look for new ways to generate revenue. The traditional ways of generating revenue is primarily based on raising taxes, et cetera. We have to, we had to form an economic development department. We didn't have one. We lost a lot of businesses. We used to be the premier county, but as we became competitive with other counties, they had a much better or more aggressive economic development team going in, bringing in jobs and providing incentives. Well, that's what we've done. We've created a first class economic development department. We're not only saving existing businesses, we're now competing to bring in new businesses here. That's bringing jobs to, and it's bringing revenue. When a house is built in DeKalb County, it costs the tax payers dollars. That's another fireman, another police, another EMS, another book in the library. But when you bring in business here, we actually make money from that business, and we have to concentrate more now on bringing businesses to DeKalb County. Story_ID: 173564 Speaker 1: What's the most rewarding aspect of being CEO [chief executive officer] of DeKalb County [Georgia]? Speaker 2: When a cus- when a constituent calls me and says I have a issue, whether it's a pothole, whether it's a drainage problem, whether their home was broken into, whatever the case was, when we resolve that issue to their satisfaction, that makes me feel like we're doing our job. Customer service is important to me. I've mandated that every county employee, from the refuge collector to the finance director, go through customer service training. That's what we're in the business of, providing services. And we have to make sure that we provide top quality customer service. I want, I want citizens of DeKalb County to have a pleasant experience with their government. And that's what we're--that's where we're beating other governments. That's where we're showing our competitive edge. You can go to any county and you have access to roads, fire, EMS [emergency medical services], et cetera, but when you live somewhere where you have quality customer service, our people responding to you, even though sometimes we may not be able to resolve your issue, but the response to you as it relates to your concern makes a difference. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 173565 Speaker 1: What's your vision, I guess, for the future of DeKalb County [Georgia]? What do you plan to do next? Do you have some big plans? Speaker 2: Well, as we close out our first term and I'm up for reelection to the second term [as chief executive officer of DeKalb County, Georgia], there, there are some key things I wanna concentrate on: one, certainly I want to always maintain the highest level of ethical standards, so we can never stop doing enough to maintain ethics in government. Secondly, I wanna concentrate more on the environment. Right now we do not have a real recycling program. Although it may be some costs, and we're looking for ways that we can minimize that cost, but we're gonna have to go to a recycling process. I think that's good for us. It's good for the community. It sends the right message to do recyclables. It saves. And thirdly, we have to address in a major way our transportation in the sense not so much public transportation with expansion of public rail, but adding left, more left and right turn lanes, adding sidewalks, widening some lanes, getting traffic moving, because we recognize if MARTA [Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid Transit Authority], our public transportation system, was to build us additional system here or extend the rail line, may be ten years before it's open. In the meantime, it makes a difference just to add a left and right turn lane sometimes or synchronizing traffic lights. So we wanna concentrate certainly more on easing the traffic congestion in DeKalb County. Story_ID: 173566 Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community in general? We always ask this question. Speaker 2: You know I have hopes and concerns for DeKalb [County, Georgia] period. I, I recognize that in many cases we're very diverse. As a matter of fact, we're the most diverse population, or populated county. And in the Latino and the Asian community it's important for me to make sure that they understand county government, and that county government is there to serve them, and to get them indoctrinated to the customs and traditions of the way we do business, and to be able to communicate with them. For example, in some ethnic groups who, who've moved here, they're used to cooking on an open fire. So they don't understand that if, if you're in an apartment and a fire breaks out, don't try to put it out yourself, dial 9-1-1. We're not there to deport you. We're there to save some lives. Speaker 1: Sir, I guess you, you may have--I may not have stated this right, but we-- Speaker 2: But I'mma--I was gon' come back to the black community. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right. Speaker 2: I'm just saying different communities have different challenges. In the, in the African American community, I, I think, and you can go a lot of different places and probably see the same, there's sometimes almost a neglect in infrastructure. You can see in some communities where they have more businesses. You can see in some communities where it's safer. You can see in some communities where the streets are better. My job is to make sure no matter where you live in DeKalb County and no matter what color you are is that you have good streets; you have solid protection; you have economic opportunities; you can live and work and play in your community without having to commute to another community. And you know, it's kind of funny, when I got elected [as chief executive officer of DeKalb County, Georgia], being the first person of color, among, among many white people there were unreasonable fears. And among many black communities there were unreasonable expectations. And I hope, since I've been in office, I've been able to relieve many of those who had unreasonable fears, and at the same time, bring some rational--rationale and reasonability to those who have these overextended expectations of me. And I've just tried to strike a balance. And as long as I concentrate on a quality of life for every citizen in this county, it doesn't matter what color you are, it doesn't matter where you live, you'll have a quality of life. But I recognize that in some areas there, there are critical needs, and I try to govern, and, and I try to work based on the critical needs, something as simple as, if, if your neighborhood has sidewalks, now they may be breaking up here and there versus another neighborhood has absolutely no sidewalks, where do I spend that dollar? Let me try to at least get some sidewalks where there are no sidewalks. And if I'm gonna build some sidewalks, let me build the sidewalks where there's a greater public safety need. In other words, do I concentrate building sidewalks in a neighborhood? Do I concentrate building sidewalks around a school where there are kids literally walking in the streets? So I try to govern based on the critical need and address challenges based on the critical need. And if I continue down that path, it doesn't matter. Now, I'm not naive and, and, and do not realize that there, there are some communities, and they're people of color, I can say who have not maybe felt inclusive. And I've tried to not only, those in the past who have been included to maintain and keep them included, but those who have been traditionally left out. That's whether there're job opportunities or business opportunities. We don't have an affirmative action program here. As a matter of fact, when they had affirmative action program less than 2 percent of contracts went to small or minority companies. What we do have here, though, is that we have a, a process where we do pre-bid conferences. We put the big boys with the little ones, and we say you guys sit around the table. There's enough for everybody. Let's work together, develop partnerships. We appreciate if you do have small businesses, or women businesses, or minority businesses. Doesn't mean that you can't get the business with us if you don't, but, but it just makes better sense. It's, it's good business for all of us. Story_ID: 173567 Speaker 1: And we have a, we do have, we have--if your business is located in DeKalb County [Georgia], we'll give you additional points. We can do it that way. Now, we ask those businesses, give us the makeup of your team, and we, we keep it in terms of information so we can see what we have. But, but we have, without an affirmative action program, I bet you probably 35 percent of new contracts have gone out the door since we've been here has been to small businesses or minority businesses. And those big businesses who did not get the contract don't feel like there was any funny business. They feel like, okay, we competed. But what we saw happen though, there were false barriers in the, in the re- in the request for proposals or, or the bids that, that calculated--in a very calculated sense eliminated some businesses. And that, that, that criteria they had in that bid was not necessary to deliver those services. So when we went through the whole package, and we examined those false barriers, or those false built-in barriers, when we removed that, all of a sudden things just started working. But I, I--when it comes to affirmative action, certainly I recognize that there are people who are discriminated against, but you know, I can't, I can't say to a white business you can't do business here because you don't have any minority participation. That white business may have never done business here before, so why would I exclude them. But at the same time, you know, I don't want to see a white business who'd been getting business here for thirty years based on the way the contract has been tailored just for that individual--when I remove that, and, and level the playing field, seem like everybody get a chance to play. And that's the key, just leveling the playing field. It's kind of funny, I, I look at--you take a little poor white boy from south Georgia, for example, who wants to go to the University of Georgia [Athens, Georgia], and his parents are barely making it, barely making it. His parents--he didn't go to University of Georgia, so he's not a legacy. His parents aren't the doctors and the engineers with a ton of money. They didn't have enough money to get him good private counseling. So he should be able to go University of Georgia and not feel like, well, I got a--I can't go because they're gonna give it to a black. At the same time, a black, whose family may be well-off, who may be a doctor or the fa- and the mom an engineer or whatever, and they can get him some private services, or some tutoring, or he can go to private school, he has resources that can help develop him. He can compete and get in there, but no difference than Anne Cox Chambers, who's over the Cox Communications. Because she's a female she gets special privileges when it was--when they were handing out FCC [Federal Communications Commission] license because she's a woman. That's not right. That's not right. Let's level the playing field. Just because [President George H.W.] Bush daddy went to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] shouldn't mean that he [President George W. Bush] automatically should go to Harvard or Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut]. That's not right. That's a set aside for him. Big businesses because they have these big time lobbyists in Washington [D.C.], why should they get money or tax breaks when the average American can't get a tax break, small business person 'cause they don't have the political clout. That's not right either. And so, if, if, if, if we just level the playing field, and give everybody--try to make it fair for everybody, I think everybody'll do well. But sometimes we use crutches. There are a lot of white people who, when they hear affirmative action, they think all of us are getting our jobs based on affirmative action. And that's, that's a bunch of crap. But then there are black people who think because we have affirmative action out there, and they have not benefitted from it at all, but they think that well, affirmative action helps us. And they've never been a beneficiary of affirmative action. Here they are walking the streets defending it, and they got their job based on the, on the merits of what they do. So that's why I say there are people who play to our fears. And when you play to someone's fears it divides us, and politicians do it. You know, politician plays to people's fears. Isn't it amazing how a person who's out there who's against abortions because it's taking someone's life, have, a person has the audacity to go and kill someone because they perform abortions? Now, here you are saying you wanna protect life, and then you go and take someone's life. Just doesn't make sense does it? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: You know. Speaker 2: Sir-- Speaker 1: I didn't mean to get into all that. Speaker 2: Yeah, well, that's, that's, that's good. Story_ID: 173568 Speaker 1: At this juncture in, and you've got--you're still young. I mean what, what, what at this point would you consider as your legacy? Speaker 2: In, in a position where I am now, here at county exec [chief executive officer, DeKalb County, Georgia], I would say my legacy would probably be efficiency in government, taking government to an information technology age, and at the same time, the preservation of green space, and protecting our rivers, and our streams, and our wildlife. Those are two things that, that we have really concentrated on that I think--I may not be around, but fifty, sixty years from now, when, when kids are enjoying the (unclear) farm or that horse farm that we talked about earlier, the Arabia Mountain project, where we're saving some 1,100 acres of land, they're gonna wonder how that happened. And I think then it'll come up. Well, it was back in 2001, a county exec [executive] named Vernon Jones passed the Greenspace Bond Referendum, and they bought the land. I mean that would be there, as we move more towards the information technology age and more people have computers, it becomes a commonplace like a refrigerator or a stove, and they're doing business with the county over, over the Internet, it may come up then. But actually, you know, I really don't even think about a legacy. I really--it's not what's important to me. What's important to me is that I serve and give it my best. And at the end of the day, whatever happens happens, because you know what, if I asked--if someone asked me right now who was the chairman of DeKalb County in 1830, I don't know. I don't know, don't care, all right. So there's gonna be some years from now nobody's gonna know Vernon Jones. It's gonna be like taking sand and throwing it in the air and being blown away by the wind, so that doesn't, that doesn't mean anything to me. Story_ID: 173569 Speaker 1: But, this is slightly different from legacy, but then how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Hard worker, made decisions, had his own style, did what he thought was right. Story_ID: 173570 Speaker 1: That's Mayor [Shirley] Franklin from the City of Atlanta [Georgia]. She had just gotten elected, and she and I were having some discussions. We were looking forward to working together on regional issues, whether it's transportation, or air/water quality. We were just saying that we're, we're both new at our jobs, and we're just looking forward to the best for the State of Georgia. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: That's actually the second time that I, that--that's actually a separate--try this again. That's actually a second time I had an opportunity to have a conversation with Muhammad Ali. And we were down at Coca-Cola [Company, Atlanta, Georgia], and we were just kidding around. The first time I met him, he did a lot of tricks for me. He loves to do tricks, but he, he's always been my hero. I have a picture of him in my office. He's a great American. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: That's, here's an oppor--here's a place where--or this particular picture is related to a training, an international Olympic training facility that we have here in DeKalb County [Georgia] where we're training athletes from all over the world to compete in the Olympics. And of course, [HM] Andy Young, who's been a longtime mentor of mine and hero, he played a major role in the 1996 [Summer] Olympics [Atlanta, Georgia]. And we were at the ceremony, kicking off the opening of the new facility. And to the right of, of me, beyond Andrew Young, is Commissioner Burrell Ellis, one of our DeKalb County commissioners. Speaker 2: Again, this is the ambassador and I having conversation about the Olympic training facility. And plus he was giving me a little advice on government affairs and how to deal with a lot of challenges I've had to deal with. So, it was a little small break to talk about a different topic. Speaker 1: About what year is this in? About what year? Speaker 2: This was last year. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Here's a shot of the new governor [George E. "Sonny" Perdue], who he and I served in the legislature together. We were out at a school in DeKalb County. And the young man there was reading for us, and it was an exciting day. The governor had just got elected. Of course there's a lot of emphasis now being placed on education in Georgia. And the governor's office called and asked if I would join the governor at one of our schools. And of course we had a great day that, that day. Speaker 1: Interesting picture here. This young fellow that I'm holding, it's probably his first public community meeting. Here's where I brought all of our county department heads and agencies out directly to the government--I should say directly to the people--to give them an opportunity to interface with government on a weekend, without having to schedule appointments or anything like that, answer any of their questions and to address a lot of their concerns. So, it was a town hall meeting. Speaker 2: Here is a friend of mine, Judge [Greg] Mathis. He was so grateful to come to DeKalb County. As a matter of fact, he's been here on a number of occasions, but this particular time he was here to come and help kick off the first day of school here in DeKalb County as kids started to go back. Of course, judge has always been instrumental in, in advising and, and providing leadership to young people and helping them stay on the right track. So, he's, he's a role model for so many, so we were joined here at a high school together to, to kick off the new school year. Speaker 1: Here we are at a blues festival. I'm here with none other than DeKalb County's finest, Clarence "Strokin'" Carter. We had a great time. We kicked off a new jazz and blues festival to be an annual event in DeKalb County. And this year our drawing card was Clarence Carter, and then let me tell you, we really had a great day that day. Speaker 2: Here I'm down at the Georgia Legislature [Georgia General Assembly]. To my left on the photo is the speaker of the house, Terry Coleman. He and I served in the legislature together. And to my right in this photo is Howard Dean, the former governor of Vermont. I was introducing the two, and I believe that Howard Dean could be the next president of the United States. And I wanted to introduce him to Terry Coleman. Speaker 1: This was right after I had gotten elected and took over office in early 2001. President [George W.] Bush's first visit to Georgia was in DeKalb County. We were over at one of our museums, and I was given the introduction. I was asked to give the introduction to the president of the United States, so it was my first time doing that, and I was making an introduction at that point. Speaker 2: President Bush is sitting right behind, right, right behind you on the left? Speaker 1: At this particular time, President Bush has not come out yet, so I'm introducing him to walk out on the stage. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE) Speaker 1: Here is where President Bush had visited Georgia for the first time. The White House had called and asked if I would introduce him. And it was my first time introducing the president of the United States. It was a great occasion, and we welcomed him here. And my mama [Ruth Hicks Jones] was very--..