 Story_ID: 33856 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm the interviewer today with the HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: It's Nathaniel James. Speaker 1: Yes. Can you spell that for us please? Speaker 2: N-A-T-H-A-N-I-E-L, J-A-M-E-S. Speaker 1: Now, do you have a middle name? Speaker 2: No middle name. Speaker 1: Okay. And, sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: July 28, 1935. Speaker 1: And, where were you born? Speaker 2: Born in Branchville, South Carolina. Speaker 1: Now where is Branchville? Speaker 2: Branchville is about seventy-five miles outside of Columbia, and about, I guess, it's about ninety miles outside of Charleston. It's on the Highway 301, and I guess that would be the middle of South Carolina as you're going south. Speaker 1: Okay. And, sir, what is your occupation and title? Speaker 2: Well, I have two occupations, naturally, because I'm a National Guardsman. So, I was a manager for the telephone company, which is now Verizon. When I worked there I was with NYNEX. My other occupation is the military occupation, which is, I had several of them, but I ended up as the Commanding General of New York Army National Guard. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is July the 31st, 19--correction. July the 31st, 2012. Yeah, I still 19's. Speaker 1: And where are we are the present time? Speaker 2: Right now, we're in what they call the West Lounge in the 369th Armory. Story_ID: 33857 Speaker 1: All right. Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions that we ask as sort of a warm-up, and they don't require much of an answer; just a short answer. The first question is: Do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Not really, no. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: I guess blue would be the best one. Speaker 1: Okay. A favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: July, naturally. Speaker 1: Now, you just had a birthday in July? Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: No. No place particular. Speaker 1: Okay. And the last one is: Do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: A favorite--? Speaker 1: Phrase or saying? Speaker 2: No. I don't have a favorite one. Story_ID: 33858 Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Well, I'm going to ask about your family history. Now, I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But we'll start with your mother's side first, then we'll put them together at the end. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: My mother's full name is Reva Marie, and her maiden name is Myers. Speaker 1: How do you spell that? Speaker 2: M-Y-E-R-S. Speaker 1: All right. Okay. And what is her date of birth? Speaker 2: She's on the--and it's funny (these things with a leap year, and so I say?) 30; the first of March, 1909. Speaker 1: And where was she born? Speaker 2: She was born in Branchville, South Carolina. Speaker 1: All right. Now, well, tell us what you know about your mother's side of the family. How far back can you trace them, and what were they doing in history? Speaker 2: As far back as I can remember, that I've been told also is that, well, I knew my grandmother; and her mother, I don't know her name, but her mother was, I think it was Heather, like an Indian name. But I don't remember what the name was. I never knew my grandfather. Speaker 1: And do you remember your grandmother's name? Your grandmother's name? Do you remember her name? Speaker 2: Yes. It was Della. Speaker 1: Della? Speaker 2: Yeah. D-E-L-L-A. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Her last name was Grimes. Speaker 1: G-R-I-M-E-S? Speaker 2: Grimes. G-R-I-E-M-S. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you know what they were doing in Branchville? Speaker 2: What they did? Speaker 1: Yeah, what kind of work or--? Speaker 2: Well, they were all farmers, sharecroppers where they do their own farming. Speaker 1: Okay. Did they own their own land? Speaker 2: (Oh, but?). Speaker 1: Did they own their own land? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Is there any story about how they got the land or when they got it? Speaker 2: No. And as far as I know, naturally from--my mother was brought up on the same property. So as far back as [we can?] remember, it's probably land that was given to them from their ancestors, which was slaves, and then the forty acres and a mule. So I figured that's when they got the land. Speaker 1: Okay. So you think it was some kind of program of the Freeman's Bureau or something? Speaker 2: Yeah, something like that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I've heard of them at times purchasing other farmers' land, but I never knew the dollar amount or how much it was or anything like that, because them being farmers, I guess they got pieces of land that they could farm on. Story_ID: 33859 Speaker 1: Okay. Are there any stories that have passed down about slavery or about reconstruction or any of that from your mother's side? Speaker 2: No, there're no stories that they--that I've been told. Let's put it that way. As far as my sisters and brothers and my aunts and uncles, I've never heard any. Other than, you know, what, the hardships that they had of making a living. Speaker 1: Well, that's a story in and of itself. I mean, it was a hard life for them? Speaker 2: Right. It was a hard life. But as a kid, I didn't (know what it was like?). As a kid, you don't know what a hard life is, you just live it, you know. You get up in the morning, they feed you, and you have meals, and that's why I have TO say we're lucky because we had the farm, the farm fed you. Occasionally, you would get something from the store. But that was like back then you had to have another job in order to survive. So, most of the family, the young people worked on the railroad because that's the one that was doing the hiring. Speaker 1: Okay. So, the railroad work, was that like part-time work? Speaker 2: No, it was full time. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But occasionally they had what they call a shape-up. So if you wanted work, you had to appear down there in time to meet the shaper. And if you were a good worker, the boss or whoever, the foreman was would pick up you the next day because you did hard work. My father used to tell me, he'd say, yeah, he had to work so hard he had to work until the monkeys got you. And what they were saying, you work so hard in the heat, and one night you'll start seeing everything starts dancing. And that's when you were getting ready to pass out. And then, if you continue to work any longer you would pass out. But they take a drink of cold water and then go back to work. They had lunch, they brought their own lunch in what they called a pail; it was a lunch pail. To me it was--to me it was like, it was like a paint can with tin coating on the inside, which was probably the worst thing they could eat. And, you'd take rice and beans and maybe some salt pork or something like that in the can, and that was his lunch. And now, I can imagine what that was like; no refrigeration, in a can, and it's sitting in the hot sun until you get ready to eat it. It was warm, but it probably had all kind of bacteria in it by that time. And then you're eating--the tin which has lead in it. So that's probably why a lot of them didn't live very long. Story_ID: 33860 Speaker 1: Now, are there any stories about the railroad? Speaker 2: Well, the railroad was pretty much the most fair thing that they could get a job at. In fact, it was--you got skills that you could use on other railroads. So once you got those skills, you could use them on any railroad. And that's what helped my father [Alexander James] out when he came to New York. The story of how he got to New York, but not that he was a farmer and his family was farmers, and what happened was a case of the cotton, as they call it. You know they grow cotton because that was the thing, King Cotton. And what it was, was they had a cotton mill in Branchville, but there's a town further north which is a little bigger called Orangeburg, and they had a cotton gin there. So, one of the fellows told them that if you go to Orangeburg, you'll get more price for your cotton. So not--they only had, like, several bales, so they wanted to get the top dollar for it. So, they decided to put it on the wagon and they went to Orangeburg, my father and his cousin. And when they got there, the guy that was there wasn't the owner, but it was the son of the owner. And he says, "You boys leave that cotton here and we'll take care of that. You come back tomorrow and we'll tell you what we're going to give you." So when they went back the next day to get the money, he told them, "What are they talking about?" That was his cotton. And so, then the sheriff down there, they didn't care much for blacks then, so they decided that they going to arrest them because he said he stole his cotton. So they told them to get out of town. So they got the first train out, and, in fact, it was a place they called Bamburg, so they went and catched (sic) the train in Branchville and went to Bamburg, South Carolina, and got the train and came straight to New York. When they got to New York, my mother's brother was living here already, and he put them up. And he got a job with the Pennsylvania Railroad. And he was working on the Pennsylvania Railroad, and, finally, he got enough money to send for his family. Meantime, we lived with my grandmother. My grandfather had already passed away. So we stayed with my grandmother and my aunts and uncles. They were younger, and they were like sisters and brothers to the younger ones. But here there were older aunts and uncles that were like the same age as my parents. So, pretty much we grew up thinking that my younger aunts and uncles were like my brothers and sisters. Story_ID: 33861 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, I don't want to get too far ahead of us, because we already kind of off, but I want to go back to your mother's side of the family. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Because we haven't even introduced your father yet. But I didn't want to stop you from telling that story, you know, so I got the story. But, now, did your mother have a chance to go to school? Speaker 2: They went to the third grade. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My father also went to the third grade. Speaker 1: Okay. Let me get your--did your mother have any stories about, you know, her aspirations and goals or anything that she wanted to do, you know, when she was growing up that she was either able to do or not able to do? Speaker 2: Well, she never spoke a lot about what she wanted to do because she had her work cut out for her. I guess she (didn't want to create no wild dreams when?) you got your work, you got to do it. That's all it is. But she always wanted to be a singer. But she couldn't sing, that's the thing. Speaker 1: Oh, she couldn't sing? Did she sing in church? Speaker 2: She went to church. You know, in South Carolina, that's--half of your life is the church. You know, the church is in everybody's life down there because this is--this is before television and radio. So the only thing you had was each other. So the church was, I guess, your biggest entertainment. You go to church and you listen to the preacher, and the preacher had a higher level, social level, so that he's very well respected. And he's the one that can read and write, and pretty much that he's the preacher. So they treat him royally. Now, occasionally, he would come home for Sunday dinner, and then we'll kick a chicken or two or fry chicken for him. And, other than that, she didn't say too much what she wanted to do. Although, when she got to New York, she did work for the--I think, with the Pullman Railroad, the Pullman car--cleaning cars for a while in Sunnyside Yard. Story_ID: 33862 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: My father's full name is Alexander, no middle, James. Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth? Speaker 2: He's on--that's one I can't remember. I know it was in March, but I don't exactly what date it was. Speaker 1: Okay. Was he older than your mother? Speaker 2: He was born in 1905. Speaker 1: Okay. And was he born in--? Speaker 2: Branchville, South Carolina. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, tell us about his side of the family. What--how far back can you trace his family? Speaker 2: Well, his father's name was Perry. But I never met him. But I got some stories from my mother about him, and that was that, what his father used to do was to rent him out to other farmers when he was a young boy. And that's how they made a living. So he worked on his farm, and then he would send him to another farm to work on send him to another person's farm to make money. Speaker 1: Okay. So did he have to start working at an early age? Speaker 2: Yeah. Oh, yeah. And that's why he only went to the third grade. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: See, back then they figured that being black, you didn't need an education. All you had to know was how to work. So when they got to the age to work, they just wouldn't send them to school. They tell them go out and get to work, because every little dime was important then. So I guess that's the way life was. So when we got to New York, naturally, it was a different story. He demanded that we get an education. Speaker 1: Okay. So I take it was--so when your father was growing up, I mean, when he was--he learned how to, I guess, grow cotton and (unclear) (simultaneous)--. Speaker 2: He made money when he was a young boy, yeah-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: --and he (worked?) on down to other farms. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: You know, like, they have extra work on Saturday and want you to come and chop wood or I want you to come and mow this part of the farm, or something like that, or want you to clean the pig pen, or something like that. He would do those kinds of jobs. Story_ID: 33863 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, is there--now, is there any goal or aspiration that your father had that he was able to--? Speaker 2: Well, his goals was to basically, to take care of his family, which I guess I inherited that, my brother inherited it. Yeah, and it's a case of, you know, you got a family and you got to take care of them. And he would work two jobs sometimes just to make sure we had enough to eat. Part of the thing, now, he had nine children, and if you count the family, that's eleven. So my mother would cook three pounds of rice every day. So you know how far a pound of rice would go. So three pounds of rice was in a big pot, and we at it all up. We didn't get a lot of meat, but we had a lot of vegetables and rice, and that was sort of a stable diet, which it would turn out good because it was healthy for us (laughs). Speaker 1: You didn't know it then, right? Speaker 2: No. But it's like, as I said, if you don't you're rich or you don't know you're poor, and neither one doesn't mean anything because when you're a kid, as long as they're taking care of you, that's all you need. So, it was a case we had a lot to eat. We didn't have a whole lot of desires like ice cream and stuff like that, because you didn't get it. Occasionally, you got some candy, and that sufficed, but you wouldn't crave for candy because you didn't get that much of it. And what my mother would make, she would make this, what they call "hard candy," where they make it from syrup or sugar, and it would come out and then they would glaze it and freeze it, and it would come out like rock candy. And that was candy. Well, I wasn't crazy about rock candy myself. I used to eat sugar out of the sugar bowl. And when I first got to New York and they thought that something was wrong with me, probably was, but I just had a craving to eat sugar. And it turned out that it wasn't and then I broke the habit. Story_ID: 33864 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, is there a story about how your parents met or how they got together, because they're in Branchville which isn't that large anyway, I would guess? Speaker 2: Well, Branchville is a little town. From what I understand, the reason they call it Branchville, it's the first branch in the railroad in the United States. And that's why they call it Branchville. In other words, the railroad people were the ones that kind of ran the town, and naturally, the families that lived around, they all worked for the railroad, and they were all, you, know, part-time farmers. So when they go to the church, that's when they all get to meet. So, that's where my mother and father met, at the church. Now, once I thought about it, you know, when you meet one family, the brothers of the other family would marry into the same family. So my mother's and father's family are intermingled like that. My uncles are some of my cousins, and some of my cousins are my uncles, and stuff like that. So it was one of those mishmashes. You couldn't tell because everybody was with the same family. So these two families sort of met at my--my mother's brother married my father's cousin. So, now, she becomes my second cousin and he becomes my uncle. But now, because she married my uncle, then she's my aunt. So, that's the family it was. And that was a lot of that then. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, did your mother's--what--did your mother come from a large family too? Speaker 2: Yeah, she came from thirteen children. Speaker 1: Okay. So that's thirteen and then nine on your father's side. Speaker 2: My father had seven. Speaker 1: Had seven, okay. I'm sorry. Speaker 2: Now, my father had two wives. My father's wife--my father's father had two wives, and he and his sister were born with his first wife. But he had, I think it was four other--four other brothers and a daughter from the second wife. And that was with my aunts and uncles, the same (way with them?). It was only one girl out the--two girls out of the whole bunch. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, when you--oh. What was the name of the church that your parents met in? Speaker 2: Zion. Speaker 1: Zion Baptist? Speaker 2: Zion Baptist Church. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No, I shouldn't say Baptist. Zion Methodist. Story_ID: 33865 Speaker 1: Oh, Zion Methodist. Okay. All right. Now, when you think about your parents, their gifts, their talents, their dispositions, their attitudes, their looks even, hobbies; who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: That I think I take after them? Well, the, naturally, (it's their?) southern discipline; yes, sir; no, sir; yes, ma'am; no, ma'am,, no, sir. That made easy for me in the Army because (laughs), it was easy for me to say that. I didn't have to worry about saying it. But that's the sort of southern discipline they bring you up. It was a case that everybody got the same treatment. You treated your elders as respected people, no matter how old they were or as long as they older than you. Now, you didn't have to treat your oldest brother with the same type of reverence; but aunts and uncles, and cousins that were elder, you had to treat them like elders, and you had to respect their position in life. Speaker 1: Okay. But I was asking you, do you--I mean, which of your parents--which one of them do you think you took the most after? You took the most after? Speaker 2: Well, I guess I took from both of them. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: See, my mother was one that watched us, so she was the one that pretty much the disciplinarian for the day-to-day thing. My father was always out working, so, but when he came in, he sort put the law down, and he backed up what my mother said. So, naturally, we got whippings. People say that that was no good for you, but I thought it was a good thing. Now, when actually when I was getting a whipping, I didn't think that. But later on I find out it brought discipline to your life, that you needed to have this discipline. So, during the day-to-day, it's things my mother did. I saw what she did and I picked up some of the things that she did. My father had this determination of hard work and make sure you get out and go to work on time, would make sure you got out to go to school on time under those kinds of conditions. So between the two of them, they pretty much influenced my life. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, can you name your brothers and sisters for us and tell us where you fit in? Speaker 2: In the age? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. The first one, the oldest one is Matthew; and then my next is a sister, Elizabeth; and then there's Retha (ph. splg.); then there's Ada; then Luella; Alexander Jr.; then there's Adella and Louis. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And those are the eight, and I'm the ninth. Speaker 1: And so, you're the youngest? Speaker 2: Youngest one was Louis. Speaker 1: Oh, so you're--where do you fit in? Speaker 2: I'm in the middle. Speaker 1: In the middle? Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. I'm the third from the youngest. Story_ID: 33866 Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Now, do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: A what? Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: I'm missing that one. Speaker 1: What's your first childhood memory? Do you have a first childhood memory? The very first thing that you remember when you were growing up? Speaker 2: You want how old I was when I first remembered that I was a child? Speaker 1: Well, what you remember, actually, though the first time you remember. I mean, when you think back--. Speaker 2: When I think back, see, I have a couple of incidents that I think back people don't believe me, naturally. But I can remember being in a crib and looking up and seeing what the ceiling looked like. But I'm pretty sure that memory is when I was a baby, otherwise, I couldn't think of it. I might have been a toddler. But the memories that I had was, you know, growing up with my mother first is that we all, we got ready to eat, we had to eat on the floor, because we wasn't allowed to sit at the table. So we had what they called tin plates, and they put the food in the tin plate and you sat on the floor and ate. They gave you bread, and if you dropped bread on the floor, they would tell you, you could pick it up and eat it. But the floors then, they scrubbed their floors and everything, I guess it was clean enough that they--but, I can remember that you could see through the floorboards on the floor. So, you never know what would come up out of the floorboards if you're living in that kind of house. Naturally, flies were everywhere, so occasionally I can remember eating a fly, but they made me regurgitate it. The next memory I can remember back is when we were getting ready to go to New York, and they came and told us all we had to get ready and put on our, what they call, your Sunday suit. And they made us all go out in the yard and take a dump before we got ready, because they said it'll be a long ride before you get back to where you go to the bathroom. So it turned out that I remember they hustled us all, and we went in what they called the field and take a dump, and then you come back out and they straightened us up, and we all got in this big car and took us to the train station. Story_ID: 33867 Speaker 1: And I can remember the train ride. And it was a long ride. We ended up, I remember getting on the subway from the train. And some of my older cousins met us there, and my uncle. And they got us at the train, and they all grabbed one or two kids by the hand, and they brought us (on it?) because we weren't used to riding a subway, and the doors to us looked like they opened and closed so fast. I remember they were dragging me off on one hand and (I getting in?). Then we went to my uncle's house, which was a cold-flat on Eighth Avenue. I remember that, is that it was a cold-flat, it wasn't no heat in there. You had to generate your own heat. They had a fireplace, and they had to take wood and put it in the fireplace and make fire. The kitchen had a, what they call a water jacket on it, and it burned wood. And they would make it you hot water in this water jacket. And if you had to take a bath, there was only one faucet in the bathroom. And they'd take hot water from the jacket and put it in the tub and run cold water with it. And they'd put all the kids in there at one time, because they didn't--I guess you couldn't boil enough water, so. And maybe three or four of us would take a bath at the same time. And then, I guess what they did with the bathwater, they still bathed some other kids in it then they'd dump it out. And the grownups, naturally, had their own bath. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: There's one other thing I remember about that place is that, because of conditions then, you could hear the rats running in the wall. It sounded like a train going by because it'll be more than one rat running through--the walls were hollow and they were plaster. They were made with these slats and then they'd plaster over them. But in between them was empty. And happened is the houses were so old, this plaster would fall down on in the inside, and the rats, when they run through, would drop some of them, knock some of the plaster, and these were rats, not mice. And so, they had to have a grownup stay in the room at night when the kids were sleeping to keep the rats from bothering them. Story_ID: 33868 Speaker 1: Sir, we were--we always ask this question like this, but you can answer within the context of where you grew up, but what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: The sights and sounds as a young person. Naturally being on a farm, I never smelled the fertilizer for some reason. I don't know, I just never remember smelling it. But I remember the smell of spring and the smell of winter. Those smells kind of stay with me. New York, I had a whole lot of different smells. I guess the ocean probably put a lot of it in there. I couldn't smell the ocean when I was in South Carolina, but in New York, seemed like at night you got this kind of ocean smell. And you got the spring smell, and winter was a little different there. You got more of a wood burning smells than you got anything else. You had the diesel trucks, the coal; I'm talking about the coals that they burn. You had all that, what you call it, carbon from coming out of the chimneys and you smell that. You could smell coke, and you could smell pigs, and the different types of coals; you could smell the difference between them, depends on what they were burning. So, that's sort of what the different smells I got when I was a young person growing up. Occasionally now, even in the evening I still smell that ocean smell like the same as I smelled it when I was a kid. Speaker 1: Now, what about sights? Speaker 2: Sights would, yeah. Oh, it's a myriad of sights, you know. When you don't see things, naturally, the first thing you see that you haven't seen is something is amazing, like the electric trucks. That was back in--during World War II. They had the bread trucks were electric. And they would deliver--and the flower truck. It was a truck, it was like a, I guess a five-ton truck, had solid rubber tires on it and a chain that went around the back that the chain driving the back wheels. And those were the sort of things that, you know, you look at them and you say, you know, looks like a bicycle with a truck. The trolley car. The first buses that, they came around with, the first one--I guess ones were gasoline, but then they changed to diesel. And the subway, the different trains. And I very rarely saw the New York Central trains. But that was something that you would see in the South, so it wasn't really amazing to us, you know. The fire department. When the firemen all would run out on, there's a lot of trucks, and they all be hanging on the side of the truck. Now they don't do that. They sitting in the truck. But then they was on the side of the truck and took on the ladders and whatnot. And the pumpers the guys who all sat on the back, they sit on a--like a rail--platform on the back and held on, and they went down to the fire. Taxicabs. They were a little different than they are now, but they still served the same thing. They were all yellow with this checker on it. And I guess how they got checker cab. Story_ID: 33869 Speaker 1: All right. Now, where did you start school? You started school in New York, right/ Speaker 2: I started school in New York. Speaker 1: Now, you were on Eighth Avenue and what? Speaker 2: I couldn't tell you exactly. It was Eighth Avenue around 116 Street, somewhere in there. But when I started school, we were living on 122nd Street off of St. Nicholas. In fact, it was--actually it's off Eighth Avenue, because St. Nicholas and Eighth Avenue come to a merger there. I started school in P.S. 57, which is now, it's a co-op (laughs). Speaker 1: Oh, it's a co-op now? Speaker 2: Yeah. They changed into--. It was unique because the school was something like this room. The classrooms were on different floors. But between the classrooms were these doors that rolled back and forth. And so, when they had assembly, all they did was roll the doors back, you sat in your classroom. And on the end of the hallway they had a stage, like, made up so that you could look over all the other classrooms. And that was assembly. I started there in 1A. And by time I got to 1B--now, what was odd is they didn't teach you to read in 1A, but you got to 1B they attempted to teach you to read. Now, what happened is that we had moved from 122nd to 120th Street, and my sister started school and then my younger sister (clears throat). So I had to take her by the hand, and we would go to school together. It's at P.S. 110. That school has been torn down. It's not there anymore. But the ironic part of that is that, I got a teacher, and I don't know why this teacher was this way, but it was, you had like a couple of teachers in the classroom, and I had just gotten in the class, and the other kids was learning how to read. Now, you learned how to write your name, and I didn't know how to write my name. So, they had my name written on a little piece of paper, and what I was supposed to do was read it and then give you a present. So to me, it was great. I couldn't--I didn't know what that was. So they says, "Can't you see that? That says Nathaniel, I've waited for you a long time." And I remembered that. And I said, "Nathaniel, I waited for you for a long time." She said, "Oh, you might sit down." You know, I had trouble all--pretty much, most of my life because of that incident. I couldn't read out loud. I learned to read out loud when I went to Officer Candidate School where they demanded that you read out loud, because they said, if you're going to be an officer, you going to have to read to your troops. And so, that's when I started the program, learning to read. And they gave you speed-reading and all this other stuff which was helpful. So, pretty much, I can remember that incident. And I can attribute that incident to me not reading out loud. Speaker 1: So it made you shy? Speaker 2: I was embarrassed. Story_ID: 33870 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what was your--were your schools--. Now, you're in Harlem, right, in a--? Speaker 2: I was in Harlem. Speaker 1: This is Harlem. So most of your classmates were black, I guess. Speaker 2: Well, then it was--it wasn't all black then. It's just, like, the middle the Harlem where, I guess was black, but naturally, as a kid, I didn't go from level to level. I could only be right there in the street. We lived on Edgecombe Avenue. And then from Edgecombe Avenue we moved to Brooklyn to Gates Avenue. And I can remember Gates Avenue and it was a--Gates and Tompkins. That's when the war was going on, and that's where I saw like they delivered fish. Well, they didn't have a lot of ice trucks then, so what they did is, they delivered fish fresh. So the fish truck would come like a tanker truck, and they would scoop down with a big net, and take the fish out, and take them into the fish market. So you know you're getting fresh fish, they swimming right there in the tank. I guess that was amazing to me to watch them dip down and get all these fish out and put them in a basket and take them into the fish market. And I could sit in the window and watch the trucks come and deliver the bread and whatnot. And occasionally, my oldest sisters and brothers would take us downstairs to play in front of the stoop. And they had a movie, the Tompkins was on the corner. And I could down that far and could look at, you know, they put the pictures of what's playing on the inside. They'd put little scenes on the still pictures outside, and that's as far as I got. If I got ice cream, I think, ice cream, they told me, was three cents. So, I could get a cone of ice cream, which I very rarely got for three cents. Speaker 1: It's unbelievable-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --now to think that you could get that for three cents. Speaker 2: I guess a dollar now is like three cents then (laughs). Story_ID: 33871 Speaker 1: So, now, did you have a favorite subject in school? Speaker 2: A what? Speaker 1: A favorite subject? Speaker 2: Well, naturally, recess was the best one. But I didn't have any particularly favorite subject. I liked geography 'cause it was learning about people and things, but that was during the time I was in the lower grades, and naturally, when I got out, I could not (say it's?)--the favorite one would have been something like geometry or something like that. I liked that because it was, what they call, you can analyze the angles and I had more comprehension to that. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what about your teachers. Did you have any favorite teachers in grade school? Speaker 2: No. I didn't have a favorite teacher, but I had like a group of teachers, like, for instance, when we first moved to the Bronx down there, there's an incidence that happened. We moved to 178th Street in the Bronx, 1017. I remember the address. And we went to a school, Public School Number 6, on Tremont Avenue which was around two blocks away from where we lived. My mother brought me there. She registered me for the school, and I remember that, meeting them people in registration, and then they took me up to the classroom. And when I got to the classroom, my mother got to the classroom, and she turned me over to the teacher, and she left. And the teacher was name is Hanrahan (ph. splg.). She was a heavy teacher. You know, you ever saw the movie, the little--the cartoon, the Little King? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: The way he's shaped like that with little skinny legs? Well, that's how she was shaped. And she had these milk bottle glasses, and she had a juicy mouth. So when she talked, she foamed at the mouth. And she says, I'm the only black kid in my class now. So she brings me in, she introduced to the class, and she says, "I don't want you fooling with him because he's my boyfriend." And she would come over to try to kiss me, and I would go "Oh, goodness." I'd say, I don't want her to slob on me. So as a kid, you know, these things affect you, so you know, I always said, you know, "Stay away from me." Story_ID: 33872 Speaker 1: And they had, what they used to have were health inspection. So, the girls used to have to hold their hair to the side and hold their ear down. The boys had all short haircuts then. So what it was is, the boys had to do the same thing, since it wasn't everybody doing the same thing. The boys sat on side of the class and the girls sat on the other. And we went out--to go anyplace, the boys would line up first, and the girls would line up behind them. And during this health inspection, we're doing this hand down and head over like that, and we're going down the row and she, the teacher would get to me, she says, "I don't know why I look at you, Nathaniel, because I can't whether you're clean or not" (laughs). As a kid, you know, what the hell does this mean? So, now there's a kid behind me named Mario, he's Italian. And so, after the teacher passed, he comes asking me, he says--(said?) "Nathaniel," he says, "How does your mother tell that you're clean?" I said, "The same way your mother tell you clean." So, naturally, being the only black kid in the class, I had to learn to defend myself. So it was a case, I learned how to fight real early to protect who I am. Story_ID: 33873 Speaker 1: Now, is this in the Bronx? Speaker 2: It's in the Bronx. Speaker 1: Now, how old were you when you moved to the Bronx? Speaker 2: Oh, I think I was seven or eight. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So, this is still early--so, you've been to, already been to-- Speaker 2: Right. We lived all over the city. Speaker 1: One, two, three--three schools, you know, by time you're seven. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I can remember when we left Brooklyn, we moved to--which may be confusing now, but I think we moved to Kelly Street in the Bronx; 875 Kelly Street. And my grandmother came up from the South and she lived down at 866--886 Kelly Street, which is down at the foot of the hill. And my uncle lived on the same block, the one that helped us on Eighth Avenue, he moved on the same block. So, I'm suspicious that he was the one that got us all to live on that one block. And he was that type of guy that, if he knew he could help you, he would help you. And he was always, like, helping the family. But he was a true Myers. They didn't mind fighting, and cutting, and carrying on. They were real ornery group of people. You know, they taught me a lot, not to be angry. But they were like an angry group of people all the time. But, anyway, we went to P.S. 39 there before we moved to 178th Street. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's another school there that (had been there already?). And here's an incident that happened at P.S. 39. After they had--we were like on welfare, so they would give you free lunch. So if you went to the lunchroom, you had a lunch pass that allowed you to have free lunch. It's mostly soup and a sandwich. So, what happened is that, they made me a lunch monitor. And if one kid didn't eat all his soup, they would leave the bowl on the table and what you as had to do was to take his tray and take it down and dump it. So that's what I was doing. And I went to dump this tray and there's a teacher standing there says, "You can't throw that food away. You have to eat it." I tell her it's not mine (laughs). She said, "Don't tell me that. You have to eat it." And she made me eat that soup. I felt terrible after that because I was thinking that I was eating spit and everything else; saying, "Why are you making me eat this?" and "It's not mine. Some kid slobbed over it." But I was glad to get out of that school, because it was a lack of understanding to who people were. Story_ID: 33874 Speaker 1: So when I got to P.S. 6, it was a lot different. We had free lunch, but they had a different kind of lunch. Now, the reason I say that is that, P.S. 39 was predominantly black and Hispanic. But when I got to P.S. 6, it was predominantly white and Jewish. So the decor was completely different almost from when I was in the other school. I always tell, you know, it's funny, see, I was a black kid in a white school. And the reason I learned all my lessons is because they taught them. They weren't going to exclude me because I was black. I was in the classroom like everybody else, so I learned everything everybody else learned. And what was ironic, I would talk to grown-ups, like the young kids later on, of the subjects that I had in the lower grades and they didn't have them in the black school. So like, when I was in the seventh grade, what I say--eighth--the sixth, the fifth and sixth grade, they taught us geometry, and science, and the different chemistries that went into the sciences (sic), and like it'll tell you, you take a potato and you rub it on a piece of brown paper, and you get the starch, you could tell it's starch. And you put it on, you get the fats, and there were little techniques that they taught how you could tell what foods had what in it. These kids didn't learn that. And I was always surprised they didn't know that. How come they don't teach the same thing in all the schools? Speaker 2: So, were your parents aware of the discrepancy in the-- Speaker 1: Yeah. But it wasn't much they could do with it. Speaker 2: Well, you were in a school that was better, though, I mean, that's what I'm getting at. Speaker 1: Yeah. That's before Civil Rights, you know, so you-- Speaker 2: So, what I'm asking is, did your parents deliberately send you to a school that was better? Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. He moved to the neighborhood because it was all white and he knew I'd get a better education. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I didn't know that. But to me, it didn't make any difference whether it was white or black, because I didn't have any preference to color. So when I was in the classroom, I just had to take care of myself as to who I was. That was it. Speaker 2: Were you treated any better in the black school? Speaker 1: The only way I can figure, some of the black schools were good. And I didn't go to them. And I only knew a few people that went to them. But the--there was a difference between the schools. I think, basically, because this school was a Jewish population. (background noise) Let me turn this off. I told them not to call me. Speaker 2: Oh. I thought I was the only one that had a phone like that. At one time I did. Okay. All right. All right. Okay. Speaker 1: I turned it off, sorry. Speaker 2: Okay. OFF CAMERA VOICE: Thank you. Speaker 1: So, we were talking about school. Speaker 2: Now, because it was Jewish and most of the teachers were Jewish, the only teacher that I--I think there were two or three teachers that were not Jewish. One of them was Catholic, the other one was Catholic but they didn't profess the Catholic religion that much. And the other one was, I think, was--he was Italian. And when there was a Jewish holiday, the school was empty. The only kids that went to school were the Christian kids, and they put us all into one classroom and give us one teacher, and the teacher would do the best he could to give you the subject matter. But it was only for the Jewish holiday. But I think the reason that school had a different curriculum on how they taught you because it was a Jewish population. They paid more attention to what their kids learned. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, did you--now, you're growing up in--wow. Now, you were a little kid, but was there a big difference between the Bronx and Harlem or Brooklyn or could you tell the difference in them? Speaker 2: No, I didn't go to school in Brooklyn. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Speaker 2: So, the kids, in other words, if I could remember, in between the schools that I went to, the kids at P.S. 57 were pretty much the same as the kids was when I went to P.S. 39, they're just a little older. But other than that, it wasn't much, and it was some mixed, but it was predominantly African-American and Spanish. It was some Jewish kids in there. But the teachers, I didn't know that many of them, but most of them were just like young adults to me. I couldn't tell what the religion or anything they were, 'cause they were just teachers. But when I got to P.S. 6 I could tell the difference. Actually, I was older too. Story_ID: 33875 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what did you like to do growing up? Did you have any hobbies or talents or anything that you expressed when you--? Speaker 2: Well, I didn't have any hobbies, per se. But I liked to do woodwork. I liked to work with my hands. And so, things that I did, I could fix bicycles and clocks. I took a clock apart and put it back together, and I would fix clocks. I would interchange parts in clocks. In other words, I had, what you call it, the knowledge or the understanding of how the mechanics of things worked. And so, I could do those things. A lot of people couldn't do them 'cause they couldn't figure out what mechanical things were in them. So I just had a gift, I guess, I could do these things. Speaker 1: Okay. Did you ever think about becoming an engineer or something? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. I wanted to be an engineer. At least I thought of being an engineer. I went to a trade school. I went to Bronx Vocational High School, and this is after leaving P.S. 6. P.S. 6 was one of these schools that was mixed with grade school and junior high. So when you finished there, you're finishing the eighth grade, and you went from the eighth grade to First Term High. So when I graduated from there, I went straight Bronx Vocational [High School]. And the reason I went there, my father told me, he says, "Look, one thing you know is that you always have to eat. And if you learn to work with your hands, you can always get something to make food for your table, because always need people that can work with their hands." So, I said, I'll take a trade. So I was with this other kid, he's a white fellow. I forget his name now. But he was saying we should go into sheet metal because sheet metal is one of the upcoming things. They were making air ducts and things like that. You know, you don't--you can't think far enough to realize that machines are going to do this work and people ain't going to do them. But that was the first trade that went by the machine. Anyway, I took up sheet metal and design. So, I went to the trade school, but before you take your subject, you had to do the other trades. So, now, in the first two grades, first term and second term, you had to go to different trade classes. So, I went to auto mechanics, I went to electric wiring, I went to woodwork, and I went to power. And then after that, you could pick whatever trade that you want. So that's when I picked sheet metal and design, 'cause they had the layout job, and then you had to learn to lay out things with a T-square and triangles and whatnot. So remember I told you that I was good at that. So I figure I'd learn that, and that would give me a good footing in getting into whatever I wanted to do. Speaker 1: So, you're a freshman. This is 1949, right? This is 1949, I guess, you were a freshman? Speaker 2: Right, 1949. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Going into 1950. So, now, I'm in the sheet metal and design now. I get ready--I'm going to get ready to go to college. I guess it's getting near the end of this high school. Story_ID: 33876 Speaker 1: Well, before we get you out of it, now, did you have to work when you were in high school? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. I worked when I was in grade school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I worked from the time I could work. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In other words, when I got up--when I was at P.S. 6, I worked in a grocery store after school. And I worked all day Saturday, which wasn't a whole big day, but it was a day, Saturday. I'd go there at 8:00 o'clock in the morning 'til 5:00 o'clock. I'd deliver the orders and stack grocery on the shelves. I wasn't even 12 then, I don't think. Speaker 1: Is this a--this is a Jewish grocery in--? Was it a Jewish grocery store in the neighborhood? Speaker 2: It's a Jewish neighborhood. It's a synagogue on the corner. And the whole population in there, and we wasn't, as a black family, we weren't allowed to live in the buildings. Speaker 1: So my father was the superintendent. So we lived in the basement, which was--turned out to be a better thing. There was a yard and it's our yard, you know. So, we had more room (to the apartment than they?) and then we didn't pay any rent. And I had to work with my father. So I learned more trades. I learned how to fix things in the house, I learned how to change washers, change light bulbs, change light sockets, put in electrical outlets and things, 'cause that's what he had to do. And once again, my uncle, the one I told you we went to live with, he helped on that, because he would come and say, "Look," he'd tell my father, "What can't do, let us know, and we'll get somebody come over and show you how to do it, and we'll do it,." 'cause he got to keep the job. So the landlord never had a problem getting the super to do anything. Well, then the super was supposed to fix things. So, if--and then he needed, like, if they bring an electrician or something in like that, he would hire the electrician, but he didn't want to bring an electrician in and change the light socket or one of the electrical outlets. That's what the super had to do that. So, following my father around, I had to be his helper and I learned to do that. It's benefitted me all my life with that learning that extra little things like that, because I got my own house now. And I can fix everything in the house. Speaker 2: Yeah. It seems like a lot of people in that generation could fix things, you know. It seems like it's a lost art now. People are not doing it as much as they used to. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I mean, fixing things like they used to. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Now, were you involved in sports at all? Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. When I was in high school, I played basketball. Speaker 2: Yeah, because you're fairly tall. Speaker 1: I played handball. Speaker 2: Well, how tall are you? Speaker 1: I was six-one when I was there. In fact, I was six foot (sic) when I was in high school. I played varsity, and I played on the varsity handball team. Speaker 2: And, once again, the high school was mixed. You had-we lived in and worked in an Italian district or neighborhood. We had some Jewish kids, not very many. We had some Hispanics, but predominantly, the group that was in the classes were Italian. And I always said they were like the Mafia in a way, because they always felt that they had control over everything, because they were in this Italian neighborhood. And it was a trade school. So, the things that would go on, it was a lot of things. In fact, as I remember, one of the Italian guys, and he was--we was in one of these classrooms that the teacher hadn't come in yet. And he was telling a story, and he's telling a story about somebody he had a confrontation with, and it was a black fellow. So he called him the "N" word. And I got up and slapped him. And he said, "What did you do that for?" I said, "Because you used that word." He said, "But I wasn't talking to you." I said, "Yeah, but I don't like you using that word." So, he said, "Well, you wait until you get outside." So that meant he was going to have the Italian gang out there and beat me up. So, naturally, the teacher said, "You can leave early." Speaker 1: So the teacher knew about it? Speaker 2: Yeah, they knew about it, so they let me go early, and I go and get on the train. I was out of there, on Courtland Avenue, I get on the Third Avenue train, and I was back uptown on 78th Street. So, later on, we lived on Tremont Avenue and I was still going to the same school. Speaker 1: Okay, now. Now, did you have any--were you--so you played a little sports and everything. Now, were you involved in music at all when you were growing up? In music? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: We had music, but I was never talented in music. I could sing, but I was--in fact, when I was in the P.S. 6, I was in the Glee Club. But I was--I had a soprano voice then, which is unusual. First soprano. I could sing higher notes than any girl. But as I got older, naturally, my voice changed. And I was never a bass singer or anything like that, but I was never a soprano again either, or even an alto. So my voice just went--then I couldn't sing, so I never bothered with it. Story_ID: 33877 Speaker 1: Okay. I was asking you about music, but I really just want to know what did you like to do when you were growing? I mean, what kind of activities--did you like popular music in those days? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. The popular music then was "the Drifters," and "the Oreos," and those types of singing groups. And I think--it was Little Anthony, I think was one; they had the one single singer, well, actually, he committed suicide. Speaker 1: Is that Roy Hamilton or-- Speaker 2: Little--Little--Little Anthony, Little something; he committed suicide on the Hudson line. The boat lines that go up, he jumped over and I guess he drowned. And I think that's when they brought that song, "I'm going to the river, going to jump overboard and drown." Speaker 1: I don't remember him. But, okay. Speaker 2: But those were the groups that were then. And that's when they had a mixture of Latin music came. That's when we learned the Mambo and the Cha-Cha--not the Cha-Cha, the Mambo and the Calypso. We started Calypso first and then we learned the Mambo. And then some Spanish dancing or South American dancing. Speaker 1: Now, did you spend much time as a teenager in Harlem? Did you ever go to the Apollo and that sort of thing? Speaker 2: Say that again? Speaker 1: Did you spend much time in Harlem as a teenager for recreation? Speaker 2: No. Pretty much we stayed out of Harlem 'cause we were Bronx schooled. Harlem back then was still mixed up with gangs. I can remember that, 'cause even in the Bronx, they had gangs in the Bronx that, you had limitations of where you went. You had to go with caution. You had the "Irish Dukes" and the "Italian Baldies," you had "the Slicksters," and there's another gang. They wasn't so popular, the Mambos or something like that. And so, we, as a group, we created our own gang called "the Corinthians." And what was it? They're only relatives (laughs). So, what we did, we traveled in a pack so that way nobody would bother you. Speaker 1: Now why the name the Corinthians? Speaker 2: Well, the Corinthians, they looked it up from Africa, and it was, I guess, it was a tribe called the Corinthians, which was like a royal group. And so, they wanted something to say, you know, they were better than everybody else, so they picked this name out. Story_ID: 33878 Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Sorry, not now. So, when you were a senior at Bronx Vocational [High School], now, did you have any special honors when you graduated? Speaker 2: No. Not really. Speaker 1: Now, did you know about the 369th when you were a senior? Speaker 2: That's when I learned about the 369th [Infantry Regiment]. It was in my senior year of high school. That's in the sheet metal shop, was a guy named Peppy Thomas. And he's since demised. But, that show you how things were. He was on dope and I didn't know it, 'cause he used to sit in the classroom and his head would be bobbing up and down because he was on high. And the teacher knew it, but she was trying--he would try to get him out of it, I guess, through some kind of social work. But anyway, he says to me--he always slurred his words, like he's singing all the time. So he says to me, he says, "They had a recruiting drive." He was in the 369th. So he says, "They're having a recruiting drive. Why don't you come down and join up?" Well, from my family history, my uncles were in World War II, so--and being a product of World War II, I always wanted to, say, be a soldier. So, here was the opportunity for me to become a soldier. So when he says, "Come down and sign up," I got the opportunity, I came down, and came into this unit here. It was right in this same building. I was seventeen and a half, and I wasn't old enough to sign my own name into it, so they say, "You got to have your mother to sign." So I went back and I told my mother [Reva Marie Myers] I wanted to join the 369th. And she asked me clearly, "You sure you know what you want to do?" And I told her "Yes." So she says, "Okay." She signed the papers and they put me in the 369th, in the Battery 8 [8th Battalion], the same Battery this guy this was in. But I never saw him after that as a soldier. And that's how, I guess, my military career started at that point. Speaker 1: Now, is this the regular Army or the National Guard? Speaker 2: The National Guard then was not the regular Army. It was a--it was New York Army National Guard. Speaker 1: Okay. So that's what you joined--. Speaker 2: It was a state unit. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: See, but it was affiliated with the Army Reserve. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So that meant that you didn't have to go overseas or anything? Speaker 2: If they called the unit out. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Now, if the whole unit was called, then I would go. They couldn't call me as an individual out. They call me as a unit. So, prior to that, they had called the 369th to duty, my uncle was in that. And he went away in the Korean War. And he was--the unit was, I forgot in Korea, but, as a unit they didn't go over there; just went over there, they went up to Fort Camp Edwards, Massachusetts, for training. And then they sent them from there, they sent them up to Huachuca, and then from there some of the people broke out and went to other units in the Army. My uncle was one. He went out and then he went to Korea, but he came back and he stayed in the Army. He's still living, in fact. He's my father's [Alexander James] brother. Speaker 1: Okay. So-- Speaker 2: But that's when I got to 369th in my senior of high school. Speaker 1: That's 1953, right? Speaker 2: 1953. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So, now--so, when you joined the National Guard, did they give you, like, the same kind of Boot Camp they give other soldiers? Speaker 2: You mean like training? Speaker 1: Yeah. You go to a Boot Camp for a couple of-- Speaker 2: Yeah. They had a--what they called a Boot Camp here. In other words, they had what they called Officer Candidates that would train the recruits. But they teach you how to march, how to salute; basic stuff. I remember my first camp tour with the 369th [Infantry Regiment]. We left this armory and went on trains over in the Bronx, the yard over there. We got on trains, and they took us to Wel--Camp Wellfleet, Massachusetts. And we got out up there, and that's when they gave us our first two weeks of Basic Training. And that was how to put up a tent, how to (unclear) you wear your uniform, how to put your pack, how to make a pack, and stuff like that. But it wasn't as extensive as the Army Boot Camp. Story_ID: 33879 Speaker 1: And, after finishing that, and I got to my senior year of high school, I decided--I couldn't get a job, a steady job, and so, I say, "You know, well, they're going to draft me sooner or later," so I volunteered draft and went on active duty. And that was an experience too. Speaker 2: Okay. So, did you have to be retrained or--? Speaker 1: (Pause). Speaker 2: Did you have to be retrained and they sent you to a--? Speaker 1: I went back to Basic Training again. Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Speaker 1: But what was good, you see, I had already learned a lot of their little techniques that the soldier had to learn. So when I was in Boot Camp, I was ahead of the other trainees, 'cause I knew a lot of the little things that they didn't know, like, how to put a tent up, how to wear your pack, how to make a pack, how to string up your boots, how to shine them and stuff like that. So, I was a little step ahead, so they made me the Guard Armor Bearer, and that's the guy that carries the troop flag. So, and I was tall. I think I was six-one then. And so, they put me out front, and I learned the rudiments of Guard Armor Bearer. I didn't mind that because you got to eat first, you got to be first in everything 'cause you're (wasn't the guard on?) instead of in the front (laughs). Speaker 2: Okay. All right. So, when you joined you're a Private, right, you know. You're a Private, right, when you joined? Speaker 1: My who? Speaker 2: You were a Private, right? Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. Yeah. Private E-1. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: What was funny, I was a Private E-2 when I went into the Army. But they bust me back to Private E-1 'cause they said, in Basic Training you can't be a Private E-2 until you get out. So, I had a Warrant Officer that was in the 369th, and his son was in the same situation I was. He was a Boot Camp in Fort Dix. So he came out to change his son's rank to Private E-2, and he realized I was there, so he got mine changed also. So, the only difference was it was more pay. So Private E-2 got more pay than the Private E-1, so he changed it over to a Private E-2, and then I was able to get the money and the back pay. So that's what I--when I finished Boot Camp, I was already a Private E-2. Story_ID: 33880 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what was Army like in 1953? Now, you're just like, you're like two years from the integration of the Army, right? Speaker 2: No. It was (unclear). I got into the integration. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: I was the first-- Speaker 1: But it was just like three years old. I mean--. Speaker 2: Yeah. I was one of-- Speaker 1: --the integrated Army. Speaker 2: I was in one of the first integrated Basic Training camps at Fort Dix. Speaker 1: So, how was that experience had, you know, for you, you know? Speaker 2: Well, to me I couldn't see it. Remember, I was brought up in a white neighborhood, so I was used to integration. When I got there, it wasn't a problem because I was still in integration. I noticed that the units, when I went to Basic Training, like within the 47th Infantry Ranger Regiment. They had a black company on my--one side, and a white company on the other side. And we were the integrated company in the middle. And little by little, it didn't run into any problems or anything like that. Nobody was racially against you, and we had black cadre, we had white cadre. So it was a mixed cadre, and the Army seemed to handle that a little better than civilian life. Speaker 1: Okay. That's what people say. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I've heard that a lot. Speaker 2: I mean, you couldn't be prejudice in the Army, because it was against regulations (laughs). 'Cause if you had broke the regulations, they'd punish you. Outside they didn't. Speaker 1: That's a good point. Speaker 2: So that's why I guess the Army worked better. It doesn't mean that you wasn't prejudiced against at different times for different reasons. But it was still there. You didn't feel the rhetoric of somebody calling you the "N" word or something like that. Speaker 1: Okay. Which was the cause during World War II. Speaker 2: Yeah, World War II, they would say it. Speaker 1: Beginning of the Korean War too. Speaker 2: Right, yeah. Speaker 1: They would call you that on a regular basis, so. Speaker 2: That's when you had the soldiers fighting soldiers, the race fights. Speaker 1: Now, did you hear about those when you were in the Army? Speaker 2: No. I didn't. That was like, those things happened before. So, you heard of them, but before I got I got in the Army. But while I was in the Army I never of any of them like that. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So you heard about it, actually, before you even got in the Army? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Story_ID: 33881 Speaker 1: So, were you stationed anywhere outside of the country? Speaker 2: No. I was fortunate in a way. I was stationed--from Fort Dix [Trenton, New Jersey] I moved to Fort Devens [Massachusetts]. The ironic part is that the shooting had stopped in Korea, and they weren't shipping soldiers over there anymore. So I ended up going to Fort Devens, Massachusetts to a Quartermaster company. And it was a Quartermaster Graves Registration. Now, in this Graves Registration Company, there's a lot of intelligent people there, because you had to be almost a college graduate to do some of the jobs that they had, 'cause it was the embalming and identifying bodies and morticians and stuff like that. And the company was loaded with these guys, all these undertaker skills. I was sent in there because I had Infantry skills. And what had happened is that, when they was in Korean, some of the companies was overrun, because they had no Infantry people with them to protect them. So their idea was to integrate more Infantry in there that know how to fight with Infantry. And that way, if they ever got to a case, they had people that had Infantry skills to protect them. So, that's how I got in this Graves Registration company. They taught me to be a Graves Registration Specialist. So, this was learning all the different parts of the body, so if you're missing a finger, you're missing an arm, you're missing a shoulder or your teeth missing; whatever was missing from your body, you get identified. So I had a good lesson in anatomy. Speaker 1: All right. So, you were a Graves Registration Specialist? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: All right. And, so, did you have to leave New York at all? Speaker 2: No. We left New York a couple times, and left before Devens a couple of times, and we went to--ironically, Cape Cod, Massachusetts, where I went to my first camp tour. We went there to put up tents for the National Guard. That was one of the assignments that we had at the time. And we ended up at Hyannis Port, which was the town (you may know it?), closest town there. And it's funny, there was a guy named Pyles, like Gomer Pyles (sic)? Speaker 1: Mm-hm. Speaker 2: This guy's name was Pyles. And I think it was Irving Pyles. I'm sure of his first name now. But he used to say that he was from there when we were in Basic Training. And he would talk about, say, "Where were you--where do you live?" He'd say, "Sandwich Row and Teaticket Hill". And we used to laugh because it sounded real countrified, Sandwich Row and Teaticket Hill. Where the heck would that be? So, anyway, we get to Hyannis Port, and the guy says there's a juke joint that's outside of town, that we could go there, and then we could have a little fun, says, girls come there. So, we're happy for that, so. We go there and drive up there, and what do we see? Sandwich Row and Tea Ticket Hill. And the first thing I thought of this guy. We went inside and he was there, he was on leave. I said, "What? How ironic could that be?" Then we had a few conversations and then we separated, I never saw him since. But that's what we did up in Hyannis Port, was put the tents up for the National Guard. Speaker 1: And then from there, we went-- Speaker 2: Did you ever see the Kennedy--the Kennedy compound there in Hyannis Port? Speaker 1: The who? Speaker 2: The--J.F.K Compound, the Kennedy--? Speaker 1: No. But that's a little before now. Speaker 2: Well, they were still there. They were there. Speaker 1: I know, but I'm saying-- Speaker 2: He wasn't the president, but they were there. Speaker 1: --this is before he was the president. Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. Right. Speaker 1: 'Cause I wouldn't even know about it. Speaker 2: Well, I don't know, but they were living there then. Speaker 1: They were living there, but nobody knew that. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: It wasn't like everybody had this information then. Later on it came about. Story_ID: 33882 Speaker 1: But, we left there and went back to Fort Devens [Massachusetts]. And they gave us an assignment to work and build bunkers. They was--they're using us as a detail 'cause we knew how to dig ditches and trenches and stuff, because we were Graves (unclear) (laughs). So they made us make bunkers for Operation Raindrop, which was one of the first atomic exercises they had in an atomic warfare. Then later on, they sent us down to Long Island to the Long Island National Cemetery out in, what's that, Amityville. And we would truck in from Amityville in a (big white side?). We'd truck in to Cyprus Hills Cemetery in Brooklyn every morning, and we'd go there and we would--to sort of straighten the cemetery out, because it needed people to fix the cemetery back up. And what happened, they took the Quartermaster and put him in charge of the national cemeteries. And that was a way of getting slave labor, (laughs) I'll put it that way. They took all the troops and sent them in there, and we did--had to take all the tombstones, fill them back in and straighten them out, and then line them back up toward the flagpole. Speaker 2: Now, for those who don't know, the Quartermaster Corps was a traditionally all-black corps, right? Speaker 1: The Quartermaster handles a lot of things. They handle supplies, they handle--basically, it's substance that the soldiers need, (not?) besides food, clothing, shelter, they go build barracks, they do that. They have the engineers working with them, but the Quartermaster is the one that sort of handles all of that. So, in this case, the Graves Registration belonged to the National Cemeteries. But they took it then because they were short of money and stuff like that, and put them into the Quartermaster. So they utilized the soldiers to do the work that they would have normally had to pay for. So they're paying for soldiers already so, put them to work there. That's why I said it was sort of a little bit of slave labor that they used. But we weren't getting paid any way near what a cemetery worker would get paid. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And then we were in abundance and we bought our own food, everything with us, right? It was like an exercise for us. But, I still--I go over--occasionally, I go out to that cemetery and visit it. They don't have any permanent keepers there now, because the cemetery is sort of like filled up. Speaker 2: Okay. Okay. All right. So, you were in the Army for, what, two years or four years? How long were you in there? Speaker 1: How long was I in the Army? Speaker 2: Yeah, in the regular Army. Speaker 1: I stayed there for two years. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I went in in '53 [1953], went to Fort Devens in '54 [1954], in '55 [1955] I got discharged, and I came back and I joined back into the 369th [Infantry Regiment]. Speaker 2: Okay. So, anybody can do this, right, you can serve--tour in a regular Army and then come back and join the Reserves? Speaker 1: Join the Reserves. Well, then it was mandatory that you do five years in Reserves. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So they had what they called, when you got out, you had to do eight years. So, two years for active and then you had to do another five on the Reserves, and then you had to go to what they called a year in stand-by Reserves. So I said, well, if I got to spend eight years, I might as well take advantage of it. So I joined the National Guard right in this unit, and I was in here with training with them. At the same time, I was working for the subway, and then later I was working with the telephone company (while?) (simultaneous) serving in the active duty--not active duty, but National Guard duty. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: One of the things I found that, what I learned in the National Guard, I could apply to my job. Things I learned on my job, I could apply to the National Guard. So, it was a good thing for both. I was able to get training through the phone company and training through the National Guard. And the subway was only one year. I learned the signal system of the subway and how the trains worked, and that was (unclear) when I was in signal, so I learned all the signal stuff. The only reason I got that because I had had electric in high school. So they took me and say, "We'll put you in to signal." So my father [Alexander James] was still working on track then, but I never saw him in the subway system. My brother also went to work for signal, and he was working there, and he ended up going to City College and becoming an electrical engineer. So, that's basically how those two things worked out. Story_ID: 33883 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, you went to school at some point, right? You went back to school? Speaker 2: I went to school after high school. I went to night school 'cause I found that, if you want to go to college, you had to have an academic diploma. So I decided to go back to do nigh school and get academic credits so I could enroll in college. So while I'm doing this, naturally, I met my wife, got married. Speaker 1: Well, tell us how you met your wife. Speaker 2: I met her here at the Armory. We were giving a--giving one of these [Bomb Battery?] parties. And there was a guy named LaVelle (ph. splg.), who worked with her in Gimbals (ph. splg.), and he brought her here as his date. And she was here, and I was a Lieutenant. And I was walking around but I didn't have my uniform on, I was just going around doing things like a Lieutenant would be doing. And she asked, "Who is that guy?" And all he said, "That's one of my officers." So she says, "Well, I'd like to meet him." So he brought her over and introduced me to her and everything. And I, you know, I didn't pay any attention then. So I said, "Hey." Girls are girls, you know. I'm still going about doing what I'm doing, and so. So, later on, this guy LaVelle, he says, "You know that girl you met at the party?" I said, "Yeah." He said, "She want to see you again." So I say, "Oh, yeah." So I say, "Well, give her my number and can call me and we can make a date." So I gave him my phone number, and she called me. And then we ended up having a date, and then we had more than one date. And little by little we got together, and then I fell in love and [I says?] the only person in my life now. So I got married. Now, and that was when I was still going to this night school. So now I'm trying to get the night school finished so I can get into college. But now I got responsibilities. Remember I told you about my father was that he had to make sure you take care of your family? And that's one of the things (unclear), take care of your family first. Speaker 1: Now, what year was this when you got married? Speaker 2: I got--1959. Speaker 1: 1959. Okay. Speaker 2: I met my wife in 1959 and married her in 1959. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So--all right. So, you're married and you're going to night school to try to get your academic (unclear) (simultaneous)--. Speaker 2: I went to Roosevelt High School in the Bronx. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 33884 Speaker 1: And I was working for the phone company then. They wanted to give me overtime, and I would decline overtime because I wanted to get that--get the night school training in. So, little by little it worked out, that I was able to get the credits that I needed. And then I enrolled in Fordham University in a computer science class. So in this particular time, computers were starting to be the forefront of the industry, and they had very few people that could do programming and so forth. So I decided that I would go and take Fortran and COBALT. So, I started with COBALT in the night school, like, at Fordham University, learning COBALT. And then, little by little, they started to teach me Fortran. And I learned all the rudiments of computers. Computers then are humongous, I mean they were-- Speaker 2: Tell us what--describe for somebody what a computer was like in--. Speaker 1: You had to be real good to do these things, because the machines, some of them were the size of that bar. In other words, if you got--the card reading machine was the size of--half the size of a desk, and that was one of the reel-to-reels. And they had like these tombstone cabinets with reel-to-reel things in them, and this one computer was an IBM 1401 computer. And that was the first one they thought, brought out about it was going to be breaking the industry so you can do all your business work. But you had to write out all of these programs, then you had to send them to a compiler, and after sending it to the compiler you got to program, then you had to take this program and put it in front of all your work and send it through the computer so it can make a tape. After it made a tape, then you can take the tape and run the program. And then you can do all your processing. If anything changed, you had to go back to the program again and you had to write another set of programs like that, and then he'd send them through the compiler and they made tickets. It was really--how would you say--consuming to just to do the simplest thing. And then they brought out the IBM 3650, which could do a lot of things of what you wanted it to do, but it did it much easier. But then, once again, you still need a programmer. I finished this school, and now I wanted to get a job in programming. I'm still working for the phone company [NYNEX]; say, hold onto your day job. So I tried to find a job, I couldn't. They said they wanted a college graduate. So, now, I'm not a college graduate, I just had college credits. So I said, "Well, I got to figure a way to get a college degree." So, anyway, I started working on that in night school and doing a little bit this, a little bit of that. But the family had to come first, so I had to do my work. So doing the job and whatnot, I had to--I worked overtime and so forth. So half the time I couldn't get to the classes, so I had to put that on the back burner. Speaker 2: Now is this at Fordham? Is this--were you going to Fordham then? Speaker 1: Fordham, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, okay. Speaker 1: I had finished Fordham by then. In other words, I did that. Speaker 2: Okay. So, you were going to graduate school then, by this point? Speaker 1: No, I'm not a college graduate yet. I only took the courses. Speaker 2: Okay. Oh, Okay. All right. Speaker 1: So now, I didn't become a college graduate until I had--long after I was a Major. And I knew I had to get it. That's when the Army changed their rules on how you can be a General. In order to be a General you had to be a college graduate. So that's when I realized I had to really buckle down then and get a college graduate--a college degree. So, what happened is that I started taking what they call "life credits." I enrolled into night school, I enrolled into correspondence courses. I did--compiled everything together and sent it to the New York Board of Education, which was New York Regents. I enrolled in that, I paid a fee to re-enroll in that, and then I could send any kind of credits I got anywhere in the country, I sent it them and they would evaluate it and give me college credits. So I ended up after all of this, I ended up with an associate degree in science, and a bachelor degree in liberal arts. And that qualified me to be a General then. So, I said, "Well, now they can't deny you." And once again, once I got this credits and things, I could use them in the phone company [NYNEX] too. So, in the phone company, I got to be a manager and eventually I got to be what they call a regional manager for the area of New York-New England in security. Story_ID: 33885 Speaker 1: Okay. So you got a bachelor's degree in liberal arts, and an associate degree in science. And so, now, do you have--you mentioned at one point, you know, you mentioned a couple of times about what you had to have to become a General. Now, were you thinking of becoming a General? Speaker 2: Well, when you become an officer, you always figure you could be a general. So, ironically, or however you want to put it, there was a Second Lieutenant with me. He ended up becoming a Bishop in a church. And he and I used to sit down after duty hours and talk. And we always said who was going to be the General first. You know, because now we're Second Lieutenant, "Butter Bars" as they call them. You don't even have a company yet, much less you just got a platoon. So, now, you're going to be a General? So, look how much you're going to have to know. Speaker 1: Then, I was in the 369th, and the 369th was still segregated, not by law, but because it was in a black community and the only people that would come here--even if you went to a white unit, they tell you to go to the 369th [Infantry Regiment] if you were black. So then, pretty much, but because of geography, the 369th stayed almost 100 percent black. Speaker 2: Just because of its location in Harlem? Speaker 1: Right. Because of the location. Now this, the officers that came here, they would send their officers here, the black officers, and they would serve here. Now, there's a few other units black officers served in outside of this community. But the Commander of this unit, they always sent a black Commander. And the highest rank that he could get, the rest of it was a full Colonel. Then they reduced it down to a Lieutenant Colonel, and they reduced it from, what they call a [Regiment Size Unit?], to a Battalion Size Unit. And then the Battalion Commander was no more than a Lieutenant Colonel. And that was the plateau for anybody serving in this unit. If you got out of this unit, there're two positions that you could get. One was in the public relations, and the other was either in the troop command, and they were only Colonels. So, there was [choose your slots?], then you could aspire to if you lived through all the ratings and whatnot that you have here. Story_ID: 33886 Speaker 1: Being here like that, we decided that--Civil Rights was on the move then--we shouldn't have to take this. So we formed what they call the Black Officers Association. And having the Black Officers Association, we had the input of black officers who had been prejudiced against and were willing to do things to get us out of this rut that we were in. So, in fact, we had meetings right in this room on what we had to do and so forth. And we formed it up, and we wrote some letters to the acting then-General and let him know that what we objected to was no opportunity, that we didn't have the opportunity to go to other units and get higher rank. So we wanted him to do something about it; otherwise, we were going to do other letter writing to higher-ups. But they listened to us. And so, they decided that, "All right. We'll make some of your higher-ranking officers, give them the rank of Colonel." And it was a guy named Lewis Duckett (ph. splg.). He was one of my commanders, and they gave him the 42nd Infantry in the, what they call, support command, which was a very large organization; it had about five or six battalions in it. So they gave him that, and he eventually, they made him a Brigadier General. So, he was the first African-American to become Brigadier General in the New York Army National Guard. Story_ID: 33887 Speaker 1: So, and that's when we had a little breakout. Now, as far as what happened to me is that, you had a certain amount of time to serve as a grade than you was being an officer. Now, you're a Second Lieutenant, you had to serve three years before you became a First Lieutenant. So you're a First Lieutenant, you have to serve up to five years to be a First Lieutenant. So now, you add two of these years, that's eight years you're standing there as a Junior Officer. Now, when you get to be a Captain, you had to serve seven years as a Captain, and then you had to be a Major. You got to be a Major, you had to serve seven years as a Major. Now you got plenty enough time to retire. So what happened to me is that, I served the three years as a Second Lieutenant. I served the five years as a First Lieutenant, and I served five years as a Captain, and I served four years as a Major. And then, I served two years as a Lieutenant Colonel. And then I got promoted to Colonel. I served two years, I think it's two or three years, as a Colonel. And then I got to be promoted to Brigadier General. And then I served like two years as a Brigadier General, and I got promoted to a Major General. And I was able to serve three years as a Major General before they put me out and I was sixty [years old] when they put me out. [And that's as far and as long?] as you can serve as an officer. Speaker 2: So when you left, you were the highest ranking--. Speaker 1: I was a Lieutenant Colonel when I left here. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 33888 Speaker 1: Now, I was going to tell you how that happened. I was here as a Operations Officer, and then [I?] eventually, I got to be the Executive Officer. So, I'm still a Major. Now, I done (sic) served the maximum time, so now, I can take--accept Lieutenant Colonel in the Reserves, which is automatic once you've served an amount of years, you'll become automatic--you become a Lieutenant Colonel in the Reserves. So, I say, "Well, if I don't get the promotion here, I'm leaving and I'm going to the Reserves." So it turn out there's a friend of ours named Vince Lanna (ph. splg.). He was a General. And he had decided that everybody deserves a hero, so he says, "Look, I tell you what, James," he says, "We'll find a slot over for you in the division. So we'll give you the Maintenance Battalion." Now, that's a feather up, and no black has served as a Commander in the Maintenance Battalion, at least in the 42nd Infantry Division. So he says, "I'll give you that one." So I said, "Okay." So, anyway, I moved from here, I took the position and I went over there, and I was in my office one day, and they decided they needed me here in the 369th [Infantry Regiment] 'cause they didn't it to fall back. So they said, "Look, I tell you what, James. We will offer your Commander," who was then General (sic) Cox (ph. splg.), called Colonel Cox then, Lieutenant Colonel Cox. Said, "Let him take the Maintenance Battalion, you take the 369th." So I said, "Are you going to convince him to do that? He's already a Lieutenant Colonel." So, he said, "Well, you talk to him and then [in a way?] that'll work out. So I spoke to him. I told him, the amount of African-Americans that had Command positions was negligible. So if this was an opportunity for the BOA to go ahead and accept this position, and we'll at least two battalions that'll have minorities or African-Americans in command. So he said, "Okay. I'll do it." So it was closer to where he lived anyhow. So he said--he took it over and went there. So they rewrote orders and put me back in the 369th as the Commander. So, when I left one they gave it to somebody else, and then, he didn't do a good job of what--they was counting on him doing a good job with it, but he didn't. Anyway, when I got back here, hey, this is--I know this unit inside out. I could run the unit with my hands behind my back. So it turned out that everything that we did was excellent. So eventually, we started going to different posts without senior headquarters. We did movements and things as a battalion. And the Army raved over what our ratings were. So they felt that that was good enough then, they said. Story_ID: 33889 Speaker 1: Came time my Lieutenant Colonel was getting to a point that I was being elevated, so General [Lionel?] then says he had a problem with the Artillery Commander off in Kings Ridge Armory. He said, "This guy is nuts." He says, "I got to get rid of him because what he wants to do, he wants to bring segregation back. He wants to create one battalion that have a Puerto Rican battery, and one with a black battery, and one with Italian battery. (laughs)" I said, "All they'll is fight each other you put them together like that." So he said, "Yeah, that's exactly what I'm talking about." He said, "I got to get rid of him." He said, "You had artillery training, haven't you?" So, I said, "Yes. Yeah, I was an Artillery Officer, and I had a [preference?] in artillery." So he said, "Oh, that's good enough." Then he said, "I'm going to send you over there." So got the orders and they sent me over there as the Divisional Artillery Commander. Now, when I got there, you always got this, [there were?] no black has had this position before. So they figure he's not qualified. So they look in my record. It turn out, my qualifications was higher than theirs. So they had nothing to [guff?] about. Now, that was one of the things that I think [Daniel] "Chappie" James [Jr.] said in one of his writings. He says, you know, "Go and get all the qualifications you can get and put them in your bag so when they ask you for the position, you reach in your bag and pull them out." And that worked for me perfect. So, I had all the credentials to be the [dividing?] Commander. So they made me the [dividing?] Commander. Now-- Speaker 2: So, this is at [Osworth?]--check the dates here. This is--you became a Lieutenant of [Community of?]--you achieved the rank of Major General in '92 [1992], right? Speaker 1: In where? Speaker 2: '92 [1992], 1992. Speaker 1: Right '92 [1992]. Speaker 2: Right. Okay. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: And what we're talking about now is-- Speaker 1: I'm talking about in 1987, '88 [1988]. Speaker 2: '87 [1987], '88 [1988]? Okay. All right. Speaker 1: See, when I was at the--the [part of?] Commander was 1995. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And then I served it from 1985 to 1986. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 33890 Speaker 1: Then 1986, they transferred me from the [Twardy?] to the DISCOM [Division Support Command] which was the Support Brigade in the 42nd Infantry. I mean, they did that because they had a guy up in Fort Drum [Jefferson County, New York] who was creating who was creating trouble for the Post, and they wanted him off the Post. He was a full-timer. So then only his qualifications was artillery, so they asked me would I go over to [Twardy?] because I had qualifications--not [Twardy?], to DISCOM because I had qualifications for DISCOM Commander also. So I said, "You know, I'll do that." So they shifted me over to the DISCOM, and they gave him the artillery. And I got there and then I did a good job in that. I was able to do all the things. I was able to converse with the officers that was (sic) under me and made them do the job that needed to be done. And they liked what I was doing, so that's when they asked me to become the Deputy Commander for Troop Command. So the Deputy Commander for Troop Command, it originally had started out, was up in Latham [New York]. So I said, "Hey, you know, I travel where the rank is." So they said, "Okay, you're going up there." I'm a Colonel then. They promoted to Brigadier General. That was in 1989. So, I'm Brigadier General there, and they gave me what they call the south portion of the state to command a watch over. So what I did is, I ran around New York and--part of West Chester and whatnot, as the Senior Officer for watching over those two command units. Now it come to a point that the times changed. National Guard is reorganized, and they now are going to take the division and split it among a number of states. So, in splitting the division among a number of states, the first job, designated Commander would be from New York. So the Commander that I had was a doctor. Now, he had a doctorate in what they call--his rank was of the there's the [Lyons?], so he could demand a division. So they asked--he wanted to be a Division Commander. Now it was between him or I to become the Division Commander. So, I thought about it, and I said, "Oh, well. Division Commander." I said, "You could have that," 'cause I figured it'll be one of these things that I go to all the time, and once you stay there a while, then they get rid of you, and then you retire. So I said I'll take the troop command. And they made me--gave me the troop command and I became a Two-Star [General] then. That was in 1992. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And then, at the same token, what happen then, that the time was up for him to stay in as the Division Commander, so they wanted somebody to be the Army Commander. But he wanted to stay another term as the Division Commander, so they said--they granted that and they promoted me to Army Commander, which was the same rank. So I took over the New York Army National Guard from 1992, '93 [1993], '94 [1994], '95 [1995]. In '95 [1995] I got out. Story_ID: 33891 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, I want to go back. I had a question from long time ago, and I hope--. When you formed the--let's see--oh, the Black Officers Association. Speaker 2: The Black Officers Association. Speaker 1: Yeah. When was that formed? Speaker 2: What was that? Speaker 1: What year did you all form it? Speaker 2: I was just a member. Speaker 1: You were just a member, but do you know when it was formed? Speaker 2: I wasn't one of the officers in it. We didn't want to beg anybody that was active, an officer in that organization, 'cause that would give them the opportunity to say he's only here to get his own promotions. So I was just a member of the Black Officers Association. The people that were officers were already retired black officers. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, I just wondered when it was formed. What year it was formed. Speaker 2: Oh, that was around 1984. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: 1983, '84 [1984]. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: And I remember them being formed, I was still a Major. Story_ID: 33892 Speaker 1: Now--okay. So, now what were your--how much time did it take for you--I mean, how much time did you have to devote to being the--a Two-Star General here, you know? Speaker 2: Well, in the first year or so, it was more like routine if you spend a little, maybe a couple of more days than you would normally do, like any other position. But as things got a little bit higher up, when I started coming further into it, activities in the world were changing. So they would--giving (sic) you to do more things. So I had to go to more schools, and going to more schools, I had to put in more days. Now, I would say luckily, my job agreed with it. They liked the idea of having a General in their employ. So they would give me any of the time that I needed. If I needed time to go to school, they would authorize the time to go to school. Now, this authorization, it came with a benefit because with the phone company [NYNEX] you got paid for so many days up to so many days, you got your full pay. And then the rest of it, they reduce to half pay. So the length of the schools usually ended up that most of the time I was in the school I got full pay. And then they reduced to half pay. So I didn't suffer too much, plus I was getting paid from the military. So it gave me a bonus up. So now I had more money to take care of my family and do the things I needed to do as an officer. Speaker 1: And, give us an example of what your duties were? What would your typical duties be on a given month, I guess, or --? Speaker 2: You got to talk a little louder Speaker 1: What were your duties like? What was your routine? What did you have to do? Speaker 2: Oh, my duties? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Okay. Well, as a General Officer, it's pretty much--I'll put it in a nutshell; you convince people to do what you want them to do. And, in other words, it's like this, you know, when I was a Second Lieutenant, I had direct connection to the troops. I was right next to the non-commissioned officers. So I could tell them what I wanted, the non-commissioned, I could go straight down to Private Joe Doe (sic) and tell him what I want. When I got to be a Captain, I had to go to a Lieutenant 'cause he was in charge of that platoon. So, now, I could still go down to the Private Joe Doe as the company commander, but that's a little overburdening. You know, you let the Sergeants talk to him or whatever it was to straighten him out, or get him to do what you want him to do. It was easier then. But that was the direct connection down. When I left being a company commander, which is a Captain, I moved to a staff position. Now, the staff position, you don't have no command. All you got is your [task men?] that you have control of, your staff section. So, you can talk to them, but it--pretty much they'll already doing what you want. But you can't go down to the Private and talk to him because he's got a Commander. So you got to convince the Commander to--talk to the Commander to get the Private to do what you want him to do. So, naturally, I worked for the Commander, so he's going to take my word and what I want to get done. So, now, you get to be a Battalion Commander. Now, you got to talk to your company commanders to get them to do the right thing, to talk to--so now, at this level, you can still talk to soldiers, but you can't go and scold them or chastise them or nothing like that. Now, it's up to the Company Commander. So you hold your reverence and you convince the company commanders what you want to do. Now, from being a Battalion Commander, you go to, like a Regimental Commander or a Brigade. Now, you're at a point. You don't ever go down and talk to the Privates. You go down and ask some questions, but you never go beyond the chain of command. You want them to do something, you go through your chain of command and tell them what you want to do. Now, it comes to the point, you got to convince these commanders to do what you want them to do. Now, to convince them, you have the pen over them. You have the OER's [Officer Evaluation Report]. The Efficiency Report. So, if you write a bad Efficiency Report, his career is finished. So, that's where your power came in, in the pen. Speaker 1: You get to be a General, it comes even more complicated. Now you got to convince those brigade commanders to convince their commanders to do what you want them to do. You can still go down and talk to the Private, but you never go there without the Commander. So, when you go down, (unclear) the chain of command becomes a little bit more elevated and complicated to get down to see what you [want?]. The only way you can find out if they doing what you want them to do, you write an order, and you send it down, and then you go down on an inspection. And during the inspection you can ask Private Jones, "What do you know about this particular order?" And he say, "I never heard of it." Or he can tell you what he was told. And a lot of times they never got down to him. Then when he says, "I never heard of it," then you look at the Commander, and says, "You know, what's going on here. Why aren't you disseminating my orders down here? Now that can go on your OER. The next time I come, it better not be the same question." Story_ID: 33893 Speaker 1: I'll give you an example of what happened. I had to relieve a guy, a Battalion Commander, for that same reason. I was the [Twardy?] Commander then, and one of the battalions was the 205th, and they were in the same Army that I was in at [King Fish?]. And what happened in this particular era, a lot of the soldiers were Hispanic, and they spoke broken English, and they didn't speak very good English. So he decided that, 'cause they only learned Spanish, he wasn't going to teach them anything. So, I would go and ask him, "What you doing with this training?" And he says, "Well, they're doing the right thing," and so forth." So I say, "You know, [make sure?] you communicate. That's one of the [problem?]. You got to be able to deliver skills to the target when the fighting infantry needs it, and you got to be active with it. You can't shoot it on them. So you'd better train your people." Okay. So we going to Fort Dix [Trenton, New Jersey] and he's going to Fort Dix for a training exercise. I tell him, I'm going to come out and I'll see your operation out in Fort Dix. He says, "Okay." So it's on the weekend training. So, first thing I do, I leave and I go out and I go to the area that they're supposed to be in. Supposed to be in an assembly area. They're not there. So I'm saying, you know, what the heck happened? So anyway, we go to the area where they're going to [bibwack?]. So there they are, they're spread out in this [bibwack?] area. So go to the headquarters, and I ask is the Commander here. "He's not here." So I said, "Well, let me see the ammunition section." So I go to the ammunition section, and what they've done, they've loaded all the ammunition off the truck onto the ground. I said, "Why did you guys do that?" He says, "Well, that's what the Commander told us." I said, "But if you have to move all of a sudden? You got to load everything back on the truck. So why can't you keep track of the ammunition on the truck?" He said, "Well, that's what we want to do, but he told us not to." Okay. So I go on down to the mess hall. So, Soldier Morale (ph. splg.) is in the mess hall. So I go to the mess hall and I says, "Where's the cook?" "Oh, he's down [drawing?] rations." So I said okay. I said, "Where's the mess steward?" "Oh, the mess steward, he went with him." I said, "Where's the first cook?" Say, "Oh, he's here." So I asked the first cook, I said, "Well, you got a cook worksheet?" He said, "No." I said, "Well, how do you know what to cook or what to prepare?" He said, we're waiting for the steward and the cook to come back so we'll know what to do." I said, "But the troops are all ready here in the field. You got to have a meal prepared for them." Anyway, I said, "All right. You give me a cup of coffee." He said, "We don't have none cooking." I said, "Now, that's the first thing you have set up, at least, if a guy like me come by that you have a cup of coffee for him." Say, "All right. Never mind." So I leave there and I go out to one of the other company mess hall. And in the company mess hall there's a battery there. I says, "How about a cup of coffee?" "Oh, sure." The guys comes out with a cup of coffee. I said, "Let me see your cook's worksheet." "We don't have one." I said, "How you know what you're going to cook?" He said, "Oh, what we do, we make up our own menu." I said, "You don't follow the Army menu?" He said, "Yeah. What we do is, we buy the food that we want to eat before we get here, then we cook it like your home cooking, and the troops prefer that." I said, "That's not how the Army run. You don't give people the food that you got like you cook at home. You give them what the Army calls for because they got the vitamins and nutrients in them and everything." They said, "Oh, okay. We understand." Story_ID: 33894 Speaker 1: So the next place I go is I go out to where the guns are. The guns are sitting there, the trails are closed, they got their covers on the guns and everything. I said, "What is this?" I says, "Whenever that gun stops, you shouldn't have a cover on it and the trails should be spread, ready for a mission." "Oh," he says, "Well, they told us not to do that. We'll get further orders." So I go to the fire direction center who's going to direct the guns. I says, "Let me see your fire plan for today." "We don't have it made up yet." I said, "Well, meantime, the guns are sitting there. They--nobody's getting any training, you guys are not doing anything because you're waiting for somebody to give you some direction." I said, "Everything out here is screwed up." So now I meet the Commander. So he comes running 'cause now he found that I'm in the area. "So," I said, "Good. Come here. Let me tell you something." I said, "Your guns were not ready, your fire direction is not ready, you're not capable of doing an artillery mission, you don't have the people with ammunition sitting out the ammunition out on the ground instead of leaving them on the truck, your mess hall doesn't have any one out drawing rations. They were supposed draw the rations yesterday. So they shouldn't be down here today drawing rations." I said, "What you're running here is a real mishmash. And I don't like it. That's not how my units are going to function." So I says, "I'm going to give you a good warning. You coming out here again next month, I don't want to see this same mess-up. Do you understand that?" He said, "I'm not a person to yell and scream." So I said, "You've been notified." Said, "Okay." So I go away, I get in and--in the meantime, I'm talking to my staff. ["I've?] screwed up this thing." And he said, "I never saw somebody so messed up like that." So, we go back to the armory and they do a drill there. The next month, we go back out there. So I go back out there and I go back to the same thing. The ammunition is on the truck this time. The cook, he drew rations the day before, I get a cup of coffee. I go out to the next unit, and he's got a cook's worksheet and he's got a menu. I go back to the guns, the guns are still sitting with the trails closed, covers on the guns; go to the fire direction, they still have no fire plan. So I says, "That's it." So I called the Commander and I told him, I says, "Next Thursday when you come to the Armory, report to my office." Now he doesn't know what it is. So I said, okay. So I get in my vehicle and I leave and I come back. The next Thursday, before that I called the General, Division Command, and I tell him, "I'm going to relieve this guy 'cause he's not doing anything. He's not training the troops, and he's not doing anything, and it's detriment to the artillery. Say, "I don't want him as a Commander anymore." Say, "I want to relieve him." He said, "Well, James, you know that's a rough thing. That ends his career." I say, "I know." He said, "All right. You can relieve him." So the next Thursday, he comes in my office. So I says, "Good. I want you to sit down." Called my executive officer in. And I said, "This is the Executive Officer," and he says he knows him. So, I said, "Call your Executive Officer and tell him to come over here." So he calls his Executive Officer and he comes over, and the guy's over there and he's wondering what's going on now. So I say to him, says, "You're relieved. And you're not a Commander. You understand what I said?" And he looked at me like (shows expression)." I says, "Yes, you're relieved. You're no longer a Battalion Commander. Your executive orders is not a Battalion Commander." And the guy is looking at me like, you can't do this. So I said, "What's the matter? You don't want to take the command?" He says, "Oh, yes, yes, yes, sir." I said, "All right. Go and take care of your troops. I want to see training going on over there." I says, "As far as you're concerned, you report to my Executive Officer for any further instructions." So he looks at me and says, "Well, I guess that's it." So he walks around, then he came back and he says, "I guess I have to resign." I said, "Okay. Call the [adjunct in?], he'll give you a 76, and you sign it right here, I'll sign it and you'll be out." Okay. And that's how I put him right out. That turned that unit around because then they knew that I wasn't screwing around with this nonsense anymore. "[When?] you take troops, you're responsible for their [lodging?] and training. And that's how we're going to run this Army." Story_ID: 33895 Speaker 1: All right. Tell this story about the two general (unclear) (simultaneously)-- Speaker 2: Tell the whole story (unclear) (simultaneously)-- Speaker 1: What it is, is that occasionally, what happens, them planes that we use are put down for maintenance. So we use a plane from another state. Now, what happened this time, when I'm going to Wisconsin to check on one of my units that are out there doing training. I'm the Army Commander now. What happens is that they send the plane from Pennsylvania to pick me up. Now, we're in the airport at Westchester. Now, we're sitting in the cafeteria waiting for the plane. And finally the plane lands, and over the PA system comes, "General James, your plane is here." So me and my entourage, we get up, and we leave, and we go out, and you go into the passenger's tunnel and everybody trying to figure out who was the General. So, we go through the pilot's gate where only the pilots go through. And we go out onto the airfield, and we walk down to the thing and I said, "Everybody gets on the plane before the General gets on." So I'm standing outside and so I say, "Okay, you guys get on, everybody get on." And so, I turned to the pilot, I said, "Okay, we can leave now." He said, "No, we're still waiting for General James." I said, "That's me." "Oh, oh." He didn't--now, he done looked over the two stars, he doesn't see that at all. He said (unclear)--now here, this is his story. He said he thought it was the General James from his state. So I said, "Okay. Well, I'm here. Let's go." So we get on the plane and we fly. A couple of hours we get out and go to Wisconsin. They leave a car there for us, and there's a driver, and me and my entourage, we get in the car and we go to the [Bachelor?] Officers' Quarters where we're going to get quarters to stay for the night. So I tell them, "Hey, go in and sign for the room." So the aide goes in and [it's what they call billing it?] and he said, "The General's here, continue." He said, "No, the General has to sign for his own room." Said, "Okay." So the aide comes back down and says, "General," he said, "you have to go in and sign for your own room." I said, "Okay." So I got out of the car and I go in. I said, "Where you want me to sign?" He said, "I told you guys the General has to sign." I said, "What do you think this is?" And I thought he looked like he could have sanked through the floor. 'Cause then he saw the two stars. And then he apologized, 'cause I always say, see, they never expect to see a black General. And there I was standing in front of him. And they expected that I wouldn't be a General. That's some of the things. It happened another time when I was out at Indiantown Gap, where I--once again, I was out visiting a unit, and we were in a car, and we were looking for the Quartermaster Exchange, 'cause I wanted to buy some underwear and things. So I'm riding around this area, and I say, "I know it was over here, but they moved it." I said, "I wonder where they moved it." So anyway, I said, "Oh, look, there's a guy up there in a car." So I said, "Drive up there, we'll ask that guy, you know, because he look like he's on the Post." So I asked him, "Where's the Exchange?" So we're now--we're in an open vehicle, so he can see it's four of us in this vehicle, and we're coming toward him. So he's working with his trunk. So, he looks and he figured we're going to stop and ask him something, 'cause we got, I guess, we were approaching him in that sort of fashion. So he turns, I stopped by and I says, "Excuse me, can you give us some direction?" And he turns down, he looks down to his car, the trunk, he takes his helmet out, puts his helmet on, and he's got an eagle on the front, and he turns around like that, and when he turned around, there were two stars shining him in the face. And he could have dropped through the floor (laughs). So I said--and the driver says, "Did you see the expression on that guy's face when he thought he was going to outrank everybody, and he was the lower rank." So that was one of the other things she said I should put in the book. Story_ID: 33896 Speaker 1: Yeah, this is different. Now, is there a--what--I guess, is there an incident that's the most memorable in terms of something positive that happened, you know, from you being a Two-Star General here? I mean, what's the most memorable thing that happened to you? Speaker 2: Oh, the most memorable thing I had ever happen, the accomplishments of people doing what you want them to do. I got several of them that I was very proud that some of my restructures and whatnot, or what is that, [finally?] seeped down and got to everybody. We were out in--I think we were up in a place here in New York, and we were in the field, and I went down to check on the people in the field. And while I was there, the Commander came out like he's supposed to, and he met with me and he told me what was going on. He gave me a briefing, and had his staff give me a briefing, and then we went around to the different positions, the gun positions and whatnot; that it just happened to be an artillery unit. And everybody was doing what they were supposed to do. And the training was going along good. I says, "You know, something must be happening right, because everything that I was preaching, it seems to be getting to everybody, and I see things are starting to work [quite?] good. So it's almost like when I--when they called the troops for Iraq. I felt that these soldiers had enough, good enough training to take the combat training to go to Iraq, that we wouldn't be embarrassed. And that was the most memorable. And when I went to visit them, they all thanked me for visiting them and how proud they was to be in the New York National Guard. Speaker 1: Now, the troops you're talking about that went to Iraq, I think that--I don't think there's ever been a time when so many National Guardsman went overseas and stayed so long in a war. Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: Is that pretty much true? Speaker 2: You think back to World War II. Speaker 1: Yeah. That was like four years at the most. Speaker 2: Yeah, and right after World War II, there's never been a call up like that. Korea, they didn't call up that many. The Army, at that time, see, the Army had their own ideas of being soldiers because they didn't have control of the National Guards like they wanted to. They didn't think the National Guard would muster up to being in their Army. So they used to didn't want them. And so, that's probably why they escaped being called up. But now, the Army is reduced, and they don't have the troop sizes that they need to do any kind of operations. So they found that while they had their regular soldiers going to do these different things throughout the world, the National Guard people had to back field to Post and do the things that they needed to do to keep the Post running (sic). Then they found that they were doing a good job at that, so they decided to deploy them to certain overseas places as goodwill. And so, little by little, the National Guard got on the goodwill tours, and they went to different places. They went to Japan, they went to the different Far East countries and stuff like that. And little by little, they decided when the war started, then they really knew they didn't have enough soldiers. So that's when they called up the [performance?] of the National Guard.. Speaker 1: Now, was--did you hear any expressions of profound dismay from National Guardsmen for being called to active duty? Speaker 2: Well, not really. Yeah, we have a couple of guys that were disappointed. They had families and they figured they're going go over there and get killed. So they don't want to go. But, hey, you took the king's crown--no, I wouldn't say that. You take his crown, you got to do his bidding. So, we've been paying you all this time, well, you're one of the unlike ones. When the war started, you happened to be in it. Could have happened to anybody. But you said I would do it, now you got to go and do it. I had a couple of guys that did things to get out. And they actually got out. Story_ID: 33897 Speaker 1: In fact, I have an officer who was right here in the 369th. He was transferred to a maintenance unit 'cause he was afraid the 369th was going to be called up. So he asked to go and take over the maintenance unit that I told you they had that exchange before. So they sent him out to this maintenance unit. And while he was there, they called up some of his companies. Well, that's the first thing they're going to call is maintenance, 'cause maintenance, it don't take that much training if you're already trained; you know, how to fix vehicles and things like that. So they called up his companies; and the next thing he figured, they going to call him. Now he's the guy that works down on Wall Street. So he's got a nice hi-fi job with, doing Wall Street-type of work, and so, he's in for a bonus or a promotion, and he doesn't want to leave. So he calls me up, and I'm out in St. Louis [Missouri]. And nobody even knows I out there. But anyhow, he figured that I'm out there. He called me on the phone, and he says, "General, this is so-and-so. I can't--I can't go on this mission." I said, "What are you talking about?" I said, "Nobody even called you yet." He said, "But they gonna call me and I know that, and I'm telling you I'm not going." I said, "What did you say?" He says, "I'm not going." I said, "You must have the wrong words. You're going if they call you. If you don't go, we'll put you in jail. So that's the end of it. I don't want to hear anything about this that you are not going." So he said, "Well, take it, whatever you want to do, I'm not going." And so he hangs up. So I called the Adjutant General and told him--this is what the conversation was. He says, "Well, I'll tell you this, if he doesn't go, we're going to put him jail." So I said, "Okay. Case closed." Now, we get back, they still haven't called him. But they call the 369th. So 369th is now scheduled to go over, and he's still sitting here. So then he realizes that they wasn't going to call him. And so he says, "Oh, I take it back , now." I said, "No, it's too late. You can't take that back. You broke when you wasn't supposed to break. So the case now, the minute this war is over, you're out. You have no more career for you." Said, "We're not going to take a chance on you anymore. You're a broken leg." "Well, can you overlook it?" I said, "No. I don't overlook people who change their oath in the middle of a time (unclear). If you were in combat, you'd do the same thing. You'd let somebody get killed so you could survive." So that was the end. And he finished, that was up. That's the highest rank he got. We put him out, he begged to get back in, but I wouldn't let him back in. So that was some of the things that I, as a General Officer, you got to stand up and be counted. Story_ID: 33898 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, you retired in 1995, right? Because I--did you retire in '95 [1995] was that? Speaker 2: '95 [1995], yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. You were 60 years old? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: '95 [1995] and so, when you look back on it--now, you're still--now, you're here on the site now at this armory, the home of the 369th as the Head of the 369th Historical Society, right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Now, tell us about how that was formed, and I think it had something to do with your relationship with your friend, William Miles (ph. splg.). Speaker 2: William Miles, right. Speaker 1: Yeah, tell us who he was and how that got started? Speaker 2: How that came about was, when I joined this unit, I didn't know it was a famous unit. Nobody knew it was a famous unit. I guess some historian knew that, but nobody in the unit knew it. Even the commanders, I think, didn't know that. Speaker 1: I think now--have you ever heard of Professor Edward Scobie? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: City College of New York? Speaker 2: Stokes? Speaker 1: Scobie. Speaker 2: Scobles, no. Speaker 1: Scobie. Scobie. Speaker 2: Scobie. No, I don't. Speaker 1: Edward Scobie. Speaker 2: I would have remembered the name. Speaker 1: Yeah, he taught at City College of New York. He's from the Caribbean, but he was a military expert in terms of the 369th. He used to talk about them all the time. I think he's in the documentary. S-C-O-B-I-E, Scobie. Speaker 2: No, I don't. Speaker 1: Yeah. Okay. All right. I just thought I'd raise him, but-- Speaker 2: I might--see, how this guy got started, Williams Miles was working for Walter Reed Sterling, which was a movie theater down on 34th Street. And he was working in the film area, where they had to cut and edit films to put them together so they could show them. And while he was doing this he realizes that, if he could make a documentary, 'cause they showed a lot of documentaries then, that he could put one together. And he thought of the 369th. So now, he knew a little bit about the 369th 'cause he had--he was in the 369th longer than me. And what he did one day, he came to me and said he wanted to get control of the library. The library's on the second floor by the elevator. So in this room, they had piled up all the memorabilia and information and whatnot that they could ever file about the 369th that was in this room; machineguns, rifles, pistols, books, uniforms, and helmets, and the whole works; just piled it in like a junk shop. So he says, "Let me show you this room." So he got the key and he went and he showed it to me. He says, "I'd like to get control of this room so we can put it together and read the history." So while I was in there, I was looking through some of the things, and I realize, I said, "This is a famous unit. Look at all the things they got." [Why are they here?] I used to wonder why they had that rope on their dress uniform, and then it showed why. They earned it in France. So I says, "Well, let me see what I can do." So he says, "Would you go to the Colonel and ask him for permission, 'cause he won't give it to an [NCL?]." So John Woodruff, who is an Olympian. He ran with the 1936 Olympics. Speaker 1: With Jessie Owens. Speaker 2: And he ran and he won the silver medal. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And he was now the Commander of the 369th. So went, and he was the type of guy, when I got to be a Lieutenant, I had to go in to see him. And he would stutter. He would always say, "I what, what, what, what, what, I tell you what." And that was his mannerisms. And he says to me, I want to tell you something, James. Remember this. Second Lieutenant should be seen and not heard. You'll be working here, we don't know what you're doing, your superior will tell us whether you're going to be a good officer or not. So, meantime, remember that. You're seen and not heard. Good-bye." (laughs). And that was the last I saw of those quarters, almost the whole time he was here. Speaker 1: So, based on that, I went to him again 'cause I had to get permission to go up--I got that (unclear) and told him I wanted see him, and he let me go up, and I asked him for permission to take over the library. He says, "Well, I don't know whatever is going to happen to that." He says, "It ain't going to buy a pound of nothing, so I tell you what, you can have it. Whatever you make out of it, I applaud it." So, I say, "Okay." So he gave me permission to take all the memorabilia over. Now I got the key. So I get with Miles and we start working in there. And there was another fellow named Henry Nicholas, who's since passed on. And Henry Nicholas worked for a logoist (sic) company. He could make logos. And that's the logo I have on my hat with the 369th with the little man. He made that logo. So, we worked in there cleaning the place up, putting things and making things into displays and whatnot. I says, "Well, what are we going to do with this stuff?" He said, "Well, nobody knows about what it is." So I said, "Okay. Well, let's work on this together." I said, "What we're going to have to do is, we'll have meetings and we'll determine what we're going to do with this. So, for the time being we'll call this the 369th Historical Committee." So that's what it started out as. Story_ID: 33899 Speaker 1: Now, what year was this when you formed it? Speaker 2: This is in 1960, I guess. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Let's revise that. 1959; about 1960. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: 'Cause he says--we worked on that for--'til 1961, I can remember that, and we had our first viewers to come through. We had a little tour to come through and look at all the memorabilia. And we went through what the thing was about, and who these officers were, and all the different things that was in there. And it sort of caught on. People wanted to know more about it. So we're still confined to this little room. So, but they won't give us anymore space in the Amory. So we'll have to do the best that we can. So, we worked on fixing the room up, and taking all the phernalia (sic) and stuff out and putting the into categories, and try to organize it to something that we'll know where it's at when we need it. So, little by little, Bill Miles now decides that he's got enough of this stuff that he can make a film out of it. So he comes to me and he asks me to write a letter on behalf of the battalion, that he could go to the National Archives and get the footage of the 369th [Infantry Regiment]. Now, if you saw the "Men of Bronze," that footage in there is the footage that he got from the National Archives. So we wrote--now, normally if you go to the National Archives, you have to pay for the footage. But, if you go there as one of the historical units, you get it free, 'cause it's you. So, anyway, he was allowed to get all of this footage free. So, he was able to do that, and he got the film, and then he decided to do interviews and whatnot. And he did a lot of interviews, you know, like the little redheaded gentleman that was here, I met him. Now, he's in the film, and he was an actual 369er. Actually, I met a number of real 369er's that was in the World War I, but since them they have all passed away, so, you can't talk to any of them at this point. But that was the beginning. And then, as time went on, we wanted to expand. But we never got permission to expand it. So little by little, as I rose in rank, eventually, I got to be the Commander. When I got to be the Commander, then I had control over everything. So, I said, "Well, we can expand this out." And I told him to put things out I the lounges. So what we do is expand it into the lounge, and we collect this stuff up and put it back in the library. So it was an on and on, put up displays and take them down. So, as time went on, I spoke to this guy, William DeFossett. He was the president of the Veterans' Association there. He was a treasury officer. And knowing him and what he could do opened a lot of doors just by him being the treasurer officer. So, we used to help him, have him help us do a lot of things. So he says to me one day, "You know, you got committee on the end of this thing, 369th Historical Committee. That sounds awful small." He said, "Why don't you make it the 369th Historical Society, and then it's a bigger thing." I said, "That makes sense." So I changed it to 369th Historical Society. And then we decided to get a charter. So, we worked that, getting a charter. We got the charter, and then from the charter we had to go and get the 501(c)(3) status. We worked at getting the 501(c)(3) status. We got that. And that's the beginning of the 369th Historical Society. And-- Speaker 1: Now, what--yeah. I'm sorry. What year is this? Speaker 2: And then, as time went on, I got to be the Army Commander. And then after I was the Army Commander, I came back here. They needed the space in the second floor library for a classroom. So I convinced them to give all the space on the walls in this lower area and upstairs to the exclusive use of the Society that no Commander can say what would go up there. That the Society would say what goes up and what takes down (sic). And I went through the Adjutant Generals' office and they gave approval. And so, we expanded everything outside to the different corridors. And that's the way it is today. And that's how the Society is now. The Society itself collects anybody that is interested in preserving history. And so, we have a lot of people that are not military. Anybody that wants to join can join for a fee of $25 as a yearly fee. If they want to be a life member, it's $300. So we got a lot of people to join in for life members, and a lot of people that do annual membership. So, the annual membership is the blood that keeps money coming in that you can do your administrative stuff. But it's nothing big. We try to get a couple of grants here and there. We've managed to get a few grants from the government through our representatives and whatnot. But it--as the budget dries up, that dries up also. So, we've been able to keep those things going. Then when we got to the point that we wanted to expand into the streets, we decided that we should be a monument up in France where the 369th fought, because we had the opportunity to go there, and there weren't no monuments to the 369th [Infantry Regiment], even in the town of Sechault. Speaker 1: How do you spell that? Speaker 2: Sechault? S-H-E-A-C-H-T-L (sic), I think it is, A-L-T, chalt. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Story_ID: 33900 Speaker 1: Any way, it's a French general. General De'jon (ph. splg), who had told us that there was no monument there and we should do something about it. And that's when we started--we sent people--Bill Miles had gone over there before, and on one of the trips with the Men of Bronze film and collected information. So he confirmed that there was no monuments to the 369th other than the 93rd Division monument. (pause, sirens). So, we decided then that we should put a monument up. So we started working with the French, La'Souvenir (ph. splg.), and they would be our French contact. And here in the United States we would collect money to send over there and have the monument erected. And so, that's what we did. The Society did that, and we collected enough money to pay for the monument. And we had it made up and erected. Now, that's another whole story in that, how that got to be there. But after we got the monument up, we went there for a visit. This is in 1967, I think it was. No, 1977, I think it was (sic, 1997). I have to check my dates now. Speaker 2: 1977? Speaker 1: I think it's '77 [1977]. But any way, we managed to get the monument erected. So, we decided that when we were there, ain't nobody gonna ever see this monument. It's out in the Champagne district of France, which is all farm district, and this monument is on a crossroad at the little entrance to the town of Sechault. And so, even erecting that where we had a little trouble trying to get it done, first they wanted us to buy the land, and we told them we weren't able to buy the land, 'cause over there they prorate the land based on how much it can grow. So, and you got to pay all of that. So, we told them we didn't have the money. And I said, "Oh, well, after all, you guys did deliver--[a little rate?] the town." Said, "We'll give you that land." So he says, "Okay." So we said "We'll buy the monument, so, but you guys are going to have to help us put it up." So they agreed on that. So then they said, "We'll provide the base, you provide the monument." We had the monument made and we went out and contracted with them and La'Souvenir did all the legwork for us doing that. We sent them the money and everything. And then one day, they said the monument is ready, and we took a trip to that site. We had two busloads. We went there and we erected the monument, said a few words over it, and then we said, "Well, if nobody's ever gonna see this, we should have one in New York." So that's when we decided to put the one up out here in the street. Now, I guess that was 1977; 1987, maybe that my years are getting mixed up now. Speaker 2: You said the French-- Speaker 1: I said 1997. Speaker 2: '97 [1997] for this? Speaker 1: This one went up. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And that was ten years after the other one. So it was '87 [1987] that the other one went up, not '77 [1977]; '87 [1987] (sic, 2006). Speaker 2: Okay. All right. Speaker 1: So ten years later, we got this one up. Story_ID: 33901 Speaker 1: Now, the problem with this one was, we had to get it, the monument [to the sculptor?], because we tried to get it made here [United States], and they wanted something like $60,000 to make it. They said they would do it over there [France] for $25[000]. So, I--well, we're a little guilty for shipping work out of the United States. So he said, "Well, we can afford the $25,000. Besides, it's made by the same monument maker that made the other one. So we said, okay, we'll go with that. Speaker 2: Is it exactly the same monument? Speaker 1: Same monument maker. Speaker 2: So it's just casted--this was casted in France and then sent back? Speaker 1: It was duplicated. Yes. This is a sculpture. Speaker 2: Sculpture. Yeah. Speaker 1: Yes. So he sculptured that the same way and put the same engravings and signatures on it, insignias on it. But the same one is in Sechault. So now, we had the monument made and everything, and now, it's time to put it up. Well, in 19--was it 1990 (sic, 2006)? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: The war started, right? Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Now, they--all the assets are tied up. So, I was able to get over there and make arrangements for them to ship the monument back. But I got ahold of the Army over there, and I asked them would they go into France and pick the monument up and bring it to Germany. And from Germany, you could put it on a plane and bring it back to New York. When you get to New York, the 369th can go up there and get the monument and bring it down here, and then we'll hold it here until we get the site that we're going to put it up. So, all of that was arranged. But the war kept us from ever getting it done. So finally, this was, I think about '95 [1995]; '95 [1995], somewhere around there, '96 [1996]. They said, "Okay. You can get the plane, and you can bring the monument over (unclear)." They told me at the last minute. So now I got to drop everything, call up the monument makers, say, we're coming to get the monument." I got to have the monument into, what you call it (pause). I'm trying to think of the name of the--not Berlin. It's Frankfurt. Have the monument in Frankfurt at the airport on this day and they'll [pick?] it up and bring it back. So, anyway, they said, okay, you can do that. So I got on a plane, I left and went out. I got to Germany. When I got to Germany, I go to my quarters, and I had to rent a car and drive into France that same day. I went to France. I met with the monument makers, stayed overnight. The next day we went to the monument maker and made arrangements. He says, "You're lucky 'cause the monument maker usually goes on vacation, and this was his last day here. So had you come tomorrow, you wouldn't had been able to get the monument." And if I missed that day, I wouldn't have been able to get the plane. So I said, "It look like fate is on our side." Story_ID: 33902 Speaker 1: So, we sat there and, now, it's ironic. This is early in the morning now. His wife cooks a meal for us while we're waiting for the trucks to come to get the monument. So, they ask if you want drinks. So I said, "You know, it's a little early for me," but the guys, (unclear), "Oh, it's not early for me. I'll have a drink." (laughs) Naturally, I guess in France they drink a lot. So anyway, they had the drinks and whatnot. I wouldn't even drink any wine then, you know, because I figured I got to drag my butt all the way back to Germany after the truck leaves. So I says, "I don't know alcohol on me while I'm driving through these roads." I'm in a foreign country, you know, and I'm in civilian clothes. So the best thing is just be cool and do what you have to do and be straight. So, anyway, here comes the truck, U.S. Army truck; pulls up, it's a tractor-trailer. They said, bring the monument out here. [We fixing to have?] the soldiers get on, they're two German soldiers So I said, "Ain't this something. Here's the Germans, the Americans, and the French, bringing the monument for the 369th [Infantry Regiment] back to the United States." So we had pictures taken and all that. And I got some shots of that. And (unclear), until the truck takes off. He said, "It'll be there tomorrow afternoon." And I say, "What were you going to do with it all night?" He said, "I'm going to still go home." And I say, "You're going to leave the monument out there?" He said, "Yeah, nobody bother it." So, sure enough the next day, I leave and that's one of these other things that happens again. So, I check out of m quarters, take the car, I turn it in, I get to the airport. You turn the car in and drop the keys in the box. I have no way of getting this car back now. So I go into the Army area, the Air Force terminal, and I says, "I'm here for a flight for New York." He says, "No flight going to New York." I said, "Yes, there is. There's a flight going to New York. I know 'cause they told me to be here today. They got to pick up a monument for me." So he says, "Well, I don't know." He says, "Well, maybe you better go to this other area over here where they have [tracking?] at." So I leave, and I go over to the other area. And I'm in civilian clothes. So I says, "You got a flight going to New York from New York [Air?] National Guard?" He says, "Yeah, but it ain't taking no passengers." I said, "Yeah, they gonna take a passenger." He said, "Well, they waiting for some General." I said, "That's me." (laughs). "Oh." He says, "Oh, gee. I'm sorry." I said, "Well, you can't tell I'm a General 'cause I don't have on a uniform. He says, "Any way, let me get you situated. You got to get a lunch." Says, "We're going to--there's a car is going to meet you outside, he's going to take you over to the mess hall and you pick up your lunch and whatnot, then we'll bring you out to the plane." So I said, "Okay." All of a sudden I get royal treatment (laughs). So they take me to the lunch thing, to the mess hall, and they make up the lunch, and then, 'cause there's no--what do you call that--galley on the plane. So you bring your lunch with you and what you eat while you're in the air. So anyway, we get to the plane, and now the guy has to put two stars on the plane. So he puts the two stars up. He says, "You know what, you're the highest ranking guy here. We can take off whenever we want." I said, "That's true." He says, "Well, you say you're [ready?]. I said, "Well, take off." He says, "Thank you." And he called on the radio, "General's on board ready to go." So I flew back on a C12 up in the same compartment with all the pilots and stuff. It was nice and then a guy asked me "You want to fly this plane?" when we were up in the air. I told him no, because I want to get home (laughs). Story_ID: 33903 Speaker 1: You're on the plane now, and you're heading for Germany, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. We headed for New York, now. Speaker 1: For New York. Okay. Speaker 2: We got the monument on board and we're heading to New York. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And we're landing up at Newburg. So, we fly across the ocean, we land Newburg. Remember I told you 369th supposed to be there to meet us? (Shakes head side to side). No 369th. It's a holiday weekend. What happened to the 369th. I call up. Nobody answers the phone. Now, I had already told the Commander that we were landing and we wanted somebody there with a truck to transfer it to bring it to the armory. (Shakes head side to side). I can't figure out what's going on. So anyway, I asked the Air Force people can they store it here in a safe place. He says, "Oh, sure, no problem, General. We'll put it on the site, and when you get a chance, you can have the trucks come up and we'll help them load it on and you'll be on your way." So I leave and I get in the car and I go back down, and I wait until workday. I come to work and I go into the Commander's office, and I say, "What happened?" He said, "Don't you start chewing me out. I wasn't going to send my people out on a holiday to pick up that monument." I said, "What?" I said, "That's it. Don't say no more. That's it." And I left. So I called up the 42nd Infantry Division and asked them can they go up and get the monument. "Oh, General, we'll be happy as a pig. We'll go up and get the monument. No problem at all." So they went up and got it. Put it on the low bed and brought it on down, and we put it in the--down in the garage area. So from then on, that Commander, naturally, you know his name was mud. So from then on, he could never get a favor or comment out of me. And see, the biggest mistake that some of these guys make, because you're retired they think you have no say-so in what the military does. Because you're retired, you're still a General. And you're still entitled to all the courtesies that a General gets. It's just that you have no command. So, and that's the things that they made. If I write a what they call a reprimand and send it in, you'll never get promoted again. So I says, "You know, all I have to do is write a reprimand on you, and that'll be the end of your career." But I didn't have to do that. So eventually, they asked me verbally, I told them, you know, what had happened and so forth like that. And so he sort of plateaued (sic) his career. Story_ID: 33904 Speaker 1: And what we do now, is we're still trying to get grants. We still do fundraisers, and we do two a year. We give a women's history month to which we do at a catering hall, and we give a bus outing, which we're going to be going in August, called a lobsterfest. We used to have a crabfest. We either go to Baltimore or we go to Rhode Island. So this year, we're going to Rhode Island for lobsters because what happened, we used go to the crabfest, and what happened, it was good when we first started it, but little by little, the food got bad. So the people started turning it off. So we figured we'd go to the lobster. They're still first-class. So we do the lobsterfest now, and that's the one. We charge enough for the bus ride to give us a few thousand dollars that we can use to buy our frames and run the Society, plus the dues money that we use to buy paper and run the machines and stuff like that. We're lucky we don't have to pay any rent. And we don't have to pay any electricity either because we're in a state building. Speaker 2: Okay. Let me ask you this? Who showed up for the dedication of the monument? Speaker 1: Who? Speaker 2: Who came out for the dedication of the monument? Speaker 1: Oh, the, what you call it--the Commissioner of (unclear). Naturally he had to come because it was their property. We had the French Ambassador to the U.N., we had the Deputy Ambassador from the French Consulate, and a lot--the congressmen and the state senators, and the city councilmen. All of them showed up. So the mayor didn't show. I said he had something else on his schedule. But we had enough people. Speaker 2: Yeah, that would have been [Rudolf] Giuliani there? Speaker 1: I don't know where he was at then, but he said-- Speaker 2: No. That was Giuliani? Was that Giuliani? Speaker 1: That was [Michael] Bloomberg. Speaker 2: Bloomberg. Okay. Okay. In '97 [1997]. Speaker 1: I think it was 1997, right (sic)? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I think it was Bloomberg then? Speaker 2: I don't think so. Speaker 1: It might have been-- Speaker 2: I think it was Giuliani. Speaker 1: Giuliani, but what's his name showed up, the Commissioner Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: The same Commissioner as now, he was Commissioner then. He showed up. I remember that 'cause now he came up and he sat in his car. And I said, "Come out and say a few words to the people." And he said, "Oh, okay." And he come out and he said a few words, then he got back in his car. But he was waiting for some activity or something was going on I guess 'cause I guess, the war and whatnot, and he wanted to stay close to his radio. Story_ID: 33905 Speaker 1: Okay. Sir, we always ask this question: When you think about everything you've done to this point in life, what today would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: Be the what? Speaker 1: Your legacy. Speaker 2: Oh. I guess the legacy would be to learn your history, 'cause if you don't, it'll disappear, and nobody'll know it. That's one of the things I preach to when I tell the kids that. If you don't know the history and the grown-ups, you stop telling the story, pretty soon nobody'll know what it is, and it'll disappear, and you'll be doomed to repeat it again. So like the kids downstairs are [painting?] the mural. It's an art class that they're teaching them how to do murals. And they doing one on the 369th [Infantry Regiment]. And they had it all set up of how they're going to do it, and then they asked me to come down and review it. So in the review, they had Martin Luther King pushing the 369th. I said, "No. That's a little out of context 'cause Dr. King didn't come until after that when the 369th. [W.E.B] DuBois and the 369th wasn't a catalyst of any kind of black movement. So if you want to look at it like that, then the 369th really the ones starting Civil Rights, by going over and fighting in a foreign country as U.S. Soldiers to prove that they could fight for their own country." So that's pretty much my legacy. I'd like it to be that. You never know until you finish. Speaker 1: Sir, you said, devulge. You mean devoid? I mean everybody mispronounce--I mean it should be Du Bois, I guess in French. Speaker 2: Du Bois. Speaker 1: But everybody says its Dubois. (simultaneously) W-E-D-U-B-O-I-S. Speaker 2: How do you spell the name like that? Speaker 1: Yeah, I guess. So we're talking about W.E. Du Bois. Speaker 2: Right. It's like I went to Germany and when I first went there, I didn't know any German. And what happened, I felt illiterate 'cause I couldn't read the signs and I couldn't talk to the people. But little by little, I found out if I spoke to people, if I said a few German words, they would quickly turn to English. They spoke better English than I did. So, and then you could get along. So I decided that maybe I should learn some German. So when I came back, I got the tapes from the language institute. And I studied, and I learned them on my car, I put them in the cassette and I learned German--I learned to say enough words that I could ask directions, I could get a meal, and I could do different things like that. So I didn't feel so handicapped. So I went back to Germany on a junket. And we went to one of these towns, and I decided that could try my German out on one of the Germans, so I'd say a few words, and he said, "Speak English." (laughs). So, I said, everybody speaking English, so I'll stick to English. And I guess to this date, when I went back over there again, I didn't have any problem because everybody spoke English. Story_ID: 33906 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, sir, do you have any reflections on William Miles, your friend William Miles? He's passed away since-- Speaker 2: Had what? Speaker 1: Do you have--sir, do you have any reflections on William Miles? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Bill Miles was a--he was a guy that--a Sergeant that the troops liked. He would like get you to be in a happy mode. He would always convince you to do good things. That's the kind soldier he was. He would always take you out and try to get the best out of you. Even in the during his filmmaking, he was a good public relations guy in that fashion. But the other thing I have of him, he was stubborn. Now, he had his ideas, he stuck to them. He wouldn't change them. And sometimes I got to knock him in the head (unclear) the changing. But he would eventually would change. But other than that, he was an overall guy that was, not happy-go-lucky, but happy mode, convincing people of what it was. And he loved the 369th [Infantry Regiment] History. Now, he loved to talk about it and he promoted it and always did that. Now, I guess the film, the "Men of Bronze" is one of his most memorable art pieces that he made. Speaker 1: Right. And I remember "Harlem"-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I remember that one too. I remember "Harlem" when he had that- Speaker 1: That was a classic film. Speaker 2: The people--the guy that was standing on the side, he's crying and saying how bad things--says, "Look at that, they're tearing the buildings down and the people still in it." (laughs) He did some good film work. Speaker 1: Yeah. Okay. Speaker 2: You know, the only thing I would say is that, he never got out a documentaries. The stories that remain are the, the art things was his acting, [where it prefabbed?] a little bit. But you got to do that to get your story over. He never made a regular movie to express something. We even tried to get some other famous producers to produce a film about the 369th as one that's one I can remember like the movie "Stormy Weather." Speaker 1: Now, "Stormy Weather" had the 369th [Infantry Regiment] in it where they have, what's that--where Peg Leg Bates and they got--what's his name--Bo Jangles. A lot of people think Bo Jangles was in the 369th. He wasn't. And until--[and because of?] "Stormy Weather," they think he was a 369er. No. He was just an actor at the time that went to that, and he could dance and do the different things, and then which represented the soldiers at that time, they had talent and they could do a lot of good things. And the way the story goes, it shows that, you know, he tells the story of how he was when he was in the 369th. But they had to do some acting in there. What's this guy--oh, they always call him "Lightening". Not the one with Jack Benny. He always talked like a slow talker, "yes, sir, and ." Speaker 2: Not Step 'n Fetchit? Speaker 1: Yeah, like Step 'n' Fetchit. I don't think [simultaneously]-- Speaker 2: Yeah, Lightening that was in Amos and Andy. Speaker 1: Yeah, but he wasn't talking like that then. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: He was talking like a regular person, but he still had that accent of the slowness that you tell by that it was him. Story_ID: 33907 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African-American community today? Speaker 2: Well, putting it on a perspectus (sic), the African-American community, the quicker they can integrate and then become a part of the whole group of society, I think the better off it will be. I relate that to the military because the best Army that the United States has ever had was the integrated Army. And when you integrate, you have the strength of all people. If you segregate, you have the strength of a few, and you don't have that team effort that everybody's got to watch out for everybody in order to succeed. So, as far as communities are concerned, the same thing has to happen. Like Harlem is gradually changing into a mixed community. I can see other parts of the country, some of them are changing to not mixed communities, but mixed communities [fair?] better than communities that are segregated. And that's my hope for what happens to the African-American community, that they integrate more than what it was. I know I've benefitted from going into an integrated community. Story_ID: 33908 Speaker 1: Okay. Tell us something about your family. You told us about getting married. Do you have children? Speaker 2: Yes. I have four children. I have a girl, my daughter, my oldest one. I have a set of twin boys, and a single son. They all got married except one. I'm going to have to say one of the twins never got married. Now, my daughter, although she's married, she's now separated and she had two daughters, and those are my granddaughters. And they both live with me now. As you would say, the coup de grace. They came and moved back with me. So now I got them living at my house. My youngest son, he married into an integrated marriage, and he moved to Michigan. And he's still out there in Michigan, and ironically, he one day, he was at the house, and the next day we went away to a trip, we come back and nobody know where he's at. And he fell in love with this girl, and he went out to Michigan to get her. And the funny thing is, the girl's father--I call him a bigot--he didn't like the idea of this racial integration, you crazy or something like that. But she defied him and said that she's going to marry him anyhow. So it was one of those nip and tuck. But eventually, he met my son and he got to like him. And his comment was, "Well, you're not like all the other blacks." Say, "You're different." That's why I say integration makes a big difference. So he has three girls and one boy. So he turned the tide and made all girls and one boy, like I had all boys and one girl. So, and he lives out there now. He's doing well. He's working for Kellogg. He was a bus driver, but he got into some kind of, one of these things in the bus driver [industry?] but the girls talk to you and whatnot and they tell them he was trying to seduce a young girl when he wasn't. The girl comes on the bus and talks to him every day. So he decided to leave that job and he went to Kellogg. He's doing good at Kellogg now. Although every now and then, Kellogg, they don't make enough cereal or cookies or whatever they make, and they close the plant down. So when they close the plant, they lay everybody off. So that's the only thing he has to worry about, you know, when they don't make enough or they make too much. And then they got to stop the plant for a while, a period of time, but then you go back to work. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, is there anything else that we need to discuss before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: Okay. That I should know or you should know? Speaker 1: No. Is there anything else that you want us to talk about or anything we left out that you wanted to say before I ask my last question. Speaker 2: No, I don't think--I guess there's a lot of things, but we'd be here for hours (laughs). So I can say pretty much of what happened to me has been told. There's always incidents and things that happened during my life and career that--what made a difference in shaping my life, has some effect on how I turned out the way I am. I always say this, two people can be born at the same time, but they all have to swim different currents. So from the day they're born, because they wasn't one, they're going to be different. So that difference is always traveling through life. No two people ever going to be the same. I have a brother that's, one a year plus almost two years older than me. He looks almost like me. We're all the same height and everything. A lot of time, what happened when we--when I was a younger officer here, he would come to one of the affairs we'd have here at the armory, and my own soldiers would think that I was him, that I and changed into civilian clothes. And I have to tell them, then they would see me in a uniform, and they wonder how I changed back so fast. So, that's how close we sort of look. But when you see us together, we resemble each other, but we don't look alike. Now, he's not a twin, so. But he's the guy that I told you he went to City College [New York], and he's an engineer. He's doing good. He's an executive now. Owns his own company, and he's doing--he refuses to retire. I said, I guess now, being the owner of the company, why should you retire, you know. As long as you're there, you're getting the salary. And when you finish, you can sell the company to somebody else. So, he's doing good. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, the last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different: Sir, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: As a person who took care of family, worked with his community, and worked with other people to try to make things better...