 Story_ID: 253658 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Ron Kirk, K-I-R-K. Speaker 1: All right, now is Ron your given name, or is it (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My birth name is Ronald-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and no middle initial. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have any nicknames or anything? Speaker 2: (Laughter) You know, not (laughter)--none that I'm gonna volunteer--(laughter); none that--I don't have a nickname; everybody calls me Ron. Speaker 1: All right. Sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: June 27th, 1954, and Austin, Texas, which is in Travis County [Texas]. Speaker 1: All right. And what is your occupation? Speaker 2: Currently, an attorney and a partner at Gardere Wynne and Sewell [Gardere Wynne Sewell LLP] law firm here in Dallas [Texas]. Speaker 1: And you were, at one time, the mayor of the City of Dallas. Speaker 2: Yeah, prior to this, I was mayor of the City of Dallas from June of 1995 until I resigned in November of 2002 to run for the United States Senate. Speaker 1: You were the first African American mayor of Dallas-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and you were also the first African American attorney general, right? State of Texas (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I was--actually, I was appointed Texas secretary of state-- Speaker 1: Secretary of state. Speaker 2: --in April of 1994 by Governor Ann Richards and, you know, we can get--we get too caught up in (laughter)--but I was the first male African American, but there actually was a previous African American secretary of state by the name of [HistoryMaker] Myra McDaniel, who served under then-Governor Mark White back in, want to say the middle--I guess it would have been 1982 to 1986. Story_ID: 253659 Speaker 1: Sir, now, what is today's date? Speaker 2: (Laughter) I don't know. What is it? Today is--this is--today is Monday, October 25th, 19--what? Monday, October 25th, 2004. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We are in the lobby of my law firm, Gardere Wynne & Sewell [Gardere Wynne Sewell LLP], here in Dallas, Texas, in Thanksgiving Tower at 1601 Elm Street, Dallas, Texas. Speaker 1: Okay. Is there a--this is a kind of a strange question, but what is the story behind naming this Thanksgiving Tower? Speaker 2: Well, actually, it's a wonderful story, believe it or not. If you recall when--at least when we talked earlier, and I was directing you all to lunch, there was a little bit of an urban plaza and a structure immediately north of this building; it's a wide spiral, and it's actually a non-denominational worship center, and it was built with the thought in mind that a--particularly, you know, if you can envision Dallas twenty years--like, like all downtowns, when downtown was really the urban center of our community. Well, the thought was there ought to be one place that people could go, even in the middle of the work day, downtown, and stop to the degree they wanted to and pray or reflect. So it's actually a multi-denominational, non-denominational worship center, and just for a little bit more trivia, actually, in the year 2000, one of the things we're most proud of, we had as part of our millennium project, we had the United Nations [UN] declare the year 2000 as a year of world thanksgiving, and we had a celebration here in Dallas, in which we had representatives including from the Vatican and the Dalai Lama, and all of the Eastern religions. We had every religion represented here in Dallas and had a world-wide prayer service, and we were actually featured on a stamp issued by the United Nations in the year 2000. So that's why--and this building, the office building, then takes its name from Thanksgiving Plaza. Story_ID: 253660 Speaker 1: There are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that I am compelled to ask you, and they only (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I like lightweight. People haven't (laughter)--that's fine with me (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay--and they only require a short answer. The first one is sir, what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: Oh, God, I almost said what isn't, but I guess being a good southern boy I'd have to say fried chicken. Speaker 1: Okay. Now do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue. Speaker 1: A favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Fall. Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Anywhere with water and a beach for my wife [Matrice Ellis-Kirk] and daughters, and a golf course and a casino for me. Speaker 1: Okay. And the last question is do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: I have a plethora of (laughter). And again, I guess I am a old country boy (laughter); I guess I--my father [Lee Kirk, Sr.] had a wonderful, profound, simple way of saying things, but one of--one thing that he--that I took from always as a guide to life was one, if you find yourself in a hole, stop diggin'. And then one of the things that I try to most impart to my daughters [Elizabeth Kirk and Catherine Kirk] and young people, as you get older, is that while dreams are important, that a vision without a plan is a hallucination, and that mainly, to get the message through, that it's one thing to dream about growing up to be a lawyer, a doctor, an astronaut, a newsmaker, but have a plan to get there. Story_ID: 253661 Speaker 1: Tell me about your family. Let me ask you about your family history. We're gonna start with your mother's side, and then we'll ask about your father's [Lee Kirk, Sr.] side. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: But can you give us your mother's full name, and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: Yes, my mother's full name--her maiden name was Willie Mae Jones. She was born February the 4th in either 1922 or 1921, depending on whether you're asking my mother or my sister. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (Laughter) She had an identical [sic.] twin brother, Willie B. Jones, who (laughter) his birth certificate is being 1921, but my mother still maintains it's 1922 (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, so how did she spell Willie Mae? Speaker 2: (Laughter) I'm sorry, W-I-L-L-I-E, Mae, M-A-E, Jones. She was born in Manor, Texas, which was a little farming community just outside of Austin [Texas]. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what do you know about her side of the family? How far back can you trace the ancestors on that side? Speaker 2: Unfortunately, not much further than my grandparents, and unfortunately, regrettably, I did not get to know any of my grandparents except my father's mother. My mother was--her father was, I guess for lack of a better--wasn't a sharecropper, but he farmed and, you know, lived off the resources of the land. She was the baby girl of fourteen siblings; she and her twin brother were numbers twelve and thirteen. Her birth mother died, I'm reasonably certain, before my mother was four, five, or six years old. Her father remarried, but both her dad and stepmother died at a reasonably young age and, as you can imagine, you know, big families--being the youngest of fourteen, she and her brother then were actually raised by one of their older sisters. Speaker 1: Okay. Are there any stories that have passed down through the family about what life was like say, you know, back in the turn of the century or even further? Speaker 2: You know, I mean obviously they were born in the segregation; they were educated in segregated schools, but they farmed, they grew--you know, they raised hogs and cattle and I know their--they loved their father very much; he was very industrious: he made syrup, he made moonshine, he provided a good life for them, but it was a tough living, and at least my mother--it was what--that generation that did not romanticize about growing up in the country at all (laughter). You know, soon as she could get to the city, she never looked back, and I'm not certain that some of that was a result of kinda the segregated lifestyle in the, you know, the South and the Southwest in that time, but she was the first, and maybe the only of her siblings, to go to college, and so she moved to Austin, lived with one of her sisters, went to then the Negro high school, Austin [L.C.] Anderson High School [Austin, Texas], you know; had no resources, no parents, and literally showed up at Huston-Tillot--it's now called Huston-Tillotson College [Huston-Tillotson University, Austin, Texas] but then there was a [Samuel] Huston College [Austin, Texas] and a Tillotson College [Austin, Texas], and it's sort of the beauty of the history of the black colleges [HBCUs]. There are many people, whether it's my mother or your grandmother or Willie Brown that tell the story of showing up at a black college and saying, "I got no money but a dream to go," and they found a way to help finance her education. But I mean, you know, they had a--that was a full life, they all worked hard and they had great industry, and obviously--well, not obviously, but deeply, deeply spiritual values on that--in my mother's family. Story_ID: 253662 Speaker 1: Now, did she [Kirk's mother, Willie Jones Kirk] have any stories of growing up that she shared with you? Speaker 2: You know, they were more, I guess, of an adult contemporary work, 'cause I guess so much of it was her association with her younger siblings since her parents died. We grew up with all of them, and we kind of made, you know, made our history. One of the things--I mean, my mother has an acute sense of family; I think being--growing up without parents made her more acutely sensitive to issues of family and families staying together than anything, and when we grew up, I mean there was never a period of time in our lives that we didn't take somebody in. In fact, we would--you know, all kids in college, which we all did, would bring home friends to come for the holidays, or if somebody got displaced, and even if they had family, we'd always tease 'em and tell 'em, "Just tell my mother, you know, your momma or your daddy's died, 'cause then she'll do anything for you; she'll do anything for you," (laughter). But we grew up mostly in the church. One of my mother's older brothers, Bill [ph.], got the calling in the sense that we understand that, you know, he didn't have theological training, but he had traveled the world, was a [U.S.] Merchant Marine, but he got the calling and became a preacher, and when you got, you know, literally, I think, ten of the fourteen brothers and sisters were still alive, and when they all live in Austin [Texas] and they were all within literally five square miles of one another, we kind of had an instant congregation. But she really didn't talk a lot, much more beyond loving her father, and what a sweet, strong man he was, and then there really is sort of this jump forward to, you know, her adult life and kind of college and marriage and on. Story_ID: 253663 Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your mother [Willie Jones Kirk] and father met? Speaker 2: You know, there are lots of stories, and they were, like most couples, divergent between my mother and dad--they met in college [Huston-Tillotson College; Huston-Tillotson University, Austin, Texas]; my father--I don't know if you want me to give his background; I know you said we'd come to that later, but (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, give us his full name, and spell it for us. Speaker 2: My father was Lee Andrew Kirk, L-E-E, A-N-D-R-E-W, K-I-R-K; he was born in San Antonio, Texas, which is Bexar County [Texas], August 27th, 1922. Unlike my mother, my father was an only child and unfortunately never knew his father, and that's something that sort of haunted him throughout his life. Speaker 1: Now, there's more history on your father's side. You've got like more history to remember on that side (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) A little bit more, a little bit more, yeah. Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I think, like one of his ancestors was a Buffalo Soldier? Speaker 2: Yeah, we found out, and we only learned that a few years ago. But yeah, my father's maternal grandfather was a, was a Buffalo Soldier. Speaker 1: Okay, any stories about him? Speaker 2: You, you know, the interesting thing; you know, our families can keep--when we don't want to talk about something, we don't talk about--I didn't find--I didn't learn this until 1994 when I was secretary of state and, as you know, there's a lot more interest within our community now about Buffalo Soldiers, and we're beginning to trace that history and that legacy of that, and they--there's a group here in Texas that's pretty devoted to keeping the memory and honor of the Buffalo Soldiers alive, and they were doing a ceremony in San Antonio and asked me--I'd just been sworn into secretary of state--if I'd come and participate and I didn't go, but for whatever reason, my brother [Lee Kirk, Jr.] decided to go, and my brother gets there, and he looks up (laughter) and sees on the stage one of my father's aunts, and she was recognized as the last living daughter of, you know, Horace Young [ph.] or Willie Young [ph.], whatever his name, and we had never heard any of this. We'd never heard anything at all about my father's grandparents, and--I don't mean to make light of it, but apparently, as noble and romantic as the notion of the Buffalo Soldiers are today, apparently, one way that you could become a Buffalo Soldier would be to commit a pretty heinous crime back during, you know, post-Reconstruction, and instead of sentencing black folk to death, they would give you the option to go out West and fight the Indians [Native Americans]. And so they would--not saying all of them, but apparently some element of the Buffalo Soldiers were some pretty tough brothers, and my--apparently, my grandfather was one of them, and had a history of being--apparently, we know now--at least what we were told, very, very abusive physically and otherwise of his wives and children, and so my aunts and great-aunts that we knew of, never spoke of him; I mean, not at all, and literally, it wasn't until this particular ceremony that we learned anything. So we really didn't have a lot of opportunity to explore that that much, that much further. Speaker 1: It's interesting how you put that because I think a lot of black people like wonder about the Buffalo Soldiers as being, you know--some people like glorify them, but then some people think about like what were they actually doing, you know, as soldiers and all that (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, the interesting thing, from some of the history I've known, as you know, the Indians obviously felt differently about the freed Africans, and in many cases, when we were fleeing slavery, a lot of the Native Americans gave us a refuge, and if you look at many blacks in the Southwest, and even in my family, if you look at my father's family tree, it's obvious there was a lot of mixing between freed slaves and Indians, and you can see it in a lot of our features and blending of our facial features, and of the Native Americans. But, you know, and again it depends on the family; it's not something, depending on what happened, that some families talk about. I regret that; I would have loved knowing that, and I don't want to diminish his stature for what he did as a Buffalo Soldier but at the same time, I think history--the value of history, it has to be what it is. You don't want to overly-romanticize it either. Story_ID: 253664 Speaker 1: Any stories from your father's [Lee Kirk, Sr.] side of the family about, about life in the early part of the century, you know-- Speaker 2: Well, both my, you know, both my mother [Willie Jones Kirk] and--my mother and dad both grew up in very, you know, hard-working families; these weren't professional--my father's side was a little bit different in that at least my father--my grandmother was, I guess the word--the polite word we would use in that--mentally challenged; she was functional, she was able to cook and clean, and she took care of my father's aunt. There were three or four sisters, Willa Young [ph.] and Mary Elizabeth [ph.], and another, and--but one of my father's aunts was one of the first school teachers and a professional, very strong business woman. She raised both my father and one of her other sisters' daughters and kind of raised them as her children, and again, you know, we were teenagers before we really understood (laughter) who our grandmother, you know, really was between Willa Young, and our grand--but my grandmother was a sweet, wonderful woman. But my father grew up, he didn't know his dad; his dad--you know, his birth certificate was listed as Robert Kirk only; that's all we know. We'd heard that he might have been a musician, you know--a traveling musician, and obviously perhaps moved through San Antonio [Texas], met my grandmother and had an affair with her to produce my dad, but my dad grew up without a father and without much financial resources, but he was industrious, he loved music, you know, played the drums in the band, had a very brilliant mind for math and sciences, and it might have been one common denominator between my mother and father, it runs in my family, is a great love and talent for music. My mother had a beautiful voice, and she sang, a number of her brothers and sisters sang, and as we progressed further, one of the ironies, I guess--I don't know if I'd call it an irony; one of the realities of, you know, the segregated South, there was, there was this wonderful network of people that folks knew, if you gonna travel through the country and go through Dayton, Ohio, you better call this family--you call the Kirk family. But because of that, we met some wonderful people in the '40s [1940s] and '50s [1950s], and my mother and father together had great stories of musicians they'd known, and people that had, you know, dropped by our house either for a day or for a week, or for a month. But (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So it's through music that these connections were made. Speaker 2: Yes, they both had a great love. My mother, during the early days, used to sing, but then the old--you know, in the context of war, it's interesting that the U--the concept of the USO [United Service Organizations] is coming back. But, you know, World War II [WWII], the Korean War, that was a big deal, but my mother volunteered and sang and, you know, used to sing at the USO clubs. And my father was in the [U.S. military] service and served in Korea [Korean War] as well, but that was this wonderful common denominator for them, but he--they met in college, though--at Huston-Tillotson College [Huston-Tillotson University, Austin, Texas] in-- Speaker 1: Okay. Now, your father was an only child, so--yeah-- Speaker 2: Yeah, and then he marries a woman with thirteen brothers and sisters, so that was instant (laughter), instant, instant overwhelming family (laughter). Speaker 1: And your mother became a teacher, right? Speaker 2: My mother was a school teacher and taught in the Austin Independent School District [Austin, Texas] for her entire professional career. She was an elementary school teacher. Speaker 1: Okay, so she basically stayed at home, you know, in Austin [Texas], right? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, Manor [Texas] is just, you know, ten miles outside of--not far from Austin as well, and San Antonio's only really sixty miles south of Austin. Speaker 1: Okay, so they were both in familiar territory. Speaker 2: Yes, sir. Speaker 1: And your father became a postal--the first-- Speaker 2: He was the first black postal clerk. He finished school. You know, at that time we were at war; he went and served in the Korean War; his dream was to go to medical school. My father had a very strong grounding in the math and sciences; loved--you know, could fix, repair anything, you know, that was electronic at that time, but he wanted to go to medical school. When--and forgive me if I don't get all the dates right, 'cause I wasn't born, but my parents married, you know, had a daughter [Victoria Saundra Kirk]--had a baby reasonably soon, my oldest sister, then he went off, served in the Korean War. He came back, and my mother got pregnant with my second sister [Connie Jo Kirk Ingram], and he'd applied to medical school but, as you know, throughout the South, at that point the schools were segregated, and he just couldn't afford to go; he had applied and been accepted to Meharry [Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee], and there was a friend of the family that had always sort of mentored my father and sort of a father figure to him in New York, that had encouraged him to come out East, but he was struggling with the reality of being back from the war and with a wife and two children, and the need to put bread on the family, and at that time, he'd applied for a job at the post office-- Story_ID: 253665 Speaker 1: There'd been black letter carriers [in Austin, Texas], but you know we--they--we had never been given the privilege of being in the house, so to speak. They'd let us--because they wouldn't deliver mail; even that was segregated. We had black letter carriers, 'cause they weren't gonna deliver mail in the black part of town, but with a lot of encouragement, remarkably, you know--and a lot of people look at this now and can't imagine how someone would pick a career (laughter) at the post office over doing whatever it take to go to medical school, but that was considered a good job, you know. Blacks had been excluded from jobs, you know, in the civil service sector, and so with a lot of encouragement from the local NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and others, he [Kirk's father, Lee Kirk, Sr.] integrated the post office and became the first black postal clerk. Speaker 2: Okay. About what year was that? Speaker 1: You know, it was before I was born, so I mean, I'm gonna guess it was late 1940s or early 1950. Story_ID: 253666 Speaker 1: Now, do you have any brothers and sisters? Speaker 2: I have three siblings. I have two sisters; the oldest is Victoria--Vicky--Saundra Kirk; she goes by Saundra. She was born in December 19th of 1944; she's still--she lives in Austin, Texas. The next is Connie Jo Kirk Ingram; she was born June 7th, 19--what'd I say the first--was '44 [1944]; I guess it would have been 1948, and she still resides in Austin. And then I had a brother Lee Andrew Kirk who was born December the 2nd, 1949, and unfortunately, he died two weeks ago, on October 12th. Speaker 1: Okay. And you were born in '54 [1954]? Speaker 2: I was born in 1954, so there were four of us. Speaker 1: Okay. And you're the youngest of group. Speaker 2: Yes, sir. Story_ID: 253667 Speaker 1: What's your earliest memory of growing up, or do you have an earliest memory of growing up? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, lots. I mean it was fu--I mean, you know, it's ironic now, and again, everything is contextual, you know, but to some degree we were, we--I don't know, I don't--it's nothing to be ashamed of, but I mean--you know, with a mother [Willie Jones Kirk] who was a school teacher and a father [Lee Kirk, Sr.] who was a postal clerk, you know, we were, you know, sort of black, middle-class, upper-middle-class. You know, we grew up in a very modest home in East Austin [Austin, Texas], but maybe, I guess, you know, among that first of--generation of our kids to have two parents who were college educated, real acute sense that we were part of the whole civil rights struggle, and struggle for social and economic justice for African American and other minorities-- Story_ID: 253668 Speaker 1: My parents [Willie Jones Kirk and Lee Kirk, Sr.] were very involved with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and other groups working to, you know, get rid of the poll tax and to gain, you know, enter, you know, access to equal opportunities in education and housing (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Black people had a--I'm--excuse me, but black people had a poll tax to pay, too? Speaker 1: Sure, all throughout the South. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: You know; doing different efforts, you know, after the [U.S.] Supreme Court rule (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Just explain what this is, and the--why it's-- Speaker 1: Well, there were many ways, and a lot of people don't--it's interesting now, when you talk to folks, and we look at voting rights and how we can best give ethnic minorities voting strength. One of the most creative things and Lanek Rainier [sic. HistoryMaker Lani Guinier] is probably--who was a professor, law professor at Harvard [Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts], is probably as much of an expert on the history of voting systems as anyone, and one of the things she proposed and people rejected, 'cause they said black folk couldn't understand it, was proportional voting, which is a much easier way to give you and I power than packing us into districts. But anyway, having said that, it's--you know, as we progress through our legal history, you know, from Jim Crow laws and other laws that said we weren't citizens to we were citizens, we had the right to vote throughout the South, many efforts were made to keep blacks in particular, and later Hispanics and others, from voting. The first, as we know, and the most egregious, were literacy tests, and every citizen was presume--and they arguably were non-discriminatory, because they were in place to make sure that everybody who was voting had the competency to understand what they were voting, so, you know, three of us would walk into a--the voting booth in the 1940s and '50s [1950s], particularly, you know, if you were Mississippi, Alabama, or Texas and, you know, the white person in line, they would say, you know, what's the, you know, the emblem--what's the national, what's the song--the National Anthem of the United States of America? And they'd say, Well, The 'America the Beautiful' or whatever our national (laughter) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) '[The] Star Spangled Banner' -- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) (laughter) you know, 'The Star Spangled Banner.' And then an African American would come--and typically, the most--the question most asked was, they'd look at somebody black and say, "How many bubbles are in a bar of soap?" Or they would ask, you know, a white person, "What's the greatest naval disaster in history?" And most people would say it was the [RMS] Titanic. Then they'd turn to the black person and said, you know, "How many people were--died in the Titanic?" And, you know, in the event that somebody was actually smart enough to know the number, then the next question was, "Name them." But it was always something, and that still persisted. And then once some courts struck that down, then the notion was put in place that, well, that, in order to be able to vote and, you know, through periods of time, voting was sort of tied to property ownership; you had to own property--you had that right. So, in a sense, you paid for the privilege of voting. And later, in the, in the South, that was translated into something we call a poll tax, and you literally had to go and raise money to pay a tax for the privilege of exercising your right to franchise, and since a lot of blacks, you know, weren't allowed access to capital and decent jobs or sharecroppers--I mean, but historically in the South, when blacks would even make the effort to go raise the money, you know, when the white leaders would find out that the Kirk family was trying to raise money for the poll tax, well, all of a sudden, for example, say the one bus that carried all the black kids to the segregated school district would stop running, or all of the black maids who worked for all the rich white folks in town would all of a sudden be laid off temporarily. All the--and every sharecropper would all of a sudden have all of his bills called in, be denied access to feed or seed--anything. And, you know, as a historical footnote, Robert Caro who wrote a book--a trilogy about [President] Lyndon [Baines] Johnson, has a very compelling story about this in the latest installment of his book called '[The Years of Lyndon Johnson:] Master of the Senate.' But it looks more at Johnson's career and evolution literally, you know, from a white, Dixiecrat, southern senator to this brilliant master negotiator in the [U.S.] Senate who passes all of the civil and voting rights acts, but the prologue--epilogue is a background telling the story of my family, your family, a family in the South who's struggling to raise money for the poll tax, and obviously, since anyone watching this may be interested in history, I would really commend--if they don't want to read the whole six hundred pages, you ought to read the first hundred pages of it-- Story_ID: 448899 Speaker 1: Just talking off-camera about [President] Lyndon [Baines] Johnson and some of the, you know, history of Lyndon Johnson. Speaker 2: Yeah, but you--I thought we were talking about the poll tax, but very much so. When I was born in the--you know, throughout the end of the '50s [1950s], you know--we tend to--we can collapse history, sometimes, the further we get from it, and we tend to believe that after 1954 when the [U.S.] Supreme Court ruled on Brown v. Board of Education [of Topeka], that everything just collapsed very quickly, but we know now that really it was ten years later, not only before we passed really the major crux of the civil rights legislation--voting rights [Voting Rights Act of 1965] and civil rights [Civil Rights Act of 1964] and ending employment and housing discrimination, but it was almost that long before the Supreme Court revisited Brown, and passed a language that we all refer to as "integrating our schools with all deliberate speed" [Cooper v. Aaron, 1958], because the original Brown case only said that it was unconstitutional to separately fund and educate children of color, and the majority, but it was many years and many cases throughout the South before we technically, you know, even had a technical definition of integration. Speaker 1: So, when you were coming along, could your family vote? Say, between '54 [1954] and '64 [1964]? Speaker 2: You know, I know--I can't say that I can speak of what happened in '54 [1954]; I know in the early '60s [1960s] they were. I know it was difficult, and we'll get to it later, but one of the reasons I have such an affinity for Ann Richards--Ann Richards was, you know, part of that band of young progressive-thinking whites at that time that used to go around and raise money--you know, to get around the recrimination against black people being caught raising money; there were always progressive whites, and Jews in particular, that would go raise the money and pay the poll tax for black people. And that's--began one of the relationships between my family, my mom [Willie Jones Kirk], and Ann Richards. But yes, they were fighting for that and very much hopeful. And even as a young boy, even at five, six years old, I was aware that there was some movement, some effort going on to kind of change the circumstances of how we lived. I mean, we were somewhat--you know, I was just a healthy, happy, you know, six year old kid, even in the segregated world. You know, I was well-fed, I was loved, I was cared for, and I grew up in the church and had lots of encouragement but, you know, as I began to go out and socialize and interact more, it, you know, became acutely aware of me that there was this separate world for blacks and whites. I mean I grew up in our state's capital and as you know, whether it's the South Side of Chicago [Illinois] or the Fifth or Fourth Ward at Houston [Texas], unfortunately, you know, all cities have their black areas. But in Austin [Texas], East Austin was literally--I could stand in my front yard and look over and see the [Texas State] Capitol; I mean it was miles away, but there was nothing to block that view. And as a boy, the Capitol grounds were as immaculately maintained as anything you could imagine; just a huge--it's a beautiful building and, in spite its ugly history, it's still one of my favorite places in the state. But as a little boy, we'd ride our bikes over there, and we would play all day, but I didn't have to be real old to realize that when it was time to go to bathroom, we couldn't go inside, and when we got thirsty, we could not get a drink of water from the same fountain that the whites folks drank for, that was a--to this day I remember the smell of this well; it was a well for colored folk to drink from, and it was not filled to the nasty and--you know, that smell sticks with me to this--just telling the story, it just sticks with me to this day, that that was there, but--yeah. And, you know, I've never--I mean, I remember when Austin finally got a skating rink; I know it sounds crazy, but I guess a skating rink coming to the (laughter), you know, the South in the '60s [1960s] was a big deal, but we couldn't skate. And our--one of my earliest, I guess, memories of--I don't know if I'd call it civil disobedience, but participating in the Civil Rights Movement was--you know, me and my best friend Stuart King [ph.] at that time, and our mothers, Marcette King [ph.] and my mother, got our picture in the front page of the paper, 'cause we were holding our mothers' hand and walking along the picketed lines, and we picketed this ice skating rink, and it never opened. And of all the--you know, the irony was they built it on sort of the east part of south--they built a skating ring in which they were gonna say blacks and Hispanics [Latinos] couldn't skate in the heart of the--sort of what is now (laughter) the African American community. But, you know, I had those memories, like lots of other people of my age. Story_ID: 448900 Speaker 1: In Texas, correct me if I'm wrong, but black folks are really a minority in--at least when you were coming up, they're really small (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I mean we're still--we're--I think we're roughly 12 percent of the population now. I don't know that we were much, you know, I don't know that I have a memory, Lawrence, of what--do you go by Lawrence or Larry [Crowe]? Speaker 1: Larry. Speaker 2: Larry. I don't that I have a memory then (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But you don't have to call me-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, what the population was, but yeah--no, we--this was not, you know, Georgia or Washington, D.C.-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: We were very much a minority (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Kind of like we were the third minor--I mean the--down--the Mexican-American population would be, like, even higher. Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, the Mexican-American population's always been pretty equal, too, and obviously now it is much, much greater. Speaker 1: Okay. So what was your neighborhood like? How was it pop--was it all black? Speaker 2: Yeah, our neighborhood was all black. There were hand--and there were, there were pockets of East Austin [Austin, Texas] that were sorta bla--I hate to say it, you know, that was a black neighborhood, and then if you went a few streets to the south, you--there was a little bit of kind of mixed African American and Hispanic [Latino], and then as you move further south, then Austin [Texas] became, you know, predominantly Mexican-American or, you know, now we call it Hispanic, but for the most part, we were in an all-black neighborhood, all working-class people; not that many professional people like my mother [Willie Jones Kirk] and dad [Lee Kirk, Sr.]; lot of, you know, bartenders and waiters, but a great--you know, as our neighborhoods were then, just a great network of adults that watched after every kid on the block. And there was a--you know, notwithstanding the ugliness; I don't want to romanticize segregation at all, but the other side of it, there was a sense of urgency, a sense of ownership, and a sense of purposeful vesting in the future of all of the young kids that you guys are gonna do better than we are. So, I mean, if you were hanging out on the street corner, anybody could come up. I mean, a brother might get off the bus from working all night washing dishes, but if he saw you not in school, he wanted to know why, and, you know, but on the other hand, you know--and everybody knew everybody's business. I used to--I'd tell my kids all the time, there was nothing better or worse than having had a really good day in school, or a really bad day in school, and then making your weekly trip to the barbershop. 'Cause our fathers, you know, my father was like every other dad; he worked at the post office, he stayed in the [U.S.] Army Reserves, he repaired some--he worked all the time and, you know, he was loving but, you know, fathers were more distant in that classic model, but we knew how our father felt about us at the barbershop, 'cause he'd tell all of them. And when we'd done good, man, you'd get in the chair on Saturdays, and you couldn't sit down, and all of a sudden the barber would start bragging on you. "I heard you scored a touchdown," or, "You made a A," or, "You sang a lead song in the choir," and everybody would--now, on the other hand (laughter), if you'd been screwing up, it was--man, that was a, that was a bad place to be. But from a young man's standpoint, coming of age, it was a special place, 'cause you knew there were a lot of people who cared and were watching and paying attention. In that sense, it was a great neighborhood to be in. Story_ID: 448901 Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: You know, there were no sights and sounds, and smells, 'cause it was just too hot (laughter); everything was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's the first time I've heard-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) That's all I can rem--you know, and I--and even, I loved the Southwest, and I still love it here, but God, man, all I can tell you, I-- forgive my profanity--it was just too damn hot (laughter). That's all I remember. But, you know, we grew up in a time--on Saturdays, your momma told you, you know, as opposed to now--I mean, the sun came up, momma kicked you out the door, "Go away, and don't come back 'til the sun come down; now, don't come back after," but I mean when we got too hot, you wanted a drink of water, "Don't come in the house; go turn on the faucet in the back." You know, we played, it was hot, and it was dusty, and we played every game you could think of, you know, to stay outside and to stay busy and keep cool (laughter) and stay in the shade. The sounds, at least for me, were still music. You know, my family--my mother's [Willie Jones Kirk] immediate family would sign up; we were all in the service industry. My mother's twin brother [Willie B. Jones] was the head waiter at a number, you know, of country clubs and businesses but you know, they were also very entrepreneurial. He owned a little joint and a little liquor store, and my mother's cousin owned what was then, you know, for East Austin [Austin, Texas], you know, the happening-est club in town, Charlie's Playhouse [Austin, Texas], and, you know, even in segregation, the white folk always found it, you know, sort of a forbidden pleasure to sneak over to the, you know, to our side of the town to drink and play and, you know, whether it was coming to Harlem [New York, New York] in those days, it was coming to East Austin. And where we grew up, we were literally only two or three blocks away from our strip. And so, even as a boy, walking home from school, you know, I'd walk by my uncles' and cousins' bars and liquor stores and, you know, if they didn't do anything but, you know, give me a nickel for a piece of candy or a cold soda pop, but I guess for me as a boy, I affiliate everything more with it being hot and being more thankful for a cool drink of water or a cold Coca-Cola, or RC Cola back then, than anything. Speaker 1: Okay. What kinda music do you remember the most? Speaker 2: Well, the great thing, my parents exposed us to everything. My dad [Lee Kirk, Sr.] loved jazz; I mean from Thelonious Monk to--Jimmy Smith was his favorite, you know, and I just remember that organ, you know, on his own little Victrola, playing and doing. My mother, you know, loved singers, and we had one cousin who had a beautiful voice who actually had sang backup with Billie Holiday. My parents were--had somehow befriended a fellow by the name of Louis Jordan, who had a big band, who traveled all around the Southwest, and we met him a number of times. They would tell us wonderful stories about him, and he would come by the house. My brothers and sisters and I all sang. My oldest sister [Victoria] Saundra [Kirk] is just a beautifully gifted and trained piano player, and against her wishes, my mother sort of forced her and she was--you know, because of integration, we were all the first to do something, but she was in the first wave to go the University of Texas [at Austin, Austin, Texas], but my mother forced her to stay and get a master's [degree] in education, but she mixed that with her training in classical piano. But my parents wanted us exposed to everything, you know. Once we progressed a little more, and we weren't far in integration, you know, because if there was one advantage of Austin [Texas] that sort of blunted, to some degree maybe, the tone of the desegregation was it was a college town above everything. It was segregated but we had Hu--you know, Huston-Tillotson College [Huston-Tillotson University, Austin, Texas], and integration and the reaction to segregation played out very differently in towns in which you had historically black colleges [HBCUs], in which, you know, there was a generation of educated, philosophical leaders for our community that could make the case. But between that and the University of Texas, there were some opportunities for enrichment, one of which was this program called Junior String Project, and it was a way to take master's, Ph.D. level students, and they'd give music lessons and, unfortunately, my mother, then my best friend's mother, signed us up without telling us, so I went and studied the cello (laugher). But, to your question, we learned everything, you know: jazz, hip-hop, pop, classics. They wanted us--you know, there was a sense then that when we got to the point that we were integrated, you know, white folk were never gonna look at us as if we were, quote-unquote, uncouth or untrained, and so that was a sense that we were gonna learn opera and classics and everything, whether we wanted to or not. Story_ID: 448902 Speaker 1: --What was the name of your church? Speaker 2: My Uncle Bill [Jones], and like everybody in the South, I don't know that I knew 'til we buried him that his name wasn't William, but he was Uncle Bill and his real name was Sylvester, but he--it was just (laughter)--you know, we didn't know any of our relatives; sad thing is we didn't know any of my mother's [Willie Jones Kirk] brothers' and sisters' names 'til they died 'cause you were thirteen. But my mother's nickname was Ankie, her twin brother's nickname was Dad, their names were Willie B. and Willie B.--Willie--Willie Mae and Willie B., and then the, the baby boy was Lotie [ph.], and I still can't--I still can't remember his real name; it was Samuel; but anyway, Bill's real name was Sylvester, and it was just a bible-founded church, the Church of the New Testament; still stands, 1601 [sic. 1602] Harvey Street in East Austin [Austin, Texas]. The most remarkable thing about it is we built that church by hand. You know, like a lot of black churches, it started in a home and, you know, they rented from another church, but with a family full of laborers and all these relatives, when we felt--my uncle felt that there was enough of us, and they had enough money to build a church, we built it, and they bought a little plot of land, and I had a number of cousins and uncles that were construction laborers, and I remember, you know, even being nine and ten years old, I remember them bringing their bulldozers and scrapers on their days off. They leveled the land and laid all the pipes, and even the youngest of us, from six to seven years old; it's a little cinderblock brick-house church, but we built that church brick by brick, and it still stands. Speaker 1: Okay, so you actually participated in building the church? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah--which later, you know, forty years later when I ran for mayor, my advertising guy came up with the most creative slogan, and he had a picture of my family church, and my first brochure ever was a picture of my family church and a caption that says, "As a boy, [HistoryMaker] Ron Kirk helped to build his family's church, now he wants to help rebuild Dallas [Texas]." It was a very, very good piece; I mean I wouldn't have thought of that, but (laughter). Speaker 1: That is good, that's a good piece, yeah. Speaker 2: But no, but the church is still there. And it was a family church literally of the--you know then, I don't know that--I can't tell you that there were five hundred or six hundred of us, but I can tell you that whatever the numbers were, that 95 percent of us were related by blood or marriage (laughter), and it was kind of scary; kind of one of those 'Deliverance' type moments: you wander in there and see all these folk who look just alike--but it was great. My mother's--one of my mother's oldest sisters, Julie Ann [Jones (ph.)], played the piano until she died very suddenly, very young, but when she died, my sister [Victoria] Saundra [Kirk] played the piano. So all through college [University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas], and a few years after that, she played, and then when she, like a lot of that generation, finished college and got on a bus and headed to L.A. [Los Angeles, California], then my mother's other niece took over and she played the piano for twenty years, and when she got tired of it, my mother's twin brother's daughter, my cousin, took over and still plays, so I mean the deacons--everybody in there was related to you. Story_ID: 448903 Speaker 1: Now, when you were a kid--when you were a little boy, what kind of a little boy were you? What were you thinking about (Simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was an outdoor boy. Now, you asked earlier if I had a nickname, and I really don't have one as an adult, but my father [Lee Kirk, Sr.] called me Nature Boy all the time, 'cause I--and the good thing, since we didn't have a choice--but I loved being outside, and I mean my brother [Lee Kirk, Jr.] and I were out, and we did that, and I mean I was a typical little boy. We didn't have, you know, as we know now, and God, I don't want to sound that old, but I mean we just barely had TV, but we didn't have video games and all that, so we were outside, and we played baseball and football, but I loved climbing trees and running around and building stuff and tearing up stuff, and I was a good--I mean, I really was a pretty good kid; I was mischievous, and I was clumsy; I was always running into something, breaking something, falling out of something, but I was--I loved being outside more than anything. Story_ID: 448904 Speaker 1: What grade school did you attend? Speaker 2: I started out at Busy Bee Nursery School [ph.], and then I attended Blackshear Elementary School [Blackshear Elementary Fine Arts Academy, Austin, Texas] which, again, was in East Austin [Austin, Texas] on--I want to say on East 11th Street, right across the street from Huston-Tillotson College [Huston-Tillotson University, Houston, Texas], and I think that's--I'm reasonably sure that's where all of my brothers and sisters and I went. About the time that I finished elementary school, Austin [Texas] had begun to experiment with school integration, so my older brother and sisters at that time were attending [Stephen F.] Austin High [School, Austin, Texas], and I attended junior high at a school appropriately named University Junior High [School (UJH), Austin, Texas]. And one of the most interesting, I think it, responses to school desegregation. Now University of Texas had loaned the City of Austin some property to build a middle school--a junior high school, and the school was populated, as I remember it, almost roughly with one-third white kids, one-third Hispanics [Latinos], and one-third black kids, and that's where I went to junior high; my brother--two of my sisters and brothers and I went. And it was the most unique social experience you could imagine, 'cause we had what we used to call almost kind of the fight of the week. You know, one week the white kids would be mad at the Hispanics, and so they would jump on the Hispanics, and we might help them, and the next week, you know, some Mexican kid might be mad, 'cause some black boy made a pass at his girlfriend, and the whites and Hispanics would gang up on us but, you know, it was a real sort of forced-fed version of the immediate sort of immersion into a tri-ethnic culture. Unfortunately, it only lasted a couple of years, because then we were all assimilated to other schools. I only attended UJH one year, then I went to [J.E.] Pearce [Junior High School, Austin, Texas], which was a school up north; that's when Austin started busing and the street--but my parents--in the nineteen, early 1960s, my mother [Willie Jones Kirk] and dad [Lee Kirk, Sr.] had gotten enough money to move us out of kind of our little three-bedroom house into a bigger brick house in a little nicer neighborhood until we moved a little further over, from 11th Street off of then what was called 19th Street, which is now Martin Luther King [Boulevard]. And the dividing line for kind of where black kids were gonna go, among the high schools in Austin, was Martin Luther King. So literally, all my friends on one side of the street went to Austin High, which was the oldest high school in Austin; everybody on my side of the street got sent to a feeder school for a brand new school called [John H.] Reagan High School [Austin, Texas]. So I attended one year of Pearce Junior High, and then I finished from Reagan High School in 1972. Speaker 1: How do you spell Reagan? Speaker 2: It was John H. Reagan, R-E-A-G-A-N High School. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And Pearce was J.J. [sic. J.E.] Pearce, P-E-A-R-C-E. Speaker 1: Okay. P-E-A-R-C-E, okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: All right. Well, what kind of a student were you in school? Speaker 2: I was a good student. Now, getting--here back at one thing--you asked what we did and the sights and the sounds, and the foo--one, my mother was a fabulous cook, so--I mean and still is; every meal was a good meal. But my mother was a teacher, and my dad was educated, and I told you that, so I mean academically, we were all good. I was a very good student from elementary school all the way up. But I was also the youngest kid, so to the degree that, you know, my brothers and sisters challenged my parents, you know, the one advantage of being the youngest is you get to see what works and what doesn't work. But I always liked school. But aside from their passion for music, my mother just force-fed us reading and, you know, everything was segregated, but I guess, again, at one fortuitous circumstance for us: the black library was only about four or five blocks from the house we grew up in, [George Washington] Carver Branch [Austin Public] Library [Austin, Texas]. And so you asked what I liked to do as a boy; I told you I loved to be outside, but a condition to that was my mother made us go to the library every Saturday morning and read for an hour or two. So before we could do anything else, we had to go up to Carver Branch Library and read, then we had to come home and tell her; I mean, we couldn't just kind of go hang out, so I--with that grounding, I was a good student. I was a, you know, I guess probably a straight A student through elementary school and, you know, more of an A and B student in junior high, and probably an A, you know, more of an A and B student, more As than Bs, in high school. But I was always a good student. Story_ID: 448905 Speaker 1: Were there any special teachers or mentors when you were growing up that you remember (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah. You know, that's the one thing I miss, and I regret now is that, unfortunately, with desegregation, you know, the sad thing is most of our black professional middle-class dispersed, but really, that began almost the absence of black men from our educational infrastructure but, you know, at least when I was a boy, right or wrong, we had strong black men who were principals and teachers, and the principal of our [Blackshear] Elementary School [Blackshear Elementary Fine Arts Academy, Austin, Texas] was a man by the name of Friendly [Rudolph] Rice who, notwithstanding his name, was one of those big, imposing, bear of a men, but, but always meticulously dressed, well-spoken, well-mannered, but he didn't take no stuff. But you loved Friendly Rice coming up and saying, "Boy, stand up," you know. He was one of the first men that ever--I never--he'd always tell us, "Stand up straight; walk tall, and look people in the eye." And I remember him always saying, you know, "Can't nobody get on your back if you don't bend over." And just, you know, little things like that. But he was--and I mean, I remember the names of every one of my elementary school teachers; then again, some of it was--you know, because of segregation, we knew our teachers; they were our parents' friends and colleagues and, you know, being the child of a teacher [Kirk's mother, Willie Jones Kirk]--I don't know that I got special privileges; I think we all did. Everybody knew, you know, when you came in class, people looked at you and said, "You're Lee Kirk's [Lee Kirk, Sr.] boy," and "You're Connie Kirk's [Connie Jo Kirk Ingram] little sister." And we liked that, but I enjoyed that much more so, but I knew all of my teachers. When I went to [John H.] Reagan High School [Austin, Texas], one of the neat things about my high school is they--when they closed the black--when they eventually closed the black high school in Austin [Texas], they didn't just wipe those people out, now. Many of those teachers and principals came to my high school, and we just had two principals--we had a black one and a white one, but W.A. Pigford [William Pigford] had been the principal at the all-black high school, [Laurine Cecil] Anderson [High School, Austin, Texas], for years, and he took a keen interest in all the young black men in our high school, but he was a wonderful mentor and friend to me as well. Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What was-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And that was Pigford--it was Pigford, I think P-I-G-F-O-R-D. Speaker 1: Okay. And who was Anderson High School named for? Speaker 2: You know, I'm embarrassed to tell you I don't know. Speaker 1: Yeah, I just imagine it's probably some black person that-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: It's probably some--for Blackshear, too (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know, I'd say that in the South, every--you know, you go to every major school in the South; we had a Phillis Wheatley High School [Houston, Texas] or elementary [sic.] (laughter), somewhere--but we had a lot of Andersons. But--and I'm embarrassed to tell you, I don't know. That'd be something for me to find out. Speaker 1: Okay. Yeah, I was just thinking it was somebody that might have been from the town that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I don't know. Story_ID: 448906 Speaker 1: In high school [J.E. Reagan High School, Austin, Texas] did you have any sense of what you were gonna, you know, pursue career-wise when you graduated? Speaker 2: Well, you know, I had a--you know, even going back, I--more-so in high school, but I had always wanted to be a lawyer, and principally because of hearing about Thurgood Marshall, you know be--you know, because of my parents' involvement and me being sort of, you know, a first-generation beneficiary of Brown v. Board [of Education of Topeka, 1954] and, you know, all these things our parents were fighting for-- Speaker 1: Did you ever meet any of these (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I--God, I wish (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah, I know you said your mother [Willie Jones Kirk] and your father [Lee Kirk, Sr.] were really involved with NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]; your father (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, but we were, you know, distant and so much of that, you know, was happening, you know, even then, in Georgia. I mean, but I knew [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.]; I mean obviously, I knew who Dr. King was, but somehow, Thurgood Marshall crept into my consciousness. And even as a young teenager, it was not lost on me that much of what we were accomplishing as a people was because we were being--we were successful in going to court and suing, and forcing America to live up to its promise--to its constitutional creed. And so I thought from early on, I thought, "I'm gonna be a lawyer; that's what I want. I wanna be the next civil rights crusader, and I'm gonna go be a lawyer and advocate for social change." Speaker 1: Well, that's something now. About how old were you when you think you came to that conclusion? Speaker 2: You know, all I can remember is from whatever time that people began to say, "What do you wanna be?" I mean--and I'm sure I had my moments when it was, you know, police officer, firefighter, but I wanted to be a lawyer. And it may be that at that time, also--and again because we had, as a class of people, been denied access to professional schools, for us, there was more of a sense that we were the generation that were gonna move beyond the jobs in the factories, and school teaching and the civil service jobs to the professional careers. Now, I don't know how much of my--I don't recall my mother and dad ever sitting down and saying, "You go be a lawyer, you just--." It's just something I thought I wanted to pursue, at least from the time I was, you know, high school on through college. Speaker 1: Were you interested in a TV show like 'Perry Mason' (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, I watched everything. Speaker 1: 'The Defenders' [1961-1965] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, we watched 'Perry Mason'--but then, I was a boy, you know. My mother--I mean, my mother's favorite show was 'The Untouchables;' we liked the cop shows, I loved the 'Perry Mason,' and then my dad liked the westerns. But yeah, no, I never missed--I loved, I loved watching 'Perry Mason.' Speaker 1: In that regard, the westerns--for somebody that's about the same age and growing up in the east, you know, some--the westerns dominated cultural content of art in America in those days; I mean the TV, radio, movies-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --westerns is all you know (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, 'Gunsmoke.' Speaker 1: Hundreds of western shows and old western movies and, you know, in the east, we always dreamed about being out in Texas or Oklahoma someplace, and romanticizing at someplace where you--everybody would have a horse (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We would dream about getting away--trip the switch (laughter). We were dreaming about being--going to Chicago [Illinois] or Atlanta [Georgia] or L.A. [Los Angeles, California] (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No, but that's--I mean, that's the way it was, you know. And then, that's what we had. But back to your deal, no, I--from whatever point; I can't say it was thirteen or fourteen, or that it was any great epiphany, but just as my, my thinking evolved in terms of my role in--that I would play, 'cause it was just sort of almost accepted that all of us were gonna continue this struggle for equal rights and civil rights, and I thought, you know, given my gift of gab, if nothing else, the most effective environment for me to do that would be in the law. Speaker 1: Now, other than the NAACP, was there a local organization in Austin [Texas]? A black organization? Speaker 2: You know, I don't recall that there were as many others; I mean, it wasn't like--I don't recall at that point that there was a dominant, say, ministerial alliance, but there may have been. But maybe, because--you comment on the demographic realities, that you reflected on earlier--I mean, since we weren't that big of a population, that there was much more uniting around. At least, late '50s [1950s], '60s [1960s], the NAACP was then the dominant voice for the black community. Story_ID: 253677 Speaker 1: Tell us about high school life for you. Did you--were you involved in all the social aspects of high school? Sports, or (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I was--it was in--my high school was real interesting; it was a brand new--it was a new high school built, it wa--and I won't say it was built in response to integration, but it was built, you know, 'cause Austin [Texas] was beginning to grow, and they clearly knew they were gonna have to integrate, but it was interesting, 'cause it was built very much out of the inner city; it was kind of built on the northeastern edge of the city which, at that point, had a lot of kind of what we call them old country white boys that lived out in--we didn't even call it suburban then. And then, here they bus in, you know, three or four hundred black kids--big school, you know, twenty-five hundred kids but, you know, 80 percent Anglo--just a hand-full of Hispanics [Latinos]. But the most comical, practical aspects of it, all of a sudden you take all these black inner city kids and put 'em with these big old country white boys, and we were an instant sports powerhouse (laughter). I mean, within six years, we had run--you know, and football is--forget everything else; football is still king in Texas, but within six years of being open, we won three state championships, one national championship, you know, and then (laughter) and, you know, with a little bit of maybe that 'Remember the Titans' feel, I mean, you know, sports was the big (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And the big movie out now, as we speak, is 'Friday Night Lights'-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 'Friday Night Lights.' Well, you combine 'Friday Night Lights' and 'Remember the Titans,' and that was Austin [John H.] Reagan High School [Austin, Texas]. Now, all that had been wonderful if I'd have told you I was the star running back, something like that (laughter) but, you know, I guess I could be a poster boy for that saying, a jack of all trades and master of none, you know. I was always too short and too small and too slow (laughter), so I played--I was a decent basketball player. I played basketball--I played J.V. [junior varsity] one year--varsity; but I--but, you know, I kept singing. Speaker 1: But you were small when you were in high school? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I was--God, I'm embarrassed (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You about 6'1" now; you like 6'1"-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm 6'1". I'm the same height--I'm 6'1", but I was skinny growing up. In fact, I--yeah, I look back now, and I regret it; I mean I spent every day from the time I was in eighth grade to when I got out of college [Austin College, Sherman, Texas] trying to gain weight, and I look back and go, "What an idiot I was," (laughter), but I mean, I remember not--I literally remember putting rocks in my pockets and borrowing some weights from my dad [Lee Kirk, Sr.] and stuffing 'em in my jeans, so I could get the weight limit to be able to play football in junior high, 'cause I didn't weigh enough. But I played basketball, but I continued to sing; I sang in the choir. In junior high, I played in the band, you know, and I told you of my mother [Willie Jones Kirk] signing me up for this [Junior String Project] orchestra. I played the cello for five years, and I played in the orchestra, I played in the band, I sang in the choir, but, you know, in the '50s [1950s] and '60s [1960s] that wasn't seen as much as being--as sort of a metro-sexually enlightened man (laughter) as it is now, but I continued to sing all in high school. I was active in student government; in fact, believe it or not, I was the second black president of my high school. Another good friend of mine, Darwin McKee had been elected president of our student body in, I think, even maybe 1969, but I was elected student body president for the fall of my senior year. And we had an outstanding choir; our chorale at my high school was one of the top performing choirs in the world. In fact, our high school choir toured Europe three or four times, and we in fact went to Europe my senior year. And so my senior year, as much as I loved basketball, as much as I knew that, you know, being a basketball star would be a lot more popular with the girls than singing in the choir, I guess I got terribly practical and realized I wasn't gonna go to college on a basketball scholarship, but that I might have--never have another chance to go to Europe, so I quit basketball and started working, 'cause I had to raise enough money to go with the choir to Europe. Story_ID: 253678 Speaker 1: I was, you know, a good student and did everything, you know--Spanish club, student council, choir, basketball--I had fun. I mean it was--and it was a char--I mean it was, it was a weird environment, you know. There were our skirmishes with the white kids, there was--and it bothers me that it still goes on in our community. I probably got--as much as I got pushed back from white kids from what I did, I got pushed back from others in the black community all of a sudden because-"Well, why you working so hard to get along with them?" "You talk white," you know. "You sing at"--you know, I--it was--you know, I dealt with it, but in a way, it--you know, my world--I felt like my world was kind of shrinking around me. I wasn't--all of a sudden, through no choice of ours, you know, through this new thing of integration with great encouragement from our parents, we're forced into this new world [at John H. Reagan High School, Austin, Texas], and then you come home and everybody else, you know, almost treats you as an alien because you go to school with white folks in the day. And then you're dropped off in this other world and, you know, they don't know what to do with you, 'cause, you know, we're all mixing. And it was, it was an exciting time but just a real challenging time, trying to find, "Where do I fit? What does all this integration stuff mean?" Speaker 2: That's interesting to know. Yeah, and people are still fighting with that, you know. Speaker 1: It does. And one thing bothers me more than anything. As much as we encourage our kids to do well, we--in our community; and I'm--and I don't know that this is--well, I don't want to even go there. I mean, it pains me, particularly when I was mayor [of Dallas, Texas] later, and others, to hear from young black kids how much they still get ridiculed for doing well, making good grades, quote-unquote talking white, as if, you know, being able to articulate, enunciate, and speak is something that's foreign--should be foreign to black kids. And even now, when you watching the media, it is sadly predictable that whether you see a young, promising, brilliant African American leader like [HistoryMaker] Barack Obama, or a promising athletic, you know, hero, who goes on TV and acquits themselves well, that predictably somebody in the white media will say, "Boy, he's articulate." Well, what a surprise, you know (laughter)--a black man that can talk! You know, nobody ever says that crap, you know, about [President] George [Walker] Bush or something, but all of a sudden, you know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, no, they wouldn't say that-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Barack's--well, that's true (laughter). That's true; they don't say (laughter), but he gets away with it (laughter). But I mean, it's still a sad commentary that one of the first things people find appealing about Barack Obama is he's articulate. But, but anyway, no, that was a great--you know, I went through a real journey from, you know, growing up civil rights, being what I call a test-tube baby of the integration movement, going through this cultural assimilation, trying to fit into the assimilated world, trying to get people in our neighborhood [East Austin, Austin, Texas] to accept me as the same person, and just figuring out who I was. I mean to get--and forgive my language, you know--to be called nigger all day at school and then come home and get off the bus and have people start calling you Uncle Tom was just--a very, very painful and perplexing experience for me. Story_ID: 253679 Speaker 1: When you came along, black history in the schools was starting to percolate a little bit (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not in high school [John H. Reagan High School, Austin, Texas]; we were aware of it, and we read. I read--I mean, I still remember the first book I bought--that I was given, called 'The Black Book' [Middleton A. Harris], you know, that began to chronicle what we had done. You probably know--I read everything I could get my hands on; I was somewhat advantaged again. Because I grew up in a college town, a lot was playing out at UT [University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas]. And you asked earlier if there were other organizations in Austin [Texas]; not so much in Austin, but UT--you know, my oldest sister [Victoria Saundra Kirk] was involved--if you 'member SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] and SD[S]--and you know, Students for a [Democratic Society] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Democratic Society-- Speaker 2: Democratic Society and Students for Nonviolent Coordina--a lot of that. And because we were from Austin, because my parents [Willie Jones Kirk and Lee Kirk, Sr.] had--you know, we didn't live that far from UT, a lot of those groups that were protesting and picketing were my sisters' friends, and they would literally camp out at my--our house and my mother would feed 'em, and they would plan their rallies and, you know, the--they used to laugh about the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] wiretapping our phones, 'cause, you know, we--my mother would--I told you, she'd feed anybody, but all these, you know, kids that were agitating for change and stuff at UT, our house was kind of, you know, revolution central (laughter), in that sense. But I had all of that exposure and experience, but just trying to find that--what is--what does this mean for me? Who am I--? Story_ID: 253680 Speaker 1: You mentioned, like during the break, several nationally-known politicians and mayors that came out of Texas (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, I--you know, because, I mean--and I loved politics, and one thing my father [Lee Kirk, Sr.] and I did, and again, and it's weird, but you asked what I watched on TV. From the time I can remember, the one thing my father and I did, we watched every national political convention--all of 'em--and I loved 'em--Democrat and Republican. I mean, I remembered watching TV when, when Bobby Kennedy [Senator Robert F. Kennedy] got shot and cried all night long. The other hand, I remember watching--I may be the only person that remembers watching the Republican National Committee [sic. Republican National Convention] when Nelson Rockefeller told a newsman to go F himself on TV, and I remember turning to my daddy, saying, "Daddy, that man said the F word." And my father turned to me and said, "Son, that's power." And for years, we had this joke, and I told him, "Daddy, some day, I wanna have F you money." You know, when you can go on TV and tell a white man to go F himself, you got power. Speaker 1: Dick Cheney just did it. Speaker 2: But I did. Speaker 1: Dick Cheney just did it this summer. Speaker 2: Well, he did it on the floor at the [U.S.] Senate and denied it, but (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, but I mean it was on camera and-- Speaker 2: Well, don't get me started on Cheney and [President George Walker] Bush; that's a different deal. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But, yes, I was aware of that, and I read about it, you know; and at the same time, I knew who [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] was, but I knew who Stokely [Carmichael; Kwame Ture]--you know; I was--is influenced by 'The Autobiography of Malcolm X' [Malcolm X with Alex Haley], by anything I read. I thought it was a powerful journey for me, and not just in militancy, but in the power of education, you know; to transform somebody's life and thinking. And I--and what I saw--I still see Malcolm as one of the most important transformational leaders of our time. I think--I most admire leaders that say, "I embrace something, but I am so hungry and thirsty for a more complete knowledge, that I'm willing to continue to learn and evolve and say, you know, I have come to embrace this religion of Islam. But as I come to more holistic understanding, to be willing to change that, and change how I perceive people and perceive the world, not be locked in a dogma." But I remember reading that and 'Soul on Ice' [Eldridge Cleaver] and, you know, following Bobby Seale and Stokely Carmichael and all of them, and at the same time, you know, King. I can't tell you that I had, you know, some overly-developed sense of how it all fit and related, but I was curious by it, I was enthralled by it and just read everything I could get my hands that they put out. Speaker 1: Now, did you have a sense of the--I mean, when you were growing up, I guess maybe about nine years old, [President] John [Fitzgerald] Kennedy was shot in Dallas [Texas]-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: --LBJ [Lyndon Baines Johnson] becomes the president; he's a Texas (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, oh, absolutely. Speaker 1: --biggest politician. John Connally's involved and all. Speaker 2: I'd always enjoyed politics. My mother [Willie Jones Kirk]--you know, my mother still teases me that when I was a little boy, that when John Connally was governor--you know, back then, radio was much more prominent and, you know, and I kind of hate the fact that kids don't know what it's like now without a TV, instead of watching the World Series, to be in a place where everybody's sitting around the neighborhood huddled under a tree listening to the World Series and hearing, you know, the excitement. But John Connally used to do a radio show called 'Coffee with Connally,' and I think I was seven, eight, or nine years old, but I would wake up and make my mother give me a cup of hot chocolate, so I could say, "Momma, I want to have coffee with Mr. Connally," (laughter). And I guess I've been doomed--now that I look back, maybe I was doomed to it as a career in politics (laughter), but I was in, I guess, 1963 when Kennedy was killed, you know--I'm nine years old, I'm in whatever grade I am, and I remember they pulled us--we didn't know what was gonna happen, and I just remember my mother cry. Everybody cried. I mean, we were fearful for the country; we were fearful for what might happen. I knew who LBJ was, 'cause he was from the Austin [Texas] area. My parents, you know, again, had campaigned for Lyndon Johnson and J.[J.] Pickle and, you know--and it's hard--the sad thing is now you can't get kids to understand that Barry, you know, Barry Goldwater almost kind of openly campaigned on a reverse Back to Africa deal, you know: "If they don't like it here, get rid of 'em," you know? So, yeah, I was acutely aware of that and--but obviously, none of us wanted to see Lyndon Johnson become president in that way. But no, we watched that and watched every minute of it, you know, from all those emotions as a boy, and then, you know, three years later, you know, when I'm in the--I'm in the eighth grade, or five years later when, when Dr. King is killed, the same experience and the same anxiety and the same fear. But all those memories--I mean, I remember exactly where I was when I heard the news. I remember where I was, what I was wearing, what I was doing when we heard that Dr. King had been shot. Speaker 1: And you were a freshman in high school [John H. Reagan High School, Austin, Texas], I guess--eighth grade, or something like that? Speaker 2: I seem to remember that I was in UJH [University Junior High School, Austin, Texas]; I was in (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Junior high school? Speaker 2: --in junior high. I wasn't at Reagan then--when Dr. King--I was still at Blackshear [Elementary School; Blackshear Elementary Fine Arts Academy, Austin, Texas], obviously, when President Kennedy was killed. Story_ID: 253681 Speaker 1: Let's just jump to your senior year of high school [John H. Reagan High School, Austin, Texas]. Did you--how did you choose? Now, you went to Austin College [Sherman, Texas], but how did you end up choosing that (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I started with the fact that I knew I didn't want to go to University of Texas [at Austin, Austin, Texas], and while I--and we'll get to that; I mean--and it's--I think it's a wonderful irony now, that given everything in my life, and what I've told you, that I end up being secretary of state [of Texas], and I end up being a distinguished alumni of the University of Texas, and a honorary Order of the Coif of the law school [University of Texas at Austin School of Law, Austin, Texas] but, you know, again, in that time and place, I mean, there wasn't this great love affair between the African American community and University of Texas and--my oldest sister [Victoria Saundra Kirk] had graduated from the University, my middle brother and sister had gone to Texas Southern [University, Houston, Texas], and while they had enjoyed it in different ways, I mean, the three of them had sort of all said, "You can go anywhere but here." But, there was a part of me that also knew that I was interested in a smaller liberal arts education. Now, I made a passing reference earlier about how I was elected student body president, but that I was, ironically for that time, the second student body president. Well, the fellow who'd been like the student body president when I was a freshman was a great friend and mentor to me by the name of Darwin McKee, and Darwin had gone to Austin College. And when you asked about my schooling, I'd started out intentionally with saying that I went to Busy Bee Nursery School [ph.] and then Blackshear [Elementary School; Blackshear Elementary Fine Arts Academy, Austin, Texas] and that, because my very best friend growing up and was my neighbor, Marilyn Pool [ph.], and we literally went from Busy Bee Nursery School to Blackshear, to UJH [University Junior High School, Austin, Texas], to [J.E.] Pearce [Junior High School, Austin, Texas] (laughter), to Reagan, and she went to Austin College. She started out at the University of Houston [(U of H), Houston, Texas] but didn't like it, and so one summer when Darwin was on--the three of us were kind of friends, and he was telling us how much he'd enjoyed Austin College, and Marilyn had not had the most pleasant experience of U of H, so it was kind of one of those, "Well, if you go, I'll come, and if you stay, we'll go," and I went up, and I looked at it, and I didn't know a lot about it; I knew it was--you know I'd heard it was a small, exclusive liberal arts school, and I guess maybe in a perverse way, what impressed me was everybody that my father [Lee Kirk, Sr.] respected knew about it. When we went to the bank and when he went to, you know, visit with people that he thought were important in his life, they all knew about Austin College and what a great school it was, and I thought if it was good enough for the banker's kid, damn sure outta be good enough for the postman's son, so--that's how I ended up at Austin College. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, did it meet your expectations? Was it (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. I mean, it was a won--you know, small schools like that--I mean you've probably not--I mean Sherman, Texas is not Austin [Texas]--it's not Dallas [Texas]; it's about sixty miles north of Dallas. Austin College is a wonderful school; it's only about twelve hundred students, very--you know, it is an educational cocoon in every way--intellectual, social, cultural; the only down side was it was next door to an old factory that made mayonnaise or something--just smelled like crud, but it was a--you know, small schools like that in small towns aren't for everybody, but if they're for you, you know it, and from the moment I set foot on campus, I loved it; I loved everything about it, and I enjoyed it. I took advantage of every opportunity to grow and learn and expand that I could. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what was your major? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Surprise--I was pre-law, whatever that meant, but political science and sociology (laughter) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Political science-- Story_ID: 253682 Speaker 1: Okay. Were there any teachers there [at Austin College, Sherman, Texas] that really stand out? Speaker 2: All of 'em, all of 'em. In fact, it's ironic; one of my--even though he wasn't one of my teachers, he became one of my greatest friends. One of our political science professors then was right out of school, and looking back, he probably wasn't more than five or six years older than us, but Shelly Williams [Dr. Shelton Williams] is just a great mind, a great intellect, great friend. Ed King [ph.]--also, you know, liberal art schools can do more, but one of the things they did, all freshmen were assigned a sort of peer counselor-teacher who wasn't one of your core teachers, and we had a little group that we called C.I., and you could get together and say, "I hate school, I don't like school," but ours was a professor name Ed King, and he was my mentor all the way through school, and I mean, we could--we literally walked to his house for dinner, for our meetings, and his wife, you know, took us in as their own. But the king of all was Ken Street [Dr. Kenneth Street], who was a constitutional law scholar, bar none, that taught political science, and he became one of my academic advisors and mentors, and to this date, he's one of the most towering intellects and most intellectually intimidating people I've ever met, but just a great mind and a great influence on, you know, me in terms of pursuing my legal career-- Story_ID: 253683 Speaker 1: Okay, so he [Dr. Kenneth Street] kind of guided you towards what you were (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah. He used to always worry that I'd make it. I'll never forget--I think the greatest compliment he gave me once is once I got in that--was trying to get into law school--'cause he is a very--of course, he's humorless, but he is just a--I mean he's tall, white-haired and austere; always wore, you know, a coat and a tie. I mean, AC [Austin College, Sherman, Texas] was one of those schools that they--half the faculty looked like us, dressed like us, we--you know, they wore sandals, we'd--you know, if we didn't want to sit in the classroom, we'd say, "Shelly [Dr. Shelton Williams], let's go outside and sit on the lawn." He'd go, "Okay." You know, Ken Street was the guy that still showed up in a white shirt and a tie and (laughter), you know, just very austere (laughter). But I remember he told someone once, he said, "Boy, that Ron's [HistoryMaker Ron Kirk] smart but he--I think he may have too much fun to go to law school." (Laughter). He's about near right. Speaker 1: So you had a lotta fun at college? Speaker 2: I had fun, I had--listen, one thing I do, if I--one fundamental element to me. You asked me if I have any sayings, and I try to--I think my wife [Matrice Ellis-Kirk] believes it's true; my friends'll tell you, though; the only question I tell people--there's only one question that's ever important every day of your life and that's are you happy--period. You can distill it to everything else, but it's are you happy? And most people are afraid to answer that question, 'cause if they answer, "No," then it means you got to change; means you got to get--change your marriage, or you got to change your job, or you got to change your career; but are you happy? And if you're not, go do something else. And it goes back, you know, to my father's [Lee Kirk, Sr.] principle, the hardest thing in the world, when you're in a hole, stop digging. And we don't realize going to work every day to a job that for--we see that as a career, but if it isn't a job that gives you joy, you're just in a hole, and you're just digging deeper and deeper; you're not paying bills, you're--you are digging your own grave. And--but back to your question, yeah--no, I--either--if I'm not having fun, I'm gonna make a change, and I know it's not always easy, but I do think--I think you can wake up and declare, "Today's gonna be a good day, and I'm gonna bring joy in my life and give joy to others." And we don't always get there, but if you don't believe you can, you won't. So, no, I--I love what I do--always have. I've been blessed by that. Speaker 1: Okay, so you were having a good time in college. Did you get (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I did, but I had my moments, but I had my moments, I--'cause I mean--and I do think--and I look at--you know, people often ask how--my life wasn't planned in the sense of that way, I tell you, you know, a vision without a plan [is a hallucination], but it did sort of follow this path. I mean, I was very happy academically and spiritually, but I was really going through an inner, personal struggle to kind of find who I was. I was studying sociology, I was studying about assimilation, I was reading 'Soul On Ice' [Eldridge Cleaver], I'm reading--you know, I'm following [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.]--I mean, you know, Stokely [Carmichael; Kwame Ture] and all these leaders, and I'm in this very, you know, almost artificially sort of free world of this nice little liberal arts school in college, and everybody's dating, everybody's having fun, then I go home, and I still live in the same segregated neighborhood [East Austin, Austin, Texas] that everybody thinks I'm this oddball, 'cause I go to some little liberal arts school. But my sophomore year, I mean, I just almost kind of became obsessed with going, "Okay, well who am I?" You know, was the purpose of integration to go mold me into some amorphous, non-existent, integrated person, or am I this other, you know--I mean who am I? And don't ask me why, but I just thought it was a--I thought it was an epiphany in my life when I reached a point where I had been in integrated schools longer than I'd ever been in a, you know, sort of an all-black world. Story_ID: 253684 Speaker 1: So I decided to leave school; I decided to leave Austin College [Sherman, Texas]. I was gonna go find myself; I thought that maybe I would go to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], you know. The answer was to go to an all-black college in a-- then I thought maybe I ought to go east. I applied to Brown [University, Providence, Rhode Island] and all that, but anyway, I showed up at home, and I mean it just broke my mother [Willie Jones Kirk] and father's [Lee Kirk, Sr.]--because one, Austin College was a private school and, again, you know, go back to the fact my dad still--notwithstanding how he viewed it, my dad worked at the post office, my mother was a teacher, they got four kids, all ten years apart; they had three of us in school always, at one point, in college, and it was a strain for them to put me through Austin College. So I come home, and I'll never forget, I--and I didn't discuss this decision with my parents, and I--you know, I told my mother first, 'cause I knew she'd cry but not hit me (laughter), and I remember telling my dad that I'd decided to take off a semester from school, and he said, "Why?" And I said, "Well, I feel like I need to find myself." And, you know, as only fathers can say, he looked at me and said, "Well, you better find a blanking job," you know (laughter). And so--but later, we had this discussion, I'll never forget, and we were talking more about, you know, why I was doing this and, you know, half the time I wore, you know, suits, and the other days I wore dashikis, and I had an afro and like all that, and I'll never forget--I mean, my father looking at me saying, "You know, it's a shame," he said, "for a white man to appreciate how black you are, all you got to do is walk out this door, and let the sunshine hit your face, and all he sees is a black man, but it's only us that sort of insist on measuring these degrees of blackness." And his deal is, "You are who you--" and I remember he just--he said, "You are who you are, whoever that is, and that's a pretty good man." And, you know, and the minute he said that, it was like it resolved it for me. I mean, that I was. I was this blended person, and I had this wonderful, rich history that you could only get growing up the way I did, but that I had this unique circumstance. So, I say all of that, because it's relevant later. I did take off, and one of the other people who really labored over my decision to leave school was Dr. [Kenneth] Street, and in my finding a job--my mother quit crying long enough and said, 'Well, go see [HistoryMaker] Wilhelmina [Delco],' and this was about 1970; this was the January of 1973. We had passed single member districts, voting rights, civil rights; Austin [Texas] had just elected its first wave of sort of progressive, liberal, Democratic legislators. Included in that was Wilhelmina Delco, who was the first African American legislator from Austin, and Gonzalo (unclear) (ph.) was the first Hispanic [Latino]. But there also was a young lawyer by the name of Sarah Weddington who later became famous for arguing Roe v. Wade [1973] before the [U.S.] Supreme Court at twenty-nine years old. Sarah Weddington's administrative assistant was a lady by the name of Ann Richards. So the time that I left for school, and I'd love to tell you I planned it, also coincided with the Texas Legislature's attempt to re-write our constitution, which had not even been revisited in a hundred years, and so the legislature was getting ready to convene in a special session. So, I went to see Wilhelmina Delco and she got together with Ann Richards, and they somehow got me a non-paid internship with the speaker of the Texas House [of Representatives] by the name of Price Daniel, who was the presiding officer. And I remember Ann Richards, even then, saying, "Well, you know what a non-paid--" she says, "you can work, but they won't pay you, but that's how you get jobs around here." And so I worked during the constitutional convention; Ken Street came up with a way for me to do a work-study, 'cause, again, remember I told you he's a constitutional scholar; so we came up with this idea, instead of me just leaving school, I did a directed study off-campus, got credit for it, and then I went to UT [University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas] in the summer and made straight A's and went back to Austin College that next fall sort of with my father's help (laughter), with my identity crisis resolved, and more at peace for me with who I was and the world I was in than I had been, and really just loved every minute of the rest of my career in college. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. You graduated with honors, right? Speaker 1: Yes, sir. I graduated with honors in political science and sociology; it's a honor society, it's called Pi Gamma Mu. Speaker 2: Okay. This is in nineteen seventy (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I graduated in four years, in 1976. Story_ID: 253685 Speaker 1: Did you go directly to--well, you didn't go directly to law school, right? Or did you? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Did you? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: I mean, I worked that summer for the [U.S.] Census Bureau, but I was fortunate enough to be accepted to University of Texas [at Austin School of Law, Austin, Texas], and University of Houston [Law Center, Houston, Texas] law schools, and I--again, principally because of the financial advantage, I enrolled at University of Texas that fall and went to law school and finished my degree in three years, and graduated in '79 [1979] with my J.D.--without honors (laughter). Story_ID: 253686 Speaker 1: Any professors in law school that stand out that you--? Speaker 2: Boy, it's embarrassing. Yeah, I mean there were some great, great professors at our law school. [W.] Page Keeton was the dean of our law school, and still taught quite a bit, but Charles Alan Wright, who passed away just a couple of years ago was, you know, widely regarded in--among the community as one of the, the two or three greatest constitutional scholars and legal minds of his generation, and he taught con [constitutional] law at the University of Texas [at Austin School of Law, Austin, Texas], and I was privileged to be able to, you know, kind of get the lottery to be in his constitutional law section. But aside from his love of the law, Charlie, as he allowed a few of us to call him, had a maniacal love affair with football and touch football, and Charlie Wright sponsored a football team called Legal Eagles that played in the intramural football league, and part of the lore that grew up around University of Texas--you know, law school admissions process was that Charlie Wright, because of his stature at the school and the amount of money he brought in, went through all the admissions policies and picked out all the athletes and got 'em in and then made 'em be on the Legal Eagles. Now, if you'd a seen the collection (laughter) everywhere, you'd know that was true. But I not only had the privilege of taking classes from him, but I also was recruited by a friend of mine that I had met when I worked on the [Texas state] constitutional convention to play on the Legal Eagles and became--I think I was the first black captain of the Legal Eagles. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But he was a great friend. Story_ID: 253687 Speaker 1: What aspect of the law did you focus on [at University of Texas at Austin School of Law, Austin, Texas]? What did you think you would do? Speaker 2: Well, you know, notwithstanding my wanting to grow up to be the next Thurgood Marshall, you know, that sort of desire out there collided with the reality; I didn't know any lawyers, you know. And, again, as--and you know, in high school [John H. Reagan High School, Austin, Texas] and as a kid, I mean my parents [Willie Jones Kirk and Lee Kirk, Sr.] were working class folk. There was one African American lawyer that I could recall growing up in Austin [Texas] and, you know, he just kind of had a one man shop, I guess, did everything, and it was probably as much a failing on my part, but as much as I wanted to be a lawyer, Larry [Crowe], I don't know that it ever dawned on me to go sit down with somebody and say, "Hey, what is the sort of things that lawyers do?" So like a lot of kids of that generation, you know, not having a father, or an uncle, or a brother that was a lawyer, I just showed up thinking all lawyers were either, you know, Perry Mason if they were white, or Thurgood if they were black, and that you were gonna be a litigator and a trial lawyer, and I had no idea that there were firms like this that did tax and intellectual property, or all of the different careers in the law. And so I literally just showed up in law school saying, "I'm here to be a lawyer." I didn't know. The best advice I got was to find out who the great teachers were, and to forget being funneled into a narrow subject matter, but take the great teachers, which is why I mentioned [W.] Page Keeton and Charles Alan Wright. And so I just--I knew I wanted to be a trial lawyer; I thought I wanted to be a civil rights lawyer. I--because of--I mentioned this flag football team--because of my being on the Legal Eagles, a significant occurrence happened, in that one of the fellows that I played with was a kid by the name of Pat Kelly, and you mentioned 'Friday Night Lights' football; Pat Kelly was one of the few people on our team that had actually played college football and grew up in West Texas playing against Odessa [Texas] Permian [High School], but more importantly, Pat Kelly was a law clerk for a law firm in Austin called Spivey, Hazel, Grigg [Spivey & Grigg], headed by a fellow by the name of Broadus Spivey. It was a small personal injury law firm of six, seven man shop, but one of the things they did was they allowed their law students to hire all of their law clerks instead of the lawyers picking them. And so Pat was a senior when I was on the team, and he came to me one day and said, "What are you gonna do this summer?" And I had worked at a department store through high school, you know, to pay for my trip to Europe and all through college and continued to work, but I knew I needed to go intern, and so Pat got me an introduction to Broadus Spivey and [Richard] Dicky Grigg, and I clerked with them all through law school and opened up the whole world of personal injury civil trial work to me, and I just fell in love with it. I didn't--you know, at that time, firms like my firm now, you know, the big corporate firms and wherever, they were not that interested in diversity; there weren't--there probably were maybe one or two black partners in the whole United States of major corporate firms. They weren't interested in recruiting us; we weren't interested in them. So, I fell in love with this law firm, and that probably hinders--much as it sort of ignited my passion for being a trial lawyer, it also put a wet blanket over my desire to pursue (laughter) my academic interest, 'cause I had more fun clerking and working than I did going to law school. So, I was not as academically successful in law school as I had been throughout my career, but I was clerking, I worked both at Spivey & Grigg, and then I continued to clerk and work over at the [Texas] Legislature, but I managed to do perform well enough to graduate and pass the bar, and after I graduated in 1979, I moved to Dallas [Texas] to go to work with a fellow that I'd met in the Texas Legislature. Story_ID: 253688 Speaker 1: --His name is David Cain, and David had been a legislator and a lawyer from here in Dallas [Texas], and upon my graduation from law school [University of Texas at Austin School of Law, Austin, Texas], I had looked at different--you know, I still had this--there was still a part of me that was pulling me to this career in civil rights, and at that time, you know, the legal aid program [Legal Services Corporation] was really beginning to take off, you know. [U.S.] Congress had put a little bit of money into it and, you know, a lot--I guess, a lot of the sort of bleeding hearts like myself at that time, were drawn to that, but we all wanted to be legal aid lawyers in Austin [Texas], or Atlanta [Georgia], or Chicago [Illinois]; we didn't want to be (laughter) lawyers out in the country, and I actually was offered a job by the legal aid corporation, but I didn't get Austin. I got assigned to Belton, Texas, which was--it's kind of between here and Waco [Texas], and closer to Fort Hood [Texas] if you've ever heard about--you know, Fort Hood's the largest--but the chance to come to Dallas, even at less money than the federal government would pay me to be a legal aid lawyer, was just one that I could not pass up. So I moved to Dallas in the summer of 1979 and went to work with David Cain and a fellow that he was starting a office with by the name of Norman Bennett--Bennett and Cain. Speaker 2: Okay. This is 1979, correct? Speaker 1: Yes, sir. Speaker 2: Okay. So-- Speaker 1: And I may as well--if you've ever read any of John Grisham's books, I mean we, we may as well have been the basis for his character in 'The Street Lawyers' [sic. 'The Street Lawyer']; we did everything, but it was one of the most fun times of my life. I mean, they didn't have any money. They offered me thousand dollars a month--five hundred dollars to run his legislative office and five hundred to practice law, but the deal was that I could keep everything I hustled on my own. And so David taught me how to do traffic tickets and how to go and do court appointments, and as a young legislator, David stumbled on the best idea he ever did, and he passed the judicial pay raise legislation every year. So, he took me around and introduced me to all the judges in Dallas County [Texas] and told 'em I was a new young lawyer, and so I used to go do court appointments, and every Friday, you know, people that had been convicted of, you know, not real serious, serious crimes were bonded out, but they had to have a lawyer who would stand there and explain to 'em and let 'em make the judgment whether they wanted to go to trial or plead out, and the county paid you seventy-five dollars a case--an appearance; so every Friday I would show up willingly and do two or three court appointments, and I was hustling no-fault divorces and (laughter), and anything else I could do. But I think I'm prouder of the fact that I made $22,000 my first year out of school, you know, on a $12,000 base than anything, 'cause I hustled, and I became fearless, and I was willing to do anything, and I learned a lot, and I learned how to go in the courtroom and as Friendly [Rudolph] Rice admonished me as a young boy at Blackshear Elementary School [Blackshear Elementary Fine Arts Academy, Austin, Texas], stand up straight and hold my head high. And even though I was terrified that they'd figure out I didn't know what I was doing, I sure didn't look like it. Story_ID: 253689 Speaker 1: How long did you do that kind of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I worked for David [Cain] and Norman [Bennett] for about a year, and then in nineteen--and then in about the middle of the next year, a good friend of mine by the name of Foster Reese who was another young black lawyer but at a larger personal injury firm headed by a guy by the name of Windle Turley, had made the decision to go out and do something else. And Turley's law firm [Turley Law Firm, Dallas, Texas] was a pretty prominent and pretty, pretty successful personal injury firm, which is what I wanted to do, and so I moved over to Windle's shop in 1980 and stayed there until I was offered the chance to go to work for U.S. Senator Lloyd Bentsen in nineteen--oh, I guess in November of nineteen--in October of 1981. So I stayed with Windle for about a little under two years. Speaker 1: Okay. Lloyd Bentsen, now he's--I guess he's most well-known for the--I guess a broader--you know, America, as the vice presidential candidate-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --for (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was a Democratic senator from-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --Texas at that time. Very, very bright; a very strong intellect, a very skilled craftsman, but quite the opposite to, in some degrees, of the LBJ [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] back-slapping, gregarious--Lloyd--Senator Bentsen was much more cut in the old of kind of Sam Rayburn who was another famous Texan and a long-time speaker but, you know, a little more patrician, quieter, but brilliant; as skilled a negotiator, in some ways, as LBJ, but a real, real force in the United States Senate, and I had the opportunity to join his team in 1981, and I struggled with that, because I really did love practicing law. When I was attorney, I was having the time of my life; I was, you know, went from making $20,000 to, you know, $28,000, and I was single; I was young; I was in Dallas [Texas]; I had my first air-conditioned car. I mean, you know, I was on my way to being, you know, this next great trial lawyer. And having grown up around politics and having, you know, worked in the legislature from the con con [Texas state constitutional convention], I knew how absolutely intoxicating the allure of politics could be, and even then, I had a sense that there wasn't gonna be any kind of two-year stint in Washington [D.C.] and then come back to being a trial lawyer. But I was also attracted to the opportunity to expand my world, because at that point in my life, I'd lived and been educated, and all my life's experiences had been in Texas--from Austin [Texas] to Sherman [Texas] to Dallas, and I knew there was a lot more out there for me to see and learn from, and so I took the job, and I moved to Washington in October of '81 [1981], and joined Lloyd Bentsen's professional staff. Story_ID: 253690 Speaker 1: So this is, as you said, the first time out of Texas really living. Speaker 2: Yes, sir. Speaker 1: Now, how did Washington [D.C.] impress you? How did you feel about Washington? Speaker 2: My first three months, I thought I'd landed in Sodom and Gomorrah; I mean my first week, I saw a woman pull out a butcher knife on another woman in the grocery store; literally, my first day at work, I saw somebody shot. You know, one of the workers in our office was kidnapped; I mean, literally, on her way to a party, and I remember calling my brother and saying, "You know, I don't want these people to think I'm a, you know, I'm a chicken so, you know--but I'm gonna give it six months and then I'm getting the hell outta here." But I (laughter) moved up--I say that, 'cause I moved up there in October. My first winter was one of the coldest they'd ever had, and tragically, that was the winter--I don't know if you remember, the airline [Air Florida Flight 90] that crashed into the Potomac River? I mean just--but I got to tell you, there's nothing like Washington in the spring, and after six months on the [Capitol] Hill [Washington, D.C.] and kind of finding my way and--in--and, you know, the experience at least, for my case, all of the folklore that I'd heard about--what it would be like to be a single African American man in Washington (laughter) proved to be pretty true in my case. But since (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, now this is significant, 'cause the ratio, from what I hear--we're about the same age--the ratio they kept talking about in the popular magazines was like ten to one. Speaker 2: It was wonderful. Trust me, after Sherman, Texas (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Ten to one. Speaker 2: You know-and frankly, after always--you know, we--and again, going back, one of the first things you commented on, you know, Austin [Texas] didn't have a huge black population, you know; we maybe were eight to ten percent of the population--Austin College [Sherman, Texas], there were, you know, twelve black kids in my class. There were only four other black guys in my freshmen class at Austin College; I was the only one to graduate. You know, by the time I got to law school, we were--we affectionately referred to ourselves as the Bakke babies, 'cause we were that first generation to come in under the [U.S.] Supreme Court [Regents of the University of California v.] Bakke case [1978]. But still, you know, UT's [University of Texas at Austin School of Law, Austin, Texas] a big law school, you know; there are six, eight hundred kids, but still there were less than, you know, sixty or seventy African Americans. And then all of a sudden--man, I'm air-dropped into Washington, and it was--for me it was chocolate city, but it was wonderful--good and bad. Speaker 1: Eighty percent black and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was wonderful, just--you know, to see the best but all--not see the worse, but see the best of us, and to see that black people were everywhere, you know. I had too long been in an environment where I was the only black person in the room, and tragically, in some cases, that can instill in you some sense that you should be the only black person in the room, you know? I mean, there are a lot of us that don't want anybody else, and the one thing that Washington gave me was the unique sense that, yeah, you're a lawyer--but so what? So is everybody else, you know; there's lots of black, talented, beautiful, black people everywhere. So, I mean if you like politics, there's no environment in the world like Washington, D.C., and I love politics, and I was in a position of responsibility with a respected United States Senator [Lloyd Bentsen], and on top of it, I was having the time of my life, so--you know, and then, about the time the snow went away and the spring thawed and the cherry blossoms, you know, had come around, I'd had a complete turn-around and man, I was in love, and I was in love; I absolutely loved it. It was a--just one of the--it was a real period of change and growth and comfort for me, professionally, personally--in every way. Story_ID: 253691 Speaker 1: Now what were your responsibilities on [Senator] Lloyd Bentsen's staff? Speaker 2: One of the things that attracted me is just because of the nature--I came on board to replace--to take the position of a fellow by the name of Mike Pate [Michael L. Pate] who became a great friend. In senators' staffs, you have, you have professional legislative staff, and then you kind of have your clerical staff, but the professional staff handle legislative policy analyses, and historically, unfortunately, you know, if you were black and--or you were a woman, we always got education, social security, you know, health and welfare. And the fellow that I replaced moved from being a legislative policy analyst to our legislative director, and he just put me in his spot, and so I handled defense, I handled the budget, and not a big deal, but, I mean, I was one of the few black staffers that wasn't slotted into, you know, education and sort of social issues. And while I didn't have an extensive military background, I had a legislative background, so it was just an opportunity for me to be involved in an area in which we didn't see a lot of staffers of color in terms of defense and military spending and policy work. Story_ID: 253692 Speaker 1: I also benefitted from the fact that at the time I went to work for Senator [Lloyd] Bentsen, Democrats had lost control of the [U.S.] Senate during Ronald [Wilson] Reagan's, you know, ascendency to the presidency and that huge legislative change that he brought in. But [Senator] John Tower, who was also a senator from Texas, was chairman of the senate Armed Services Committee, and back then--you know, people long for the good old days, but there was a--so much more comedy and cordiality, and so much more working together, at least between Senator Bentsen and Senator Tower, than there is today. So, my being a defense staffer, Tower's team literally just adopted me as one of their own, and so I had essentially, all of the cache of working for a majority senator although I was working for a senator in the minority power. Speaker 2: Hmm, that's interesting. You know, things have become increasingly polarized (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, they have been, they have been. But it was a good experience, and it was good for me. I mean, it--just seeing everything differently and just seeing how it worked and then some really big intellects--some pompous intellects, but a lot of good people, and just seeing how different the world could be outside of Texas. I never will forget--you know, and again, growing up when I did, the things we talked about, my mother [Willie Jones Kirk] and dad [Lee Kirk, Sr.] were just fascinated, and I would call home, you know, every week, and they would--all they would say--I mean, I'd call 'em every night the first two weeks, and every day my mother and father would say one thing, "Have you seen Teddy?" You know, "Have you met Teddy?" You know. "Have you met Senator--have you met Teddy Kennedy [Senator Edward M. Kennedy]?" (Laughter) And I'd be, "No, no, no," you know, 'course I was living to meet him (laughter), and fortunately my--I had a cousin who was a professional staffer on the House [of Representatives] side by the name of Bill Kirk [William A. Kirk] who had gone to school with one of [HistoryMaker] Andrew Young's daughters--I think Andrea [Young]; and Andrea worked for Teddy Kennedy, so I got her to introduce me, but ironically, you know, going back to how the way things worked because of my being a defense staffer and the relationship with Tower, I spent a lot of my time working with John Tower's professional staff on the Armed Services Committee, which meant I had a lot of exposure to John--Senator Tower. And they basically reached out to me and said, "Look, anywhere we go, you're welcome to go." And given the importance of the military industrial establishment here in Texas, and the--you know, I referenced my legal aid assignment to Belton [Texas], but I mean we have a number of important military bases here in Texas, including the largest in North America at Fort Hood [Texas], but we've got Dyess [Air Force Base, Texas], and the complex [Joint Base San Antonio] in San Antonio [Texas] and elsewhere. We would go on all these junk--not junkets but, you know, we'd go to visit all these military installations. And many times, on that plane with John Tower would be Barry Goldwater. And talking about coming full circle, you can't imagine what it's like to call your parents and say, "You'll never guess who I had a drink with last night!" They'd go, "Lloyd Bentsen?" I'd say, "No." They'd say, "Teddy Kennedy?" I'd say, "No." And they go through all this (laughter), you know, and you just can't imagine the silence on the other end of the phone when I told mother and dad I had a chance to sit down and have a glass of whiskey with John Tower and Barry Goldwater (laughter). But at that point in his life, Goldwater had, you know, gone through his own transformation. He was still crusty and conservative but, you know, it was just one of those wonderful ironies in the way life can work. Story_ID: 253693 Speaker 1: How long were you on [Senator] Lloyd Bentsen's staff? Speaker 2: I stayed on Senator Bentsen's staff until October of 1983; I was on with him through--'82 [1982] was an election year, so I stayed through all of '82 [1982], I was there in '83 [1983], and I was happy. I was happy; I was socially happy (laughter), and in fact, I had pretty much thought, you know, I think I'm gonna stay here a while. But there was a part of me as much as I liked it, even then, that was saying, "You know, you got to be careful, 'cause this is the kind of environment that, before you know it, you can wake up and you're a forty-nine year old professional staffer on a government salary," and--you know, and I'm not knocking that, but I knew there was more out there, and about that time, my phone rang, and one of my classmates from law school [University of Texas at Austin School of Law, Austin, Texas] was a wonderful friend, Vonciel [Jones] Hill, who was then working for the Dallas [Texas] city attorney's office, and literally, had been at lunch and was eavesdropping on a conversation between the city attorney and someone else, in which the city attorney was asking them if they knew of anyone who might be a good candidate to come and be the chief lobbyist for the City of Dallas, and that it had to be a lawyer, but it had to be someone that had a background in legislative affairs, a little bit in Washington [D.C.] but more so in Austin [Texas], and we won't go into all of it, but my friend Vonciel's just one of those people that's just fearless (laughter), and so after lunch, she marches into the city attorney's office and said, "I have the perfect guy for you." And it's just--and maybe there is something--higher order that guides our lives. I just happened to be at home on vacation, and I was out with a bunch of my old fraternity brothers and friends from Austin College [Sherman, Texas] out at a lake [Possum Kingdom Lake] that we used to all go play at up in Possum Kingdom [State Park], and Vonciel called and said, "Are you interested in coming back lobbying for the city?" I said, "I don't know." She said, "Well, if you are, you need to be here Monday and interview." And I was--I mean, I was home, and I didn't plan on interviewing; I borrowed a friend's suit, I went in and interviewed, and by the end of the interview, Analeslie Muncy, who was then the city attorney, offered me the job. So I agreed to come back, and in October I moved back and then started what's become a twenty-five year love affair with the City of Dallas. Speaker 1: Okay. So, this is October of '82 [1982] that you came back? Speaker 2: I moved back in 1983. This was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Eighty-three [1983], okay. Speaker 2: This all happened over the summer of '83 [1983], and I moved back in October of '83 [1983]. So, I was in--I was almost in Washington two years to the day. Story_ID: 253694 Speaker 1: Now you're involved in city government, I guess, formally for the first time, and-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: What did you--I mean who was the mayor then? Speaker 2: The mayor then was a fellow by the name of Starke Taylor, and he was the last of kind of mayors--almost sort of elected, but anointed by the Dallas [Texas] business leadership. Dallas was just then, even in the '80s [1980s], going through the realities of becoming a more urban community, becoming a more ethnic community, and how that was gonna manifest itself politically. But for years, you know, throughout the '40s [1940s], '50s [1950s], '60s [1960s], Dallas politics had really been dominated by a group, the old [Dallas] Citizens Council, and it was populated almost--I won't say almost, but solely by white business leaders. And Dallas was a city that, very early on, that it embraced the council management form of government as sort of a repudiation of kind of the old ward politics, but also with--some thought that government ought to run more like a business, and you ought to separate the politics from the management of the city. And, in that thinking, the council really would operate like a board, and hire professional managers to run the city, but in that vein, you didn't need paid council members, so the council members were only paid fifty dollars a meeting, and the thought was that service on--in electoral politics here--local politics, was kind of the capstone of a great business career. And at the end of, you know, running the history project and having made, you know, your millions of dollars, then you'd go serve on the council, and you didn't need any money. Well, as we progressed through the '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s], and there was more of a push for diversity, that theory sort of clashed with that, both on the notion of its equality of representation and that it excluded women and minorities, but it also made it real hard for anything but wealthy people to serve. And Mayor Taylor--anyway, to fast forward--was kind of the last of that generation of business leaders who was mayor and was--I mean, while he was a very fine man on a personal level, really handcuffed by the reality that he spent most of his time telling everybody he didn't know anything about politics, and most of his tenure kind of proving that. But he was the mayor when I moved back to become the city's lobbyist. But ironically, the way our charter is established, the charter empowers the city attorney with representing the city in legislative and governmental affairs, and so I was hired by the first woman to be city attorney, and it did not require concurrence in this form of government by the mayor or the council, so the first female city attorney hired the first black lobbyist for the city. Story_ID: 253695 Speaker 1: What were your duties as lobbyist? Speaker 2: I was our chief lobbyist; I--cities--you know, when, when you move away from the--you know, I guess the sort of practical notion of what a city is, a city is a very complex holding company, and it's a holding company for a police department, a fire department, a water department, in some cases a housing or education, or health care, and a street and water, and we are more impacted by state regulatory laws than probably any other body. I mean a state like Texas--I don't want to get too technical, but usually literally three-quarters of all bills introduced in a legislature, and I'd say probably in any state, impact on what a city does. And so our job was just to go and kind of remind the [Texas] Legislature, "That's wonderful, but if you aren't gonna pay for it, you know, we are self-governing and, you know, follow that 'first, do no harm' doctrine; just leave us alone." But I was the chief strategist and spokesperson for the City of Dallas [Texas] for six years, both in Austin [Texas]--primarily in Austin, because we really did not have a heavy legislative presence in Washington [D.C.]. But to degree that we pursued issues in Washington, I covered those as well. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, six years, that's--anything memorable that you think (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I had an extraordinary success rate, you know--don't know that I follow it, but we passed a higher percentage of the city's, quote-unquote, legislative wish list than any period of time in history. Most remarkable thing is that it was at least as much fun being young and single, and back on home turf as it was (laughter) in Dallas, and I guess, you know, on a professional level, I'd say I continued to grow, I continued my exposure to the political process, and for me it was kind of a nice blending of my--I mean, 'cause technically, I was hired back as a lawyer, but it was a nice blending of my love of politics and law. But the most significant thing and period that occurred in that period of time was I met and courted and married my wife [Matrice Ellis-Kirk] and started my family. Speaker 1: Okay, so that's--yeah. So what year did you get married? Speaker 2: We got married in 1987. We met the summer of 1984, my first summer that I was back. We met at char--Dallas is one of the most competitive fundraising communities in the country for charities, and it's a--I hope it doesn't offend you: we have a joke here that you can dance for a different disease almost every weekend. But it--but that's a great thing about us. But I mean we had benefits for everything, and one of the bigger benefits at that time used to be a wonderful event called Symphony in Black [Concert], which supported the black arts academy [Junior Black Academy of Arts and Letters; The Black Academy of Arts and Letters, Dallas, Texas] here, and I met my wife at that event. Story_ID: 253696 Speaker 1: The arts in Texas--a lot of the black arts people in Texas were starting to blossom during the '80s [1980s] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. My wife [Matrice Ellis-Kirk] and I, we met at the--at Curtis--at a benefit benefitting [HistoryMaker] Curtis King's facility then; then, it was called the Junior Black Academy of Arts and Letters-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --and now it's just called The [Black] Academy of Arts and Letters [Dallas, Texas]. Speaker 1: Why did they call it the Junior Black Academy? I never could figure that out (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous -I don't know; you know, we used to be called the African American Museum of Life and Culture [Southwest Research Center and Museum of African-American Life and Culture; African American Museum of Dallas, Dallas, Texas], now we're the African--we evolved. Speaker 1: It seems like a--the Junior Black Acad--I mean, as if there's a senior one or something (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't--I think--you know, I don't know; maybe, it's a time, we were younger or that, but it has grown, and it--you know, they've had their struggles, but they're still here, but thanks to them, and Symphony in Black [Concert], I met Matrice Ellis at the event and took one look at her and fell in love and, you know, started harassing her and courting her and three years later we got married, and two years later, we had our first child [Elizabeth Kirk]. And about that time, that coincided with an opportunity for me to leave the City of Dallas [Texas]; I had a wonderful career there--great experiences, but because of my success in passing the city's legislative initiatives at that--you know, the world of lobbyists in any environment is, you know, reasonably, a cozy field, but I had a number of offers to join other law firms and help them build their lobbying practices, and that is what helped me transition, kind of, to the world that I'm in now, and so in 1990, I was offered a partnership then at one of Dallas' more prominent law firms, Johnson & Gibbs, which I accepted. Story_ID: 253697 Speaker 1: Johnson & Gibbs is 1990. Speaker 2: Yeah, I joined them in January of 1990. Speaker 1: All right. So, you were just with them a year before you became the chair of the Texas [State Purchasing and] General Services Commission, right? Speaker 2: Yes, sir. By the time I joined--during, during--and I have to get my times straight--I guess coinciding with my move into private practice, 1990 was a gubernatorial election year here in Texas and, you know, I'd mentioned earlier my sort of family's long history and friendship with Ann Richards and I didn't mention, but you mentioned different law professors that mentored me. One of my adjunct professors in law school [University of Texas at Austin School of Law, Austin, Texas] was a fellow by the name of Stan Richards, who was the husband of Ann Richards and taught labor law, and Ann had transitioned from sort of just being a, you know, homemaker and, you know, sort of Democratic activist to a much more formal role in politics, and she had weathered--that she talked about freely, you know--a personal battle with alcoholism and divorce, but gone on to seek elected office, and had run and won a seat as a commissioner in Travis County [Texas], and then during the late '80s [1980s], been elected as the treasurer of the State of Texas, and in 1990, she sought the governor's race, and at that--and she ran in a very crowded and tough Democratic primary against a real vocal, fiery attorney general by the name of Jim Mattox, who was outta Dallas [Texas], and Jim was supported by a lot of the black political establishment, but I and a number of, I guess, some of the up-and-coming young leaders had worked to elect Governor Richards, and she was successful in that. She asked me to chair her inaugural ball, which I did; she offered me a number of positions in her cabinet, which I turned down, because I wanted--you know, I was fulfilling a dream; I'd become a partner in a big law firm, but more importantly, I had a wife [Matrice Ellis-Kirk] and a baby [Elizabeth Kirk]. So I didn't want a paid position and--but she later asked me if I would consider chairing--becoming a part of and chairing the General Services Commission, which was the purchasing agent for the State of Texas and, at that time, the State of Texas did less than two percent of its business with women and minority-owned firms, and the sad commentary--I'll tell you how bad it was, less than one percent of that was African Americans and Hispanics [Latinos], and Asians combined. And so I didn't see my goal just to raise African American numbers; I saw my goal to raise the pie. And one of the things I'm most proudest of (unclear) in my year, and even only the three years I was on that commission, you know, we increased that spending to almost 800 percent. Even though we only raised it numerically from 2 percent to 6, to 8 percent, the numbers were huge, and they were huge for everyone--for African American and women, and others. But that sort of began the tilting of my career away from straight, you know, advocacy to more policy-making. And then in 1994, the fellow that Governor Richards had appointed as secretary of state in 1990, John [H.] Hannah [Jr.], had been nominated by President [William Jefferson "Bill"] Clinton to be a federal district judge, and like a lot of President Clinton's nominees, he had been held up by the Republicans for over eighteen months. I guess to his good fortune and mine, in February or March of that year, he was finally confirmed. And so Governor Richards then came back and asked me if I would serve the balance of his term, and even I couldn't say "No," to (laughter) the opportunity to serve as secretary of state. But for me it was very different deal because I was gonna do it for one year. It was an election year; I didn't have to uproot my family, and my law firm was very gracious about giving me a leave of absence to do that. So, you know, ironically, on April the 4th, which was the day that [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was assassinated, but April 4th of 1994, I was sworn in as secretary of state of Texas. Story_ID: 253698 Speaker 1: What was that experience like? I mean what were the highlights (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Wonderful. I mean you know, the secretary of state is technically, in most states, you know, he's the chief sort of corresponding record keeper for the state. You do everything from maintain corporate records and that, but as Kathleen Harris [sic. Katherine Harris], even though she shouldn't have, has probably taught America better than anything, we run elections. And some states like your state, they issue license plates and considering the number of secretary of states y'all have locked up for stealing license plates money, I guess I'm glad I didn't have that (laughter) opportunity here in Texas. But the biggest thing is we're the record keeper and we run the elections. But for me personally, I guess everything for me has such a personal spin, there just couldn't have been a finer moment for me than having been born in Austin [Texas], grown up playing on the playgrounds of our [Texas] State Capitol, and not being able to come inside to use the bathroom or to get a drink a water. And watching my parents [Willie Jones Kirk and Lee Kirk, Sr.] have to struggle to fight to get the right to vote without paying a poll tax--there's just not been a more personally emotional or rewarding moment for me than to have my mother live long enough to stand there and hold the Bible for me while [Governor] Ann Richards swore me in as secretary of state. And unfortunately, my father had died while I--right after I moved to Washington [D.C.]; he passed away in 1982. But that was just a--to me, just a completion of a circle, and kind of closing that chapter on the state's kind of ugly history (laughter) of discrimination which, now, we're fighting to try to keep closed, in terms of making sure that our right to vote isn't abridged. Speaker 1: Now, is there a highlight to your term of service as secretary of state? Speaker 2: Well, I mean, I did a couple of things personally. I helped to modernize some of our election systems, but I mean, I was there for nine months, but I was there during an election year. I was most--I mean, I guess the highlight was a negative highlight in that I had presided over the election in which Governor Richards was defeated, you know, by George [Walker] Bush, which was (laughter) not my thing. I mean, I guess I can be proud in my own sense of ethics that I conducted an election the way a secretary of state should, and I didn't get involved in a partisan way that Kathleen Harris did, I think, in Florida, in a subsequent presidential race. But I think I'm proudest of the fact that I actually made some substantive changes in personnel and helped to modernize some of the features of our elections office, and that we had an election in '94 [1994] that went out pretty much without a hiccup and without a lot of complaints from either the Democratic or the Republican Party. Story_ID: 253699 Speaker 1: Texas, in a lot of ways, you know, earns our reputation for being different, but, you know, in about a third of the states, secretary of states are appointed and not elected; Texas is one of those states. But as the chief elections officer, whether you're appointed or elected, I do think in order to maintain any appearance of impartiality and evenhandedness, that it's just not within the norm, and it's not good form for a secretary of state to take a role in a partisan election, and more than anything else, you know, I don't know that I can sit here and tell you that, that Kathleen Harris [sic. Katherine Harris] violated the law here or there, but I can say unequivocally that she certainly left herself open to having every decision she made questioned, because of the active partisan role that she played as part of [President] George [Walker] Bush's campaign team in Florida. And I think most secretary of states would disagree with her decision--take issue with her decision to do that. Story_ID: 253700 Speaker 1: What do you think it was that propelled George [Walker] Bush to--well, he's got money, name recognition, a lot of things but, you know, Ann Richards was--I mean, she seemed to represent kind of a new hope for Texas (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She did, she did. But--and I don't want to talk about, you know, my relationship--I know President Bush. I had a chance to work with him as governor; I served on the board of the--I was president of the [Dallas] Zoological Society [Dallas, Texas] earlier in my career and served on that board with his wife [Laura Bush], and they're good people, but my rela--I'd much prefer to talk about my relationship with Ann Richards. She is a fabulous woman of great heart and great love and great passion. And I believe, to this day, had George Bush's name been Jeb Bush, Ann Richard would've been reelected governor of the State of Texas. I am not proud of it, but the enmity in this state against Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] in the 1994 election was stronger than its love for Ann Richards. I mean, in exit polls, on election day, Ann Richards polled a 78 percent favorability rating in Texas in 1994. And people would say--they'd ask voters, "What do you think of the job Ann Richards is doing as governor?" "She's fantastic." "How do you like her?" "I love her." "Who'd you vote for?" "George Bush." (Laughter) Now, I don't want to take anything away from the Bush--he--I mean, the governor was a very disciplined campaigner, and as we know now--and I don't think, you know, he is without intellect. I think it's too much of an over-simplification for people to say Bush isn't smart. He's very--you know, right or wrong, he is very disciplined, he gets for things, he sticks on 'em, and he did that, but I still believe he was aided as much by--in Texas that year, and I could just see and feel it. A vote for George Bush was a vote first and foremost against Bill Clinton; it was almost sort of a vindication of, you know, President [George Herbert Walker] Bush, forty-one, having lost to Bill Clinton, and then third, you know, it was kind of a vote for George W. But, the other thing was Ann Richards at that point was sixty-plus years old, and this is a woman that she would tell you that started out, you know, as a housewife and a volunteer, and as she says, a drunk, and then a reformed alcoholic and a commissioner, and being the first of any generation to do something is wonderful, but it can be a burden like you can't imagine. And what I'm saying, that being the first woman, sort of minority, mayor [sic. governor] of Texas; I mean, she carried the banner for women, she carried the banner for divorced women (laughter), as she called it; she carried the banner, you know, for reformed alcoholics, for minorities and, you know, the weight of all of that can just make it so much of a burden to carry all those banners, that sometimes you want to say, "Just go let me be governor." And personally, I think frankly, she was tired. I mean, I am--I can't say that I was, but I know that I was the first person that saw Ann Richards when she stepped into the [Texas] State Capitol the day after she lost--when she came from her residence, and only 'cause we just happened to run into each other in the elevator. I never saw her shed a tear, except for when she pulled all her staff together and she cried for, you know, the lost jobs for those young people. And she pulled me in her office, 'cause at that time, I was struggling with the decision to whether or not I would run for mayor [of Dallas, Texas]. And I remember--and in the midst of all that, when it was over, she pulled me in her office, she says, "Don't you let my defeat deter you at all from running. You have got to go run and win this mayor's race." Story_ID: 253701 Speaker 1: How were you first approached about the idea of running for mayor [of Dallas, Texas]? Were you approached, or did you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, a little bit of both. I mean--and when I say that, the one thing--and I think you'll get some sense of us--one thing I promised to myself is that if I ever ran, I was not gonna be one-a those politicians that sat and said, "Well, everybody, they came to me and told me to run," (laughter). That's bull, you know; every--as my wife [Matrice Ellis-Kirk] would say, "I wasn't pushed, I jumped." Now, I mean, I had encouragement, but, you know, I loved politics. And you referenced earlier that my work at the city was my first extensive time in the city but, you know, there became a period in my time when I thought, "Wow, you know, I've had this wonderful experience working in the legislature; I've spent two years working in Washington [D.C.], and now I've spent six years working at the local government." I mean, in some ways, I was just sor of a bathed in government at every level. And in my own mind, I'd always--you know, 'cause people would always say, "Well, are you gonna run?" And at some point, I remember always saying, "You know, if you're gonna run, boy, there can't be a better job than being the mayor of a big city, or United States senator, or federal district judge." And having told you how non-distinguished I was in law school [University of Texas at Austin School of Law, Austin, Texas], I knew the judiciary wasn't there (laughter). But anyway, having said that, in my mind I had always thought that if I did run for office, I wanted it to be at the local level. So you fast-forward this, now I'm [Texas] secretary of state. Dallas [Texas], through the late '80s [1980s], was going through a number of transitions in our form of government which I referenced. We'd had a couple of lawsuits forcing the city to redistrict, to--and you know, and expand single-member districts to create opportunities for women and minorities, in nineteen eighty--late nineteen--1990, we'd gone through one of those election cycles and elected our first council under our new form of government in which we went from having--we used to have a system--literally had eight sort of, you know, all at-large members to then eight single-member districts and three at-large; then in 1990, we were forced to go to basically an all single-member district council and one mayor. That mayor happened to be a former Republican congressman named Steve Bartlett, who came home to run for mayor and kind of put everybody in their place--a very good man, but just had a disastrous term of office. I mean, it was a new council, much more diverse; he had a hard time managing that. To everybody's surprise, he announced, in the summer of 1994, he wasn't gonna run for re-election. And at that point, a number of pretty prominent people at--some on--let me back up, one thing. Also, Dallas is unique in that we don't elect our mayors in partisan races, so you just run for mayor. You don't--we don't have Democratic or Republican primaries. But a number of friends of mine began to call and say, "Wow, you ought to look at this." And again, I thought, "You know, I've taken a year off to be secretary of state, I got a baby, I got a wife--I gotta make money." And again, remember I told you, this was a job that pays fifty dollars a week and, you know, I'm not a captain of the industry; I was a lawyer, and a new partner. But I talked about it, I prayed about it, I talked about it, I prayed about it, until ultimately, obviously, I made the decision to run. 'Cause based on the number and the breadth of people that were approaching me, I began to think, "You know if I can keep the African American vote, if I can get the Democratic Ann Richards vote, I can win this thing." And notwithstanding Dallas' reputation and Texas' reputation for being such a conservative Republican stalwart, our urban areas are just like every other urban area, and I wasn't running for mayor of Texas, I was running for mayor of Dallas. Ann Richards carried Dallas, Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] carried Dallas and, from my vantage point of secretary of state, I just quietly began to crunch the numbers, and when I pulled out Dallas County [Texas] and looked at where the vote was, I knew I could win this mayor's race. And so I threw my name in the hat along with six other candidates, and to everybody's surprise--our mayor's election during the spring; I mean, I ran reasonably strong, I had a modest amount, but enough business support to kind of give me credibility in the Anglo community, very strong support in the African American community. One of the candidates I ran against was an incumbent, a Hispanic [Latino] councilman who drew most of the Hispanic vote, but much to everyone's surprise, in a seven-person field, I won without a run-off with--it's over--with over 60 percent of the vote. Speaker 1: Hmm, that's pretty good. Speaker 2: Yeah, shocked me, too (laughter). That was kind of my deal. But it, but it was; it was, it was--and I loved it. Story_ID: 253702 Speaker 1: I was very fortunate, I had a great tenure, and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And this is a job that pays fifty dollars a week? Speaker 1: Pays fifty dollars a week. Speaker 2: As mayor--hmm. Speaker 1: But, that's one reason I love this place; I had joined--my old law firm dissolved in December of 1994, and I joined Gardere Wynne & Sewell [Gardere Wynne Sewell LLP] in January of 1995. Now, flip-side to us not paying is you have your own job, you have your own job, and if you run your company and made $8 million--you know, as long as you aren't--you know, obviously, there can be no conflict, and there should be no convergence of your private interest and your public interest. But the good thing for me was by then, I had a four-year successful track record as a successful governmental affairs, you know, lawyer, and I had enough of a foundation built on that I could maintain that practice and maintain my partnership, which allowed me to feed my family and be responsible there, and go and be mayor. 'Cause notwithstanding the fiction of it being a part-time, fifty dollar a week job, as you know, once you're the mayor, you're the mayor, and you're the mayor seven days a week, twenty-four hours a day. Speaker 2: Hmm. What--do you have any stories from your tenure as mayor that you can tell us about? (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, you know, I got stories for everything. You, you gotta put more collars on me than that (laughter)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, all right. Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Even though it was won--the whole thing was wonderful and one, I mean, I--my biggest challenge, at least originally--and when--you know, when you're--you know, I talked about--we were talking about Governor [Ann] Richards' race and her, you know, her defeat to [George Walker] Bush, and being first. Well, one, I was the first black mayor of Dallas [Texas], but I made a point of saying to the African American community, "I know we're excited and I--but I can't be elected mayor of a city with a 25 percent African American population on 'we need a black mayor.' You've got to give me the liberty to go be mayor." Secondly, I'm not that special. You know, while I'm proud to be the first black mayor, it could've been Maynard [Jackson], it could've been Tom Bradley, it could've been any one of--you know, I, again am the beneficiary of this accident of time that made me the right person at the right place. Third, I do think America had, at least at the mayoral level, kind of gone through its neurosis over what happens when a black mayor takes over a city. So, the fact that Carl, you know, [Carl] Stokes had governed Cleveland [Ohio], and it didn't blow up, but more importantly, Maynard Jackson, and then more contemporarily, that Henry Cisneros had had such a successful tenure, even though Dallas hadn't done it, you know, the whole notion of a African American mayor of a major city, or an ethnic mayor, had somewhat been played out in the broader picture. Speaker 2: Now, you became mayor around the same time as--it was around the same time as [HistoryMaker] Lee P. Brown in Houston [Texas]? Speaker 1: I was elected four years ahead of Mayor Brown (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Before, ahead of Lee P.--okay, all right. Speaker 1: I was elected the same time as Bill Campbell in Atlanta [Georgia]; [HistoryMaker] Marc [H.] Morial; in Denver [Colorado], I think [HistoryMaker] Wellington Webb may have been in office a couple of years before I did. But the campaign was just wonderful; I remember every bit of it, I remember all the sounds, I worked my tail off, you know; the excitement in the African American community, the anxiety, you know, in the white community--and I'd had more people try to tell me how they did it in Atlanta [Georgia], and I kept--I finally had to tell somebody, "You know, Dallas and Atlanta are not the same--" Story_ID: 253703 Speaker 1: Dallas [Texas] and Houston [Texas] are tri-ethnic cities in every sense of the word. And Atlanta [Georgia]--and I know it's changing--it's still--Atlanta and Washington [D.C.] are still black and white cities. San Antonio [Texas] is a brown and white city. Politics in a bi-ethnic community are real easy. You walk in a room and 70 percent of the people look one or other way, you got tp know you're deal--you know where you can play and you cut your deal. When you walk in a room, and there's 25 percent who look one way, and 30 percent who look here, it's obvious no one group can get what they want without one of the other groups. And so you immediately--I mean, it's like watching--it's a smaller version of 'Survivor,' you know; it's gonna be [HistoryMaker] Ron [Kirk] and Larry [Crowe] versus him, or you two against me. And there's as much anxiety about who's gonna be left out as among who's gonna be getting in. So, one of the things I did was--and everything we did in our campaign, we had to transmit a message that this is a guy that can be mayor for all of Dallas. And you asked me if I have slogans, and I love 'em; I find 'em, I love simple slogans that people can do, but Dallas had gone through a great period of racial unrest and disharmony: in our community, on the council. Our city council fights were legendary; I mean, we literally had fights in council chamber. We had ugly shouting matches, and I mean, they were played out all over the country. And so one of the African proverbs I adopted was this simple saying that, "Two people in a burning hut don't have time to argue." And, you know, my kind of tag line was, "The blame game's over, nobody's won; it's time to stop fighting. We got to put our house in order." And everything I did, I made sure that I had on my stage, and it was scripted almost to the point of (laughter), you know, of being as non-transparent as could be, but I never took a stage that I didn't have a woman, and an Asian, and a Hispanic, and an Anglo, and a Jew; but I wanted to give those voters who weren't of color, a sense that, "Yeah, he's African American, but he's also gonna be out for all of us." And that's, that's kind of what our theme was, and that's the way we tried to govern. But still the campaign was just as exciting as anything that I've ever done in my life. Speaker 2: Okay. So, [HistoryMaker] Wellington Webb had the shoe icon, you know; he walked the whole Denver's [Denver, Colorado]--he walked around the whole edge of Denver, I think (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I didn't have a shoe. You know, you learn those tricks--you know, people look at that and go, "Oh, you gonna walk and knock on doors?" When you running for mayor--you know, Dallas is twice the size of Atlanta, or Denver, or San Francisco [California]; it's a big city. Now, I'm not--you know, I'm--nobody gets in the metropolitan areas. I had enough sense to know I wasn't gonna knock on a million doors, and I hate to say it, and I don't mean to be crass, I also knew--and I mean I'd studied elections, again. I knew I was gonna get 90-plus percent of the African American vote. The only question in my election was frankly whether white folk were gonna--were ready to take a chance on a black guy. And so, I didn't have a ton--you know, I raised and spent about a million bucks, but what I found when I did my focus groups, and I didn't spend my--I had a consultant, Carol Reed, who's a white Republican woman who had run the last four successful mayors' races for both Democrats and Republicans, we figured out early on that I did okay on TV, but when I walked in a room and sat down and talked with people, I said--I just sort of put 'em a ease and dispelled whatever fears that they may have that, you know, I'm more Willie Horton than I was [HistoryMaker General] Colin [L.] Powell. And so we--it was harder on me, but we realized early on that I have to be in front of people. And so I did, I think--I don't know, a hundred of what we called Meet Ron Kirk events in which we got people to agree to invite anywhere from twenty to sixty of their neighbors to come there, and we totally changed my strategy, and I mean, we were doing three a night, as many as we could, and I just did 'em--bang, bang, bang, bang, bang, bang. But the biggest thing which caught on, was--I know it sounds crazy--was this simple say--you know, for a tag line, throw-away line in a speech-"This blame game is over, and nobody's won," which just got played over and over, 'cause the city was at war. Everybody was fighting everybody. Every--the city council was an embarrassment, people felt. And that just seemed to kind of capture people's fascination with, "We're tired of fighting one another; imagine what we could do if we all got on the same page." Story_ID: 253704 Speaker 1: You know, public safety and better schools and better jobs, that's not a black issue, that's not a white issue, that's not Hispanic [Latino]--you--the more you can get all of us saying, "Yeah, I can go along with that," you take the debate off of race and what's--you know, what defines us by our lowest common denominator, and you raise it to a level of where you go, "You know, that really is kind of a Dallas [Texas] agenda." And I think more than anything, that's, that's what my [mayoral] campaign was noted for. Then, the second thing was people wondered if I could do--and I mean I don't want to--I know we've got three hours, but I mean, I could spend eight hours, but I can't--I don't know in this short time I can give you an idea of how dysfunctional our council was. But I think, more than anything, within six months--our average council meeting used to be eleven and a half hours. I mean, they ended--if it had started on Wednesdays at 9, and they went to 10:30, 11, 1 or 2:00. I mean during my whole tenure as mayor, our average council member [sic. meeting] ended probably at 4:30, you know, without the acrimony; we got more business done with more civility. And then we'd be good at--we could go and focus on what we wanted to do, because we weren't fighting one another. Story_ID: 253705 Speaker 1: What are the highlights of your administration? I know we've--I've read about--I know a new sports arena [American Airlines Center, Dallas, Texas] was built, and there were some--let's see--a light rail system and-- Speaker 2: We did a lot of things. One--you know, we had a lot of challenges, and one, I was the beneficiary of some groundwork that had been laid before, but we ushered in the era of light rail in the Southwest. We were the first southwestern city to prove that you could make rail work in other than a densely-populated area like--say Chicago [Illinois] or New York [New York]. But we also--there was--you know, ours was a twenty year journey. We do everything different here in Texas, you know. We thought we would finance well ourselves by taxing ourselves sales tax, so literally, everybody in Chicago and New York looked at us like, "Y'all are nuts, but that's great. Give us your share of the federal dollar." But what happened is over the twenty year process of trying to save enough money to pay for it, there was a lot of skirmishing, a lot of pull-back, because we have a thirteen city regional transit society--authority, because it takes that much to pay for it. And those other cities, toward the end, began to really believe, "You know, we're never gonna have enough money but to do anything but build a model train for Dallas [Texas], so let's get out now." And when I became mayor, we had this curious phenomenon, before we'd ever built one track, that any of the cities within DART [Dallas Area Rapid Transit] on a certain amount of notice could have what they call a pull-out election, and so six of our neighbor cities had scheduled pull-out elections within the first year that I was elected mayor and we, working with those mayors, were able to defeat all of those, we were able to open the first rail line in Dallas, prove all the critics wrong; it was an extraordinary hint, but it also showed that it could work, and it showed how big a part it could be in urban development. The big picture--I mean it's--unfortunately, in the world of mayors, you know, building sports arenas gets all the attention, and I would say I found out--and I say that, but I do think it was a curious phenomenon that I noted at one point, that every new arena built kind of in the '90s [1990s] were built by a city with a black mayor--from Norm Rice [HistoryMaker Norman Rice] in Seattle [Washington] to what Maynard [Jackson] and Bill Campbell in Atlanta [Georgia], to what [HistoryMaker] Lee [P.] Brown did in Houston [Texas], what I did here in Dallas (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Detroit [Michigan], yeah (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) what Dennis Archer did in Detroit. I mean, all of the sports arenas were being built in urban areas headed by African American mayors. But the real thing for me, against the backdrop of what we talked about earlier, was I had to change the culture and the perception of what could be done here. We had--there was a lot of anxiety when I ran over--first of all, couldn't anybody get quote-unquote control of the [city] council--make them behave. Secondly, the Dallas Mavericks were threatening and asking for a new home, but nobody believed we could build a home, because they never believed the city could get its act together-- Story_ID: 253706 Speaker 1: --Third, like every major urban city, we were really struggling to re-define our urban core and sort of stop the decline of jobs and families and businesses out of the city and revitalize that urban core, and what I guess I'm most proud of was at least conducting myself in a way and sort of re-establishing the tone--changing the paradigm at city hall that people believed we could do any of these things, and to me, that is more important, 'cause if you don't change the way you do your business, you don't get to a debate about the arena, and big picture--most important thing we did was I passed the largest bond program in our city's history, a $500 million bond project, half of which was devoted to an urban re-development project to re-do our green belt. We have a fairly pitiful waterway here in the Trinity River that really functions more as a flood control panel--channel for the city than it does a waterway. This two hundred and plus million dollar bond initiative I passed will, over the life of that program, help us to re-capture that--really rebuild a series of lakes, improve flood protection throughout the city equitably, which it wasn't, allow us to add other amenities that will give us an attraction in the heart of our city that is going to be around for two hundred years as opposed to, you know, a sports arena which may last 'til you pay off the bonds. Now I'm proud of the fact that we kept the Dallas Mavericks and the [Dallas] Stars here, and our American Airlines Center [Dallas, Texas] is, I think, unquestionably the finest arena that's been built in the country, and I'm happy I got to hoist the Stanley Cup and host the [Dallas] Cowboys trade, you know, I mean Cowboys Super Bowl Parade and, based on how they played last night, that ain't gonna be a problem any time soon (laughter). But more importantly, I'm most happy about the things we did every day to improve the lives of people that will never be able to afford to go sit in that arena, by making our neighborhood stronger, bringing more jobs in the communities where poor people, who tend to be African American and Hispanic [Latino], live, than we'd ever had before, having an equity of spending of city services and investment throughout the city, whether you lived in our richest neighborhoods or our poorest neighborhoods, but changing the tone and the tenor of the debate at our city hall so that our city worked better, grew faster, created more jobs, invested more in parks, libraries, public safety than in any period of time in our history. Speaker 2: Now, what aspect of change were you the most passionate about? Speaker 1: The biggest thing was chained to the cultural change and the attitude. I mean like all cities that we talked about and, you know, from my story growing up, I mean, it just is that way; every city that--the city with the, the greatest need for infrastructure, the greatest challenges as it relates to decayed--decaying housing infrastructure, the highest crime--sometimes the highest crime rate, the--and the biggest absence of retail, or where we live, you know, the old black and Hispanic segregated neighborhoods that were built. And it so hard to change minds about investment and opportunity, and that had to be a passion for me, but I had to articulate it in a way that it was an issue for Dallas [Texas], that it wasn't a, quote-unquote, black issue, it was an issue for Dallas. But Dallas is land-locked, and the reality is the only place we have room to grow are in our predominantly ethnic neighborhoods, and if Dallas is gonna continue to add jobs and grow, we're gonna have to embrace our diversity as an economic tool. And one of the things I tried to do was take advantage of the fact that while--and, I mean, Dallas doesn't have any geographic asset or reason for being here, other than the fact that the Trinity is non-navigable, and the guy that founded Dallas got stuck here, which is a true story (laughter). But I mean you fly in--I love this city, but I tell people, you know, we're a commercial center; nobody moves to Dallas to be near the mountains or the oceans, you know. It's a great testament to our entrepreneurial spirit that we've become, you know, a city of over a million people without oil fields, without mountains, without an ocean, without a waterway; we create our opportunities, but we've got to create them in a way that all of our citizens benefitted from it, and that's what I tried to do. Story_ID: 253707 Speaker 1: Now, you were only mayor [of Dallas, Texas] for one term, right? Speaker 2: I was the mayor--I was still--I was the mayor actually two and a half terms. Speaker 1: Two, oh. Speaker 2: I was elected for a four year term--I served from 1995 to '99 [1999], I was re-elected in 1999 with over 75 percent of the vote and was content to be in office and finish my term and come back to my career, and then in the spring of 2001, Phil Gramm, who had served in the United States Senate for three terms and run for president twice and mercifully failed (laughter), but Phil Gramm sort of unexpectedly announced he was gonna resign, and I do believe, and I will tell you, I still believe, one of the--with the exception of when my brother died--one of the last days I cried was the night before I resigned from mayor. I mean, I loved it, you know. I think if you were to talk to Rich Daley or--and I know you done talked to [HistoryMaker] Lee [P.] Brown or any other mayor, it is just one of the most dynamic, rewarding, frustrating jobs in government, but having worked in that United States Senate, I knew what a powerful opportunity that presented for me to continue my public service and try to help do for Texas what I'd done for Dallas [Texas]. I knew it was a long-shot; I mean, being a Democrat, an African American in a state that, you know, had produced not only Phil Gramm, but Tom DeLay and--I don't know--Dick Armey and [President] George [Walker] Bush, but it was too special an opportunity--U.S. senators serve for six years, you know; whether they're from Texas or Illinois or Alabama, they almost all serve two or three terms. So, I made the decision in November of 2001 to resign midway through my term and seek the U.S. Senate seat. Speaker 1: Now, that is quite a decision to make. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Oh, yeah, but anybody can run, you know; it's just like filing a lawsuit. But I did, and I got to tell you, I didn't look back; I knew it was a uphill race but I didn't approach it that way. I was on a short time frame. I resigned November of--the first week of November in 2001. We had--Texas is an early primary state, so we had our Democratic primary in March, so I had less than five months, and I raised $3 million in five months, and won a very tough contested Democratic primary, and even though we didn't get there, we ran one heck of a race. We energized and mobilized a lot of people all over the state, and I--you know, I often tell people that I think I might have done better had I not been from Texas, 'cause, you know, we all--all of us--I mean--and I know even those non-Texans sort of talk about our addiction to how big everything here is maybe with more ridicule than you do admiration, but this is a huge state. And I'm not so sure I was more disadvantaged by thinking that I was from here and that I could grasp what it meant to run for office in a state, you know, that--with 24 million people and twenty-two media markets, but--and having said all that, I didn't know any better not to. So I tell you, I ran, and we fought, and we clawed, and it was a tough competitive race, but the events of September 11th, 2001 [9/11] probably changed and impacted that election in 2002 as much as they are impacting this presidential election that's about to occur next Tuesday. Story_ID: 253708 Speaker 1: Now, you ran [for United States Senate] against a Republican by the name of John Cornyn? Speaker 2: Yes. He had been a [Texas] Supreme Court [Supreme Court of Texas] judge--he--appointed to the--appointed Supreme Court justice, I think, by Governor [George Walker] Bush, and then ran for re-election but, but essentially ran on a platform that, you know, "I'll do whatever the president wants me to do." And in Texas, if you're a Republican, that's good enough, but, I mean, and I don't have any, I don't have any ill feelings. I mean, we got real close. I ran on the first ticket, ironically, with a Hispanic [Latino] who was running for governor; we were on the most diverse ticket in this nation's history, but I just don't think I could ever overcome the sense that we were at war, and the country was evenly divided--and also, I will say, I think--and I'm not taking anything away from Senator Cornyn, but Karl Rove was brilliant in crafting an argument that--because one, I had a great relationship with the governor when he [President George Walker Bush] was governor; we got along fine, and people knew that. And--again and going back to reality, remember I told you how we were elected non-partisan; I won my mayor's race with extraordinary Republican support, and even when I ran for the United States Senate in the summer of 2001, I was the only Democrat in the country that had outraised my Republican opponent, and he--and outraised him in the most Republican precinct in the State of Texas, I raised more money in my U.S. Senate race than my opponent. But Karl Rove was masterful in crafting an argument that if George Bush was going to lose the United States Senate--and you remember Jim Jeffords had switched party? The senate was even--that this race was not about--you know, [HistoryMaker] Ron Kirk's a good guy, but Texas cannot be the state that deprives George Bush of a Republican majority. And a lot of folks, you know, you know, they were good friends, but at least they were honest enough to say, "You know what? John Cornyn's a good guy; we think you're a great guy, but this is about George." But, you know, I haven't looked back. I was fortunate; I think we ran a great race, and we enjoyed great support, but more importantly for me, I didn't go into debt, I finished my (laughter)--you know, to run a federal race and not end up under investigation by the Federal Election Commission [FEC]--I mean we had no FEC violations; I had no debt; I paid all my bills, you know. I think we gave an inside look to how politics can be to a lot of the next generation of Ron Kirks and [HistoryMaker] Barack Obamas. And I tell people, you know, too much of my life, I have sat in chairs that were reserved for Tom Bradley or Maynard Jackson or [HistoryMaker] Willie [L.] Brown or, you know, Juanita Crafts and others. But they couldn't sit in 'em, because this state wouldn't allow 'em to, and I likened my race for the senate, and any race for us, as a relay race, you know. Everybody wants to be the--run the last leg on the 400-meter relay in the Olympics, 'cause you get to cross the finish line; but somebody's got to run the first three legs, and my being there, my being [Texas] secretary of state, I have crossed more tapes and held more batons and stood on more platforms than I'm probably entitled to, purely because I was born at the right time. And I believe my run for the United States Senate was my way of saying, "It's time for me to run the first leg and hand the baton to somebody else." So, I think it's gonna happen. When I look at the demographic changes in this state, there's no doubt we're going to have some young African American boy or some young Hispanic girl that's gonna represent this state in one of its highest offices. Story_ID: 253709 Speaker 1: What's next for you now? You went back to the law partnership [R Wynne Sewell LLP] here [Dallas, texas] in (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yep, I was back here the morning after--I didn't know what else to do, so I showed back up to work and-- Speaker 1: Yeah, I read that, and it seems like (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I mean I--listen, I got a fifteen--you know, we were talking; I got a fifteen year old [Elizabeth Kirk] and a twelve year old [Catherine Kirk] and, you know, one--the one blessing for me being mayor when--and I look back at some of the pictures you'd asked me to go through--when I was appointed [Texas] secretary of state, man, my daughters were five and two and a half; when I was elected mayor [of Dallas, Texas], they were six and three, and the good thing about it is that mayors, at least you sleep in your own bed every night and, you know, I--you know, at my daughters' elementary school, I was never mayor, I was Alex's dad, I was Catherine's dad, and it didn't disrupt our lives and I--while there's a part of me, I've got to tell you, that I envy, in the most positive way that I think I can, [HistoryMaker] Barack Obama. I also know the extraordinary drain that's gonna be on him and his young family because--Maynard Jackson told me, "When you're the first in that sense, you know, you all just think you're electing Barack Obama from"--I spent more of my time with people calling me saying, "Can you get Barack," you know, "to come speak to our NW"--he is gonna be in such a demand. But anyway, for me, I was able to maintain my family life. When my daughters--you know, I love politics, and this is an intoxicating business, but I promised myself I would never, never allow myself to become so addicted to being in office that I'd put it ahead of my family, and when I look at the realities--I think somebody put out a statistic the other day the average age of a United States Senator is sixty-five, and their average net worth is $10 million. Well, I'm fifty, you know; I've got the rest of my life to play politics, but I got one chance to watch my daughter go from being a fifteen year-old to twenty-one, and I think the most important place I can be right now is trying to build some economic wealth for us and to be a part of their lives, and then I've got all the rest of my life to pursue my political dreams. Speaker 1: Okay, so you're not done politically. Speaker 2: I'd like to think not, but you know, but if I am, I'm comfortable with that. I mean I've--I'll be honest, I--because of my twin love of the law, I've always struggled with whether I wanted to be, you know, the next Lloyd Bentsen or the next [HistoryMaker] Vernon [E.] Jordan [Jr.], and in my world, whichever way I turn is not gonna be bad. I'm always gonna be involved, I'd like to think, in the political discourse, and that may be in elective office, it may be in a role played like Vernon Jordan or Bob Strauss [Robert S. Strauss], or others. Story_ID: 253710 Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: Well, my biggest hope right now is that we vote like we've never voted before (laughter) in this election in November. And I--and you know, and I--in every election, you hear people say, "This is the most impor--." But I do think this is critical. And knowing--and I say this in all honesty, knowing [President] George [Walker] Bush like I do, I have been almost stunned at how much to the right he has moved as president versus how he was as a governor, but if you go back to my--the start of our conversation and my journey in the law, because of my influence of Thurgood Marshall, I'm more concerned about the fact this next president is probably going to have a chance to put three more people on the [U.S.] Supreme Court. Everything you and I--that's good that's happening in our lives, Larry [Crowe], happened because of something somebody served on that bench did fifty years ago. You pack that Supreme Court with a bunch of forty year-old right-wing jurists, our children will live under that rule of thumb for the rest of their lives, and after what happened in Florida in 2002, I'm just hoping and praying that that will ignite a sense of passion and a sense of urgency among our community over how important it is for us to vote as it was for our parents when we were struggling to overcome the poll tax and literacy test. Secondly, I do think we have a unique opportunity. My father [Lee Kirk, Sr.] used to always sort of ridicule what he used to call black folks hanging onto what he called most favorite minority status. And you observed, you know, Texas doesn't have that big a black community but, you know, this year is remarkable in that at least this was--2000 was also a census year, and then-Secretary of Commerce Bill Daley [William M. Daley] asked me to chair the National Census Advisory Committee [National Advisory Committee] which I did. But that year was remarkable; its first year, we know what--we intuitively sensed that Hispanics [Latinos], nationally, had overtaken African Americans as the largest ethnic minority. I think that gives us an opportunity to say, "You know, we had these issues and yes we had these challenges and we had this legacy of discrimination in this country that's got to be overcome, but you know what? This is an opportunity to have a shift in our thinking." And I think whether it was articulated in the right way or not, but from Bill Cosby to [HistoryMaker] Russell [Simmons]-- Speaker 1: Simmons? Speaker 2: --Simmons and others, I think the next challenge for African Americans generationally really does have to be economic empowerment. And, you know, we have lived a long time at the trough of sort of using the courts and the political infrastructure, and somehow we have to take this wonderful blending of opportunities we've had because of social integration, but get back to the entrepreneurship that existed in our community that was never stronger than when we lived in segregation. You know, the sad thing, we were never economically more entrepreneurial than when we were during segregation; we had our own baseball leagues, we ran on--if we could do that when we were forced to, we should be able to do that now, because we choose to. And that, I think, has to be the next frontier for us as a people: continue to be politically responsible, but be much more--the next frontier has to be economic empowerment. I--one of the most rewarding experiences of my career as mayor was that I got to travel a lot, you know, as the public face of Dallas [Texas], and I promoted Dallas internationally. I went to Europe, I went to Asia, and I went to all that, but the first trip--trade mission I led, I led to South Africa, and no--obviously, no mayor of Dallas had ever been--no business delegation. And we go over, and like everybody, I mean, I would, I would love to meet Nelson Mandela but, you know, presidents receive presidents--there is a protocol. And I know I'm not on that pecking order but I want to, and I make it known, and I meet the South African ambassador; I tell him this true story that I hadn't told many people of--that when Mandela was freed from prison, and if you'll even allow me a few minutes and I'll close it, but when Nelson--and when he was freed from prison and he'd--I don't know if you remember, he came to United States in either early '90 [1990] or '91 [1991]--might've been '90 [1990]; he only went to three cities and, you know, he was embraced around the world. If you remember when he went to London [England], I think they said something like 4 million people packed Trafalgar Square [London, England]. When he came to the U.S., he only [sic.] went to Detroit [Michigan], Atlanta [Georgia] and Washington [D.C.]. Speaker 1: Yeah, Chicago [sic.]--I think he went to (unclear). Speaker 2: But I didn't know anybody in those cities and--I mean, and people--it was just impossible to get tickets. But having worked in Washington, the Black--the [Congressional] Black Caucus hosted him for a breakfast. And so I started calling, and everybody was like, "We get four tickets each, one for each member of the Caucus, one--." I mean, nobody had a ticket, and I remember saying to my wife [Matrice Ellis-Kirk], "I don't care," I said, "if I can't be in the event, I got to at least be in the city." I called my cousin, I called all my friends and I said, "I'm coming." They said, "[HistoryMaker] Ron [Kirk], we don't have tickets, don't--" but anyway, I got on a plane (laughter), and I just went. Story_ID: 253711 Speaker 1: And I remember, I stayed at a friend's house, and she was volunteering on the deal, and I got to the event, and I mean there were just no tickets and the may--I think it was in the Rayburn House Office Building [Washington, D.C.], and everybody was outside, you know, waiting to just get a glimpse of him, and if I can go back (unclear), you know I told you, you know, there are some advantages to growing up in the South and a family full of waiters and bartenders, and I had on what I call my dress blue suit and my white shirt, and while I'm standing outside the door just hoping, looking, scheming any way to get in, I notice somebody is pulling over here, all these young kids that are obviously the wait staff for this event, and they all have on white shirts and ties (laughter), and stuff. So my friend who knows me--two words--says--she goes, "Please don't do that." And so I take off my coat, and I fold it up and I throw it under a table (laughter), I stick my tie in my shirt and I go get in line and I go in with the wait staff, and I serve breakfast (laughter). But I had to be in that room, and I remember when [Nelson] Mandela came in, I mean, the room just exploded; I don't--you know, I can't remember a thing he said; I remember I cried like a baby just to be in his presence. So, anyway, getting to this backdrop, now I'm mayor [of Dallas, Texas], and I go to South Africa, and I met the South African Ambassador Franklin Sonn, who's a fabulous man, and somebody has told him this story. So, you know, we're gonna try to back-door me a meeting to Nels--to President Mandela, but it has to be unofficial, 'cause it's just too much demands on his time and his health. Well, it--and I mean now we--they give me a pager, and we have all this stuff and we have all these complex deals that--if I get to see him, it's gonna be two minutes on this day and literally just go in, say "Hi." Well, I'm carrying this pager and I'm praying, I'm praying. My pager rings, I get this call and they said, "You're gonna go see the president." They said, "We got good news, and we got bad news." They said, "You're gonna get to see the president." I'm like, "Thank God." And they said, "Well, you're not seeing President Mandela, you're seeing President [F.W.] de Klerk." And I'm like, "What?" And they said, "Well"--and I had forgotten, you know, people forget post-apartheid; for a period of time, de Klerk and Mandela were in this power-sharing arrangement. So they said, "Oh, yeah, you're going to Pretoria [South Africa], and we have a car picking you up in fifteen minutes." (Laughter) And so, I can't remember if my wife [Matrice Ellis-Kirk] put me in there, but I mean I'm sitting in the back of this car, Larry [Crowe], and I mean, I'm pissed, I'm fuming; I'm thinking I'm come--and I mean I had--but I'm thinking, you know, kinda one-a those--as my sister's sometimes favorite prayer, "Lord, I love you but I see why you don't have too many friends," (laughter). I'm thinking, "What is this?" And I guess God heard me and somewhere, from that ride from Johannesburg [South Africa] to Pretoria, it hit me that, you know, they did give the Nobel [Peace] Prize to both of 'em. They shared it. And while no, it wasn't Mandela that--what de Klerk did, in his own way, by letting this man out of prison, was every bit as courageous as what Mandela was doing. But long story short, I spent the most fascinating hour and a half with de Klerk that you could ever imagine. And I say all of this--and one of the comments he made to me talking about the--and other people had commented to me on the sort of curious protectionism between Mandela and de Klerk, and de Klerk was very protective of Mandela and that film that--what he had to do to transform their economy, because of the influence of the trade unions there and labor, into a free market economy was every bit as difficult as it was for him to turn his back, you know--I mean not turn his back but, but basically say to the white South Afrikaners, "We got a power share." But anyway, in this conversation, he says to me, he says, "You know, one thing all people have in common, whether we are black or white, no matter what," he said, "all of us have come from the land; all of our families, no matter where we come from, started out as a farmer, and some generation got tired of looking at the back of that mule and said, 'Daddy, I don't want to farm, I want to go to town.' And that generation left the farm and went to town, and if they were lucky, got a job in the saloon or maybe a grocery store. And then it was the next generation that said, 'You know, I don't wanna work in a factory or in a saloon, I wanna go--I want you to have it better, and you go to the city.' And they go the city and they become the teachers and the postal clerks--my parents and your parents; or they became the factory workers in the auto and the steel mills. And then our parents say to us, 'You know what? I want you to go be a doctor and a lawyer,' and then we go out and become professionals. And then we're the generation that finally says, 'You know what? If we can work at a law firm, why can't we own the law firm? If we can work at Ford [Motor Company], why can't we own the de'"--and what I'm saying is that the next generation, I think, for African Americans, we have got to make that leap to that entrepreneurial state of life to where we, instead of looking for financing, say, "Why can't we own our own bank?" And instead of decrying the lack of investment in South Side of Chicago [Illinois] or South Dallas [Dallas, Texas], say, "You know what? Be our own developers." And political empowerment is important and all of that, but I think the next frontier for us has to be entrepreneurship and wealth creation. Story_ID: 253712 Speaker 1: You say your mother [Willie Jones Kirk] got a chance to see you be sworn in as mayor, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She did, and that was great fun; that was great fun (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) For her and that generation; that was--I mean, it was, and I mean--you know, I--on one hand I think--I mean I had--that's a hard thing to balance, the whole--excitement and anxiety of a black community with that--but it was still special; I mean other than--you asked (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I mean, being mayor is a big deal. Speaker 2: It is a big--it is a big---oh, I got to tell you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--You know, it--even still it's kind of funny to think that we can actually interview 'em-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, you--here's one; you asked for anecdotes. When I was running and, you know, a lot of people had run before, but our commu--you know, we're not crazy; I mean, people think differently than if Joe Blow runs for mayor or if Harold Washington. I mean, I as running--I was working in the United States Senate when Harold Washington ran for mayor. Let me tell you, every black staffer in Washington [D.C.] took a leave and came to Chicago [Illinois] I mean--'cause we all thought, "Man, we got a shot." This was different, you know; this is Harold. So I'm running here, and I'm trying to, you know, balance that emotion and all that, but there was some point in my race when people--and I know it's weird, but I guess it was when I went on TV and had billboards and people thought, "Okay, this brother's got a shot," (laughter). But all of a sudden, you know, the number of black people turning up at my rallies just goes up, and the intensity goes up and I'm--but I'm doing a rally over in South Dallas [Dallas, Texas] which is the heart of our black community, one Saturday afternoon, a little church, and I mean, it is like a tent revival. I mean, the preacher's got everybody wired up, and we go, and we do this thing, and I mean, it is--this place feels like the roof's gonna come off of it. And sitting on the front row is literally about a ninety year old African American woman, and just tears are streaming down her eyes, and everybody's deferring to her, obviously, and I don't know her, but I mean she's clearly the matriarch of this community. So, when the thing's over, I mean, I got--you know I told you, I got a ton of these things, and I got staffers pulling me, and her granddaughter comes over to her and says, you know, "Would you just take two minutes to let my grandmother say something to him?" And I said, "Sure." So I go over to the lady, and she takes my hand, Larry [Crowe], and she just holds my hand and she doesn't says anything, and then she just starts working her hands up my arm and just touching my body. At first, I'm thinking, "Oh, my God, what is this?" And then she just takes her finger, and she starts tracing my face, and it takes me a while, you know, once I get over that, to realize she's blind. And she's just touching--she says, "You just have to forgive me, baby," she said, "but I just--I never thought I'd live long enough to see the day Dallas [Texas] would elect a black man as mayor." And I just got a--and I mean she was crying, and I--you know--and it was one of those moments you stand up going, "Don't cry, don't cry," you know. And then I get in the car, and I get in the back seat, and I mean, I'm just blubbering, but it did mean a lot and at the end of the day--you asked what I was proud--I mean--and there are a lot of things, and I hate distilling it. One of the things I'm proud of is I don't think I did anything to disrespect the honor that she gave me that day during that--my tenure as mayor. Story_ID: 253713 Speaker 1: What would you consider at this point to be your legacy? Speaker 2: Well, I'm not done writing my legacy, and I'm serious. I tell--you know, I tell my kids [Elizabeth Kirk and Catherine Kirk] that; I mean--and mine--you go back to my home, you know, the only thing that matters are you happy. I mean, I--well, one, I'm happy; I'd love to think--if nothing else, I think my sisters--my mother [Willie Jones Kirk] and my surviving sisters can say, "What a great son, what a great brother." I hope my wife [Matrice Ellis-Kirk] and my daughters will feel, "What a wonderful husband and father." And I think wherever I've worked, the people will say, "What a great guy. What a good intellect, what a great work ethic, what a great man of integrity and vision." But more than anything, I hope they'll say, you know, "Boy, he lost that [U.S.] Senate race--." I mean, I hope they won't say, "He lost that senate race and just blended into obscurity." I mean, I'm fifty years old and, you know, whether I run for the senate or not--hell, we had to drag Jesse Helms out the U.S. Senate, so whatever I do, I'm gonna--whether I go out at seventy or eighty or ninety, I hope to add a lot more chapters to this book before I start writing the epilogue. Story_ID: 253714 Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Well, I'm not sure if that's the--I guess those things--someone of integrity, of vision, of passion, of concern and, you know, I mean--the same things I said; more to--I mean, I think those personal things really--it--having had to bury a brother [Lee Kirk, Jr.] at fifty-four years old, and go through the emotion of watching him suffer and deteriorate in a hospital for eight weeks forces you to be reflective about your life. You realize how inconsequential the--I mean even though we go to church, and we're people of faith, and we say it but, you know, it ain't about what you own, it's not about all the titles on your door at the end of the day, it's how you love: how deep you love, how you treat the people around you. And, you know, in that sense, I guess more than anything I just--I still feel like I'm just one of the most richly-blessed people in the world, because I'm loved and have been able to love and be around people that have good values, good faith, and good courage. Story_ID: 253715 Speaker 1: Is there anything major that you would do differently if you had it to do again? Speaker 2: I guess only study a little harder in law school [University of Texas at Austin School of Law, Austin, Texas]. So of those three jobs I told you (laughter), I could at least think about something (laughter)--following [U.S.] Supreme Court on the--following Thurgood [Marshall] on the Supreme Court (laugher). No, no; you know, in the end of the day, I resist that because boy, my life has been so rewarding, and I'm afraid if I go back and change this, how do I know it doesn't change everything else? You know, if I go back and say, "Well, I was richer," and that, I never might have met the wonderful woman [Matrice Ellis-Kirk] that became my wife, and I don't meet her--you know, I don't have any complaints. Story_ID: 253716 Speaker 1: --It's a picture of me [HistoryMaker Ron Kirk] and my wife Matrice [Ellis-Kirk]. This was an event, Dallas Day's annually--the Ambassador's Ball, in which we invited the foreign ambassadors' corps in Washington [D.C.] to Dallas [Texas], and I think this was about in nineteen--the Ambassador's Ball in 1977. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: This is a picture of my two daughters. On the left is Elizabeth Alexandra [Kirk] that we call Alex, and on the right is my daughter Catherine [Kirk]; I think that was taken a couple of years ago, 2002. Speaker 1: (Laughter) This is a picture--I think you should recognize the follow on the left; this was when [President] George [Walker] Bush was governor of Texas, and this was taken here in Dallas [Texas] in the event that--the governor spoke at a chamber event. And interestingly enough, this was a picture the governor chose to submit to The New York Times when he was running for president, to prove that he was friends with Democrats. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: This is one of my favorite pictures; unfortunately, I don't know the name of the little girl, but I did--used to do a wonderful program with a group called Project Hope--every Dallas--for Christmas that we brought children of all international backgrounds to city hall for an international society, and she just was a little girl I fell in love with. This was taken about December of 1977. Speaker 2: This one's a little easier; this was a cover of one of our ethnic publications, Our Texas magazine, taken on my patio outside the mayor's office at Dallas City Hall in the summer of 1995. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: And the fellow on the right, I hope you recognize, is the NFL's [National Football League] all-time leading rusher and touchdown scorer, Emmitt Smith, at an event in which we honored Emmitt here in Dallas, I think, in around 1999 or 2000. Speaker 1: This is a picture of an event that we hosted in Dallas with Vice President Al [Gore] and Tipper Gore, in which he did a town hall meeting with a number of young people, and this was taken at [W.E] Greiner Middle School [W.E. Greiner Exploratory Arts Academy] in Dallas in the spring of 2000. Speaker 2: This is one of the few pictures I had available, with me and my mother and father. I'm on the left; standing in the middle is my mother Willie Mae [Jones] Kirk, and to her right, in the middle of the picture is my father, Lee Andrew Kirk [Sr.]; we are in the [Texas] State Capitol in Austin, Texas. This is when I was an intern during the constitutional convention in 1974. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Very good, next. Speaker 2: This (laughter), this is a picture that my brother and sisters will be angry at me for showing, but this was a family photo during our period, I guess, during the '70s [1970s]. On the left is my brother Lee [Kirk, Jr.], to his right in the coat, is my father Lee, Sr., in the middle is my oldest sister Vickie [Victoria] Saundra [Kirk], next to her is my mother Willie Mae, next to her is my sister Connie [Jo Kirk Ingram], and I am on the right. Speaker 1: Oh, this was in--obviously, in the middle, kind of left of the picture is Chris Rock; he came and visited me at city hall when he was promoting one of his movies; I think this is when he did the movie 'Down to Earth,' that I think came out about 2000 or 2001. Speaker 2: This was one of my last visits to the White House [Washington, D.C.] with President [William Jefferson "Bill"] Clinton. This was a delegation of mayors that the president had invited to Washington in support of his effort to pass the open trade agreement with China, and that was take--that would've been taken sometime in 2000, before the end of President Clinton's term. Speaker 1: This was a picture when we welcomed President Clinton to Dallas. This young lady on my left, I can't remember her name, but one of the most fun things I did as mayor was I did a mayor for the day project in which I had a different high school senior spend every city council meeting with me, and I allowed them to go everywhere and do everything I did, and this young lady was from Woodrow Wilson High School [Dallas, Texas], and she had a chance to welcome the president to Dallas. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Next. Speaker 1: This was just a file picture that I had of myself as mayor; I was speaking at the Hockaday School [Dallas, Texas] in Dallas, and that was in the spring of 2001. Speaker 2: This is one of my favorite photos; this is a picture of me and my wife Matrice. This was my last day in office as mayor, and my last kiss from my wife, before I went upstairs and announced my resignation as mayor and my run for Unites States Senate. That was taken in November of 2001. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: This is a picture of one of the other most special women in my life; this was taken on April the 4th of 1994 when [Governor] Ann Richards swore me in as the ninety-eighth secretary of state of Texas. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 2: And this was a picture taken in the summer of 1995, and it was one of--the first opportunity I had to welcome President Clinton to Dallas. It was taken at Dallas Love Field Airport [Dallas, Texas]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: Again, this is one of my file photos, taken during my term, my second term as mayor, in the spring of 1999. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Next. Speaker 2: This was a picture in which I was happily able to participate in a major donation to our African American Museum [of Dallas, Dallas, Texas]; I'm standing on the left. Standing in the middle was, I think, Valencia McClure, who was then a governmental affairs representative for one of our major companies here in Dallas, and to her right is [HistoryMaker] Dr. Harry Robinson [Jr.] who is the founder and director of our African American Museum, and to his right is Billy Robinson [ph.] who was then the chairman of the board of the African American Museum. I think that was taken around 1999. Speaker 1: And this shows just how far I've come (laughter), from my senior year and [John H.] Reagan High School [Austin, Texas]. This would've been taken in 1972. Speaker 2: And this was a picture of me when I was a boy; I think I was about eighteen months old. I'm on the right, and on the left was my next door neighbor and best friend, Thomas Tindle [ph.]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Next. Speaker 2: This was a picture, again, of when I was a senior in high school. I was speaking to the Austin Exchange Club [Exchange Club of Austin]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Hold on, please. Next. Speaker 2: This is one of my favorite pictures. One of the most rewarding endeavors I participated in as mayor was I started a mayor's summer reading program in which we awarded students prizes and coupons for reading, and at the end of every year, I had a free party to hand out computers and cash prizes to the kids at the Dallas Zoo [Dallas, Texas]. This would've been taken out at the zoo. I think this was in 1998. Speaker 1: And this was a picture with me and some of my family on my successful re-election night in 1999. On the left, in the suit, is my brother Lee; seated in the middle is my mother Willie Mae; standing immediately behind her is our very good friend [HistoryMaker] Congresswoman Eddie Bernice Johnson, and standing to her right is my sister Saundra. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 1: And this is a picture on election night as well, with me and my oldest daughter Elizabeth. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Next. Speaker 1: This is another picture from election night. On the middle is my--on the right--the left, I'm sorry, is my wife Matrice Ellis-Kirk; in the middle is her uncle Milton Grant [ph.], and on the right is our very good friend and our daughter's godmother, Diane Curry. Speaker 2: This is another picture from election night with me kissing my mother Willie Mae Kirk. Speaker 1: This is one of my favorite pictures. This is--these were some of my closest colleagues as mayor. Seated on the left, with his finger on his head, is [HistoryMaker] Mayor Marc [H.] Morial from New Orleans, Louisiana; to his left is Mayor--was [HistoryMaker] Mayor Wellington Webb from Denver, Colorado; I'm seated next to Mayor Webb; to my right, standing, is one of our host from Lagos, Nigeria, and then seated to my left--I'm sorry, to my left seated is Mayor Dennis Archer from Detroit [Michigan]. We were part of a delegation of mayors that had the privilege of accompanying President Clinton on his very last international trade trip to Nigeria. Speaker 2: This is a picture of Matrice and I during one of our business development missions, and we were standing at the base of the Great Wall of China. This was taken in 1999. Speaker 1: This was a picture of my wedding day, December the 5th, 1987. On the left was our pastor, Reverend Zan Wesley Holmes, Senior Pastor of St. Luke Community United Methodist Church [Dallas, Texas]; in the middle, obviously, is my bride Matrice, and to my right is--was our associate pastor Vonciel Hill who was the young lady I told you was my classmate at the University of Texas [at Austin School of Law, Austin, Texas] that referred me to the Dallas city attorney's office. Speaker 2: And this was my family's annual Christmas photo that we sent out while I was mayor; I'm standing on the left. Standing to my left is our youngest daughter Catherine; to her left, seated, is our daughter Elizabeth, and all the way to the (laughter) I guess to my left in the photo is my wife Matrice. And this picture was taken in, I believe, December of 1999...