 Story_ID: 117520 Speaker 1: My name is Julieanna Richardson. And I'm the interviewer, and Matthew Hickey is the videographer, and observing somewhat is Kathleen Knight, your wife. And I'd like to start out by having you state your name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Okay, my name is Merald Woodrow Knight, Jr., M-E-R-A-L-D, Woodrow, W-O-O-D-R-O-W, Knight, K-N-I-G-H-T, Jr., J-R. Speaker 1: And your nickname? Speaker 2: Bubba, my nickname is Bubba, B-U-B-B-A. Speaker 1: And your date of birth? Speaker 2: My date of birth is 9-4-1942, September 4th [September 4, 1942]. Speaker 1: And your place of birth? Speaker 2: My place of birth is Atlanta, Georgia. Speaker 1: Okay, and today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is August 28th, 19--ooph, 2013 [August 28, 2013] (laughter). Speaker 1: And our location? Speaker 2: Our location is my home. My wife Kathleen and I live here in Las Vegas--well, Henderson, Nevada, 2149 Horse Prairie Drive, Henderson, Nevada 89052. Speaker 1: And your occupation? Speaker 2: My occupation is, I'm a recording artist and an entertainer, performing artist. Story_ID: 117521 Speaker 1: And I'd like to ask five People magazine-ish questions. What is your--short answers, what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: My favorite food is pasta. I like pasta. Speaker 1: Favorite color? Speaker 2: I don't really have a favorite color, but I like earth tones. Speaker 1: Favorite time of year? Speaker 2: My favorite time of year is, I think it's summer. I like summer. Speaker 1: Favorite place to vacation? Speaker 2: Las Vegas [Nevada] (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) That's cute. And favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: My favorite phrases or saying is, "You've gotta wanna", and that, that's the way we say it, "You've gotta wanna", but you've got to want to, for those of you who may not have gotten that. Speaker 1: And I don't ask this usually, but what about your favorite song? Speaker 2: My favorite song? My favorite song is "Midnight Train to Georgia" because it went to number one, and it made the most money for us. So that's my favorite song by [James] Jim Weatherly, written by Jim Weatherly, and recorded by Gladys Knight and the Pips. Story_ID: 117522 Speaker 1: Now, I wanna start out by asking you about your family background. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And I want to first ask you about your father, 'cause you're a junior. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And so, can you tell us about him, you know, his name and what you know about his growing up, where he's from? Speaker 2: Okay, my father is Merald Woodrow Knight, Sr. And his name was given to him by his mother, Sally Knight, my grandmother. She wanted a spelling that was different from every other Merrill or Mereld [ph.]. And she spelled it M-E-R-A-L-D. My father was born in Cordele, Georgia. He grew up in Atlanta [Georgia] from what I was told. And from what I know about my father, he was a very good man. I, I really loved being with my father and learning from him. He was one of the first African American postmen in Atlanta, Georgia. He was one of the few. And he used to deliver special delivery packages. And he wasn't at home a lot because he had three jobs. My dad worked three jobs. He was a workaholic. And so I missed being with him, missed growing up with him being around. But on special occasions, when he was around, I enjoyed my dad. As a matter of fact, I missed him so much when I was little, that I ran away from home one night. And when he was going to the post office, and I hid in the back of his car. And he didn't know I was there. I hid up under his rain slicks. And when he got to the post office, I said--I got up. I said, "Dad". He said, "Oh". And (laughter), and he said, "You scare (laugher), you scared me the death, boy. What are you doing here?" He, and then I told him, "Dad, I just wanted to spend some time with you". And he told me that, "Oh, you've really messed up because I don't have time to take you back home and get back to work on time". And so at that time, there were no cell phones. So he had to go inside the post office to call my mom [Elizabeth Woods Knight] to tell her where I was. And he said, "Okay, since you're here now, I can't take you back home. What I want you to do is you're gonna have to hide in the truck". (laughter) So I hid in the truck as he made his deliveries. And I'll never forget that because that was a special time with me and--my dad and I, for us to be together. And he, after he got over the initial, being angry at me, he would give me packages to go up to the door and knock on the door and say, "Special Delivery". And I would knock on the door and say, "Special Delivery". (laughter) And we got back in the car. And then he took me home that night, and they told me how wrong that was for me to run away. And they explained it to me. And I explained to them that I just wanted to spend some quality time with my dad. Speaker 1: Now, how old were you, you think, about that time? Speaker 2: Oh, I had to be about, oh, about nine, ten, somewhere, nine, eight. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, now, what, how would you describe him? I know you've said you weren't around him, you know, he spent a lot of time working, but--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --how would you describe him as a person? Speaker 2: My dad was a very well-liked man. I can't remember anybody saying any negative comments about my dad. Everybody loved him and respected him. Unfortunately, by my dad working so much, I think it became a stress kind of a factor with him. And it came out in our home where he and my mom would clash, with arguments and things like that. But when he was at home, in the beginning we had a tradition that we would meet at the table, the dinner table, when my dad came home from work. And we would all sit around the table and pray and eat together. And that was a special time for me. And at one time, that became dysfunctional because of his being a workaholic. He was stressed out a lot. Speaker 1: So he would be in a bad mood. Speaker 2: Yep. And he would come home in a bad mood. Speaker 1: In a bad mood. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And he taught us to-- Story_ID: 117523 Speaker 1: I mean, my dad [Merald Knight, Sr.] was a very religious man. And he would go to, like he sung in the choir at Mount Moriah Baptist Church. Speaker 2: That was a family church, right? Speaker 1: Yeah, Mount Moriah Baptist Church [Atlanta, Georgia]. Reverend Smith was the pastor. And my mom [Elizabeth Woods Knight] and my dad sung in the choir. But I remember my dad singing, singing this song--he had this solo, [singing] "Now, let us sing, sing to the power of the Lord come down". And his part was [singing] "Now, let us sing" (laughter). And I loved that, man (laughter), and I used to watch my dad in the choir. And he was so proud when he sung his solos (laughter). And he was, he taught me a lot of things like changing the tire on the car, and, and, oh, one of the other things I remember about my dad. I have to go back a little further, when he was, when he was--he was a Harley Davidson man. And he had a blue motorcycle. And he would drive me to the barbershop on his motorcycle. I would sit on the little fat tanks. And he would drive me to the barbershop. And he would, I would sit in that chair with the plank across it because I was so little. And I remember him telling the barber, he'd say, "Mr. Knight, how do you want it cut?" And my dad would say, "Give him a high right and a low left". (Laughter) I don't know what that meant. Speaker 2: A high right and a low left. Speaker 1: A high right and a low (laughter) left. I remember that. But my hair was unlike my dad's. My dad had beautiful hair. His hair was wavy and silky, naturally. My hair was kind of tight. It was tight. And when he would take me to the barbershop, and when the barber would, would comb my hair, little tears used to come (laughter), come out of my eyes 'cause he was going like this (pulling) and I'm going like, "Ah". And I was trying to be proud. I mean I was trying to be strong for my dad 'cause all the guys was sitting around. And they were watching dad. "Mr. Knight, you got a good boy there, you got a good boy. Look how mannerable he is", you know. And so, you know, I tried not to cry, but little tears used to just trickle down my face (laughter). Speaker 2: That was a big deal to have a motorcycle, though, back then? Speaker 1: Yeah, my dad would go, he would drive to the post office on his motorcycle sometime, before he had the car. Story_ID: 117524 Speaker 1: Now, did you know your, his [Merald Knight, Sr.'s] parents? Did you know the parents, your grandparents on that side? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, I knew my, I knew my dad's mother. Her name was Grandma Sally, Sally Knight. And she was a teacher. She was the one that created my dad's name, that's been passed down to me, to my son, his son and hopefully, it'll go on for generations, the name, Merald. Grandma Sally was a school teacher. And she used to teach us about reading and writing the best she could. As a matter of fact, I remember my grandmother, Sally, I was left with Grandma Sally when my mom [Elizabeth Woods Knight] took my little sister, Gladys [Knight], to New York to be on Ted Mack's "Original Amateur Hour", when she was like six or seven. And my mom left me with Grandma Sally. And Grandma Sally and I would sit on the front porch. We had a screened-in front porch on Chestnut Street. And we would sit on the, on the front porch and just swing on that swing. It was like, like a metal, kind of a swing that (laughter) would like, rock like this. And we would sit out there and just, I mean we would just watch the neighbors go by, watch cars go by. And she would tell me stories about when, when my dad was coming up, how he used to like to be the sharpest dresser in the community and things like that. And we developed a bond, my grandma and me during that period. And she was a well-dressed lady. Grandma was sharp. And what do I remember about grandma? She had the prettiest hair. Her hair would--my dad took hair after, after (laughter), after his mom, my grandma. And I was, I was always wondering why didn't I have hair like theirs 'cause I wanted hair like, that you could just comb through. And, and she explained to me, "Well, see, you took hair mostly from your mother's side (laughter) of the family", which was not as easy going (laughter) as ours. And, and that's what I remember about my grandmother. And she was a very lovable person. As a matter of fact, most of my family have been loved and respected throughout our neighborhood, throughout the community, and now throughout the world. We have a great deal of respect and that's of value to me. Story_ID: 117525 Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause we were talking about how family seems so important now. Let's talk about your mother. Can you give her name? Speaker 2: Okay, my mother's name was Sarah Elizabeth Woods Knight. And my mom, to me, I wouldn't have wanted to be born to anybody else but my mom. She, she was and still is the greatest because a lot of things that she taught me, taught Gladys [Knight], Brenda [Knight] and me--my brother, David [Knight], is deceased now. But we still carry a lot of the things that she taught us through our lives now. And my mom was the greatest. She was a teach--she was a great teacher. She was a great mentor. You talking about a role model, my mom. She was a visionary. She could see things in the future that, that we had no idea where she was coming from (laughter). But later on in life, we could see where she was coming from. She could, she could recognize talent. She saw the talent in Gladys. She saw that Gladys was a prodigy when she was a little baby. And she saw something in me that I didn't see in myself. And I still have a problem with seeing some of the talents that she said that I had (laughter), that I had that are coming out now. And, and she developed those talents. Speaker 1: So what talents did she see in you? Speaker 2: She saw that Gladys-- Speaker 1: No, in you? Speaker 2: Oh, in me? She saw that I had a personality that, that would, would tend to lead to me being like a comedian. She saw that. I didn't see it. And she said that you have a co--"You are able to connect with people, that you don't even know that you can do this yet. But the older you get, the more that it--that talent will mature in you and you'll see it come to fruition". And I kind of see what's she's talking--(laughter) she was talking about now. Speaker 1: She's right. She is right about that. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yep. And so. Speaker 1: So what about, how far back did she know her family? Was she from--where was she from in Georgia? Speaker 2: Yeah, she was from East, she was born in East Point, Georgia, and she grew up in East Point and in Atlanta [Georgia]. And, and she knew her mother, Suzie. Her mom was Suzie Woods--what was grandma's name? Speaker 1: Carlisle. Speaker 2: Carlisle, yeah. Susie Woods Carlisle. And she used to speak very highly of Grandma Suzie. Grandma Suzie had passed when my oldest sister, Brenda, was born. When she was born, Grandma Suzie passed the same year that she was born [1941]. So she didn't get a chance to see my oldest sister, Brenda nor, naturally, me, Gladys and David. Speaker 1: So you really grew up with one grandmother then? Speaker 2: Yes, Grandma Sally. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Story_ID: 117526 Speaker 1: So now, what--how did your parents [Merald Knight, Sr. and Elizabeth Woods Knight] meet? Speaker 2: That's a good question. I, I don't know the answer to that. I don't know how they met, but I understand they fell in love a long time ago when they were young. And, and my dad, of what I understand, my dad was like a--women loved my dad. I mean he was a handsome guy from what I understood (laughter). And he was sharp. And all of the women wanted my dad (laughter). But he, he fell in love with my mom, and my mom fell in love with him. I don't know very much about how they met. Maybe my sister, Brenda [Knight], may have--I'll ask her that one day. Story_ID: 117527 Speaker 1: So now when you--what is your earliest memory? You've shared some memories of growing up, but what is your earliest memory of growing up, "the" earliest that you--? Speaker 2: The earliest memory that I recall growing up was when we were in the Gray Street projects [Atlanta, Georgia]. We lived in the Gray Street projects. And this stands out in my mind because it had such an effect on me. I remember my sister, Gladys [Knight], and I playing in the upstairs bedroom. And we were jumping on the bed, jumping up and down. And I think that was when I felt like I wanted to be an athlete or something like that 'cause I could jump real high on the bed. And I fell off the bed, and when I fell off the bed, I rolled down the concrete steps in the project and broke my collarbone (laughter). And, 'cause Gram had--I mean my mom [Elizabeth Woods Knight] had hollered upstairs, "Gladys, you and Bubba stop jumping on that bed". We didn't stop, and I fell and broke my, fell down the steps, broke my collarbone, took me to the hospital. And that was, that was my first memory of growing up and on top of that, I was learning things about--I was curious about how fire worked, you know, matches and things. How does--that's amazing. That's magic. So I had--I got a hold to, hold of a book of matches. And I was playing with 'em upstairs--this is after I broke my collarbone, playing with 'em upstairs. And one of the matches burned down to my finger, and it burnt my finger, and I jumped like that. And when the other match caught the other book of matches on fire, and when the book of matches exploded, I threw it up like that. And when I threw it up, it caught the curtains on fire. And now the curtains are burning. And Bren [Brenda Knight], my oldest sister said, "Come on, get out of here". And Bren pulled us out of that room, and she said, "Mom, mom, mom, mom, mom, the house is on fire, the house is on fire". And Bren took Gladys and I downstairs. And my mom ran--she was outside, she ran in the house, and the house was burning and on fire. And she ran next door. And they called the fire department. And we got out safely, thanks to Brenda, my sister. We got out safely, and my mom asked what had happened. The fire department got there, and they were putting the fire out. And so Bren[da] and Gladys was looking at me like, "You gon' fess up (laughter) or what? Or do we have to tell?" (Laughter) So, so I told mom, I told mom, I said, I was, I was playing with matches that you told me not to play with, and I was trying to see how matches worked, and I caught the curtains on fire. And that's what set the apartment on fire. Speaker 1: Did you get a whooping? Speaker 2: At first she was really, really angry, and so she said, "Okay, wait till you dad comes home". And so the manager around there, of the apartment, came over and said, "Hey, what's happened, you know, what happened here?" And then they told him that I had set the house on fire, the apartment. And they said, "Well, you gonna have--you guys gonna have to move". (laughter) Yep. So we had to move and we moved in with my, my Aunt Velma [ph.]. Speaker 1: That's pretty serious. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. It--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: You didn't get--your father didn't whoop you? Speaker 2: Nah, nah, he--they just talked to me about how bad it was-- Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: --and what I had done 'cause I could have killed everybody. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: They talked to me, but I don't remember getting a whooping. Speaker 1: That's amazing. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, you got that right. Speaker 1: Were you spoiled? (Laughter) You were the son-- Story_ID: 117528 Speaker 1: (laughter). Speaker 2: Why don't we talk about your siblings-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and, you know, in birth order. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. My siblings. My oldest sister, Brenda [Knight], was born first. And from what I understand, she--my mom [Elizabeth Woods Knight] and my dad [Merald Knight, Sr.] were living with, were living with--what was it? My aunt or somebody until we moved into the projects where I got us kicked out. And then we moved from there to Merritts Avenue where my, where my mother's sister was living, she and her husband, Uncle Ben. And they had a room in the back where we, where we moved to, all of us. Speaker 2: All of you. Speaker 1: We stayed in that one room. And they had a bathroom that you had to go down the hall to get to. And that, that's all I remember about Brenda. Brenda was always reading a book. She was always reading a book. And on Merritts Avenue, Gladys [Knight] and I spent more time together, getting into trouble. And my oldest sister, Brenda, didn't have very much to do with us. Speaker 2: Now, what is the age difference? So Brenda-- Speaker 1: Is one year older than me. Speaker 2: One year older. So there's a-- Speaker 1: And I'm two years older than Gladys and Gladys was two years older than my baby brother, David [Knight], who passed away. Speaker 2: So you're almost stair steps? Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: So four kids? Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: Okay, two boys and two girls? Speaker 1: Yeah, and Brenda was always kind of, you know, she was kind of always a loner because she didn't have very much conversation to do with us. And like I said, she read all the time. So she would close us out (laughter), which she became the brains of the family, you know, by reading all the time. And, oh, one thing I remember about Brenda, she taught me how to say and how to spell my name because I said, "You know, my name is hard. It's not like Jim or Joe or, you know, like that, Tom. She said, your name is Merald, Merald, like emerald, like Gerald, without the "G", without the "E". It's Merald. That's your name". And she said, "You spell it M-E-R-A-L-D". So she taught me how to spell my name because I couldn't, I couldn't--Merald? That was difficult for me (laughter). Speaker 2: And, you know, what's interesting--so did you get kid a lot about your name? Speaker 1: Oh, my gosh, I mean they called Mildred, Marilyn, all--in school, ah, they wore me out, you know, and I got the name "Bubba", not from Brenda, but from Gladys because they were teaching Gladys to say, "Merald is your, your older brother". She couldn't say "brother", and it came out "Bubba". That's my "Bubba", that's my "Bubba". And so everybody thought, "Oh, how cute". We'll call him "Bubba". So I was happy about that 'cause Bubba was a whole lot easier (laughter) than Merald, Merald. And people could pronounce "Bubba" a lot easier. Speaker 2: Now, did other, did Brenda or--you call her "Bren". Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: And Gladys, did they have any nicknames either, and Gladys? Speaker 1: Well, Bren was just Bren. Speaker 2: Bren. Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Gladys was just Gladys. And now, we call her nicknames like [excuse me], the "Cap", like the captain, and we call her, some--we used to call her like Haiti, Haiti Gladys. And we'd say Haiti. So, but of the time, everybody's calling her Gladys now. Speaker 2: 'Cause a lot of times in the South, people had nicknames and some-- Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: --or they had initials for names too. Speaker 1: Yeah, "G". We call her "G" sometimes. But Bubba is-- Speaker 2: Is your nick--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: That's it. Everybody knows me by "Bubba". Speaker 2: Is it--Bubba is going along with Merald too, right? I mean you're, with your son, is he called Bubba too, Bubba, Jr. Speaker 1: Yeah, Bubba, Jr., but see that, that was a mistake. My first wife, when--she named him after me, Merald Woodrow Knight, III. But she also named him "Bubba", and when I got home off the road, after he was born. I say, "Why'd you name him Bubba?" You should have named him something else so whenever people call him Bubba, Bubba. So it stuck, so he's Bubba--and now, he's Bubba, Jr. Speaker 2: Junior. Speaker 1: But Merald the third. How confusing is that? (laughter) Story_ID: 117290 Speaker 1: Let me go back to Brenda [Knight]. Brenda was the first one to go to college in our family. And because she was so brainy, and she also formed Gladys' [Gladys Knight] corporation which its name is "Shakeji". And Bren took the first names of Gladys' children and came up with that name Shakeji, Shanga [Hankerson], Kenya [Newman] and Jimmy [James Newman]. And she created that, and she, she started Gladys' whole financial empire (laughter), you might say. She was the head of that. And that's one of the things that I'm really, really happy about Brenda being a part of. That's why she's on my staff right now. I took her from Shakeji (laughter). Speaker 2: Wait so, she--does she live here too? Everybody-- Speaker 1: Yeah, Brenda lives here as well. Speaker 2: Wow, the whole family, okay. Speaker 1: As a matter of fact, Brenda moved to Las Vegas [Nevada] before any of us did. She was the pioneer. And my mom [Elizabeth Woods Knight] came out here to see Brenda, and liked Las Vegas. And we got a contract here in Las Vegas at the casinos and moved the whole family out because we were spending more time here in Vegas than we were on, in other, at other engagements, yeah. So Brenda, Brenda was--we're really proud of her. Speaker 2: So she's like an older, older sister in that way (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, yeah. And she, she's the brains. Story_ID: 117291 Speaker 1: So then I wanna ask, what sights--well, first of all, when you were talking about your earliest memory of jumping on the bed-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: --and then you fell-- Speaker 2: Right, set the house on fire, yeah. Speaker 1: Right (laughter). Well, how old were you? Speaker 2: I had to be about eight, nine, something like--wait a minute. I may have been even younger, six or seven, yeah, six or seven, something like that. Speaker 1: Was it around the time, because, okay, well, I'll--I'm gonna try to establish chronology, 'cause six or seven, that would be, you would be, it would be 19-- Speaker 2: Forty--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --forty seven, eight, '48 [1948]. Speaker 2: 'Cause I was in '42 [1942]. Speaker 1: Forty-eight [1948] or '49 [1949]. Speaker 2: Yeah, '48 [1948] or '49 [1949], somewhere in there. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Now, what--can you describe--so, how old were you when you left the projects then? Were you--was that around the time '48 [1948], '49 [1949]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And then you lived in the, the--you lived in the room. How long were you living--you, the whole family living--is that temporary? I'm thinking-- Speaker 2: Yeah, it was temporary. We lived, we lived--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: And where did live--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --on Merritts Avenue at my, my aunt and my uncle's house, Uncle Ben and Aunt Velma Hoke [ph.]. We lived there temporarily until my mom [Elizabeth Woods Knight] and my dad [Merald Knight, Sr.] bought a home on Chestnut Street in Atlanta [Georgia]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, and living--that's when my dad would drive me to the barbershop, when we were on Merritts Avenue on his motorcycle. He had the Harley Davis [sic, Davidson]. That's before he had his car. And when he bought his car, and the home on Chestnut Street is when we started like really being a, a--to me, a real family. Speaker 1: Family, 'cause you're all together? Speaker 2: Yep, we were together then. Speaker 1: Okay, and that's when you--so you--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: And my dad, by the way, my dad and my mom taught me about real estate at that time because we had been, we had lived with different relatives up until that point, and when he bought the house on Chestnut Street, it was a duplex. It was a upstairs and a downstairs. And he rented the upstairs apartment out to pay for the mortgage. And I'm going like, "Okay". So they showed me about--that's my earliest knowledge of how real estate works. And that's what I'm, I do today (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, I have read, that's right. I had read that part. Okay, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's what I do today. That's why I went to real estate school to learn more about it (laughter). Speaker 1: I see. Okay. So you buy--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: My dad-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --and my mom. Story_ID: 117292 Speaker 1: So, so describe what sights, smells and sounds remind you of growing up? Speaker 2: Smells, cedar Christmas trees, Christmas trees on Chestnut Street [Atlanta, Georgia]. I, I remember that smell. It was, it--the house would just, I mean the food, the ham and the, you know, the vegetables and everything, mom [Elizabeth Woods Knight] and grand--my Grandma Sally [Knight] and my Aunt Ruth and my, my mom and all of us, lived at that house. Speaker 1: On Chestnut? Speaker 2: Yeah, all of us was in there (laughter). And that was a good, that was a good time for me because all the family was together. And I remember how, how the food would smell when they would cook, and especially around Christmastime and Thanksgiving and those types of things, that was--those were memorable times for me. I, I loved those times. And that smell from the kitchen and from the cedar Christmas trees that my dad [Merald Knight, Sr.] used to bring home that we used to decorate. And the, the nuts that we--we had a nutcracker, and we would eat a peppermint stick, peppermint canes and mix 'em up. Oh, man, ooh. I-- Speaker 1: So you would eat the nuts and the--you cracked the nuts--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, you crack the nuts-- Speaker 1: --with the peppermint? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, you eat the peppermint and the nuts at the same time, and it gave it a--oh, man, great, great, great taste (laughter). It was good. Speaker 1: So what about sounds? Speaker 2: Sounds, we had a little record player and--that my dad and my mom bought us. And we used to play--well, first of all, radio. The radio was our, our connection to sound. And we used to listen to people on the radio like the McGuire Sisters, The Four Freshmen, with those beautiful harmonies and things like that. That was our introduction to sound. Now, I don't know where my sister, Gladys [Knight], got her music knowledge from because there wasn't a whole lot of it around. We didn't even have a radio when we were on Merritts Avenue. So--and my mom would teach us--I'm going back a little bit now. I remember my mom would teach Gladys and I--Gladys and me about singing "Ave Maria". Now, don't ask me where she got this from. But I know that she used to have Gladys, me--Gladys and I in the bed with her, Gladys and me in the bed with her. And she taught us "Ave Maria" in Latin, all right. And when she taught it to us, I remember she had Gladys to stand at the edge of the bed and sing what she had just taught us. And Gladys was singing like that, the whole song. And then when my time came to sing, I'm going like, "That was amazing". That's what I'm thinking. And I couldn't remember all of that. So I couldn't do it. So Gladys--I mean mom would tell Gladys, say, "Well, teach Merald, Jr. the rest of the song 'cause you know it now." And-- Speaker 1: But--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --that's when I found out she was a child prodigy. Speaker 1: So how old was she then because-- Speaker 2: She had to be about four or five. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: About four, about four years or four or five years old because she went on Ted Mack's ["The Original Amateur Hour"] at seven. Speaker 1: Right. Story_ID: 117293 Speaker 1: So how did that come about, the Ted Mack ["The Original Amateur Hour"]? Do you know how--I mean Ted Mack was a very popular show. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: But, so how did that happen? Speaker 2: My cousin, Bishop Crockett [ph.] out of New York [New York City, New York], my mom [Elizabeth Woods Knight] wrote Bishop Crockett a letter telling him about her daughter, about my sister, Gladys [Knight], and was telling him that she was a phenomenon and that she was a child prodigy and that she wanted her to be auditioned for the Ted Mack's "Original Amateur Hour" show, which came on the radio. And he wrote her back and said that he had an audition scheduled for my sister and for her to come to New York. So they got on the train, went to New York, and that's when my mom left me with Grandma Sally [Knight], that I was telling you about. They went to New York. She did the audition, and mom wrote back home that Gladys made it, and she's gon' be on the Ted Mack show. So they stayed in New York, and she came home. And then she went back to New York to do the actual contest. And we would listen to her on the radio. And she won. Speaker 1: So do you remember, can you take yourself back to when you--she was on the radio, and you're listening? Can you take yourself back and remember who was all in that room? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, my grandma, and my aunt and we would gather around the radio. And there were some other neighbors that would come to listen to Gladys on the radio. We would sit on the floor and listen to Gladys singing. And, and the way the voting worked during that time was, you would have to send in penny postcards. And they would count, they would calculate the postcards for the different contestants. And that's how you would win. So when Gladys was on Ted Mack, my grandma went and bought a bunch of postcards, and I would go around the neighborhood and give postcards to the neighbors and have them to sign it and put my sister's name on it to vote. And we would buy the little stamp. We would buy the postcards and the stamps and take 'em around and get people to sign 'em. Story_ID: 117294 Speaker 1: And let me go back a little bit further. Ms. Ruth Hall Hodges, who was the art teacher at Morris Brown College [Atlanta, Georgia], was very instrumental in supporting my little sister [Gladys Knight] on--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I see. Speaker 1: --on the Ted Mack ["Original Amateur Hour"], yeah. Speaker 2: So how--what do you mean? Financing it or how--and how had she come into your life? Was she at church? Speaker 1: She was a friend of my mom's [Elizabeth Woods Knight]. Speaker 2: She was a friend. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, she was a friend of my mom's. I'm kind of--I gotta go back a little bit because the elementary school that we attended-- Speaker 2: Well, I wanna--I mean-- Speaker 1: Ms. Handley's [ph.]. Speaker 2: Okay, so, you went, so let's, let's-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --so you went to elementary school where? Speaker 1: Private school. Speaker 2: Private-- Speaker 1: In Atlanta [Georgia]. We went to a private school, Ms. Handley's private school from kindergarten till first grade and like that. And I kind of skipped over that a little bit. But when we were living on Merritts Avenue at my aunt and uncle's house, that's where we went to school. Speaker 2: That's when you started--you're-- Speaker 1: It's Brenda [Knight] and Gladys--I mean Brenda, me, Gladys and David [Knight]. Speaker 2: Okay, but you're how--she's born in ninety-forty-- Speaker 1: Four 1944. Speaker 2: Is she just two years younger than you? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Just two years? Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: Younger than you. Okay, so you go to school--so you're, both of you are at Merritts. How, you--I don't think you were at Merritt that long, were you? Speaker 1: Who, me? Speaker 2: How long were you at Merritts, you stayed on Merritt? Speaker 1: On Merritts Avenue? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Oh, it couldn't have been no more than, what a year or two years, I think. Speaker 2: Okay, but that's when you start school, when you go-- Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: Okay, but Gladys, does Gladys go to the same--she doesn't go to the same school as you? Speaker 1: No, she was, she wasn't going to-- Speaker 2: She wasn't going--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Where did Gladys go to school? I went to Ms. Handley's--I'm trying to think if Gladys went to Ms. Handley's in kindergarten 'cause I went to Ms. Handley's--I started in the kindergarten, and then I went to the first grade. So that was two years, right, trying to get my, my years together. I'm really bad at that. Let me see. Ms. Hodges--let me just tell you this. Ms. Hodges and Ms. Handley were sisters. Speaker 2: I see. Speaker 1: I'm trying to make the connection now-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --of how Ms. Hodges got into the picture. Speaker 2: Okay, so, but Ms. Hodges was at Morris Brown? Speaker 1: Yeah, she was a teacher at Morris Brown College. Speaker 2: Okay, at Morris Brown College, okay. Speaker 1: Right. And Ms. Handley was her sister who was my teacher in, at kindergarten and first grade. Speaker 2: Okay, but what I was wondering is were they at all involved in the--I see, okay. I understand. Were they involved or were they members of Mount Mariah Baptist Church? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: They weren't? Speaker 1: No-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --no, Mount Mariah Baptist Church was a totally different situation. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: They, we just--our education was with them and support for Gladys on Ted Mack and Gladys' first recital before Ted Mack was given by Ms. Hodges-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --at Morris Brown College because she, she had heard of Gladys' talent and she--talents, and she supported her. And Ms.--I was, I was gonna tell you. Ms. Hodges, when Gladys was on Ted Mack, she had all the students to fill out postcards and mail 'em in to Ted Mack's to help Gladys win as well. That's where I was, where I was going, where I was going with the postcards (laughter). Speaker 2: I see. So Gladys, when she had her first recital, was she four or six? Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, she was about four or five when she had her first recital. Speaker 2: I see. Speaker 1: Uh-huh, I can see her now. She had on a little--anyway, go ahead (laughter). Speaker 2: She had what? Speaker 1: She had on this little gown--I can remember the gown that was all, it was long. And it was white, and it had some satin kind of bow around it. And, and when, when was--Nat King Cole came to town--some of this stuff is just popping in my head, right. So I'm jumping around, and I hate to do that, but (laughter) I'm kind of jumping around. Speaker 2: That's okay, go on. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But when did Nat--Nat King Cole came to town. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Were you young? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: We were little kids. Nat Cole came to town. He was at the Municipal Auditorium performing a concert. And I remember Gladys--there was a picture of Gladys and Nat King Cole. And I remember standing back in the back, while they were taking, taking that picture. And they were telling Nat King Cole about Gladys being a prodigy and that she was, one of these days, she was gonna be famous like him (laughter). Story_ID: 117295 Speaker 1: So, so this is what I--so there's no--but you're saying, is there a lot of singing in the house? There's not singing in the house-- Speaker 2: Except for at church [Mount Mariah Baptist Church in Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 1: At church. Speaker 2: Uh-huh, at church. That was about it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then, and then when my mom [Elizabeth Woods Knight]--when, when Gladys [Knight], Brenda [Knight] and I started singing and mimicking things on the radio, like I was telling you, like the, the Andrews Sisters and the Four Freshmen and those kind of people, mom saw that we had, had a talent for being a group. And so it was just the little Knight Children at first. There were just the three of us, and we would sing songs. Speaker 1: You, Brenda, Gladys? Speaker 2: That's it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Me, Brenda and Gladys. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: Uh-huh--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: And then were you-- Speaker 2: --from church. Speaker 1: --you were doing--at church? And this is at Mount Mariah? Speaker 2: Mount Mariah. Speaker 1: Okay, now, I have read that your, your parents, they were--was the gospel choir called "Wings Over Jordan" or was that something separate? Speaker 2: Yeah, that was different from Mount Mariah Choir. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They sung--from what I understand--I didn't really know a lot about the "Wings Over Jordan", but mom and dad [Merald Knight, Sr.] song in the "Wings Over Jordan's Choir". Now, when they rehearsed or where they rehearsed, I never heard them sing. When I heard my dad and mom sing, it was at Mount Mariah, at church, when they would take us to church on Sunday. That's what I remember about their singing. Story_ID: 117296 Speaker 1: Okay, so, so you're--that day that she [Gladys Knight], she's on the Ted Mack show ["The Original Amateur Hour"], you were describing who was-- Speaker 2: Yeah, was sitting around the radio. Speaker 1: Sitting around. So how did it feel? That's what I'm just wondering. Everyone's listening, 'cause radio was the thing back then. Speaker 2: Yep (laughter). It was amazing, to hear my little sister come over that, that box, that radio, it was--I couldn't believe it. You know, here she, she was in New York City [New York], and I could hear her live, singing over the radio. That, it was just amazing to me. You know how I was about the matches (laughter). That radio thing would, it was more amazing (laughter). And, but I was so proud of her, you know, because everybody was talking about--they were clapping in the room like, "Oh, she was so good, listen to her". And I was just, I was just proud of her. Speaker 1: So, so what--do you--did they describe how it was on their end though too, when they got back? I mean did they describe, did your mother [Elizabeth Woods Knight] and Gladys describe how it was on their end or did you hear your mother recount the stories? Speaker 2: Actually, I remember Gladys talking about the little Lucky Strike Girls, that had the boxes on, that--for the commercials. Speaker 1: Oh, that's right. Speaker 2: They were (laughter)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: The commercials were live. Speaker 2: Yeah, they were live. So, so it was--she was telling me about how the Lucky Strike Girls would have those boxes on and they would run around, you know, in the boxes. And she was telling me how well she got along with the rest of the contestants on the show and how she would sing in front of all these people, lots of people. And because the last, the finale was at Madison Square Garden [New York City, New York]. And that was a lot of, huge crowd over there. And she would tell me about that. And, and I would ask her, I (unclear) say, "Were you scared?" 'cause I didn't know about nervous, said, "Were you scared?" She said, "No, man, I was having fun". So I'm going like whoa--anyway. That was the gist of it. Speaker 1: So, the three of you--was it after that that your mother start having the three of you perform together or was that before when you were the "Knight Children"? Speaker 2: We performed as the "Knight Children" before Gladys went to Ted Mack's and after she went to Ted Mack's. My mom used to take us summer vacation from school, she would drive us to Detroit [Michigan] to take harmony lessons from Mr. Maurice King who was the musical director of the Flame Show Bar at the time. And he had a group called the "Sweethearts of Rhythm", all girl--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: "The International Sweethearts of Rhythm". Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: [HM] Cathy Hughes' mother was in that group. Speaker 2: Get out. That was Mr. King's group, yeah. He was the, he was the musical director--as a matter of fact, he was the musical director at the Flame Show Bar in Detroit. And my mom would drive us to Detroit every summer to take harmony lessons and vocal lessons from Mr. King. Mr. King used to come over to Aunt Rose's house in the basement, and he would like give us hours and hours of musical harmony rehearsals and things like that. And that's how we got our, our sound. And, as a matter of fact, when Brenda [Knight] and Eleanor, my cousin, Eleanor Guest--by that time, we were a group. She had added William [Guest] and Eleanor to the group. Now, I'm kind of jumping ahead, but I need to go back and say how that happened. Speaker 1: Yeah, can you--so, this is what is striking me. Your mother is very serious about this. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: I mean you don't go and take a child--I mean you have to have the means-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: You don't take your child--you know, that, this is--she's serious about this. And then even taking you to Detroit. Speaker 2: Yeah, she was a visionary. Like I said, she could see, she could see in the future what this could become for her children. Story_ID: 117297 Speaker 1: And I'd like to go back a little bit and tell you how Gladys [Knight], how "The Pips" got formed, if that's okay. Speaker 2: I would love that, yes. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Speaker 2: But see, I'm trying to understand so, because "The Pips" get formed--how old are you when the "The Pips" get formed, 'cause you're the "Knight Children" first. Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: And you're the "Knight Children", let's see, in 1952, she's on the Ted Mack Show ["The Original Amateur Hour"]. You're saying you're-- Speaker 1: In 1952, she was Ted Mack? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: Yeah, she was--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: That's when the group started. Speaker 2: Okay, so 1952--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Right after she came back from Ted Mack, that's when we, that's when we formed the group. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: And so they--I have it that she's age seven-- Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: --so you would be nine, I think. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay, at that point. Speaker 1: Uh-huh, two years older, uh-huh. Speaker 2: So tell me what--'cause what I also read was that she won $2,000. Is that true or is that lore? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: That's a whole lot of money. Speaker 1: That was the prize money. Speaker 2: What--the family is celebrating. Speaker 1: Actually, my mom bought a piece of land for Gladys (laughter) in Atlanta [Georgia] with that money (laughter), which was good. Speaker 2: So these were practical people. Speaker 1: Real estate. That was my mom [Elizabeth Woods Knight]. She was, you know (laughter). Speaker 2: Your mom and your dad [Merald Knight, Sr.]. Speaker 1: And my dad, yeah. They were trying to give us sort of lessons of how to grow financially, how to make smart business moves and, and investments and things like that. Speaker 2: So, 'cause some people would just spend the whole money. It would be gone in heartbeat. Speaker 1: Yeah, my mom bought, bought my sister a lot, a lot in Atlanta of a, of a development that was becoming a, like a, like what we have, like the suburbs now. She brought a piece of land and gave it to Gladys. But eventually, she sold it. But she made a profit off of it. Speaker 2: I see. Speaker 1: So. Speaker 2: Okay, so let's talk about "The Pips". So you-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --Gladys comes back. What, when people--is there a big celebration when they both--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Oh, my gosh, yeah. When she came back from Ted Mack's, everybody met her at the train, train station in Atlanta [Georgia]. And the Boy Scouts and, they had flowers and everything for Gladys coming home. And when the train pulled in, Gladys came off of the train, and everybody was applauding and, "Hey, hey", and she had to go from the train station to a radio interview at Mr.--oh, God, what's his name? Right across the street from Washington High School. I can't think of, I can't think of this, the radio host's name now. But we went directly to his place, and she was on the radio, talking to the people of Atlanta and thanking them for voting for her and making her the winner of the Ted Mack's "Original Amateur Hour." And it was a good celebration. Speaker 2: So then, you mother gets serious. And so she--at this point, you're not taking, you're not going to Detroit [Michigan] at that point, to take lessons at the-- Speaker 1: No, not yet. Speaker 2: Okay, so she forms, you go from the "Knight Children" to "The Pips". Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: But what I don't understand is the name. I know how the name, you're named after--James-- Speaker 1: Woods-- Speaker 2: --Woods. Speaker 1: Uh-huh, my cousin. Speaker 2: Right, but how did the name come from his name as opposed to--how did that happen? Speaker 1: That was his nickname. Around, around Atlanta, everybody called him, "Pip". His mama called him "Pip" and his, his uncle. Everybody called him "Pip" (laughter). Speaker 2: But it's not like he was the lead--was he the lead of the group? Speaker 1: No, no, he was just, he was just my cousin, and he was just well known in Atlanta around town. He was, he was like--everybody knew Pip 'cause he, he was a, he was a lady's man (laughter). Pip was a lady's man. All the girls loved Pip. Boy, they loved Pip, and he was well known in the, the club scene around Atlanta, you know. And he was a sharp dresser, and, but Pip was a hard worker. He was a construction worker. He worked for my Uncle Ben, which was his stepfather, who was his stepfather. And Pip built houses. He was a plasterer, yeah. And, and he worked for his money, and he bought sharp clothes and everything. Speaker 2: So you think it was because he was known around town-- Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: --that you took the name, because the name was known. I, I'm just wondering 'cause I was thinking with the "O'Jay's", you know, they were named after--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Eddie O'Jay. Speaker 2: --O'Jay, who was well known. Speaker 1: Yeah, he was a disc jockey in Buffalo [New York]. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: I remember Eddie. Speaker 2: Right. Story_ID: 117298 Speaker 1: So, so, so you take, so take on the name ["The Pips"], and the group then is three girls and two boys, right? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay, and so how--what are you-- Speaker 2: How did that happen? (Laughter) Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Okay, let me tell you from the start. They were giving me a birthday party at, on Chestnut Street [Atlanta, Georgia]. One guy brought his record player. We were playing records. He didn't like what we were playing, took his record player, went home. We decided to have a talent show in the backyard. So we decided to sing, my cousin, William [Guest] and my cousin, Eleanor Guest were there at the party. So we decided to sing, and we had--they, we all belonged to the same church [Mount Moriah Baptist Church]. So we had song in the choir together as well. So we were singing in the backyard, and my mom [Elizabeth Woods Knight] heard us singing, and she liked the sound that we had. And after the party was over--long story short, she asked us to come into the living room and asked us if we would like to be a group. And we said, yeah. So that's how we started being a group with Brenda [Knight], Gladys [Knight], Eleanor, William and myself. So that's how we became a group. Speaker 1: Now, is your mother managing you at this point in the early-- Speaker 2: She was the visionary. You would say, yes, she, she was the manager because she put together--she was the organizer. Speaker 1: So where are you performing then? Speaker 2: Nowhere, at church. I mean singing in the same choir, but not performing anyplace. And then mom decided to--excuse me, decided to have us to become a group that would perform. So she would have us to practice. She would bring Babe Brother in there with--I mean Babe Brother and Eleanor to the house to practice. And she'd say, "You're gonna need a manager," so that's when she brought Pip in, my cousin, James Woods. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: And--because Pip could take us around town, not mom. Pip had a car, and Pip became our manager. And he bought us uniforms. He, he paid for the gas in his car. He would take us to the different locations. He's the one that got us to perform at this Morocco Lounge for a contest to win a professional weekend engagement at the Royal Peacock [Atlanta, Georgia]. That was the prize. And we performed against other groups in Atlanta. And we won that, long story short, we won that contest, and that's how we became the group to perform at the Royal Peacock, although we were all under age. Speaker 1: Right, so the Royal Peacock, is that a local club--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, that was, that was the--that was one of the most popular clubs in Atlanta at the time on Auburn Avenue. Speaker 1: Oh, it was on Auburn Avenue. Speaker 2: Uh-huh, and the Morocco Lounge was also on Auburn Avenue, and they were right down the street from each other. Speaker 1: Do you know the address particularly, or you don't remember that? Well, that's okay. It doesn't matter. (unclear) Speaker 2: I don't remember the address. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But the Morocco Lounge was on one corner, the Royal Peacock was across the street, and the casino, Casino Lounge was across the street from the Royal Peacock. And also, Wheat Street Baptist Church, I think was on the, on the corner of Auburn Avenue, right (laughter). Story_ID: 117529 Speaker 1: You--go on. Speaker 2: Excuse me, and by the way, we, what we did was, when we decided to have the group, and this is how the name--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: --this is how the name came about. We were trying to figure out a name for the group, as opposed to the "Little Knight Children" (laughter) because we got, we have William Guest and Edward Patten--I mean William Guest and Eleanor Guest in the group. Speaker 1: Which are your cousins. Speaker 2: Yeah, which were my cousins, right. So we're trying to figure out a name for the group. And so we didn't come up with a name. We decided, okay, let's honor "Pip", since he's [James "Pip" Woods] been there for us. He's spent his--put his money out there. He's taken us places, and let's name the group "The Pips" and would never change that, in honor of "Pip". That's how we got the name, "The Pips". Story_ID: 117530 Speaker 1: So you're going around--now, you're, like how old are you? You're--are you-- Speaker 2: I don't know (laughter). Speaker 1: Ten, eleven. Speaker 2: Ten, eleven, twelve. Speaker 1: And so you, you're performing, you're performing at night clubs sort of? Speaker 2: Uh-huh, and--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: So how does that work? Speaker 2: Okay, they would slip us into the back of the night club--matter of fact, the car would be parked in the alley. We would sit in the car till time for us to go on. We'd go up the back steps of the Royal Peacock [Atlanta, Georgia], go on stage through the back door, sing, come off the stage, go back downstairs and sit in the car and wait till the next show (laughter). Speaker 1: And that would be how it would be done? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Uh-huh, 'cause we couldn't, we wasn't supposed to be in the, in the--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: You were not supposed to be--(unclear)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --night club 'cause they were serving liquor (laughter). Speaker 1: So are there other young groups performing too, at the same time that are your age or not? That's what I'm just-- Speaker 2: Not that I know of because the groups that we were, we were in contests against were older than--these, these--the people that we were singing against were grown. And they were, they were in college. Like one of the groups--I can't think of the name. It was William Howard's group. They were majoring in music over at Morehouse, Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia], man. And they, oh, could they sing. Whew. They had some harmony, man, that was just, it would blow you away. Anyway, we were performing against these kind of people, but we won the contest which was great. Story_ID: 117531 Speaker 1: So where are you in school now, then? Are you in school where, 'cause you (unclear)--did you have junior high or did it go from elementary--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh, we, we went to English Avenue [Elementary] School, and from there going to Turner High--I went to [Henry McNeal] Turner High School for one year. And then I was transferred to [Samuel Howard] Archer High School where I graduated from. But Brenda [Knight], my oldest sis--my oldest sister, was one of the first students to go to Archer High School 'cause they had just built it in, at--in the Perry Homes district. And Brenda was one of the first students--(unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Now, what, what section of town, of Atlanta are you in, you know, I mean when you're-- Speaker 2: We were living on Chestnut Street-- Speaker 1: Chestnut Street. Do you know what--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --over near--that was not too far from Morris Brown College [Atlanta, Georgia]. Morris Brown and Spelman [College in Atlanta, Georgia] and all--we were-- Speaker 1: What they call the AU Center [Atlanta University Center Consortium] now. Speaker 2: Yeah, we were right, we were right, not too far away from there. We were just blocks away-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --from the colleges. Speaker 1: And you, so, I mean this is really, I mean we're talking about the segregated South. Speaker 2: Oh, my God. Speaker 1: But still, you know, Atlanta, I mean I think, wasn't--God, what's his name at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia,]? Story_ID: 117532 Speaker 1: Are you performing on the colleges at all too? Speaker 2: Not yet. Speaker 1: You're not? Speaker 2: No. At, at that time, we were perform--our first performance was at the, the YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association] on Tatnall Street, right across from Morris Brown College [Atlanta, Georgia]. We performed at a tea at that, that, at that YWCA. And, and that was early on in our careers. Speaker 1: Okay, and then you start performing at the night clubs and competing? Speaker 2: Yeah-- Speaker 1: And you're performing at churches? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. And my mom [Elizabeth Woods Knight], my mom used to take us to Detroit [Michigan]. That's where I was telling you about Mr. [Maurice] King. She would take us when school was out. She would take us to Detroit for harmony lessons with the Pips. Speaker 1: So how long would you stay in Detroit when you went and--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Just for the summer-- Speaker 1: Just, but who would--(unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --and back to school. Speaker 1: But who would you live with when you were up there? Speaker 2: Aunt Rosa. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Aunt Rosa Robinson [ph.], and Uncle Blevie [ph.]. We stayed in the basement at that, in their home. And Mr. King would come over to their house and, and teach us harmony and Mr. King was very instrumental in, in our sound, in making the Gladys Knight and the Pips' sound. Speaker 1: So just, so talk about that. So what do you mean by that? What did he teach you and what was the-- Speaker 2: He--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --okay, go ahead. Speaker 2: Mr. King taught us modern harmony chords, more so than just, you know, first, second and third. He would, he would teach us harmony chords where we could sing sevenths and sixth and ninths, and that kind of thing. And he would, he would make us blend and trained our ears to hear these chords. And that's part of what gave us our sound, in my opinion. Speaker 1: So how much would you practice like? Would you do it daily or were you--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Um-hum, daily. Mr. King would come over daily. After he would get off from work at the Flame Show Bar, he'll get up the next day and the next, the next day, and he would come over and have us to, to rehearse like in the afternoon until he have to go to work. Speaker 1: So, were you hearing about, at that point in time, I don't think Jackie Wilson--no, okay. But the Flame Show Bar is a very famous spot-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: --and, you know, became a very famous spot in Detroit, like Jackie Wilson and people performed at the-- Speaker 2: Yeah, let me tell you--you mentioned Jackie Wilson. Story_ID: 117533 Speaker 1: Mr. [Maurice] King was very influential in Detroit, in the music scene. And as a matter of fact, he had a contact over at Brunswick Records where Jackie Wilson performed and where [HM] Berry Gordy was a songwriter. And Mr. King had written this song called "Whistle My Love and I'll Come Running to You", and another song called "Ching Chong". And he had the people at Brunswick to allow us to go over there and record "Whistle My Love" and "Ching Chong". And that was our very, very, very first recording, "Whistle My Love". Speaker 2: So you're--I think by then, you are thir--fourteen-- Speaker 1: Un-un. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: I don't know. I was a teenager. Speaker 2: Fourteen, you're fourteen [sic, the record was released in 1958, when Knight was fifteen or sixteen]. Speaker 1: I was a teenager. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: So what was that first--back then, when you had recording sessions, where were you actually recording? What was the, what was the set up? Like Brunswick, what was the set up there? Speaker 1: It was a studio with musicians. I can't recall where the studio was, but I know Mr. King took us to this studio. And the musicians were in there, and they would have us in a, like a little screened-in area. And we would record live, all of us at the same time. He would count it off, one, two--dah, dent, dent, dent [musical simulation]. And we would sing. And during that time there--I think it was illegal to overdub so everything was like on the spot--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: It had to be (unclear), whatever you did is-- Speaker 1: Whatever you did is what you heard on that record (laughter). Speaker 2: How much would you practice before you went in? I mean how long were the-- Speaker 1: Not much. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: No, as a matter of fact, we didn't, we didn't even rehearse with the musicians until we got to the studio. That was it. And maybe the--like Mr. King would go, he would bring the music in and he would have the musicians to play the music down once or twice because they were all readers, once or twice. We didn't read. But once or twice, and then he put us in the booth and said, okay, here we go. Speaker 2: So that's a big deal to have a record--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Oh-- Speaker 2: --at that point in time. Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. Speaker 2: And, plus, you're recording in Detroit. You're not even recording just in Atlanta [Georgia]. Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Not at all, and it was a long time. And I don't think I--I don't even remember hearing "Whistle My Love" on the radio at all (laughter). I don't think it even made the radio (laughter). Speaker 2: But the fact that you had done it, that was the big deal. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: That's right, no. Speaker 1: And, and it was a tangible record. We had a copy of it. I don't know where it is now. Speaker 2: Do you have a copy now? Speaker 1: I wish I did. Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Speaker 1: I wish I could find a copy of "Whistle My Love" and "Ching Chong". Oh, man. Speaker 2: So, now, then, what happens at that point then? And, you know, so you're still--so how many summers are you going up and down there? Is that like all the time? You're going every summer? Speaker 1: Every summer. I remember--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Every summer until you're what age? Speaker 1: Oh, wow. That's a good question. I, I remember spending at least three or four summers with Mr. King. He also wrote a commercial for the "Parker House Breakfast Show"--I'm a go back a little bit. He wrote a commercial for the "Parker House Breakfast Show". It was a sausage. Speaker 2: Right, well, Parker House Sausage was owned by a black man [Judge H. Parker]. Speaker 1: Yeah? Get out. Speaker 2: No, it is. Speaker 1: I did not-- Speaker 2: Um-hum, Parker House Sausage. Speaker 1: Yeah, and Mr. King wrote, wrote (laughter), he wrote a commercial for Parker House, and he taught it to us one year when we came to Detroit, one summer. And he took us to this radio program down on Woodward Avenue. And we went in there, and the radio program was live actually. And when the commercial came on, Mr. King had us sing, "The Parker House Breakfast Show" (singing), the Parker House Breakfast Show" (laughter). I remember that. It just came back to me, just then. Speaker 2: So are you--you're kids--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: We're little kids. Speaker 2: So you're little kids. Are you getting, but you're getting, who--now, is Pip still managing you in all of this or not? Speaker 1: Yes, and everybody was managing us (laughter), my mom, Mr. King, Pip--'cause Pip would drive us to Detroit some time in his car. Speaker 2: And do you know how much you're making at this point? Speaker 1: What you mean, making? (Laughter) Speaker 2: (Laughter) Are you getting paid any-- Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: Little pennies? Speaker 1: No, we don't get paid. Speaker 2: I see. Speaker 1: Come on. We don't get paid, and that's a, that's another story (laughter). It was a long time before we got paid. Speaker 2: Really? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay, so-- Story_ID: 117534 Speaker 1: You're--so, you're just performing, you're performing around, and then at what point--wait, okay. So, at what point do Brenda Knight and Eleanor [Guest] get, what--what point do Bren--Brenda says, "I don't wanna do this anymore?" Speaker 2: Yeah, she wanted to go to college, she and Eleanor. Speaker 1: Okay, so she's, so she's eighteen-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: --at that point? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay, and then Eleanor says she doesn't wanna do it anymore. So-- Speaker 2: Right, both of them, both of those two, bookworms. Loved reading, wanted to go to college. Speaker 1: So they didn't like the, they didn't like the life. Speaker 2: Nah, they didn't wanna be entertainers. They wanted to be, they wanted to do other things with their lives, you know. Speaker 1: So how is it decided that Edward Patten and Langston George, how--does that happen at the same time or-- Speaker 2: Yes, at the same time. Speaker 1: But do you remember what year this is or how old you are when that happened? Speaker 2: So if Bren was 18, I had to be 17 or 16, 16, I guess 'cause she was getting ready to go to college. Speaker 1: So that would be 1959. That doesn't seem-- Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-nine [1959]? Speaker 1: Really, yeah, that's what it says. Speaker 2: Let me see, '59 [1959]? Speaker 1: That doesn't seem--'42 [1942], no, yep, you were born in '42 [1942]. Yeah, it would 1959. Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-nine [1959]. I'm glad you're doing this 'cause you're helping me. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You're really helping (laughter), helping me get my life story (laughter) in order. Speaker 1: So in 1959, you are, they join the group? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, 19--let's say 1959, 1960. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: They join the group. Speaker 2: William Guest, I mean Edward Patten and-- Speaker 1: And Langston--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --and Langston George. Speaker 1: So, now, how did you know them? Speaker 2: Let me tell you. I didn't know them. But Edward was my cousin by marriage, 'cause Pip married his, Libby--I'm going--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: I was very confused on--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --I'm going--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: No, but can you explain, 'cause it said two of them got married, and I was like, who's the two. So who got married, and-- Speaker 2: Who, who? Who (laughter) got (laughter)-- Speaker 1: Who got married in the group? It says that--who got married? Who left the group? Speaker 2: Okay, Brenda left the group and Eleanor left the group. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Let's start from there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay. What, Brenda and Eleanor left the group. Bren went to college, got married. Eleanor went to college, left the group and when they announced their retirement, Pip came to rehearsal one day with, with Gladys [Knight], William [Guest] and me. We were rehearsing. And Pip walks in the door on Chestnut Street, and brings Edward and Langston (laughter) into the rehearsal, and say, these are your two replacement (laughter)-- Speaker 1: He did? Speaker 2: --members. We said, "Wait a minute, hold it" (laughter), wait a minute. We were gonna be a trio. But Pip said, "No, we need a higher voice, and we need a bass." So Edward and Langston. Langston had a high voice. Edward was the bass. And so we said, "Okay." And we started from there, and started rehearsing. And what else happened after that? Story_ID: 117535 Speaker 1: But wait a minute. But you're rehearsing. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: So--wait, let's talk about when--before when you were a group, as The Pips-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --is each--what I had heard or read, that each of you were singing songs. You each have solos. Is that right or am I wrong about that? Speaker 2: Yes--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --in the group. Speaker 1: In the group. Speaker 2: Yeah, each one of us would have solos, like I would do like James Brown, "Please, please, please, please" and Bren [Brenda Knight], Bren would do, "Buzz, buzz, buzz goes the bumble bee", "Tweedly, tweedly dee goes the bird"--I forget what group that was. And Eleanor [Guest] would sing a song called "Easy, easy, easy baby, easy, easy" (singing). Now, see, all this is coming back to me now, you're asking these questions. And Gladys [Knight] would sing--when did "Don't be Cruel" came out [1956], when did "Don't be Cruel" come out, Elvis Presley. "You know I can't be (unclear)" (singing). And then we would sing a song called, "Now what you gonna do" [sic, "What'Cha Gonna Do"], Clyde McPhatter and the Drifters, "About Half Past Eight"--oh, God, I'm remembering our lineup (laughter). And anyway, those are some of the songs that we would sing. And each one of us had a song to sing. Speaker 1: Now, what are you learning about performing at this point and working with the audience and all of that? Are they telling you this or it's just your natural talent that people are-- Speaker 2: Natural. Speaker 1: So it's the natural talent people-- Speaker 2: Natural talent, and they just put us up in front of people and we sing. Speaker 1: And you're singing, okay. Speaker 2: And we developed our movements on stage as, as we're watching each other, kind of a thing. It was nothing like really set. And that's how we, that's how we performed. Speaker 1: So- Story_ID: 117536 Speaker 1: So when, when the, when the girls [Brenda Knigh and Eleanor Guest] leave and the guys [Edward Patten and Langston George] come-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: --then at what point are there--where does Gladys [Knight] start being, you know, the Pips are behind Gladys? When does that happen? Speaker 2: Yeah, she was the lead vocalist at that point. Speaker 1: So that--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --and Langston George. Speaker 1: Okay, both of them? Speaker 2: Uh-huh, Langston and Gladys. Speaker 1: Langston and Gladys are lead--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Mostly Gladys. Speaker 1: Mainly, mainly, okay, okay. Speaker 2: Uh-huh, were the lead vocalists. And we basically-- Speaker 1: And that was Pip's decision? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. And we were basically singing background. Edward, William [Guest] and me. Speaker 1: Okay, now what about the moves and things like that? That is not established at that point, right? Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: So what is your repertoire at this point? What are--are you singing popular songs of the day and, the group, the group? Speaker 2: Yeah, the group, we were singing songs like, "What'Cha Gonna Do", Clyde McPhatter and the Drifters. And I think we sung "Stormy Monday", Bobby "Blue" Bland's "Stormy Monday". We sung, let me see, Langston used to sing, "I don't"-(singing) "I don't have anything, since I don't have you", that song. Since--what was it? "Since I Don't Have You" (laughter) Speaker 1: Right, "Since I Don't Have You" [by The Skyliners]. That's right it is. Speaker 2: And let me see, what did--Gladys song songs like "To Be Loved", Jackie Wilson-- Speaker 1: Which was very popular at that time. Speaker 2: Yeah, "To Be Loved" and, oh, gosh, I can't think of some of the lineup, I mean some of the songs that we sung then. But those were some of the songs that we sung. Speaker 1: Okay, and did, memorization of words--I often think, you know, when I see, you know, singers singing, does that become part, you learn how to memorize easily or-- Speaker 2: Yeah, it becomes--you have to develop a second nature as far as memorizing lyrics. And I'm working on that right now because I'm--I have been for the most part of my career a background singer, singing back-up with the Pips. But now, I'm developing--and Gladys is working with me on this, I'm developing more of a solo artist kind of a thing, you know, king of stepping out there doing my own thing. Speaker 1: So isn't that nice, isn't that nice, all of a--all this time, look at that. Speaker 2: All of this time, yeah. And you know what? I have to tell you this. It takes a special kind of mentality and a special kind of character in order to be a back-up singer. And a lot of people don't know this, but you have to be, you have to become flexible enough to blend with other people, where a solo artist, you just go for it, whatever comes to your mind or however you wanna do it, you do it. But being a background singer, you have to tailor-make what you do to, to become in sync with those other members. See, and that's a special talent in itself, and I think that's what my mom saw in me, that I would, I would be able to do that. Speaker 1: Now, how--that's, so you, so Patten is really constructing the group. He's saying what you should do. He's choosing the lineup. Speaker 2: Pip [James "Pip" Woods]. Speaker 1: Pip. Speaker 2: Yeah, you said Patten. Speaker 1: Pip, I'm sorry. Speaker 2: That's okay. It was Pip. Speaker 1: I'm thinking Patten 'cause I was just reading here that Patten helped with the choreography. Is that true? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: This is what--this is written some place. Speaker 2: Edward Patten, Edward Patten was one of the (laughter), he-- Speaker 1: I know it said--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: No, no, no, no. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, well, we won't go there. Speaker 2: Okay, I--William Guest and I did a lot of the creative choreography. We created a lot of it, William Guest. Edward Patten, not so much. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: So now, you--so 1960--well, it's probably even past that time. Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty [1960], I got-- Speaker 2: So who are patterning yourself after? Speaker 1: Oh, we liked, we liked the Four Freshmen, we liked their sound. We liked the Four Freshmen-- Speaker 2: The Four Freshmen. Speaker 1: We liked Hank Ballard and the Midnighters. We liked the "5" Royales. We liked other groups--let me see. We liked Frankie Lymon and the Teenagers. We liked, what, Little Anthony and them (laughter). Speaker 2: Little Anthony and the Imperials. Speaker 1: (Laughter) We--all of these groups, all of these groups were like, inspired us to be a better group, you know, from kind of hearing about them and watching them as much as we could. And those were some of the people that in--oh, no, I said Hank Ballard and the Midnighters, right? Yeah, yeah. Hank Ballard, they were very instrumental, and the "5" Royales, they were very instrumental in us becoming the kind of group that we became. We always wanted to be, have our own identity, but we would take certain things from them and incorporate in the things that we did. As a matter of fact, at one point, we tried to--we wanted to do the splits, you know, like a lot of groups were doing the splits. Man, they would, bam, bam. So, we tried that out on Chestnut Street. Man, that was the worst thing we could ever do. We sprung thumbs, and our knees and things were hit. And so we decided, we don't wanna be a group like that. We don't wanna be acrobatic. So let's just do some moves and things like that. And that's how we developed more (laughter), more dance moves than the, you know, acrobatic kind of stuff. Story_ID: 117537 Speaker 1: Now, I have here that in 1961, you recorded--you had a hit with the version of Johnny Otis', "Every Beat of My Heart". Speaker 2: Oh, my gosh, yeah. I was telling you about the "5" Royales. And Sonny Woods was a member of the "5" Royales [sic, the Royales, later the Midnighters], and he took us under his wing. And-- Speaker 1: Now, where did you--is that in Atlanta [Georgia] that he did--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, we met him in Atlanta, but we had, we had been--let me see? Had we been on tour? I think we were on tour with Sonny and the Midnighters, Mr. Henry Wynn, Supersonic Attraction tour [Supersonic Attractions]. That's where we met a lot of--Jackie Wilson, Sam Cooke, "5" Royales, the Midnighters, all-- Speaker 1: So he was a big promoter? Speaker 2: Yeah, Mr. Wynn? Mr. Henry Wynn of Atlanta, Georgia. Speaker 1: Is that W-Y-N-N? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes, and he, he--and Mr. Wynn, I don't know of any other tours like Mr. Wynn had tours out at that time. I think he was a pioneer with this stuff. And he had us on tour with the Midnighters and the "5" Royales. And the "5" Royales' [sic, The Royals'] Sonny Woods, took us under his wing, and I remember one night, Pip [James "Pip" Woods] said, Sonny wanted to seat us at--see us at his hotel. So Pip took us to Sonny's hotel, and when we got there, Sonny said, I have a song that I want to teach you guys because I love your talent, and I see you're going a long ways in the business. I wanna teach you this song, and if you ever get a chance to record, I want you to record this song and I guarantee you it'll be a hit. He taught us "Every Beat of My Heart" in his room that night. Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: Yep. And so we were working at a club called the Builder's Club in Atlanta. And the club owner, the club owner's name was Fats Lewis [sic, Clifford "Fats" Hunter]. And Fats Lewis had bought some recording equipment. I think it was Wollensak, and he wanted to try out his equipment after we had performed that night with, with Cleveland Lyons [ph.] was the musical conductor. And he said, he asked Pip if we could stay over after we had done two shows that night in his club, if we could stay over and test out his recording equipment for him. We said, Pip said, "You guys wanna do this?" We were tired. And he said, we said, "Ah, we wanna go home." But he said, "Come on, let's do this favor for Fats." So we decided to do it. And we recorded the Clyde McPhatter song, "Now what you gonna do, do, do" (singing "What'Cha Gonna Do"). We did that, and he tested it out his equipment, and said, "Okay. That's enough." And we were getting ready to leave. And he said, do you guys have any original material? And that's when Eleanor [Guest] said, you remember that song, yeah, that--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: WV-- Speaker 2: Yeah, that Sonny (unclear) taught us, "Every Beat of My Heart", let's do that. And so we decided to record. I'm sorry--not Eleanor. It was Langston [George] and Edward [Patten]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, it was Langston and Edward, did that, not Eleanor. Speaker 1: Okay, Langston and Edward did that--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Patten. Speaker 1: Patten. Speaker 2: Yeah, we were taught "Every Beat of My Heart". Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so, I think it was Langston or Edward said, "What about that song--Babe Brother, William [Guest], said, "Every Beat of My Heart", let's sing that song for him. And so we song "Every Beat of My Heart"--no, Fats, Fats Hunter, not Fats Lewis, Fats Hunter, told Cleve Lyons to make up an arrangement right quickly. And he said, "Okay, sing it for me, kids." So we sung it, "In every beat of my heart (singing). And he start playing the organ, dah, dah, dah, and put the chords to it. And he said, "Okay, we're ready to record" (laughter). Speaker 1: And that's how it got recorded? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: And released. Speaker 2: And we sung "Every Beat of My Heart", and, and the next day, we were coming home--not the next day, but some time that week, we were coming home from school, and the kids were telling us how much they liked our new record that was being played on the radio. And I'm like, "What new record?" And they said, we liked your new record. And we got home, and Babe Brother called me on the phone, and he said, "Bubba, turn on the radio, turn the radio on. Our record is playing, our song that we recorded at, at the Builder's Club is playing." And I turned it on, and caught the last little bit of "Every Beat of My Heart". Story_ID: 117308 Speaker 1: Because where we were was that you had, you know, you start hearing yourself on--people were saying, listened, you're on the radio. Speaker 2: Yeah, from school. Speaker 1: From school. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: And then people--it was known, you became known or the song became known in Atlanta [Georgia]--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and soon it starts going to, you said New York [New York City] and Chicago [Illinois]. So can you talk-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Word of mouth, from Atlanta, Vee-Jay Records in Detroit, Mr. Abner--I mean in Chicago. Mr. Abner had heard about this little group in Atlanta that had a hit record out locally in Atlanta. So did Bobby Robinson from Fury Records in New York City. The word had spread to New York and Chicago. And they both wanted to get involved and have a piece of this up and coming hit record. So Vee-Jay [Vee-Jay Records] asked my mom [Elizabeth Woods Knight]--I'll just Ewart Abner, asked my mom for us to sign with Vee-Jay Records. She declined. Speaker 1: Now, why did she decline? Speaker 2: Because she didn't know anything about contracts or signing with record--she didn't wanna tie us up with anybody that she didn't know anything about. So she was trying to get information and asking around the people that she knew that could give us some information. And she wasn't getting it fast enough. So she declined to sign with Vee-Jay Records. So what Ewart Abner and Vee-Jay did, they went to the owner of the club where we recorded the record, [Clifford] "Fats" Hunter. They went to Fats Hunter and made a deal with him to sell them his master tape which he didn't have the right to because we wasn't signed to him either (laughter). Speaker 1: But he sold it? Speaker 2: Yeah, he sold to Vee-Jay, don't know how much he got or whatever. But they paid him off. And, and so, Mr. Abner and Vee-Jay owned the original "Every Beat of My Heart" that we recorded in the club that night. It was already being played on the radio, on the HunTom label, from the club. Now, it was being labeled and played on the radio nationally with the Vee-Jay label as well. Speaker 1: The same master--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: The same master, right, but two different labels. Now, Bobby Robinson sends Marshall Sehorn to Atlanta to talk to my mom to get Gladys and the--well, us to sign with the New York label, Fury Records. Okay, she decided to sign with Fury Records. She liked Marshall Sehorn and what he was saying about how he would take care of her children and dah, dah, dah, dah, dah. And he explained a lot of things about the record business to mom which Vee-Jay hadn't explained to her. So she felt a little more comfortable with that. So she had us to go and sign with Bobby Robinson in New York City. And in doing that deal, we had to go to New York to, to Fury Records. And Bobby Robinson wanted us to come to New York and sign and record "Every Beat of My Heart" again in his studio. So, now, we have Vee-Jay, "Every Beat of My Heart", Vee-Jay's "Every Beat of My Heart" out, and we have HunTom's "Every Beat of My Heart" out, playing nationally, Vee-Jay, locally HunTom. Then we went to New York and recorded "Every Beat of My Heart" over again. We covered our own record with Fury Records for Bobby Robinson which he owned that master. He put his out. So now, "Every Beat of My Heart" is out on Vee-Jay, HunTom and Fury [Records]. And the Vee-Jay and the Fury Records, both of 'em was on the charts (laughter). Speaker 1: I've never heard of that. Speaker 2: (Laughter) I know. Speaker 1: You mean they're both on the charts. Speaker 2: They were both on the charts. Speaker 1: But they're each--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: They--and they were different records. One was a cover. One was the original. (Laughter). Story_ID: 117309 Speaker 1: So, so are you--this, but the way things are working, you have--people are getting--DJ's [disc jockeys] are very important. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So the playing of them and we have--what is sort of happening that people are trying to get--at this point, are they trying to get on white stations or that hasn't happened yet? Is it--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: As a matter of fact, the Vee-Jay [Records] and the Fury [Records] record started going national playing on--at that particular time, it was more, the record, I mean the radio was more like, it wasn't like all divided like it became later on. At that particular time, you could hear everybody. We heard Patti Page, we heard everybody's records on all of the radio stations. It wasn't divided up like the way it became later on, pop, hip-hop, you know, R&B, we didn't any--all of that at that time, although it was, it was a little more difficult to get air play on white radio stations, but it was more combined at that time. So "Every Beat of My Heart" was heard by everybody. Speaker 1: So they're taking--I'm just saying from the record company's standpoint, they're taking your record and they're pitching it. So Vee-Jay's pitching theirs and-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh, and Fury [Records]--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: is pitching theirs? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: And both of 'em are getting play (laughter). Speaker 1: But who's managing you now at this point? Speaker 2: My mom, Pip-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --Mr. [Maurice] King, anybody who wanted a piece (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And now we become sort of managed by Bobby Robinson at Fury Records. Speaker 1: 'Cause he's in New York [New York City, New York] and he's--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, he's in New York, and it's his record now. Speaker 1: Now, are you still in Atlanta [Georgia] or have you moved to New York? Speaker 2: We didn't move. We just went to New York. Speaker 1: You just went to New York. Speaker 2: Okay, and part of the deal that Bobby Robinson had presented to my mom [Elizabeth Woods Knight], I found out later, that he had included an appearance at the Apollo Theater. That's what broke that in. Speaker 1: That's what broke that-- Speaker 2: And we didn't know anything about Apollo. What? And that was part of his deal. And he got us a, he got us to perform at the Apollo Theater. Bobby Robinson had a record store right on the corner, down the street from the Apollo as well. And he used to play our records and everybody's records out there on the street, on 125th Street. And people would just go in his shop in droves and pick up music, right on the spot. He was his own DJ. (laughter). Speaker 1: So, so, let me ask. So this--at what point does Gladys [Knight] have her, you know, her daughter, and is that happening around this time or is this--are we a few years, you know, just a year or two above, you know--'cause she, she drops out of the group for a while. Speaker 2: Yeah, to have her son, Jimmy [Newman]. Speaker 1: Right, her son, okay. Speaker 2: Uh-huh, and that was--I don't remember the timeframe. Speaker 1: But do you remember--but this is not happening when you're in New York? Speaker 2: This is after--let me see. Did Gladys get married before, before we went to "Every Beat of My Heart". "Every Beat of My Heart" came out in 19--what? Sixty-- Speaker 1: It came in 1961. Speaker 2: Sixty one [1961]--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: And then-- Speaker 2: And Gladys got married in '61 [1961]--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: She rejoined, yeah, she rejoined you in '64 [1964], I read some place. Speaker 2: Right, because she went home to have, have Jimmy right after the, I think right after we did the Apollo. Story_ID: 117310 Speaker 1: Okay, so you did, okay, so let's talk about the Apollo then. I'm just trying to-- Speaker 2: We performed at the Apollo Theater [New York City, New York]. Speaker 1: So let's talk about that. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Okay, so let's talk about that evening. Let's talk about how they, you know--it was negotiated in the contract [with Bobby Robinson of Fury Records], but talk about whose on the line-up, if you remember that evening. Speaker 2: Yes, I do. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We were, we were accommo--our accommodations were at the Theresa Hotel [sic, Hotel Theresa] on the corner of 125th Street. Speaker 1: Which is a famous hotel. Speaker 2: Yeah, the Theresa Hotel, man. And we--Bobby Robinson took us to this clothing store and bought us a couple of suits and bought Gladys a, bought Gladys a outfit--it was a horrible outfit. It was green, and it was Army, Army green. The suits were Army green, and her dress was Army green. And, ah, it was--I hated it. And, but he bought us one other outfit which was a black double, double breast, at that time, double breast suit, which to me, I liked a lot better. And, and we had two songs, "Every Beat of My Heart" and the flip side of "Every Beat of My Heart" which was "Ain't You Got Some Room in Your Great Big Heart for Me" [sic "Room in Your Heart"]. So we song these two songs (laughter), these two songs at the Apollo. Going to the Apollo, he took us over to the Apollo, backstage, and Spain, the doorman, showed us how to go up the steps to our dressing room, which was at the top of the Apollo. We had to walk like, what, one, two, three, four, five, six flights of steps to get to our dressing room. The star's dressed on the bottom (laughter). We wasn't nowhere near being no stars (laughter) at that time. So we walked up to our dressing room. And we got dressed and went downstairs to do our first performance. And that was the first time I had ever seen a microphone come out of the floor, man. It blew my mind. The mic came up, and that's the mic that, that the "Pips" sung on, the four of us sung on that microphone that stood up in the, in the middle of the floor. And Gladys [Knight] had another microphone over there that she performed on. Anyway, these things were shocking to me. And we weren't really accustomed to having lights and a band, I mean a big orchestra behind us and everything. And I remember who it was now. It was Lloyd Price, "Stagger Lee", Lloyd Price and his big orchestra at the Apollo Theater. And we were like the opening act. And I think there were some other acts on the show, but I don't remember those acts. I do remember Lloyd Price though. I remember him singing "Stagger Lee". Anyway, we sung with Lloyd Price's band. We didn't have any charts or anything, and we were kind of embarrassed because they were going like, "Well, where are your charts?" We're going like, "What's a chart?" (Laughter) We don't know nothing about the chart? (laughter) And those days, we were saying, "Catch me, give me a, a 'A' and catch--give me a 'A' shuffle". Doom de, doom de (laughter). That was the charts for us. But anyway, we got through it. And, oh, one other thing I remember. The first day we performed at the Apollo, we were accustomed to doing like two shows at clubs, right? And after the second show, we packed up or we got ready to leave the Apollo Theater, and the doorman--his name was Spain, and he used some curse words, but I won't say that on camera. But he said, "If y'all don't get y'all little (laughter) blank, blanks back upstairs, you got two more shows to do. You crazy? (Laughter) Say where y'all think y'all going? Where y'all think y'all going? Said, this is the Apollo. We do four, five, six shows sometimes (laughter) a day." And so we didn't know. So we went back upstairs and put our uniforms back on and came back downstairs to do another show. And I, I remember that because that was the first time I had experienced doing that many shows in a day. Speaker 1: How many shows did you do? Speaker 2: We did four that day. But on the weekends, sometimes you do five and maybe six if, if, if you got like extra performers coming on, doing guest spots and things like that. It all depends. Speaker 1: So what were the times of the shows then? Speaker 2: It started in the afternoon. Speaker 1: They start in the afternoon and you would--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause they used to show movies in between the show. But sometimes when they would do a lot of different shows, they would, after you come off, they would say the "The half hour is in". You go upstairs, do a half hour; you back downstairs doing another show, "Half hour's in", up, down, up down. And so that's how it was at the Apollo. So we were getting broken into the theater circuit (laughter). Story_ID: 117311 Speaker 1: So what was--how did the audience [at the Apollo Theater in New York City, New York] accept you? Speaker 2: Oh, that was amazing. I mean for them to like us, and they took us in right away. Now-- And that was, that surprised me because they didn't know of us. It was our first time being there, and it was like they kind of wrapped their arms around us. They were clapping and applauding and stuff. I'm going like, hum, this is all right. This is all right. Speaker 1: Because the Apollo audience can be brutal sometimes--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh-- Speaker 1: --if they didn't like you. Speaker 2: Will kill you (laughter). Speaker 1: So after that--I mean, and that's a big deal to be at the Apollo. Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: And when we went back to--went back to Atlanta [Georgia] after we did the Apollo, everybody was like patting us on our back and talking about, "We're really proud of you guys. You keep up the good work", dah, dah, dah, dah. Speaker 1: Because you're becoming national--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --with that. You're no longer just Atlanta. Speaker 2: Yep, and Bobby Robinson did that. Bobby Robinson did that. Speaker 1: So is he then continuing to guide your career at this point or-- Speaker 2: At a certain point, yes, yes. He, he did because he--we recorded more records with him and with recording more records, we started to playing more theaters like we went to the Howard Theatre in Washington, D.C. We played the Uptown Theater in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] with Georgie Woods and Jimmy Bishop and those guys down there. And we also played the Regal Theater in Chicago [Illinois]. Yep. Speaker 1: These are all the big theaters. Speaker 2: All the big theaters. Speaker 1: Theaters in the urban areas. Speaker 2: Uh-huh, so our career is taking off now, man. I'm going like, yeah. I like this. Speaker 1: And so- Story_ID: 117312 Speaker 1: What, so how, so Gladys [Knight] leaves, but she comes back in 1964. Speaker 2: Yeah, she left after we finished the Apollo Theater [New York City, New York], she and her husband, Jimmy [James Newman], got married [sic, they got married in 1960]. And she became pregnant with little Jimmy [Newman]. And I think that was in 1962, 1962. And she decided, she say, "Okay, I'm leaving the group. I wanna be a housewife. I don't wanna do this anymore. And this is what I wanna do. I wanna cook. I wanna clean, I wanna be married. I wanna have a normal life." "Okay, if that's what you want. We don't want you to do it, but if that's what you want, that's what make you happy, God bless you. We'll continue on." So William Guest, Edward Patten and I--I'm trying to think if we decided at that point to go--yes, yes. That's when we decided to, we wants to keep the name, "The Pips" going. Oh, I gotta go back a little bit 'cause this is interesting. We were "The Pips" up until we went to New York and recorded "Every Beat of My Heart" for Bobby Robinson. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: We were just The Pips. When we got to New York, Bobby Robinson asked us if we mind changing the name to "Gladys Knight and the Pips." That's when we changed the name to Gladys Knight and the Pips so we could distinguish his "Every Beat of My Heart" from Vee-Jay and HunTom's "Every Beat of My Heart". And we agreed. Speaker 1: So was there any discussion about that? Speaker 2: Un-un. We said, okay. Speaker 1: It was the natural thing 'cause she was singing lead anyway. Speaker 2: It don't matter. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: We were a group anyway. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: I mean we were like this [clasping hands together in closeness]. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And everything we did, we voted on it any--we were a democratic group. We voted on everything. So, we voted, "Yep, that's fine." Speaker 1: So when she says she wants to leave then, what does, what does that mean to the group then at that point? Speaker 2: We're done (laughter). When she, when Gladys said, "Okay, I wanna be a housewife. I'm a be a mother, raise my baby, and I'll see ya" (laughter), we said, "No." No, we said, "Okay" 'cause we wished her well 'cause she had put her time in. And she had been loyal, man. I mean no problems. She, she hung in there with the guys. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: You know, she was the only girl and she hung in there, man. So I wanted Gladys to be happy. That was my main thing. And so I said, "Well, okay. Come on, we'll make it on our own. Let's don't give up." Story_ID: 117313 Speaker 1: So we decided to, to start writing some songs. We went home at Chestnut Street [Atlanta, Georgia]. We wrote songs, and we, we were going to New York [New York City, New York], and Langston [George] said, no, I'm not going to New York because he was, he was a lead singer. So he had his own career that he wanted to build which I understood that, wasn't a problem. But he said, "Well, I think my career will be, my solo career will be a lot better than your career as a group. So I'm going solo." "Not a problem. We wish you well, my brother, you know. We've come up through this thing together." And Langston went solo, and it left the three of us, Babe Brother [William Guest], Edward Patten and me. And so we said, "Well, what are gonna do? First of all, we gotta get to New York." So we, I think we had a old Nash Rambler, yeah, a old Nash Rambler car that Bobby Robinson had let us use to get around. And we had a, we had a clothes hanger for a antenna on it. It was just that raggedy. And one of the windows was broken (laughter), the one on the driver's side. Anyway, we got in that car and we drove to New York, went to the office where Bobby Robinson and Fats Lewis were, and I told Bobby Robinson, said--knocked on the door. Bobby said, "What are you guys doing here in New York?" I said, "Well, we wanna record." And he said, "Well, where is Gladys [Knight]?" I said, "Well, she's in Atlanta. She's not with the group anymore." He said, "Well, yawl can't record without Gladys" (laughter). We said, "No, but we wanna record. We're still a group and we, we're with your company. We want you to put out a record on us." And he said, "Nah, not without Gladys." So he was headed back into his office, right? And so Babe Brother, Edward and I said, okay, let's sing this song. We said, "Whoa, whoa, whoa darling (singing), oh, darling (laughter) whoa, darling." And Bobby Robinson stopped, and he turned around, and he came back. And he said, "What is that?" And we told him, "That's one of the songs that we, we wrote, and that we wanna record on your record label." And he said, could y'all sing that again?" So we sung the whole song for him, and then he went in to Fats Lewis and told Fats, "I got the Pips out here." He said, I heard him say, "The Pips? What they doing, what are they doing here in New York?" And then, and Bobby told him, said, "and they here without Gladys." He said, "Without Gladys? What are we--what? (Laughter) We don't wanna do anything with them without Gladys." And so Bobby Robinson said, "No, you need to hear this" (laughter). And so he had us to go in the office, and we sung "Darling" for Bobby Robinson and Fats. And Bobby said, "I'm gonna record that." And so he said, y'all have any other songs? Said, yeah, we got about four or five songs we've written. Speaker 2: So you had--that's what you had been writing on Chestnut Street then? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And that Langston-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --wouldn't, didn't, wasn't a part of it. Speaker 2: And that Langston, because he left. Speaker 1: Just, yeah, just me Babe Brother and Edward. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So, Bobby Robinson took us in the studio and recorded "Darling", and played it on his, at his record shop on 125th Street, and people started coming in there and buying it (laughter). And so Bobby Robinson got us a gig at the Uptown Theater in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] with Georgie Woods 'cause Georgie Woods had broke "Darling" in Philadelphia. We went down to perform "Darling" in Philadelphia, and we song it at the Uptown Theater. And coincidentally, Gladys and Jimmy [James Newman] were driving up from Atlanta to go to New York to record a solo record with Bobby Robinson for-- Speaker 2: Gladys was? Speaker 1: Yes, Gladys (laughter), Gladys-- Speaker 2: She was turncoat (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) Speaker 2: We thought it was all a group (laughter). Okay, it was that husband's influence. Speaker 1: (Laughter) No, actually, what it was, it was they ran out of money 'cause her husband, Jimmy was a musician. He didn't have as much work at that time as he had before, when they got married 'cause he was playing around town, doing all the clubs and stuff. But that tapered off, and the only money that they had coming in was the money that Gladys was making. So Gladys was influenced to come back to the business because she needed milk for little Jimmy. They needed diapers, they needed food, Gerber's and all that kind of stuff (laughter). And so she decided "Well, I got this gift. I may as well use it." So they were driving to New York, and they were coming through Philadelphia, and the word had gotten around that The Pips was playing at the Uptown Theater. So they stopped by on the way to New York. And Gladys and Jimmy were in the audience. And Jimmy Bishop and them heard about--and Georgia Woods heard that Gladys was in the audience 'cause the buzz had gotten around. And so Jimmy said, I mean Georgie Woods, "Okay, ladies and gentleman, that was The Pips. Give 'em a round of applause and what I understand is Gladys Knight is in the audience. And if we give a round of applause, maybe we'll get her to come up and sing a number with the Pips". So they kept clapping and clapping and standing up, and Gladys got up and came up on the stage. And we song "Every Beat of My Heart", turned the place out (laughter). Story_ID: 117314 Speaker 1: And that's how you came back together again, and got her [Gladys Knight] back? Speaker 2: No, we were still broken up (laughter) 'cause they hadn't gotten to New York [New York City, New York] yet (laughter). Speaker 1: Oh, I see. Speaker 2: They were still on their way to New York. And when they got to New York, she recorded a solo song, "Come See About Me" or something called "Come See About Me", and they used the Ray Charles--the conductor used the Ray Charles Singers as her backup, and she was saying (singing) "Come see about"--and they'd say, "Come see about me" (singing in an operatic tone), "Come see about me". They were so proper, (laughter) and it was like, ew, 'cause I went to the session (laughter). I went to her recording session, and it--not taking anything away from the Ray Charles Singers, but they were singing so proper (laughter). And I'm going like, "This doesn't fit" (laughter). And so I remember my, my brother-in-law, Jimmy [James Newman], he comes running out the studio, talking about "Bubba, Bubba, we got a smash, we got a hit, we got a smash, we--", and I said, okay (laughter). I didn't wanna tell them, but, man, that's--okay. I didn't like that, not because I was any kind of way jealous or anything like that, but it just wasn't, didn't sound like my sister's sound. Story_ID: 117315 Speaker 1: Anyway. Long story short, that didn't too particularly work out because the record nosedived. And so, they're in New York starving. We're in New York [New York City, New York] starving, and over at Fats--Fats Lewis had given us one of his apartments. And I hate to say this, but he was sort of like a slum lord, and the apartment that he gave us had little-- Speaker 2: Roaches? (laughter) Speaker 1: Yeah, roaches and little mice and stuff running around through it. And we didn't have but two beds, and it was the three of us. So by Edward [Patten] being the oldest, he got to sleep in the bed by himself. And me and Babe Brother [William Guest] had to share a bed, a little cot. And it was kind of bad. And then we met--William Guest met Marguerite Mays' niece. Her name was Little Marguerita [ph.]. And my, and Little Marguerita told her aunt about us as a group. And that's how Marguerite Mays got interested. And she had an apartment for us and told Babe Brother to tell Gladys [Knight] and Jimmy and Little Jimmy [James Newman] that she would rent them an apartment in her mansion out in, on Ditmars Boulevard. And so we passed the word on to them because they were struggling just like we were [clearing throat] excuse me. And so they, they decided to move in with Marguerite Mays, take the apartment. And in the meantime, she rented the basement to Edward Patten and me. And that's, that's a whole 'nother story. But Marguerite Mays told us that--and by the way, at that time, I was working in the garment district so I could pay the rent in New York. Okay, now, Marguerite Mays saw that we had a talent that wasn't being developed, and she had a meeting with us and told us to go back together, a long story short. She put us on, she had a friend called Larry Maxwell on Maxx, with Maxx Records. And Larry had this label, and she wanted us to record on Larry Maxwell's label, but she wanted us to go back as a group with Gladys Knight and the Pips. And she said, I will manage you and I will help your career get off the ground again because Marguerite who was Willie Mays' ex-wife, had a lot of connections around New York. Speaker 2: Willie Mays, the-- Speaker 1: Ex-wife, the-- Speaker 2: The ballplayer. So-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --his ex-wife became your manager? Speaker 1: Yeah, Willie Mays, Marguerite Mays. Speaker 2: Wow. Speaker 1: Uh-huh, and we were staying with her. She put us back together. She put us with Larry Maxwell from Maxx Records, and she also had Mack--Larry Maxwell to contact (humming "The Hustle"), Van McCoy. Van McCoy, had Van McCoy to come out to the house. She made me quit my job 'cause she wanted us to rehearse. And Van McCoy brought this song called "Giving Up is Hard to Do" [sic, "Giving Up"] that he had written. And he taught us "Giving Up". Larry Maxwell took us in the studio. We recorded "Giving Up is Hard to Do", and Larry Maxwell had connections with the Magnificent Montague [Nathaniel "Magnificent" Montague] over at the radio station, took us over to Montague's station one night, and Montague locked the door and played "Giving Up" over and over and over. And the owners of the radio station apparently got very, very upset because he had taken the liberty to play, break giving up. And they sent some of the people over to the radio station to stop it. And Montague had locked the doors, and had us to go in one of the back rooms and hide (laughter). Speaker 2: Because that--the DJ [disk jockey] could, they could make or break you at that time. And they had a lot of power. Speaker 1: So we owe the success of "Giving Up" and our comeback to the Magnificent Montague, Larry Maxwell, Marguerite Mays. And after "Giving Up" came out, we got a chance to go back into the Apollo [Apollo Theater in New York City, New York] again. And that's when Marguerite Mays introduced us to Cholly Atkins [Charles "Cholly" Atkins]. Speaker 2: Okay. That's-- Speaker 1: That's how he got into the picture. Speaker 2: Okay, I see. Okay. Story_ID: 117538 Speaker 1: So he's in-(Simultaneous) Speaker 2: Marguerite Mays. That's how we got introduced to Cholly Atkins [Charles "Cholly" Atkins]. Speaker 1: Now, what was his--was he in the New York [New York City, New York] scene? Speaker 2: He was in New York. Speaker 1: 'Cause he's still affiliated with Motown [Detroit, Michigan]. Speaker 2: He wasn't. Speaker 1: At that point, but I mean he came to be, I mean he-- Speaker 2: Later. Speaker 1: Later, okay. Speaker 2: After word got around. Marguerite Mays put us with Larry Mac--oh, gosh, excuse me. Marguerite Mays put us with Larry Maxwell at Maxx Records which recorded--when we recorded "Giving Up", that Van McCoy had produced on us, introduced us to Cholly Atkins before we went into the Apollo [Apollo Theater in New York City, New York] the second time around, introduced us to Cholly Atkins and told Pops she wanted him to polish us. So when we went back into the Apollo this time, we would go to another level. She bought, she sent us and had tailor-made clothes for us, that looked like Sammy Davis [Jr.]. She had tuxedoes and they were velvet collars and red lining in 'em. And she had us three different suits made. And she, she went in her closet and dressed Gladys [Knight] with lavish gowns. And that how--that's how she wanted us to be presented. And she wanted us to become the best group in show business, the best-dressed group in show business and the best group. So she introduced to Pop, Cholly Atkins. Cholly Atkins would take us to his basement studio and we would rehearse all day, every day, every day, all day. And he developed, I mean he got us--he choreographed "Room in Your Heart" and he choreographed, "Giving Up", and those were our two numbers that we were gonna go back in the Apollo with. Story_ID: 117539 Speaker 1: So is--what was he [Charles "Cholly" Atkins] doing? How, was he, was he around the Apollo Theater [New York City, New York] and he was just considered-- Speaker 2: He and Honi Coles [Charles "Honi" Coles]. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: "Pop" [Charles "Cholly" Atkins] and Honi Coles were a team. Coles and Atkins, and they were bigtime in the day. But Pop continued to choreograph. Honi Coles became a manager or associate manager or assistant manager or whatever of the Apollo Theater along with Mr. Frank Schiffman and Bobby Schiffman, who was Mr. Frank's son. And they ran the Apollo, even after Mr. Frank Schiffman passed, Bobby and Honi continued to run the Apollo Theater. So Honi Coles and Pop Atkins were, they were artists together, but they were very, very good, best friends as well. So, Pop was developing us and choreographing some other groups like--I think he choreographed Speedo [Earl "Speedo" Carroll], who sung with the Coasters at one time. But Speedo was with another group. Anyway, I can't get into that 'cause I don't know that much about it. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: But Pop choreographed us, and when we went into the Apollo Theater this time, we made a big sm--, I mean we were so successful. I mean we were getting like standing ovations and things like that. And that's when our career took off to another level, a higher level. Speaker 1: Okay, but this is still, we're still talking about the mid-'60s [1960s]-- Speaker 2: Sixties [1960s], yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, this is--I, this may even be '65 [1965] because--now, how do you get to--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Whenever "Giving Up" came out, that's-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --that's when it was, whenever "Giving Up" came out [1964]. Speaker 1: Okay, so- Story_ID: 117540 Speaker 1: Now, how--where, how does Motown get into, come into play? So you come, go back in the Apollo Theater [New York City, New York]. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: She's [Marguerite Mays] still managing you? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, so how does [HM] Berry Gordy get in the, in the picture? Speaker 2: Okay, [HM] Smokey Robinson. Smokey had heard about us and had seen us, and we had worked together on the Supersonic Attractions shows that Mr. [Henry] Wynn used to put together back in the day, there with the Mir--we worked with the Miracles and especially Smokey and Claud--when Claudette [Robinson] was in the group, okay. And we knew each other from back then with [HM] Jerry Butler and Dee Clark and Smokey and all of us. We grew up-- Speaker 1: Performing the circuit. Speaker 2: Yeah, we grew up together on, on the Supersonic Attraction tours for Mr. Wynn, okay. Now, Smokey, at that time--now, Smokey at, had gone to--he and Berry Gordy had formed Motown Records. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: All right. So from the day of us working with Smokey, he had approached Gladys [Knight] to become a member of the Motown family on a number of occasions. And we turned him down. Now, one of the times when we were at Apollo, Smokey approached Gladys again. And by that time, Berry Gordy had heard about the success of Gladys Knight and the Pips. So they developed, they--he formed a department of artists development. When he, when they formed artists development at Motown, they hired Cholly Atkins because he had a reputation--we had a repu--he had a reputation from artists seeing us perform. He hired Cholly Atkins for the choreography for his group, and hired Maurice King for the musical department. So he was taking all of our, all of our people away from us. And Cholly Atkins went to Motown, and he told Berry Gordy and them in his contract, the only stipulation, the contingency that he wanted in his contract was that he could continue to work with Gladys Knight and the Pips. But he was exclusive for all of the rest of the Motown acts. And Berry Gordon signed it. Speaker 1: Well, because, I mean he's the one who groomed a lot of acts there. Speaker 2: Yep. So, so when Smokey approached us once again after Cholly Atkins and Mr. King were at Motown, I started listening to Gladys saying, "Hey, Smokey keep asking me for us to go to Motown". Gladys--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Are you still with Fury [Fury Records] at this point? Speaker 2: No, we're still with Maxx Records. Speaker 1: You're with Maxx Records, okay, all right. Speaker 2: Yeah, Larry Maxwell. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: "Giving Up". Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So the word got out that we were thinking about going to Motown Records, and at that time, Jerry Butler had formed a record company in Chicago [Illinois]. And he wanted us to sign with his record label in Chicago and Gladys and Annette [Butler] and all of them, all the girls, they were all buddies. And so Gladys wanted to go to Chicago with Jerry and be with her girlfriends. But Jerry hadn't established himself as a record (laughter), as a successful record label at that time in comparison to Berry Gordy and Motown. So it was a split vote in our group. William [Guest] and Edward [Patten] wanted to go to Motown. Gladys and I wanted to go with, with Jerry Butler, and the only reason I wanted to go with Jerry is because I knew, I knew that it would make Gladys happy. And that wasn't good business thinking. That was not good on my part. So we had this last meeting. We said, we have to make a decision. And so I thought about it. I went to the meeting. I said, Cholly Atkins is at Motown, Mr. King is at Motown. Berry Gordy has proven himself to be a successful record label at Motown. All of these things and Aunt Rose is in Detroit. I gotta switch my vote. I got to be the swing vote. We gotta go to Motown, ain't no question about it. It's the best business move that we could make. If we get one hit record over at Motown, look what it does for us nationally. So I'm thinking this way, business wise. So I said, Sis-- Speaker 1: So she went along with the group. Speaker 2: She had to-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --because we were a democratic group. The vote, (laughter) the vote was three to one (laughter). So she was upset. She didn't want that, but anyway, she went. Story_ID: 117541 Speaker 1: So what is the Motown you come into at that point, and do you actually move, are you moved? You move from New York [New York City, New York] to-- Speaker 2: We moved from New York-- Speaker 1: To Det-- Speaker 2: --we moved from New York to Detroit [Michigan]. I got to back up just a minute. Now, during this negotiation with Motown, after we decided to go, we went to Larry Maxwell, and we went to Marguerite [Mays] and told them that we've decided to go to Motown records. And Larry Maxwell, since we were under contract to him, he said, okay, I need to negotiate with Motown to get the contractual thing straightened out. We had a meeting with Ralph, Mr. Ralph Seltzer and Larry Maxwell and some of those Motown exec people at Larry Maxwell's meeting place. We went in there, and Mr. Seltzer was getting us to sign the contract. And he had something on there about--and we were going to Motown in debt from some money that was paid, some finder's fee, okay, a finder's fee that was being paid to Larry Maxwell and Sister, Marguerite, and they were charging it to us against our record. And Larry saw it in the contract. He said, "Wait a minute" (laughter). Larry Maxwell said, "You, you children, go out, go out in the other room for a minute." And, man, they got to--we could 'em screaming and hollering at each other in the room. But when we came back, Larry say, "Okay, y'all can come on back in here now." And he had them to take that out of the contract 'cause they were getting ready--the Motown lawyers and people were getting to make us pay Larry Maxwell and Sister for letting us go to Motown. And he made 'em take it out. Anyway, now I had to say that 'cause Larry--I, I really respected him. Speaker 1: 'Cause he was looking out for you. Speaker 2: He was looking out for us, you know. Speaker 1: So- Story_ID: 117542 Speaker 1: So, you were, so at Motown--so, Cholly Atkins [Charlie "Cholly" Atkins] is already there though-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: --he's already moved at that point. Speaker 2: And Mr. [Maurice] King. Speaker 1: And Mr. King, okay. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: And so what is the Motown you come into? Speaker 2: We came into a Motown that was family-oriented. And we felt really, really good about being (unclear) with 'em because we knew a lot of the acts that was older there. We knew Smokey [HM Smokey Robinson]. We know the Marvelettes, we knew Kat [HM Katherine Anderson Schaffner] and them. We knew the Four Tops. We knew the Temptations, all--the Supremes. We knew all of them. So, like we were, we were embraced as part of the family, and we felt really, really good about that. But the thing about it, we weren't getting the same kind of attention that the rest of the artists (laughter), like the rest of the artists were getting. And so we were getting like, sort of like hand-me-down material and stuff, although Johnny Bristol and Harvey Fuqua were working with us exclusively at first, which was good. Speaker 1: It's good. Speaker 2: Yeah, which was, which was very good. But our records weren't really taking off like the way that we wanted it to. We, you know, we, we were recording songs like "Should Have Been Me" [sic, "It Should Have Been Me"] and--which was good, you know. And "Walk In My Shoes" [sic, Just Walk in My Shoes"], which was our first release over there, "Walk In My Shoes", which was good. They were good, but we needed hits like the Temptations, Supremes, Four Tops and all those guys in order to get to where we wanted to go. So, we had a meeting with Berry Gordy one day. Ms. Rebecca Jiles called us and said that "Mr. Gordy would like to have a meeting with (laughter), with you guys." And so we went over to the company, and we went into Mr. Gordy's office. And we were sitting around and Mr. Gordy, "I wanna, wanna welcome you to the family, glad to have you over here." And, and so my, my curiosity was I asked Mr. Gordy, I said, "Why you want us over here with all of the acts and every--all the success that you have with--. He said, "Well, the thing of it is, is that every time one of my acts would come back from on the road, working with you guys, all I could hear was, (unclear) "Them damn Pips", "Them damn Pips" (laughter). And so he said, I may as well have 'em over here if they're that good. So that was his explanation in signing us to the company, you know. And I'll never forget that because that was quite a compliment coming from the other artists, you know, and saying how good we were out there on the road with them. Story_ID: 117543 Speaker 1: So anyway, we finally, after seven years, we [Gladys Knight and the Pips] started getting some record, record recognition over there [Motown Records]. Norman Whitfield came to us--and I'm jumping ahead now. This was after, "If I Were Your Woman" and some of those songs. But Norman Whitfield came to us-- Speaker 2: Well, wait a minute. Why are you jumping over those 'cause those are significant songs. Is it just-- Speaker 1: Well-- Speaker 2: You're saying that the, that period of time--are you trying to say that at the period of time, even though you're recording, you're not getting the recognition? Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: From a promo--now, is Mickey, Mickey Stevenson [William "Mickey" Stevenson], he's doing--is he, he's the sales. Is he there? Speaker 1: Yeah, Mickey Stevens is there, but we didn't have really, like real-- Speaker 2: You didn't have the contacts--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --we didn't have the contacts with people like Mickey Stevens [sic, Stevenson] and, and we recorded one song with Smokey [HM Smokey Robinson], like, I think it was called the "Bed of Thorns", "Bed of Thorns" [sic, "My Bed of Thorns"] or something like that. We, we got little records like that from, like Smokey and from--but we never did really have, have one of those guys like Holland, Dozier, and Holland [the songwriting team of Lamont Dozier, Brian Holland, and Eddie Holland]--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Assigned to you? Speaker 1: Yeah, they weren't, they--we didn't get material from them until Norman Whitfield came along. Speaker 2: Now, how did that come? Did he, was it that you went after him or you went--'cause he--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: No, we didn't, we don't--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: But was he--but he was there already, right, Norman? Speaker 1: Yeah, Norman was there. Speaker 2: But what--had he been working with this, the Temptations at that point? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: He had-- Speaker 1: Norman had been working with the Temptations. Smokey started off with the Temptations with "My Girl". But then they switched producers and writers to go to Norman Whitfield because they were trying to take the Temptations in a different direction musically. And so he was working with them and, and until we got to Norman, you know, some of the other producers--we weren't--I don't wanna put them--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: You weren't happy. Speaker 1: --down. Speaker 2: You weren't happy with them. Speaker 1: No, I, I wasn't getting what, what I wanted us to have at Motown. I wanted the level of musical success that the Supremes, the Temptations and the Four Tops, all of those guys were having. Speaker 2: So you were feeling like second fiddle then? Speaker 1: Yes, indeed. Speaker 2: Okay, the truth be told. Speaker 1: Yeah, truth be told, it felt like (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: And I, and I even read some--I don't know when--maybe I'm jumping ahead then, Gladys [Knight] felt like, that Berry Gordy was paying all the attention to Diana [Diana Ross of the Supremes]. Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, of course. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And that's obvious. I mean that's, that's obvious. And, and Martha [HM Martha Reeves of Martha and the Vandellas], but Martha wasn't getting the kind of attention that, that Diana and Mary [HM Mary Wilson] and the Supremes were getting. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: You know, or Kim Weston or-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: They were getting attention, but they weren't get--they weren't getting "that" kind of attention. And my sister [Gladys Knight] was in that number of not getting that kind of attention, which we needed in order to move to where we were trying to go. Story_ID: 117544 Speaker 1: Now, until Norman Whitfield came along--and Norman, he was the first producer to, like give us free reign to be ourselves. He gave this Wollensak tape recorder, with a track on it and told us--and some lyrics, and told us to go and put "Gladys Knight and the Pips" on it. And we lived with this song for like, what? A month, we lived with it, and made it like what we wanted it to be. And it was "I Heard It Through the Grapevine". And we took it back to Norman, and we knocked on his door at his office, and said, okay, Norman, we're back, and we've worked on this song, and we'd like for you to hear what we've done. And you tell us what changes you want us to make. And so we sung, "I Heard It Through the Grapevine" just like we did. We turned the track on, (singing) "Ooh, I bet you're wondering how I knew" (singing). And we showed him just what we had done. And he said, sing that again. And we sung it again. And Smokey [HM Smokey Robinson] was in the studio at the time, and he got on the phone and called up to the studio, said "Put Smokey on the phone. I gotta talk to Smokey right now". So they put Smokey on, and he had--he told Smokey, said, I need some of your time right now. I mean right now (laughter). And Smokey gave the studio up and let us go in there. Speaker 2: Wow. Speaker 1: Bam. Gladys hit it, bam , we hit it, boom. "Heard It Through the Grapevine". Number one (laughter). And that's how we got rolling. Speaker 2: So that really gave you your place in Motown. Speaker 1: There we go. Speaker 2: Okay, you, you know, 'cause-- Speaker 1: At that time-- Speaker 2: Money talks. Speaker 1: --that was the, that was the biggest record that Motown had had that particular period. We went to number one with "I Heard it Through the Grapevine", man. And that, that brought a smile to my face. I said, now, this is what we came over here for, yeah. And-- Speaker 2: So what happened after that though? Speaker 1: After that, we, we were on the Motown Review at the Fox Theatre [Detroit, Michigan]. I remember this, and we sung, "I Heard It Through the Grapevine". Stevie Wonder was on the show, Temptations. Speaker 2: You're talking about the Motown Motor Revue [sic, Motortown Review]. Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: That went traveling around? Speaker 1: No, but we didn't travel. Speaker 2: Okay, you didn't travel, okay. Speaker 1: No, we didn't travel with the review. We were at the Fox Theatre, and they had the revue at the Fox for that--they would have the revue like at Christmastime and holiday times and stuff like that. They would have the Motown Revue at the Fox. So we happened to be on it this time. And we sung, "I Heard It Through the Grapevine", and [HM] Berry Gordy used to have a meeting with, with the acts after each show and tell us what he saw, what he'd like to see and that whole kind of thing. And in the meeting--and he applauded us for doing "I Heard It Through the Grapevine" in our act. He said, but it's missing something. He said, you're really not selling that song, as big as it is. You're supposed to be killing with "Grapevine". And so we went back into rehearsal after that to build "I Heard It Through the Grapevine" up. And that's when we put on, put in the audience appreciation part of it, to, to get the audience more involved in "I Heard It Through the Grapevine". And we choreographed it a little bit differently, you know. I think Pops [Charles "Cholly" Atkins] choreographed "I Heard It Through the Grapevine", yeah, he did. Speaker 2: Yeah, I think he did. Speaker 1: Uh-huh, yeah, Pops choreographed "I Heard It Through the Grapevine", and so we, we made it--we got it to the point where it became our closing number. Speaker 2: And Norm Whitfield, he's the one who wrote--did he write the lyrics? Speaker 1: He and Barrett Strong. Speaker 2: Okay, oh, he and Barrett Strong. Speaker 1: He and Barrett Strong wrote, "I Heard It Through the Grapevine". And a little tidbit about "I Heard It Through the Grapevine", Smokey and the Miracles had recorded "I Heard It Through the Grapevine" before we did. But it didn't pass artists, artists approval. They had artists develop--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: It was, it was--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --not development. Speaker 2: No, no, no, it was called the "quality control" meetings. Speaker 1: Quality control. That's it. Speaker 2: (Unclear). Speaker 1: That's it. It didn't pass quality control. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: That's exactly right. And so Norman gave it to us and say, "Do what--do the Gladys Knight and the Pips thing on it". And when it went back through quality control, at that time, it passed. They said, "Yeah, this is it for Gladys and the Pips." So in--after that we, we developed "I Heard It Through the Grapevine" to be our closing number which was approved by Berry Gordy and everybody else. It became, "Yeah, that's what we're looking at, that's the one we're looking for." Story_ID: 117545 Speaker 1: So how is the money at this point, that you have the hit song ["I Heard It Through The Grapevine"]? Speaker 2: Not good. Oh, I forgot to tell you about this. We, at this time, we're being managed by a company, Sidney Seidenberg, and Floyd Lieberman--I done left out a whole big chunk of-- Speaker 1: Seidenberg, wasn't he--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Seidenberg, yeah. Speaker 1: He was the--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: [HM] B.B. King. Speaker 1: That's where I know him from. Speaker 2: That's where Uncle B.B.--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: Uncle B.B. with Sid--I mean Sid Seidenberg made Uncle B.B., he and Floyd Lieberman. And Sister, and Sister [Marguerite Mays] and, and Larry Maxwell introduced us to Sid Seidenberg. Now, I left out that whole--and they were a very intricate part of our success. I mean--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: But wasn't there--they're managing you when you go to Motown [Records] or they're managing, because--I'm confused. Speaker 2: Yeah, Marguerite Mays released us. Speaker 1: She released you. Speaker 2: Yeah, and Larry Maxwell released us to Motown. But we started being managed by Sid Seid--we were development a management with Sid Seidenberg and Norman Whit--Sid Seidenberg and Floyd Lieberman. Speaker 1: Even though you were at Motown? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You're being managed by--okay. Speaker 2: In the background. We had them as our accountants. But, now, now, Motown had a management operation called ITMI, International Talent Management, right, Enterprises, I think [sic, International Talent Management, Inc.]. Anyway, we were managed at Motown by ITMI, which was Motown's management division. But, (excuse me) at the same time, we had our own managers, managing us as well, but they were our accountants at that time. Speaker 1: So they were taking care of the money? Speaker 2: And we brought Sid Seidenberg and Floyd Lieberman in to, to, to have a--to, oh,--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Contract? Speaker 2: No, what's the word when you-- Speaker 1: What, artists--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Audit, audit. Speaker 1: Oh, to audit the records. Speaker 2: There we go. Speaker 1: I got you. Speaker 2: Now. Now, we're becoming a real corporation now, you know, perfection in performance. Speaker 1: And so that was from--and so you weren't happy with what you learned? Speaker 2: Oh, no. I mean we weren't earning anything. We were getting tidbits, little pieces here, little pieces there. We weren't getting royalty checks. We would get like, something statements. The statements would always reflect indebtedness for certain things. Speaker 1: Were you given advances? Speaker 2: No. We didn't get an advance, no. No advances. That wasn't part of it. Speaker 1: But how are you living then? Speaker 2: Well, huh? Speaker 1: How are you living off the money if you-- Speaker 2: We're working. That's how it works. You work. That's how you survive. You do concerts, you perform, you-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and that money is your money. Speaker 1: Oh, so the concert money is yours? Speaker 2: That's your money. Speaker 1: But the record money is a different thing? Speaker 2: Different, whole different situation. Speaker 1: I see. Okay. Speaker 2: So, anyway, Sid Seidenberg and Floyd Lieberman very, very intricate part of our success. Came in, we brought them in, starting doing audits. They start finding money and things like that. And-- Speaker 1: So they were just--they would look at the books and see--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --what the proceeds were and what, what you were supposed to be getting 'cause you--I'm sure it's out of expenses, that you were getting that out of expenses, right? Speaker 2: All the expenses were paid. As a matter of fact, some of our gig money that we would--gigging, we were putting money away. We would give money to our management over at Motown for them to put our taxes, tax money away so when tax time came around, we could pay our taxes. At the--almost at the end of the Motown contract, it was time for us to pay our taxes, and we were asking for the money to pay our taxes. The money wasn't there. "What happened to the money that we put aside, we told you guys to earmark for taxes?" "We spent it on photographs, travel expenses, dah, dah, dah, dah, dah, dah, dah." "Well, wait a minute whoa, whoa, whoa. We didn't tell you to do that." Story_ID: 117546 Speaker 1: So we're at the end of our contract with Motown now, coming up on our seven years. The tax man is on us, the IRS [Internal Revenue Service] coming for their money. So we're--they want us to sign up with Motown again. We don't wanna sign with Motown because we don't feel that we're getting what we needed to get from Motown. So we're deciding that we're not gonna sign up with Motown anymore. Let's look at that [HM] Jerry Butler deal and all of that kinda stuff again. Now, Motown gets wind of this, the lawyers over there. So they sent, they had this lawyer to call me on the phone and said, "We want you to sign up for another seven years at Motown, and if you do, we'll pay, we'll take care of your tax situation, and we'll take care of dah, dah, dah, dah, dah, dah." We're going like, "Wait a minute. They're trying to twist our arm to sign with Motown. Naw, we didn't wanna do it that way. We'll find out a way to pay our taxes." Anyway, long story short, Mr. [Ewart] Abner called us into a meeting and said at the end of our contract-- Speaker 2: He's come back, Abner-- Speaker 1: He's at Motown now. Speaker 2: He's at Motown. Speaker 1: Oh, I didn't tell, I, I didn't tell you. He was at Motown when I was, when we went to Motown. Speaker 2: So when you went back to Mo--he had moved from Vee-Jay [Records] to Motown? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I left that out, didn't I? Speaker 2: No, I think you had mentioned it at some point that-- Speaker 1: Yeah, Mr. Abner is over there at Motown too. Speaker 2: I see, so everybody's at Motown. Speaker 1: So we got all our buddies over there at Motown, right? And, so Mr. Abner was, was--he was high on the administration list at Motown. I don't know what his position was. But he was right up there at the top. And so what, what he did was, he called a meeting for, for--with us at the Pontchartrain Hotel [Detroit, Michigan], and this--I'm getting back to where I was telling you about the Pontchartrain Hotel now. And he said, "We want you to sign back up with Motown for seven, seven more years." And we were telling Mr. Abner that we didn't wanna do that. And during, during this time, we went in the studio one last time for Motown to record this one last record that Joe Porter had for us, that was written by Jim Weatherly. And we just, we said, "Okay. We'll go in the studio and record this last record," but we're thinking about not being with Motown. We went in. We recorded "Neither One of Us" ["Neither One of Us (Wants to Be the First to Say Goodbye"]. And--oh, let me back up a little bit. Right before we recorded "Neither One of Us", we had this meeting with Mr. Abner, and we told them we weren't gonna sign with the company anymore. And he said, "Well, what about your taxes?" We said, "What about 'em? We're working. We'll pay our taxes even though y'all kept the money." And so when we walked out of that meeting that day, Mr. Abner, Mr. Abner came out in the hallway. And I'll never forget this, he said, "You know, I've always loved you guys like my own children." He said, he said, "but I'm a tell you something, to walk away from this company, y'all got plenty of guts" (laughter). And he hugged us and said, "The best go with you." And that was the last time we talked to Mr. Abner. He gave us a hug and wishes us well. He said, "Y'all got plenty of guts" (laughter). Story_ID: 117547 Speaker 1: So was he saying that was quite daring to be moving--'cause the company was busting, I mean it was, it was-- Speaker 2: I know. Speaker 1: --it was hot all over the place. Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: And Motown was all, everything was happening. Speaker 2: Yeah, and, and one of the other things I think that Mr. [Ewart] Abner was saying that, you know, they have a tendency to kill careers, and, you know, like you could-- Speaker 1: You could be (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --where you would not do anything after that. Speaker 2: You won't be doing, you won't be doing well (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (Unclear) because he said, "You have guts." Speaker 1: But you felt strongly--(unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh, we felt very strongly because we had been raised in the streets. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: We were raised from, way before Motown was even thought about or any of the artists that they had developed that, that were home grown. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Stevie Wonder, all of those, all of those--(unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: They were just--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: They were home grown over there at Motown. Speaker 1: They had just--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: The Supremes. Speaker 1: They had just known that area. That's what I'm saying. Speaker 2: That's it. Speaker 1: 'Cause really--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: But we were from the street, we were from the street, so we knew how to go out there and get gigs and make our way even after Motown. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: So we felt very confident in doing whatever we wanted to do. That's our, our call, you know. And at that time, we went in there and recorded "Neither One of Us" ["Neither One of Us (Wants to Be the First to Say Goodbye"]. That was the last song we recorded with Motown. And this is the part--I'm a tell you about this and then I'm done with that part of it. We recorded "Neither One of Us" and it went to number one, right, on the charts. And [HM] Berry Gordy and Mr. Gordy was calling us to congratulate us on, on the number one, record with "Neither One of Us", and that's when he found out from his lawyers and Mr. Abner and them that we wasn't with the company no (laughter), anymore (laughter). Speaker 1: He probably flipped his lid. Speaker 2: Yeah, he was, he was-- Speaker 1: He was probably very upset. Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause see, I don't, I don't think he knew what was happening his attorneys and with his negotiators and people like that. And probably if he had known, maybe he would a called us into a personal meeting. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And we would of sat down and discussed the things that wasn't, that weren't happening with us that we wanted to happen. But we were, just wasn't getting through to him. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: We needed him. Speaker 1: That's right. But he had a lot of de--a lot of things were happening--(unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh, of course. And we understood that. Speaker 1: Right, right, right. Speaker 2: We understood his hands were full with all of his artists that he was developing-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --you know, and he was doing a great job with them, but we were, we were going lacking. So we went to, we signed with Buddhah Records [later known as Buddha Records], Art Kass, Neil Bogart, Cecil Holmes, yeah. That was our team now. Story_ID: 117326 Speaker 1: Okay. So my name is Julieanna Richardson, and I'm the interviewer. And Matthew Hickey is the videographer and your wife, Kathleen [Knight], is here, not known as Katherine, but also known as Kate. And can you start out by stating your name and spelling it for us again and today's date? And that's all. We'll go on with the (unclear). Speaker 2: Okay, my name is Merald Woodrow Knight, Jr. M-E-R-A-L-D, W-O-O-D-R-O-W, K-N-I-G-H-T, J-R. And I--my nickname is Bubba Knight, B-U-B-B-A, K-N-I-G-H-T, yeah. Speaker 1: And your--today's date? Speaker 2: I don't know. Oh, today's date is November the 20th [2013]-- Speaker 1: The twentieth? Speaker 2: Yes, today is the 20th because I signed a check yesterday to the, to my tax people who did my taxes, and it was the 19th and that hurt (laughter). Story_ID: 117327 Speaker 1: So I wanna start, I don't know--you know, I do want you to talk about Moms Mabley [Jackie "Moms" Mabley] since she just saw that, but we'll start there and do a few things. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But where we ended was really, I wanna go back to your time at Motown [Records] and then we'll go further than that. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But let's just talk about Moms Mabley because you said you met her at the Apollo Theater [New York City, New York]. Speaker 2: Yes. We [Gladys Knight and the Pips] worked with Moms Mabley--we called her "Moms", at the Apollo Theater back in the early, let me see, '60s [1960s] and late '50s [1950s] I think it was, no, no, '60s [1960s]. It was the early '60s [1960s]. And Mom was phenomenal. She was so funny. And her stories were magnificent, and she told stories that you, that had substance to them. She would attack the, the segregation and Civil Rights and all of that kind of thing in her stories. But she would make 'em in a--she would perform them in a way where they would be funny (laughter), you know. But she was a great entertainer, great entertainer. And we just loved being on the show with her. Speaker 1: Do you have a couple Moms Mabley stories and memories to share with us? Speaker 2: Actually, don't have a whole lot, but Moms used to--she would get dressed in her Moms Mabley outfit with her skull cap and her funny-looking socks and all of that kind of stuff. And she would come off, and when she would come off stage, she'd be another kind of person (laughter). And, and--but Moms loved us. And, you know, one thing about Moms Mabley was that you respected her. You respected her, and you felt like that Moms could handle any situation that came up, like if somebody got out of line or whatever, Moms could handle it. And you would think that she was a person that could go around the world and be respected by politicians, by queens and kings and the whole shop because she had that kind of aura about her. And everybody respected Moms, like they did my mother, like Elizabeth Knight [sic, Woods Knight]. She had that kind of respect. I don't have a whole lot of stories to tell you about Moms except for when I would see her from the wings, I would learn a lot of how to deliver comedy and deliver my, my performances. I, I included in a lot of my performances in what I got from watching Moms Mabley from the wings. Speaker 1: Can you describe that? I mean, what you mean by that? Speaker 2: Yes, like now, when Gladys [Knight] and I are on stage, and when we talk to each other, we're talking to each other in a personal way. And I make--say, for instance, like when Gladys went solo in 1989, I put that in the act. And I say, "Lil Sis, I really, really love you being of your word because you're allowing me to perform on your show, and you told me that when you went solo back in 1989. And when you went solo back in '89 [1989], it was hard out here on a Pip." So that was Moms, Moms Mabley. I got that, I got that in, but the people really, I mean they enjoyed, they laugh at it, you know. So I, I kinda got that from Moms. I got my point across, but I didn't do it in a mean spirited kinda way, and that's what I did. Speaker 1: So when you said she was a different kind of person when she came out, what do you mean by that? Speaker 2: Well, Moms, you know, it was kinda well known around the business that Moms was gay. And when she would come off stage from being "Moms", Mom would dress up in her suit (laughter) and like hat and whole shot and be, you know, dad. That's the best way I can put it. Story_ID: 117328 Speaker 1: And you were even saying that in the business, very early on, you're seeing all kinds of different people. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: --you're exposed. Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, back in the day when we were in the, first in the business, being gay wasn't a big deal for everybody in the business. I don't know why, but it was more accepted in the entertainment industry, maybe more than it was in society at that time. But we worked at, say Ben Reed's [ph.] Supper Club in Atlanta. And everybody in that, everybody on the show was gay. And you had Billy Wright, you had Kilroy [ph.], you had Mary Jo [ph.], who was a striptease dancer. And people would come from all over Atlanta just to see that show. And that show was--I don't know whether you remember the Jewel Box Revue that used to go to the Apollo [Apollo Theater] every year, and everybody in it was gay. And they only had one female in it, but everybody else were, everybody else were men. And I was performing as a little boy with sort of like the Jewel Box Revue back at Ben Reed's a long time ago. They would come out and perform and, I mean perform. They were great. Speaker 1: And you were saying also that, that Little Richard was Billy Wright's mentee. Speaker 2: Yeah, he--that's right, that's right. (Laughter) Billy Wright taught Little Richard a lot of, about his flamboyancy, and I think if not, if I'm not mistaken, Richard told us at one time that Billy Wright taught him how to put makeup on, and that's how--and how to be flamboyant because he had to be that way in order to get to the level in show business that he wanted to achieve. Story_ID: 117329 Speaker 1: So now, I, I just wanna start out by covering some things maybe I didn't cover the last time. And I want to ask, you know, because you had said that in the beginning, you were trying to also, to incorporate splits and things in your acts, and you were all getting beat up. This is, you know, around the time of the Apollo [Theater in New York City, New York]. And you said, "Oh, well, we don't--I think we'll just take the dancing." And this is around the time--and so, but I wanted to ask you because you also said that you and William Guest were the ones who did the choreography before Cholly Atkins [Charles "Cholly Atkins"] came in. And is that true, and can you explain to me 'cause I'm trying to understand the different rolls that people had. Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Well, one of the things that, that William and I thought about when we were trying to be a unique group and not like the rest of the groups that were out, we tried doing the splits, and it didn't work out because we weren't that athletic. And we decided to be a little more classy with our choreography. So we would watch people like Sammy Davis [Jr.] and like--let me see. We watched Sammy Davis. We watched Jackie Wilson. We watched artists like that and saw how their choreography was and how their dance move was. And, see, Sammy's movements were more like tap and, and sliding and Mr. Bojangles, [singing] dunt, dah, dah, dah. It wasn't all splits and everything. So we decided to adopt, adapt to that kind of choreography. And so, we got away from the splits and went to a more smooth, sort of a picturesque kind of a choreography that would enhance what Gladys [Knight] was singing about, the lyrics and that type of thing. So we, we came up with that until we got with Cholly Atkins. And Cholly Atkins' role, as Marguerite Mays would tell us, who was our manager at that time, who introduced us to Cholly Atkins, said, "I want to take you to Cholly Atkins so that he can polish you." And that's what Pops did. He didn't only polish us, he created a lot of the choreography and gave us moves that he and Honi Coles [Charles "Honi" Coles] were doing when they were a, a duet, a dance team. And he incorporated what he, his experience in dance, he gave it to us and taught us and polished it. And that's how we did it. So we took what we had, added it to what Pops gave us--who was Cholly Atkins, and he polished it all up, Voila, and the Pips (laughter). Story_ID: 117330 Speaker 1: Well, you know, I found that fascinating about, even Marguerite Mays-- Speaker 2: Marguerite Mays. Speaker 1: So at the time, she's divorced from Willie Mays, right-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --at the time? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: What was her background? You know, I know you said that she had a lot of contacts, but what was her background? Speaker 2: Oh, my gosh, yeah. I never knew Sister to have a job (laughter). She, Sister was just fine, and she knew a lot of people. Everybody loved Sister, man, everybody. And as a matter fact, Marguerite Mays--when I say "Sister", that's who I'm talking about. So, Sister introduced us to Sammy Davis [Jr.]. She introduced us to the people at the Apollo [Theater in New York City, New York]. She introduced us to Pete McDougal, yeah, that's his name, who used to run Smalls Paradise in New York. She introduced us to all of those people, and she also wanted us to play the Copacabana [New York City, New York]. So she was grooming the Pips to go into the Copacabana. And she bought us wardrobe. She Dave Alter [ph.] at F & F Clothiers, yeah, to make us tuxedos to look like Sammy Davis, Jr., with fur on the collar, I mean velvet on the collar and red linings on the inside. And Sister went into her closet and dressed Gladys in some of her most lavish gowns that she had. Oh, man. So she, she always told us she wanted us to be the "Number one best group in show business," and she went about doing that. And we, (laughter) we got the title. Speaker 1: Well, a lot happened because of that, really, because the, you know, the relationship with Cholly Atkins [Charles "Cholly Atkins"]. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: Was she acting as a typical manager, I mean, meaning, was--'cause I don't think, the money had not started coming at that point. So--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --so she was really more acting like a patron. Speaker 2: Yep. Sister wasn't getting paid. As a matter of fact, we paid her 'cause I rented the room at her house. That's how we met her. I was renting a room at her house. And Sister, she loved us like, like we were her children. As a matter of fact, she came and told us one day--and I'll never forget this. The lady that owned the Drifters, I can't remember his name or her name, but when the owner of the Drifters passed away, the rights from the Drifters went to his wife. And I still see her sometimes when I go to England. And she and Sister were really good friends. And Sister went and had a meeting with her one day. She came back to the house, and she called a meeting with us, and she told us, said that "I've been advised that I'm being too much of a mother to you, to you children. And I need to treat you more like a business. So I wanna, I'm gonna become the, the fifth Pip." And we're going like, "What?" (Laughter) That's what she said. And we had a meeting, and we said, "No, we love Sister, and everything, but no, we're not gonna have a fifth Pip (laughter), say, it's gon' be us" (laughter). But she was getting us gigs and everything. And Sister gave us, let us use her car. Whenever we went to Harlem [New York] from Long Island [New York], William, Edward [Patten] and I, Sister would give us her big Lincoln. And she's, she said, "Babies, if you gonna go to Harlem, you got to go right 'cause you're representing me." And we would take the, we would take the big Lincoln and drive up to Harlem, and all our buddies be going like, "Hey, Pips, hey, Pips". We'd be waving out (laughter). Speaker 1: Well, the Lincoln was the car of day. Speaker 2: Oh, man, that big Lincoln, and it was, oh, man. But we were her children more than her business, you know. And she opened a lot of doors for us, and she--to me, Sister doesn't get the credit that she should get and that she deserves for making us have the success that we have, have had in the business, in show business. Sister--and there were some other people too that never get their names mentioned. Story_ID: 117331 Speaker 1: We talked about Cholly Atkins [Charles "Cholly" Atkins]. We talked about Maurice King. But we never mentioned people like Sid Seidenberg, Floyd Lieberman, all of these people--Art Kass over at Buddah Records [later known as Buddha Records]. We spoke about [HM] Berry Gordy, which I think we'd probably get to that. But these were people--Marshall Sehorn, Bobby Robinson, all of these people played a role in us achieving the level of success that we've had in show business, but they never get mentioned. Speaker 2: Right. So really, in New York at this point, it's Bobby Robinson-- Speaker 1: Fats, Fats Lewis, Bobby Robinson who owned Fury Records. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: They were the ones. And they had groups like Louie Lynn--Louie Lymon [Lewis Lymon], Frankie Lymon and the Teenagers' brother. They had Louie Lymon. He had Wilbert Harrison, "Kansas City". They had Little Ann--[singing] "Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, I need your lovin' every day"--who is that? Little Ann and Slim [Tarheel Slim and Little Ann] or something--I can't remember. And, let me see, they had a, they had Lee Dorsey. They had so many acts. Bobby Robinson and Fats Lewis, Fury Records were hot. And Bobby Robinson promoted his own records at his record shop which was right down the street from the Apollo Theater [Apollo Theater in New York City, New York]. And he would just blast--he had big speakers outside. And you could hear the latest records and the latest acts, artists at Bobby Robinson's record shop. And people were lined up to go buy those little 45 [RPM] discs. And, man, those were the good ole days. Yeah, we found out that Bobby was bootlegging our records (laughter) out of, out of Fats Lewis' basement (laughter). Speaker 2: So when you say "bootlegging", he was-- Speaker 1: He was selling 'em, but he wasn't paying anybody (laughter). It was like the kids do nowadays when they say, "I'm selling this outta the trunk", Bobby and them was doing that a long time ago. Yeah, they had boxes and boxes of records, and we stumbled up on this. William Guest, Edward Patten and I were asked to move some furniture for Fats Lewis. That's Bobby's partner. And they told us to go over to Fats' house, and in his basement, there's some furniture down there that he wanted (laughter), wanted us to move around. And we went down there, Julieanna, and all these boxes and boxes. So we opened one of 'em up (laughter), looking in there, and our records, our records were in there. And so Bobby would take the records--he would buy the records from the, from the plant, store 'em in the basement, take 'em out of the basement and take 'em to his record shop and sell 'em over the counter, and didn't account to--you know, we didn't know anything about finding out how many records was sold and all of that. We're just little, little kids right out of Atlanta [Georgia], going to New York with this record company, you know. So, they made a lot of money off of us. Story_ID: 117332 Speaker 1: So, who is managing the business at this point [around 1961], I mean-- Speaker 2: William-- Speaker 1: --you know, or any agreements? Is your mother [Elizabeth Woods Knight] trying to look and see or are you--who, who--remember, because she's the one, at one point, she liked Fury [Fury Records], right over--didn't she--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: She chose Fury over-- Speaker 2: Vee-Jay Records. Speaker 1: Over Vee-Jay. Speaker 2: Out of Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 1: Out of Chicago. Speaker 2: Now, the thing of it, the thing of it was, is that Marshall Sehorn was representing Bobby Robinson. Marshall Sehorn was a good ole Southern guy, Southern boy who smoked a cigar. And he, he--Marshall had a--he was white, by the way. Marshall had a, a pleasant sense about him. You would like him right away 'cause he [imitating Sehorn] (unclear). And he became like, like endeared to us. And we were endeared to him because he liked us like his own children. And mom liked that when she first met Marshall Sehorn because of the way that he wrapped his arms around us. She felt like she could trust us with Marshall Sehorn in New York [New York City, New York]. She didn't--we didn't meet Bobby Robinson, Fats Lewis until we actually got to New York City, and when we got to New York, Bobby Robinson rolled up there with his--he had a red sports car (laughter) when he first met us in front of the Apollo [Apollo Theater in New York City, New York]. Marshall took us over to the Apollo and showing us where the Apollo was and showing us where the Theresa Hotel [sic, Hotel Theresa in New York City, New York] was, where we were staying at the Theresa. So Marshall took us up to 125th Street, [imitating Sehorn] "Want you to meet Bobby Robinson and Fats Lewis. We're in a record company together." So he drove us up there, and as a matter of fact, no, we walked, we walked from the Theresa up to the Apollo. And I remember Bobby Robinson pulled up in this, in this red, two-seater sports car. And Bobby Robinson had a process. His hair was back, all slicked back, and Bobby Robinson had on this bad sport coat. He was sharp, man. I'm going, like, whoa, look at this guy (laughter). And Bobby Robinson had the longest fingernails of any man (laughter) I had ever seen. And he was just, he was just--he was like a pimp. But anyway, he met us, and he took us to, he took us to dinner--was it lunch or dinner? Anyway, he took us to eat, and I can't remember the place, but it was right down the street. It was a famous restaurant right down the street from the Apollo. I can't remember the name of it. But anyway, that's the first time we met Bobby Robinson. And so he talked to us and told us that he had gotten us an engagement at the Apollo Theater, since we had "Every Beat of My Heart" out. And he wanted us to perform at the Apollo Theater. And that's when he took us to the Apollo and, and let me see, I think he introduced us to Mr. [Frank] Schiffman who owned the Apollo at that time and Bobby Schiffman, his son, who ran it after Mr. Frank Schiffman passed. And he introduced us to those people and Honi Coles [Charles "Honi" Coles], Cholly Atkins' [Charles "Cholly" Atkins'] old dance partner. Anyway, and he told us that we couldn't go on stage looking like what we were looking (laughter). So he was gonna have to buy us some uniforms, and he took us to this store. And, who took us? I think it was Marshall, Marshall Sehorn, took us and bought us two suits and bought Gladys [Knight] a green suit that looked like one of the green suits that he had bought us. You talking about ugly. Oooh, my Lord. I could throw up every time I think about what they put my sister--what they (laughter) had Gladys in. It was terrible. But we made our debut at the Apollo with two songs, "Every Beat of My Heart" and "Ain't You Got Some Room in Your Great Big Heart for Me", "Room in Your Heart", yep. Those were the only two songs we had. And, and Bobby took us, and told us that we were gonna have to do--I think we did like three, four or five shows that day, which I wasn't accustomed to. We were accustomed to doing night clubs. We'd do one show or maybe two and go home, you know. And, we got broken into the circuit that way. And from that point on-- Speaker 1: Well, this was a different kind of circuit, right? Speaker 2: Yeah--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: The circuit was different with the Apollo-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --'cause you had been in--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Theater. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: That was theater. We had never played theater before. We just played night clubs, yeah. So that was a whole different, different kind of, you know, different kind of entertainment for us, you know. Story_ID: 117333 Speaker 1: When you came across the records [in Fats Lewis' basement], what did you say? I mean did that ever-- Speaker 2: In the basement? Speaker 1: Um-hum, the basement. Speaker 2: We just said, we didn't--"Do we get paid for this?" (Laughter) It was like we didn't really know. We (laughter) didn't know. All we knew is that when we performed, whenever we would work some place, we would get paid. We didn't know about records. We didn't know you were actually supposed to get paid for recording and making records. We never knew that. That's how we lost--William [Guest] and I lost all of our publishing from the songs that we wrote, "Darling", "Linda", "I Went to Bed Last Night", "Happiness", all of these songs. We wrote about five, six songs when we went solo--but I'm kinda jumping ahead. This was after Gladys had-- Speaker 1: After. Speaker 2: Yeah, when Gladys went solo [1962], when she had Little Jimmy [James Newman]--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: When she had Jimmy. Speaker 2: --her first child. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: That's when we wrote, we wrote songs and went back to New York to show Bobby Robinson and the guys. Anyway, we didn't know about getting paid for records and recordings and publishing and all of that. So even to today, I think about it because I still see some of the records that William Guest and Edward Patten and I wrote that's still on some of those records that, you know, like Rhino [Rhino Records], some of those record companies that buy up old masters and things like that and put 'em, remix 'em and put 'em out, I still see our, some of our records on there. And they don't have our name (laughter). Speaker 1: So whose name went on those records? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: Whose names went on them? Speaker 2: A lot of different people. As a matter of fact, I saw one, one of the--we call 'em renegade or bootleg records. I saw one of 'em, and it had, it had my sister's name on one of the records that we had written "Darling", that the Pips had recorded. And she, she had nothing (laughter) to do with that. But that was just one. All of the rest of 'em had different people's names on them. And I don't know whether they were Bobby Robinson's and them relatives that--'cause they were, they were slick like that. They would put other people's name on there and collect the check from, you know, that kind of thing. So I don't know legally whether William Guest and Edward Patten and I will ever recoup royalties and publishing and things that was taken--that were taken from us. Like Little Richard, I think about Richard. Richard got ripped off for all of his "Good Golly Miss Molly" and "Long Tall Sally", all of that. Richard didn't get paid either. So that was a era and a time when record companies and managers and people like that were ripping you off more than you can even imagine. And that stopped when we signed with Sid Seidenberg and Floyd Lieberman. Speaker 1: I see. So up to that point--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: That's when we got educated. Speaker 1: I see. Story_ID: 117334 Speaker 1: Yep. So Floyd, Floyd Lieberman and [Sidney] Sid Seidenberg were very instrumental in keeping us from being the same kind of financial victims that some of the other artists at Motown [Records] had become because Sid and Floyd went into Motown and audited the books. Speaker 2: So what I wanna--how did you find, how did you meet them? Where did they come because you came to Motown on your own [in 1966] and you tell the story about how, really Gladys wanted to go with [HM] Jerry Butler--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --you know, and you--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: --(unclear) sided with Jerry, and-- Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: --you know, the others wanted to go with Motown and everybody's moved to Motown--I mean not everybody, but a lot of people moved there that you've been working with. Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: But how--you never tell the story about how Floyd Lieberman and Sid-- Speaker 1: Seidenberg. Speaker 2: Seidenberg, how they come into the picture? Speaker 1: Okay, this is how Floyd and Sid Seidenberg--well, Sid Seidenberg and Floyd 'cause it was Sid's company, this is how they came into the picture. We were with Marguerite Mays and Larry Maxwell who owned Maxx Records. Marguerite Mays and Larry Maxwell was telling us, they taught us that "You're gonna have to start looking after your business," not just the [clearing throat] (excuse me), not just from the performing side because we were getting paid on the performing side. That's the only money that we made to survive with. And he said, "You need to, you need to take care of your business. You need to get in touch--you need an accountant," and that's what Sid Seidenberg and Floyd Lieberman were. And that's what Marguerite Mays and Larry Maxwell, all of those people were telling us, to make our business part of our group, a real business. And Marguerite Mays and Larry Maxwell introduced us to Sid Seidenberg. Speaker 2: So you met--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: He was an accountant. Speaker 2: So you met him before you went with Motown-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --or after? Before. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 117335 Speaker 1: But you went to Motown before--on your own without even having them [Sidney Seidenberg and Floyd Lieberman] with you at the time. Or when did they become--when were they officially signed on to help you? Speaker 2: Actually, I'm gon' tell you this, okay, and nobody knows this. But Sid Seidenberg and Floyd Lieberman, Marguerite Mays, Larry Maxwell, all of these people, except for Bobby Robinson 'cause my mom [Elizabeth Woods Knight] signed the contract with him, we never had a contract with these people. It was just handshake. It was like, you know, "You trust us to do our part; we trust you to do your part," which is bad. I don't, I don't, you know, I don't advise that for anybody that's watching this. You know, get it in black and white. But we had a, we had a bond with each other. Before we even went to Motown, we had, we had Floyd and Sid helping us to put our, our corporations together. Sid is the one that taught us how to, how to be incorporated and the value of being incorporated and the protection that you would have in being incorporated from lawsuits and all of these kind of--he was really a good teacher. And I listened, I really listened to him. James Brown told me one time when we were playing the Apollo [Apollo Theater in New York City, New York] 'cause James had a--I hate to keep jumping like this, but the stories just keep popping in my head, okay. But James had a manager. His name was Ben Bart, and James Brown was a businessman. James Brown had radio stations. James had all of these kinds of things and James was a ment--a business mentor to me. And when we would work with James--we played a lot of shows with James like back when Jackie Wilson, Sam Cooke and all those, James was also on a lot of those shows [Supersonic Attractions]. And, anyway James told me one time, he said, "Bubba, this business is like this. If you wanna have a business side of the business and get into certain doors that, that's closed to you, you got to have you a Jewish person out front." He said, you gotta have some representation of somebody who can get through these doors. And so when, when Sister [Marguerite Mays] introduced us to Sid and Floyd, it was like, I'm going like, man, this match must be made in Heaven 'cause that's the same thing James told me a long time ago. Now, we got friends and family who are Jewish, that can help us to get to where we wanna go in this business. So it was a, it was almost a natural match, you know. And grandma [Knight's grandmother, Sally Knight] always taught us that just because we grew up in the South and we were treated with disrespect and had segregation and the "Colored" water and the "White" water and all of these kinds of things, she taught us to not let that be a hindrance to us in going forward in what we wanted to do because you're gonna have white people, black people, you gon' have all kind of people. You're gonna meet up with all these kinds of people, and you're gonna have to relate to them. If you're gonna sing and perform and that kind of thing, you're gonna--you wanna perform to the world. You don't wanna be performing to a narrow group of people, just your people. You wanna perform to everybody. So when Sid Seidenberg--and we were introduced to Sid Seidenberg and Floyd Lieberman, I'm going like, "Hey, this is my family that I've been told about, that James told me about, that my mom and everybody told me about, the people that we're gonna have to work with in order to get to where we wanna go." So, that was a match to me (laughter) that was made in heaven 'cause they were just (sound), right there. Story_ID: 117336 Speaker 1: So did they [Sidney Seidenberg and Floyd Lieberman] play a role with the deal with Motown [Records in 1966], going in there or not, or you decided you were going and they, they lived with your decision? I'm-- Speaker 2: Yes. Larry Maxwell, Larry Maxwell spearheaded that Motown connection. He didn't actually spear--I, I--that may be a wrong term. He didn't spearhead it. Actually, [HM] Smokey Robinson spearheaded it 'cause he had spoken to my sister, Gladys [Knight], on a number of occasions to come to Motown. And two or three times, she had denied him. She didn't wanna go to Motown, right. But the third or fourth time that Smokey approached Gladys to come to Motown, she told us about it. She didn't tell us (laughter) about the other meeting--the other times that Smokey had asked (laughter). And when she--I said, "Did Smokey ask you to come to Motown?" And since we had so many friends over there that we had worked with in the business--oh, gotta go back. Smokey was a part of that touring [Supersonic Attractions] that we did with James Brown, Jackie Wilson, James, all of those people, Sam Cooke. Smokey and the Miracles was--were in that as well with Chuck Jackson and Dee Clark, all of them, right, [HM] B.B. King. Anyway, when she told us that Smokey--we knew that Smokey was the vice president of Motown Records--I did, anyway. And when Gladys approached us about going to Motown, she had also talked to [HM] Jerry Butler and Annette [Butler], his wife, about coming to Jerry's record label [Vee-Jay Records] because Jerry was getting ready to start his own record label in Chicago [Illinois]. And we were sitting in the car, and we took a vote in a meeting. And I'm looking at Motown and Jerry. I love Jerry Butler. He's a great friend of ours for years. But Motown's got it going on. This was what we need. This is my opinion. This is what we need. We have the act. We can perform. We performed all, all over the, you know, South and the North, every--we're good at performing. But we need records. We need a number of records in order to get to the next level. So when Gladys told us about that, I'm going like, oh, I think we need to look into this. So we were with Larry Maxwell on the Maxx label [Maxx Records], told Larry about it, that Smokey wanted us to come to Motown. Now, we're under a handshake contract with Larry Maxwell, right. So we were talking to Larry, and Larry went and made the connection from his record company to Motown because we, we were handshake under contract, we had a handshake contract with Maxwell. So Larry was okay with us going to Motown because he wanted to see us grow like Sister [Marguerite Mays] did. He wanted to see us get to the high level that we could get to in the business. So he made the business contact with them. [HM] Berry Gordy sent, Berry Gordy sent Ralph Seltzer to New York [New York City, New York], and we had a meeting in this, this office building where Ralph Seltzer brought contracts and everything. And we were sitting in there with Larry Maxwell and all the lawyers from Motown. And they pulled the papers out and we were reading over the contracts and everything, out loud like they used to have us to do, and there were some things in the contract that didn't sit right with Larry Maxwell. So Larry said, okay, you kids leave the room for a minute. So we went outside, and Larry holler--he was so angry. He said, he said--well, he went to cussing and, 'cause Larry could cuss (laughter). He said, "This ain't the [blank] deal that I made (laughter), dah, dah, dah, dah. You got all this stuff in there." And we went out, and we came back in, and everybody was kinda calmed down, and they had scratched out some things (unclear) whole shot. But I found out what it was that Larry was getting a finders' fee for delivering us to Motown. And the lawyers, Ralph Seltzer and the lawyers had put that fee into our contract. And we were going over there with a bill before we even made, opened our mouths. And he had--they had a lot of things in there like that, that Larry had them to take out. He said, "No, you don't get 'em unless you, you take out all of this junk that y'all got in there, that's ripping off my, my children." So they took it out. We signed the contract and we went to, went to Motown, and Larry hugged us and sent us on our way (laughter). Story_ID: 117337 Speaker 1: So you went there and then Floyd [Lieberman] and them [Sidney Seidenberg] find out, I mean, you know, they come in later, and you had a tax that you said that you had, ended up with a tax? Speaker 2: Yeah, they were already--Floyd--Sid Seidenberg and Floyd Lieberman were already in place-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --at that time. They were already our accountants. We just didn't have a whole lot to account for except for the little jobs that we were working, right? Now, we're getting ready to get into the, the record money end of it, okay. So, we informed Floyd--Sid and Floyd. And so they made contact, and they, they told us that they were gonna--what they were gonna do as accountants was they were gonna get statements of all of our royalties and that type of thing. And they were gonna help us build our business, our (excuse me), they were gonna help us build our business, Perfection in Performance which was our company, Perfection in Performance, Inc. And so we went to Motown and Floyd and Sid did what they said they were gon' do. They watched the money. They would go over the statements and show us, you know, teach us about the statements and that, which we didn't have that kind of education. And he--Sid taught us, he taught us. We would go and read every contract that we would sign for anything and that type of thing. And then they became more of a manager because we--at the time, I think we were with Shaw Artists [Corporation], and then we were with Queen Booking Agency [sic, Queen Booking Corporation], and Floyd--Sid and Floyd would take these contacts from these performing dates and go over them to try to get us the best dollar for the date, which was--they were trying to raise our value. And they did a great job of that too because the money that we were making on our own was nothing in comparison to what Sid and Floyd did, you know, as far as getting our moneys up. Story_ID: 117338 Speaker 1: And we went to Motown [Records] and then we recorded our first record which was "Walk in My Shoes" [sic, "Just Walk in in My Shoes"], with Johnny Bristol and Harvey Fuqua. They wrote "Walk in My Shoes". This is a interesting story too. When we first recorded "Walk in My Shoes", we got the, the record back, well, the tape that they had sent us to listen to it. And they had all of these girl voices on there [singing in a high voice] "Walk in my shoes, walk in my shoes". We're going like, "What is that?" (Laughter) And what Harvey and Johnny Bristol had done, they had put The Andantes which was Motown's girl background, singing group, that's on everybody's record, just about, you know, they had put them on our first record. We heard them, we're going like, "Wait a minute" (laughter). And we went back and had a meeting with the A&R Department [Artists and repertoire] people and Johnny Bristol and Harvey, and we just told them, "That's not what we're trying--we're trying to sell the Gladys Knight and the Pips sound. We're not trying to sell--I know y'all trying to make us Motown, but we don't wanna be like that. We wanna stand up--we stood up on our own two feet and our own sound. And that's what our, our fans are expecting from us. So, we don't want you to put any voices on any of our records. We'll do our own backgrounds. That's the Gladys Knight and the Pips way." We thought they were gon' hammer us with that, but they, they (laughter) said, okay (laughter). They said, okay. So (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: How did you find it there [Motown] when you went though, I mean because it was really doing very well at the time. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: You know, you had, it was--it had become hot. Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. Speaker 2: And they--was having hit after hit, and I don't know, had [HM] Berry Gordy moved into his big house? I mean had he been--he had a big, he had a big mansion like there. I don't know if it, by that--he had it by that-- Speaker 1: Yeah, he used to live on Outer Drive when we first went there which was not too far from where we lived on LaSalle, yeah, we lived on LaSalle and Six Mile or Seven Mile. Anyway, Berry Gordy had a nice, big house out there on Outer Drive at that time. And when we went to Motown, it was almost like the arms were opened when we went to Motown. It was like we were part of the family, and I really felt that because we knew just about everybody over there. We had worked everybody, the Marvelettes, Kat [HM Katherine Anderson Schaffner] and the Marvelettes and Gladys Horton and all of them. We had worked with the Four Tops. We had worked with the Temptations. We had worked with the Supremes. We had worked with just about everybody who was, who were at Motown at the time. I don't think we had worked with, worked Stevie [Stevie Wonder], I don't think. Anyway, just about everybody over there. And we were accepted like part of the family, which was great, although we weren't getting the material, the songs and the producers that we thought that we could really work with and have super, super, super hits like the Temptations, like The Four Top, like the Supremes and Stevie Wonder. All of those people, we didn't really feel that we were getting that kind of concentration from the producers and the writers. Although they were good. I'm not knocking them or anything like that, but we felt as though we could have a really good relationship with Holland, Dozier, and Holland [the songwriting team of Lamont Dozier, Brian Holland, and Eddie Holland], Mickey Stevens [sic, William "Mickey" Stevenson] and some of these top producers. We even, we recorded with Smokey [Smokey Robinson]. Smokey recorded, I think it was one song and us called "Bed of Thorns" [sic, "My Bed of Thorns"], something like, yeah, and I kind of liked that record. Anyway, that's beside--but, but we stuck, we stuck with, with Harvey and Johnny Bristol. The thing of it was that Motown delegated certain producers to certain acts. And I think it was because of the chemistry with these producers and the acts because that is very important in this business. The writers, the producers, the artists have to be on the same accord in order to make hit music. I mean hit records, and, and we were just trying to find our way with that connection, which it didn't come until we, until Norman Whitfield was assigned to us. Story_ID: 117339 Speaker 1: So how did that happen? I mean those assignments, did you have to lobby for those assignments and, and are you touring still? The tours are handled differently. Are they now part of Motown [Records]? Is Motown booking you for, for concerts and things? That's separate? Speaker 2: Yeah, that's separate. Speaker 1: That's separate, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's separate. We--actually, at first, we were still booking ourselves, along with [Sidney] Sid Seidenberg from the agencies (excuse me). But we signed with ITMI, which is International Talent Management [Inc.] at Motown Records, which was the management arm of Motown. Now, it was a little bit confusing because we had Sid Seidenberg and Floyd Lieberman. We actually didn't need ITMI 'cause we were doing just fine with our little, personal setup. But in my business thinking, I'm going like, "Okay, what if we added ITMI to Sid and Floyd and the agencies that we're with? What if we combine all of these people and have them to work with each other in order to give us that boost that we need to get to that next level?" So I'm thinking like business wise, that would be a good thing. So we, we included ITMI, we went to ITMI with them being our manager. That didn't work out--it worked out okay, but that didn't kind of work out too well because then ITMI started spending money and doing things like that, that we didn't approve. Everything that we did with Sid Seidenberg and Floyd Lieberman, we approved it as a unit, as a group organization. ITME was like, by themselves. They were Motown, and we do things this way, and that type, dah, dah, dah, dah. So I think they got us into a couple of places like the Copacabana [New York City, New York] with Jules-- Julie, Jules Podell. They got us to perform in the Copacabana--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: ITMI got you to perform? Speaker 2: Uh-huh, that's where we--yeah, we performed--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Okay, but wasn't--Diana Ross and they had opened up the Copacabana, didn't they? Were they--'cause not many people had been able to perform at the Copacabana. Speaker 2: Jackie, Jackie Wilson was the first. Speaker 1: Was the first one, okay. Speaker 2: Jackie Wilson was the first. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And when, when we were working with Jackie and we heard about--and Jackie, his people told us that Jackie had gone into the Copacabana, and the word was that Jackie paid Julie Podell [sic, Jules Podell] to go into the Copacabana which broke the ice. Jackie went in the Copa, and I understand he did very well. But he paid to get in there, okay. Then I heard that Sam Cooke was trying to go into the Copacabana, don't know how that worked out, but I don't recall whether Sam ever played the Copa--maybe he did [Cooke performed at the Copacabana in 1964]. But I may not have that information. And Sister, Marguerite Mays, always told us, "I'm a get y'all in the Copacabana", which she didn't, but when we got to Motown and ITMI had that connection--and I'm not sure, but I think the Supremes had gone in there. Speaker 1: They had gone in. Speaker 2: Yeah, they had gone in already. So that part of the business thinking that I had was working to a certain extent because that would get us into the Copa. And going into the Copa as you probably well know, was a, a credit. Speaker 1: Stamp of approval. Speaker 2: Yeah, that you needed in order to, to get to some of the other clubs and the other bigger clubs in the country. And if you got that, that Copacabana stamp on you, then the other promoters and the other clubs would say, "Okay, they played the Copa; they did all right. Maybe they can play in my club." Story_ID: 117340 Speaker 1: So did you--but you were with Motown [Records] for seven years [1966 to 1973], right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, and would you say--how long did it take for things to start happening there? Was it--you know, 'cause I--what I understood is that maybe the first four years were sort of slow. But I'm not, I'm not exactly sure on the-- Speaker 2: Record wise. Speaker 1: Record wise. Not performance-- Speaker 2: Not performing wise. Speaker 1: Not performing wise. Speaker 2: Performing wise, when we first hit Motown (speedy arrow sound), perfect, because Cholly Atkins [Charles "Cholly" Atkins, also known as "Pop"] was there. [HM] Berry Gordy had hired Cholly Atkins, and he had hired Mr. King, Mr. Maurice King. And that--those people, that--it was like, man. You already have my family over here (laughter). So Berry Gordy, good job, man. And we, and they had a department called artists development at Motown. Oh, man, that was the best. I'm going like, oh, yeah, because the Pips, not Gladys [Knight], loved to rehearse. Man, we loved to rehearse. We would look forward to going to Pop and Mr. King 'cause they were training us. And that's what we used to do before we got to Motown. But we, we could go, we could go to Artists Development and work with Pop and Mr. King, and Johnny Allen for free--well, it wasn't really free because (laughter) we were paying (laughter), we were paying out of our royalty (unclear) (laughter). So we were really, we were paying, but it felt like it was free (laughter). I remember, I remember when the Four Tops and when, when--at Pop's funeral, I spoke at Pop's funeral. And I remembered there were two things that was very important that I spoke on at the funeral. One of them was that, you know, the Four Tops, Levi [Stubbs] and them, you know, they go (singing music with the Four Tops' hand movements). This is their choreography (hand movements) (laughter). This is my hit (laughter). So they didn't want anything else. And so Pop, Pop used to get on the phone and he would call us, and he'd say, he'd say, "Bub"? Say, "Pop, is that you?" Yeah. He'd say, come on over, the Four Tops canceled again (laughter). Speaker 1: Oh, so they didn't--they have their one look or whatever, and they didn't want anymore. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Oh, that was great, that was great, and every time they would cancel, Pops said, "Come on, I got a slot for you." We'd jump in the car and go over and rehearse with Pop on the Four Tops' time (laughter). It was great. It was great. And the other thing is that, is that--which was so important to me, when Pops signed with Motown Records with Berry Gordy and them, his contract read (excuse me), that--he had one stipulation in his contract. He was exclusive to the Motown acts, exclusive, except for "Gladys Knight and the Pips". And he, he made them put that in his contract. And he said, that's the only stipulation that I want you to put in the contract that I can work with, I can still work with my, my kids. Loved him for that, man. I was going like, "You go, Pops", and when he told us about that, I didn't feel so bad, badly about him going to Motown because I knew that we would still have access to Cholly Atkins, you know. So that was very important to me. And that was one of the major facts that I put in place when I decided to, to make the swing vote, to go to Motown, was Cholly Atkins and Maurice King. I mean, of course, all of my buddies, all of our buddies were over there, you know, but those were the two main reasons that I, I swung the vote to go to Motown 'cause Gladys [Knight] didn't wanna go, period. No, don't wanna go over there and get put on the shelf, be behind all those other acts (laughter). You know we're not gonna get--yeah, well. Story_ID: 117341 Speaker 1: Can you describe what Cholly Atkins [Charles "Cholly" Atkins, also known as "Pop"] was like because since, you know, we sat down, I had, you know, we did a Levert, and he-- Speaker 2: Eddie [HM Eddie Levert], yeah. Speaker 1: The things he said--there are three reasons for our success, and it was Cholly Atkins, and by the time--he was older than when working with you. So, I'm just--can you describe him because-- Speaker 2: Cholly Atkins became my dad. He, he would talk to me about things in life. He would talk to me about things in show business that he had experienced and didn't want me to run into these things, like the drugs, like the alcohol, like all of these kinds of things that he--I don't, we had a connection. We had a bond like a fa--like a father and a son. And that's the way--Pops felt that. And he and Mama Atkins, Maye Atkins, that's the way they treated all of us really. But me, in particular, and Gladys [Knight] in particular. (Clearing throat) (excuse me), Cholly Atkins was brilliant in the way that he could teach choreography to non-dancers, to people like, like us. We knew nothing about the dance moves that Cholly Atkins was teaching. We, we had, we had never been experienced. The little things that we created were not smooth and not polished, like the way that Pop taught us to do. And he was a, Pop was a, he was a good man. Pop was--how could I explain? He, he was the kind of person that you wanted to go to ask questions about life, to me. And he was the kind of person that would give you the kind of answers that made sense, just common sense. And he would, he would--he reminded me more of what my mom [Elizabeth Woods Knight] used to teach us when she would explain things to us. Pop had a way of telling me things about drugs and about the entertainment business that I could see clearly of what he was saying. And you know what? I could take it from Pops because I knew he had been there. And he had, he had witnessed all of, all of these things. And he used to tell me about performing. And he would, he would explain to me things like, "You don't perform only to that person that's sitting out front. You perform to the balcony. You perform to that last row back there in the back. That's how you perform. You don't, just don't perform here, and you just don't close your eyes and just be into yourself. It's okay to do that, but don't let your whole performance be with, with your eyes closed. Open up. You know, make eye contact with people." And those are the kinds of things that he taught us about show business. But he also taught me a lot about, about life. He liked, he liked [Sidney] Sid Seidenberg and Floyd Lieberman and Mr. [Maurice] King. He liked working with all of these people. He liked working with Joe Guercio, who was Elvis Presley's musical conductor and director. We had a cohesive group of people with expertise in different areas that came together, that gave us the fuel and gave us the push that we needed to get to the level that they all saw that we had the potential to get to, but we just needed all of these little ingredients and these little things in order to make us, to go to the top of the mountain. So. Story_ID: 117342 Speaker 1: So did he [Charles "Cholly" Atkins, also known as "Pop"] end up liking Motown [Records] himself? Speaker 2: Liking Motown? Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: I think Pop enjoyed being at Motown because it gave him an outlet to all of those different artists that he could work with. And I couldn't understand how Pop could choreograph us so well and make us look so masculine (laughter) in our dance moves and turn around and choreograph the Supremes on the other hand. I'm going like, "How do you do that" (laughter)? But it goes back to what I was saying that Pops had a way about his teaching that could teach you and bring the best out of you to be the best "you" that you can be with his choreography. Speaker 1: Now, how did he do that? Was it, his mind--it was technique and a mind, you know, he would work, try to work with people where they were. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Is that--the other thing is, how often would you rehearse with him, and when would--would, like if you were preparing to go out on the road, would you be rehearsing more? Speaker 2: Every day, sometimes twice a day. We would take off, take a break and go back. And one of the things that Pops loved about us, the, the choreography and the things that he taught us that morning, we would take it home and do homework, where some of the other acts would just, hey, well, we'll be in class again tomorrow. We would take what Pop taught us and go home and perfect it to ourselves so when we, when we were with him the next day, we could move forward from what he had taught us the day prior to. And that's what Pop loved about us. He had a special kind of arm wrapping around the Pips. We were like his babies. And Pop, a lot of Pop's business, like the Manhattans, Blue [Winifred "Blue" Lovett] and the Manhattans, like the O'Jays--I'm trying to think of some of the other groups that he choreographed, can't think of 'em right now. But those groups were his clients because of what they saw that Pop had done with the Pips. So we were like Pops' babies. We were like his calling card. And, you know, I was proud of that. I really was, and, and I was going like, I'm going like, "Pop, how can you teach these groups to be themselves and, and some of the same moves (laughter) moves and things that you give to us?" And he was telling, he was telling me that everybody have their own personality. And although they may do the same step, but they'll do it in their way, you know. And I'm going like, that kind of makes sense. That's cool. But I loved, I loved, I loved Pop--I miss him now because I could really, really use Pop, Pop's choreography and his, his thinking in, in putting my show together, my solo show. Man, I could really use him now. So all I do now is I try to remember things that Pop taught me, way back then and incorporate them into what I do now. And that's what I do on--when I go out with my sister, Gladys [Knight], now. I just reflect on some things that Pop taught me and try to make them mine. And so far it's been working (laughter). Story_ID: 117343 Speaker 1: So he [Charles "Cholly" Atkins] and Honi Coles [Charles "Honi" Coles] had actually, they had been dance partners together. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: And so Honi Coles ended up going into administration, and, but, but Pops [Charles "Cholly" Atkins] was able to continue to really-- Speaker 2: Choreograph. Speaker 1: Choreograph. Speaker 2: He be--he just became the ultimate choreographer of groups 'cause he, he did Speedo [Earl "Speedo" Carroll], the Cadillacs before he, he choreographed our group. I think Speedo and the Cadillacs were the group right before us. But (clearing throat) (excuse me), his, our career was just taking off, and I think the Cadillacs career was coming to a slow halt, you know, although they had records and Pops had choreographed them. But we were like, sort of like the new kids on the block then, you know. We were like, we were like Cholly Atkins' "Jacksons". That's who we were at that time, yep. Even Michael [Michael Jackson] and them stole some moves from us. Anyway, go ahead (laughter). Speaker 1: Well, didn't he work with--did he work with them too or was it that point? Speaker 2: Un-un. Speaker 1: He didn't. Speaker 2: No, Pop didn't, Pops, I don't think Pops--(unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: He worked with the Temptations though, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, he worked, he worked with the Temptations for a while, and then Lon Fontaine worked with the Temptations after Pops. Story_ID: 117344 Speaker 1: And, oh, well, I don't know whether people know this or not, but as far as the Temptations goes, the Temptations were choreographed by Paul, Paul-- Speaker 2: Paul (unclear)--no. Speaker 1: Paul Williams. Speaker 2: Paul Williams. Speaker 1: Paul was a--you know, the "Temptation Walk", that's Paul Williams. Speaker 2: I see. Speaker 1: I would--I just happened to go by one of their rehearsals one day. And it wasn't at Motown. It wasn't at--it was another little place that they were rehearsing. And, and I was going to see Eddie [Eddie Kendricks] 'cause Eddie and I were buddies. And Eddie told me to stop by. And I was picking them up, and we were going someplace. And Paul came out, came outside. He said, he said, "Little Bubba, Bubba, come here, come here, come here. I wanna show you something, show you a move that I just made up." And he did the Temptation--he say [movements of the "Temptation Walk"]. He said, how you like that? I said, man, I like (laughter), I like--"what, are you giving it to me?" (Laughter) He said, "Naw, man, that, that's mine." So, Paul actually created the "Temptation Walk". So whenever you see somebody doing that, that's Paul Williams. Yep, yep (laughter). Story_ID: 117345 Speaker 1: Now, when were you--is it this time that you're taking more of the business role with the group? When do you start 'cause you're still pretty young. You're in your twenties or, you know, but--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --are you starting to take--when do you start taking on the business role? Is it later? Speaker 2: Actually, as soon as I was introduced to [Sidney] Sid Seidenberg, that's when my business interests took hold. And Sid and I used to talk--even without the group. Whenever we would go any place or perform any place, I would sit with Sid, and he would teach me about the business side of the business. And I was just hungry for knowledge. I was just hungry 'cause I didn't know all the time, of how badly we were getting ripped off. And Sid was teaching me about what to do in order to get the most out of the financial end of this business as you possibly could. So my interest was there, and I think, I do believe that I was voted president of, of Perfection in Performance, Inc. because Gladys [Knight], William [Guest] and Edward [Patten], I think, they saw how interested I was into what, what Sid and Floyd [Floyd Lieberman] were teaching me 'cause I was like in class, man, every--I was asking questions, everything. And that's why they voted me the liaison between the office and the group because I'll bring it back to them. We sit down and discuss it. It's a go, green light, Sid, Floyd. That's how it was. Story_ID: 117346 Speaker 1: So, you--I mean money--okay, so money had, money starts to flow really after you leave Motown [Records], right? Or does it--is it flowing while you're at Motown because of the performances? Speaker 2: It started coming--yes, the performances. That's what we would--that's how we made our money, from the performances, which would go into the office, and then we would--one of the things I wanted to say about that, is we instructed ITMI [International Talent Management Inc.], our management company, to earmark certain monies for certain things because with Sid [Seidenberg] and Floyd [Lieberman], our taxes were paid. We would pay our taxes 'cause Sid taught me, "You don't wanna get in trouble with your taxes", like so many of our artists used to do. You know, you look around they're ripped off--broke, can't pay their taxes and penalties and interests rising all over the place where they can never get out. So Floyd, I mean Sid and Floyd taught us, "We're gon' pay the taxes. We're not gon' get caught in that one." And we were paying--and we, when we got with ITMI, we, we told our manager over there to earmark--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: And who was your manager? Speaker 2: God, I (unclear). Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: I'll think of his name, but I can see him just--I can see him. He had pepper, pepper gray hair. Oh, God, Mr. Cox [Taylor Cox], Mr. Cox. He was good too. We liked Mr. Cox. He was very good, but they didn't do something that we asked them to do with our money that was coming in from the road, put certain amount of money away for our taxes so when tax time come around, we got it. They didn't do that. And when we approached them about it, it was like, "Well, you needed pictures and you needed dah, dah, and you needed--", "Wait a minute. Nah, we didn't sign off on that. We told you to put that money away for our taxes." And this is what's so odd about that whole thing is that when our seven years were up, those taxes that we didn't have the money to pay became an issue, an issue to the point where that was used as a bait to get us to sign another seven years with the company; didn't wanna do that, not that way. And it was told to us by one of the lawyers that it could be fixed, our taxes and everything could be paid if we would just sign another seven years with the company. We had a meeting, like we always do, and we were going like, "Nah, nobody's gon'--no, we're not doing that." We voted. It was unanimous. We'd rather, we'd rather deal with taxes another kind of way. We'll get Sid and Floyd and we'll figure out something else, but they're not gonna, they're not gonna railroad us into signing another deal with Motown that way, although the records and everything were--we, we found our niche, niche with Norman Whitfield and everything. And that was one of the things that I was considering as a business move, maybe--but we would have gone back into the company, in debt again, like what Larry Maxwell wouldn't let them do when we first signed with the company. So we would putting ourselves back into that financial debt. And that didn't feel so good. So, anyway, we talked about it, and we decided, nah, we're not gonna do it, we're not gonna do it that way. And, so we left the company. Story_ID: 117347 Speaker 1: We went to--we, we went to another record company, Buddah Records [later known as Buddha Records]. Speaker 2: Records you went to Buddah Records. Speaker 1: Art Kass, 'cause Sid was telling us, Sid Seidenberg was telling us, "Okay, we don't have to do that [accept a new contract with Motown Records]", all right. And he respected our decision about why we weren't gonna do it. And he said, we'll work out something else. Speaker 2: Now, at the time-- Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: --there are others that are, maybe starting to leave. And had H-D-H [Holland-Dozier-Holland, the songwriting team of Lamont Dozier, Brian Holland, and Eddie Holland], they hadn't filed their suit at that point, right? Speaker 1: You know what? Speaker 2: 'Cause they filed a suit for--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: That's a good question. Speaker 2: --for $25 million. Speaker 1: That's a good question. I really don't know [the suit was filed in 1967 and settled in 1977]. Speaker 2: I wish I knew the dates. So go ahead. Speaker 1: But I know it was--I mean things were like brewing-- Speaker 2: They were started, they're starting to brew around that time. Speaker 1: Yeah, things were like brewing around that (laughter), that time because, I'll tell you what, the Isley Brothers had left Motown right before we did [in 1968]. They had left right before we did. Speaker 2: They filed suit too. Speaker 1: And the word was, I think the record, "It's Your Thing", was it, and I think Motown was suing the Isley Brothers because they, they were--the word was that the Isley Brothers took that from Motown and went and started T-Neck, their own label and everything. And that was a Motown record. I don't know how much truth that is. But, and, and when the Isley Brother-- word got out that if you leave Motown, not physically, but you die, okay (laughter). You die (laughter). You don't leave Motown. It's like you--and the only way you get out of it is you cut your throat (laughter). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So there had been the deal with-- Speaker 1: So we had that hanging over our heads. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But anyway, go ahead. Speaker 2: Mary Wells had had a problem, right? She-- Speaker 1: Who, [HM] Mary Wilson or Mary Wells? Speaker 2: Wells, Wells. Speaker 1: Mary Wells--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: She hadn't done-- Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, that's right. Speaker 2: She had left [in 1965] and she hadn't done well. Speaker 1: That's right, Mary Wells. And you know, you know who else had a problem was when they broke up was Florence [Ballard], with the Supremes 'cause I was, I was really upset with that, with all the money that was made over there. And to see Florence go through what she went through as far as, you know, nobody coming to her aide and everything. I, I--you know, I'm going like, that's just not right. That's not right, you know. I would even help her if I could, you know. Anyway. That was the word. Speaker 2: And you know, Detroit [Michigan] wasn't new to you anyway because Aunt Rosie was there. Was she still there when you came back [from New York City, New York in 1966]? Speaker 1: Who is that? Speaker 2: Aunt Rosie, isn't the--didn't you have a Aunt Rosie there? Speaker 1: Oh, Aunt Rose, yeah. Speaker 2: Aunt Rose, I'm sorry. I had a Aunt Rosie. Speaker 1: Aunt Rosa, yeah, yeah--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Aunt Rosa, okay Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, but we called her Aunt Rose. Speaker 2: Okay, Aunt Rose. Speaker 1: Yeah, Aunt Rose was, she was, she was still there. I'm trying to think when Aunt Rose passed. Story_ID: 117348 Speaker 1: So when you go over to Buddah Records [later known as Buddha Records], who is there? And who are--can you describe who, you know, who--isn't it--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I can tell you exactly. Cecil Holmes, Art Kass, Milt Sincoff [Milton Sincoff], Neil Bogart and Ron Wisner, all of those people were my, oh, man. They took us and they said, okay, here we go (laughter). Speaker 1: Now, that's 1973, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, and who--what is Buddah? Who, who is Buddah Records at the time? I mean--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Good question. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Buddah Records was not a record company. Buddah Records was a distributing company. That's what their, that's what their whole business, were built on, them being distributors, not a record company. And that was a perfect match for us because they wanted to be a record company. And I'm trying to think, not [Ronald] Ronnie Isley, but--oh, gosh, I can't think of the Isley brother who called me on the phone 'cause he got the word. He had the word that we were leaving Motown [Records], and that we were gonna sign with Art Kass, and Buddah Records and Cecil and Neil and all of them, and Ron Wisner, right. And, oh, gosh--anyway, the Isley brother, I'll just say that, called me on the phone. He said, "Bubba, are you nuts?" (Laughter) I'm going like, "What are you talking about?" He said, "Man, I heard you guys were getting ready to sign with Buddah." I said, "You heard that, huh?" He said, "Yeah." He said, "Don't sign with Buddah. They're only a distributing company, not a record company, man." I'm going like, "Okay, I hear you, my brother, and I know you're looking out (laughter), know you're looking out for us and everything. And thank you for the call. And I'll pass it on to the group." I didn't care. But, you know, I really appreciated him reaching out and looking out for us. And I felt like, after we had our meeting, we say, "Okay, we've been in a pond, and we've been a little fish. How about if we go to a little pond and be a big fish? And they can help us to get to the level that we're trying to get to" because I feel them. They really feel like they're sincere in wanting to take us to the next level with Art Kass and Neil and Cecil, Milt Sincoff and Ronnie Wisner, I felt them. We felt them, and so we said, "You know what? Whatever the consequences are by leaving Motown going to Buddah Records, we'll deal with 'em." Story_ID: 117349 Speaker 1: And Motown [Records], had it moved yet? It hadn't moved, it--had it--was it still in Detroit [Michigan] at that point? Or were they--'cause was a surprise. They were still in Detroit at this point. Speaker 2: Un-un. Speaker 1: They had--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: They had moved to California [in 1972]. Speaker 1: They had moved to California. Speaker 2: But, they moved to California. And I remember going up to Mr. [Taylor] Cox (laughter). I said, "Mr. Cox, I, I heard the company is moving to California." And he said, "Yep, that's right" (laughter). I said, "Well, what about us?" (Laughter) Oh, God. It was like, "Yeah, well, there're certain acts that's gonna be moving (laughter), i.e., the Jacksons, i.e., the Supremes, i.e.--", you know, cream of the crop, which that let me know right there that we weren't included in that cream of the crop bunch. So, you know, it's a good thing because it really put a spotlight on where we were in that we had to go back into, coming from the streets and coming from where we grew up from, you know, making our own way, we just had to go back into ourselves and be the Gladys Knight and the Pips that we know that we can be amongst us, and we'll take the licks, we'll take the up's and the down's. As long as we're together, we can deal with whatever consequences come about. So, we decided, okay, we're leaving. So we met with Mr. [Ewart] Abner at the Pontchartrain Hotel [Detroit, Michigan] and he tried to persuade us not to leave Motown and we told him, "Mr. Abner, we love you, we got a long history with you. We gotta go." So, yep and we left. Speaker 1: So, you know- Story_ID: 117350 Speaker 1: There're two things. One, I had read that Gladys Knight helped, I--you know, loc--she had seen the Jackson Five, and a lot of people take credit for the Jackson Five. Did she, is that wrong that she had seen or had any-- Speaker 2: No, no, it's right. We were playing the Regal Theater in Chicago [Illinois]. And Joe Jackson came over to the Regal--we were having a show there, came to the Regal and asked if he could speak to my sister, Gladys, because I'm not sure, but I think we were like one of the main headliners on that particular show. And he brought the kids up to the dressing room and everything. They're sitting in Gladys' dressing room. Michael [Jackson], he was so little, his feet wouldn't even hit the floor--he was (laughter) sitting on the sofa like this. And, and they were talking about the kids going on, doing a part--singing in the show, doing one or two songs or whatever it was. And Edward [Patten] And Babe Brother [William Guest] and I had heard about this little group over in Indiana that was outstanding, that everybody was talking--they were on everybody's lips. And when, when they came to the Regal, it was sort of like we had heard of them before--me, Babe Brother and Edward, not Gladys. And I remember Joe [Joe Jackson] and the kids in Gladys' dressing room before they went on. And they went on stage, and so I, I went out my dressing room. I said, hey, Babe Brother, Edward, let's go hear the little group that we heard about. Man, Michael and the Jacksons--I mean the Jackson Five went on stage that night, killed. I mean they were out-freaking standing. I, I'm going like, "Oh, my--do you see what we see (laughter)? This group is outstanding. They're the best I've seen since we've been coming up through the ranks. They're the best that I've seen." You know, they're the, they're the Frankie Lymon and the Teenagers, how big they were. This group is them. And so Gladys--when we went back upstairs, after they had performed and killed, went back upstairs and said, "Gladys, you gotta, you know, let's make a call", said, "Make a call, make a call." She called Mr. [Taylor] Cox, and told him about this group that was just on the show at the Regal Theater and to send a representative, somebody down there to talk to Mr. Jackson because this group is phenomenal. "Yeah, okay, Gladys"; send nobody, didn't acknowledge. She called back again. "You gotta send somebody to see this little group." This was another day. And they just pooh-poohed it. Yeah, right, kind of a thing. And it made us feel like she didn't have the kind of clout that maybe [HM] Smokey [Robinson] had because he and [HM] Berry [Gordy] were so close, and such good friends. Gladys' word didn't ring at the company like it would have in my opinion if Smokey had called. So, it was like pooh-poohed. And, but, now, Bobby Taylor of the Vancouvers, we had told Bobby Taylor, Bobby Taylor had gotten the word as well, that this group in Indiana was outstanding. So when he went to Chicago to perform, Bobby Taylor took a tape recorder, and he filmed 'em and took it back to the company (clearing throat) (excuse me). He filmed the Jacksons and took it back to Berry Gordy and them. That's when they--"Oh, that's what Gladys was calling us about, these little kids." Yeah, right. But after that, then they had a aud--then I think what happened--I'm not real sure, but I think what happened is they brought the Jacksons out for an audition. And that's where it all started. Now, you will hear in the media that Diana Ross discovered the Jackson Five. That's not all together true. My sister actually tried to get them to see the Jackson Five. Now, but I understood the marketing of Diana and Gladys and all of us understood it because, (swallow) (oh, gosh, excuse me), the marketing because Gladys, Gladys' name, Gladys Knight and the Pips' name wasn't, didn't have the credibility around the nation and the world that Diana Ross and the Supremes had. So to put them with Diana Ross to me was a very smart business move, which Berry Gordy is. He's brilliant. So, Diana Ross discovers the Jackson Five, and here they are (singing intro music) (laughter). Story_ID: 117351 Speaker 1: But, I wanna go back just real quickly with Norm Whitfield because--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Norman Whitfield, okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, because you did enjoy working with him [at Motown Records], right? Speaker 2: Loved working with Norman Whitfield. Speaker 1: Okay, can you describe him, you know, because he became a giant. You know, it was either H-D-H [Holland-Dozier-Holland, the songwriting team of Lamont Dozier, Brian Holland, and Eddie Holland] or Norm Whitfield, but can you describe him? Speaker 2: Loved Norman Whitfield. We all did because Norman-(clearing throat), (excuse me), Norman had a kind of personality (laughter) that you had to, you had to laugh at Norman because his head was so big (laughter), he knew he was the king (laughter). And he would tell you, and he'd let you know he's the king, and he's the best. He's the baddest. That was Norman with us. That's the way he was with us. Norman (laughter), excuse me, but Norman, Norman would walk into a room where, where we--he would be teaching us a song or something like that or playing a track for us. Oh, like, like the day that he was playing the track for "Nitty Gritty". He was playing the track for that, and actually, Norman told us, I said, hey, Norman, I like that track, man. I really like it. And he said, "You can't have this. This is for the Supremes." I'm going, like, Norman, but I need--this is us (laughter). Come on, Norman, pull some strings, man. And Norman--he gave us that track. He gave us that, that track 'cause we--I loved it. And we loved the "Nitty Gritty", liked it. So Norman pulled some strings and got it. But what I was gonna tell you was, Norman's ego, Norman's ego was so huge, you would have to laugh at Norman because he--when he would walk into a room, he'd stretch his arms out like, oh, God, oh, Lord, (unclear) Norman would stretch his arms like that. And he'd cross his, (laughter) cross his (unclear). He'd say, "Do you recognize me?" (Laughter) I said, "You ain't Jesus" (laughter). Oh, God, oh, man. I loved him, man. He, he was, he was just--that was my buddy. I loved Norman Whitfield. He was great. And actually, (clearing throat), excuse me, Norman was really responsible for our career taking off. As far as records were concerned, Norman Whitfield, man. I'll give it to him. He was great. Speaker 1: So you have to say Motown [Records] played that role there because--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: --"I Heard It Through the Grapevine",-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: And so go through--it's "I Heard It Through the Grapevine", "Nitty Gritty"-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: "Friendship Train", I mean all those things happened, a lot--"If I Were a Woman" [sic, "If I Were Your Woman"], I mean you have--there are a lot of hits here. Speaker 2: (Unclear) (laughter). Speaker 1: I mean for you, and these are classics. Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter). Speaker 1: I mean for you to be saying "We didn't do too much there"-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, we, we did all right (laughter). Speaker 1: Can you see (unclear), I mean you did a lot of songs there. Speaker 2: Yeah. "If I Were Your Woman", you know, was produced by one of, one of Norman Whitfield's protege's who was Clay McMurray. Clay McMurray and, what was her name? Ware, I think Clay McMurray and something Ware [sic, Pam Sawyer] wrote "If I Were Your Woman". I can't think of her name right now. But, anyway, they wrote "If I Were Your Woman", and Norman Whitfield had Clay McMurray to produce that on us. And when we got in the studio--this is interesting, the backgrounds that we made up that Clay wanted us to do was like, Gladys said, "If I were your woman", and we'd say, "If I were your woman" (singing). I'm going like, wait a minute. I'm going like, "Clay, do you mind if--I gotta tweak this. I've got to tweak this, man. Let's, let's have the Pips say, 'If you were my woman' instead of 'If I were your woman'. I know that's the name of the song, but come on, let's, you know, let's kind of move this around a little, (laughter) a little bit." He said, "Oh, okay, okay, Bubba, go ahead." So that's how we got to sing "If you were my woman" instead of "If I were your woman". Story_ID: 117352 Speaker 1: Anyway, I got a ton of those as I, you know--I don't wanna, I don't wanna be boastful or nothing like that. Speaker 2: But you should talk about that because I just, I as just looking, I mean I'm thinking, look at all these songs. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I mean, you know, "I Heard It Through the Grapevine", that, I mean--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Let me tell you about "I Heard It Through the Grapevine". I don't know whether I told you this, this story or not. But "I Heard it Through the Grapevine", we created "I Heard it Through the Grapevine" because it was out on Smokey [HM Smokey Robinson] before we got it, before Norman [Whitfield] gave it to us. I don't know whether I mentioned this before, but Norman gave us the track to "I Heard It Through the Grapevine", and the lead lyrics and said--and gave us a tape recorder, a Wollensak, and told us, "Go see what you can do with it." We took "I Heard It Through the Grapevine" home with us. We, morning, noon and night, we would practice, "I Heard It Through the Grapevine", and we came up with, we came up with the lead vocal and the background; went to Motown one day, told Norman that we finally finished this song that we wanted him to hear, "I Heard It Through the Grapevine". And he said--(excuse me), he said, he could--he said, okay, put the, put the tape on and let's hear it. So we put the tape on, and we song it. Gladys' said, (singing) "Oooh, I bet you wondering how I knew", and we're going like (singing) "Oooh, ooh, ooh [singing]. And Norman--we song the whole song. And so we said, how you feel? He said, "Could you do that again?" And so he put it on again, and we song it again, the second time, and so, when we ended that time, we're waiting to hear a response from him, and he got on the phone. And he said, "Smoke, he said, I need a studio" (laughter), 'cause Smokey was in the, in Hitsville [Hitsville U.S.A., Motown Records in Detroit Michigan]. He was in the studio recording some of his records. And so he told Norman that, he said, "Okay," "I got to come in there now, right now." And so we went up, recorded, "I Heard It Through the Grapevine", and that's what you hear on the record. Story_ID: 117353 Speaker 1: On "I Heard It Through the Grapevine", I heard that he [HM Berry Gordy] saw you on concert and then he even had other comments about how to make the show better. Is that true? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, in Detroit [Michigan]? Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, oh, yeah. We was playing the Fox Theater on one of the Christmas Show, Motown Christmas Show. And Mr. Gordy was in the audience, and he, he would have a meeting after every show to go over what was good about the show, what didn't work, dah, dah, dah, dahta. So we were in the meeting with everybody, Stevie [Stevie Wonder], everybody, the Temptations, and he, he was saying, "I really liked--now, now, Gladys and the Pips, I really like what you were doing, I really like what you're doing, but the thing of it is, is that you need--you gotta, with a big record like "I Heard It Through the Grapevine", it's gotta be spectacular. It's gotta, you know, gotta really wow the audience. And it didn't really do that, good performance, but it, it didn't do that." So that was a critique that he gave us, and, you know, we took it to heart. So what we did was, we went, we took "I Heard It Through the Grapevine", and we went back to practicing. So we added this, this part on the end where, you know, you get the audience involved, you know, (singing) "heard it, heard it, heard it, heard it through the grapevine". Break it down, now the boom [singing measured beats], boom. And, you know what, Gladys could have some rapport with the audience and, and that came from Berry Gordy's critique. And "I Heard It Through the Grapevine" became our closing number. And she still uses some of the same things that (laughter), that we made up in the end of "I Heard It Through the Grapevine", she still uses that in her show today, you know, yeah. So it's good. I mean he was very, very good with seeing how things could be better as far as your performances were concerned, really, really good. And I, I like us because we kept a open mind and a open spirit to creative criticism, and we didn't take it to heart. We took it inside of us to make us better. And that's what I like--Smokey [HM Smokey Robinson] used to do the same thing, Smokey. I remember Smokey came to a performance when we were performing at the Hilton, the Las Vegas [Nevada] Hilton. That was our show. And we had had a personal problem that night with some outside activity, and I was very upset about it, very upset to the point where it was very difficult for me to get over that, what had happened. And we had to go on stage shortly after that had happened. And when I went on stage, I couldn't shake it, and in my performance--Smokey was sitting in the audience, and he saw it. And he came backstage, and he came to the dressing room. And he was telling me, he said, "You never, ever take your personal problems on stage." And I never forgot that. And Smokey did that for me, and because I respect his opinion and Berry Gordy's opinion, Mr. Gordy, all of 'em, as far as show business was concerned, just like Cholly Atkins [Charlie "Cholly" Atkins] and Maurice King, if they had given us this kind of critique, I would have taken it out of respect for them as well and tried to utilize it to better my performance. (Clearing throat) (Excuse me), but, and I got that from Smokey, got a lot of information from Mr. Gordy (coughing) excuse me. Story_ID: 117354 Speaker 1: You were the first, you were on the show-- Speaker 2: Act. Speaker 1: --act on "Soul Train" which Don Cornelius, you know, 'cause it's [HM] George Johnson of "Soft Sheen" [Johnson Products Company] who was the advertiser--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --of that show. So. Speaker 2: George Johnson. He was in the meeting, Mr. Johnson, Mr.--let me see. I don't, I don't remember all of the people who were in this meeting that Sid Seidenberg took us to, but I know Don Cornelius was there. Don and Mr. Johnson and I think it was about five or six different people in that meeting. We met at the Brown Derby in Los Angeles [California], Brown Derby Restaurant--I'll never forget that. And Don Cornelius came over to us and everybody was speaking, and he was saying that "we want you to be an act, our act, on this TV show that we're putting together called 'Soul Train'". So we flew up from Las Vegas [Nevada] because we were playing the Hilton. And I'm going like, "Why is Sid having us to come all the way up to Los Angeles to meet with these people about doing a TV show, and we're, we're working down at the Hilton in Las Vegas. And matter of fact, we gotta get a, we have to get out of here because we gotta get back to work. We have a contract (laughter) that we have to honor." And we were getting ready to leave, and I was explaining it to Don and them that we were, "We're working in Las Vegas, and for us to do a TV show, the timing is kinda bad right now, you know." And we were getting ready to leave, and so Don asked if he could have a word with us privately. So we went over there privately in a little corner, and Don was telling us that, "Look, it's like this, you guys. If I don't get a name act to be on this TV show, my show, then I don't have the sponsors. They won't back me with just local acts. I gotta have a name act, and I need you guys." My question to Don was, "Call [HM] Berry Gordy, shoot, he got, I mean a stable over there that's, man, shoot. Those are the names." And he said, "I didn't get a response. So if y'all don't do it, then I don't have a show." So, I said, "Okay, let us think about it and talk about it and see if we could work it out." And we had our meetings like we always do, and we told Don, if you can work it out where we can do our show at the Hilton, come here, do your TV show and you'll have us out in time because we were, we were familiar with some TV kind of stuff. They (unclear), man, you don't get on in time, and we had to get back to Vegas. And he promised us that he'd us in and out in time for us to get back to Vegas to our show that night. So, we're, "Okay, my brother. We'll do it," and he said, "All right. (Laughter), Right on." Speaker 1: So that was the launch of [in syndication], I mean because it ended up becoming very popular. Speaker 2: Yep, and we, we flew in from Las Vegas after we did our show that night, we flew in to Las Vegas--I mean to Los Angeles, and went to the "Soul Train" set, did the "Soul Train" show, and the rest is history. And Don got us in and got us--just like he had promised. He got us in, got us out. We went back to, to Las Vegas, did our show at the Hilton, and here comes "Soul Train". Daht, daht (singing "Soul Train" theme song) (laughter), which was great and that was--you know, I was so proud of the fact that we helped our brother get his show off the ground. Man, that was a great feeling. When "Soul Train" took off like the way that it did, and everybody was going on "Soul Train", I felt so proud that we did something with, our talent (clearing throat) (excuse me), with our talents and with what we, we could give back to our brothers and sisters. That was great, loved it, and still proud of that today, yep. Speaker 1: Did you go on the show many times after that? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. We went on many, many times. Whenever we had a record that, that we wanted to, you know, put out or whenever we were in the area, Don would let us come on any time we wanted to, yep. Speaker 1: 'Cause you know when people are doing shows from that era right now, you--when they're--most of the footage is coming from "Soul Train" of the artists. Speaker 2: Right, that's right. Speaker 1: Most of it. Speaker 2: That's right. I was proud to be a part of that, yeah. Story_ID: 117355 Speaker 1: So now, you--let's talk about, before we leave Motown [Records in 1973], what are the songs that you do in the Motown stable. So we already know "I Heard It Through the Grapevine". We talked about "Nitty Gritty". What are the other songs? Speaker 2: We, we recorded a song called "Everybody Needs Love". That was in the early, that was after "Whistle My Love" [1958]. "Everybody Needs Love" [1967], and "You Need Love Like I Do (Don't You)" [1970]--oh, wait a minute. Nah, that's not Motown. Speaker 1: "Friendship Train" [1969]. Speaker 2: Yeah, (unclear) and we did--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: "End of the Road", "The End of the Road" [1968]. Speaker 2: Yeah, we did "End of the Road", and, and "End of the Road" came out right after "I Heard It Through the Grapevine" [1967] because Norman was explaining to us, Norman Whitfield, was explaining to us that what they try to do is try to make a record, a follow-up record, not too far away from what the hit record was. They tried to, not to duplicate, but try to have a semblance of what that hit record was so it could, it could like continue, continue on. And so he recorded, he recorded "End of the Road". (Singing) "This is the end of, end of our road, the road", something like that, and "Heard it through the grapevine" [singing]. Oh, nah, that's Marvin Gaye's, oophs, I just messed up (laughter). Our "Grapevine" was different. Speaker 1: Yours was different. Speaker 2: Was different (laughter). I just, I just sung Marvin Gaye's "Heard It Through the Grapevine". Anyway, he tried to have something that was similar to our "Heard It Through the Grapevine". It didn't quite work, "End of the Road" didn't take off that way. Oh, we were, we recorded a song called "Should Have Been Me" [sic, "It Should Have Been Me" in 1968], that--who covered "Should Have Been Me"? It was an artist over there that covered that song that we recorded. Anyway, that was another one that we recorded, "It Should Have Been Me". Speaker 1: Okay, but "If I Were Your Woman", that's a big record. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, "If I Were Your Woman" [1970], "Friendship Train" [1969], "Friendship Train", "If I Were Your Woman", let me see-- Speaker 1: [Whispering]. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, "I Don't Wanna Do Wrong" [1971], which we wrote. We wrote, "I Don't Wanna Do Wrong". Oh, you know what was interesting? "I Don't Wanna Do Wrong" was a record that we had recorded, that we had written, Gladys [Knight], Babe Brother [William Guest], Edward [Patten] and me, Kat Shaf--[HM] Katherine [Anderson] Schaffner, and all of us. And we went in the studio recording--oh, no. I'm getting my history mixed up because we recorded a song called "Daddy Could Swear" [sic, "Daddy Could Swear, I Declare", 1973], "Daddy Could Swear" was on there as well. Story_ID: 117356 Speaker 1: And when we were in the studio recording "Daddy Could Swear" [sic, "Daddy Could Swear, I Declare", 1973], I remember the, the company sent--oh, God, what was his name? He worked with Suzanne de Passe. I can't remember his name, but he came into the studio and he stopped the session. And I'm going like, "Why is he stopping the session because it's going very well." And he pulled us to the side, and he said that "if you don't sign the publishing rights over to Jobete, then this, this session is over and this song won't come out." I'm going like, "What?" (Laughter) So in order for us to finish--and that was one of the first, I think that was before "I Don't Wanna Do Wrong". I think we recorded "Daddy Could Swear" before or either after "I Don't Wanna Do Wrong". Anyway, long story short, they told us if we didn't sign the publishing rights over to Joe Bett, with "Daddy Could Swear", that it wouldn't--we wouldn't finish recording it, and it and it wouldn't come out. So we had a meeting (laughter). We decided that it's better to have a song out and we lose our publishing on it than to have it just to die and never be played on the radio or anything. So we signed our rights over to, our publishing rights over to Jobete, which is Motown's-[HM] Berry Gordy and them publishing company, and, you know, like that. Speaker 2: So--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: It was a business decision. Speaker 2: Right, so but how did--what, what did you--how many of your songs have you written over the course, that you actually have publishing rights to? Speaker 1: At the--at Motown or-- Speaker 2: Or, period, I mean at--well, let's say at Motown first. Are there-- Speaker 1: We wrote "Daddy Could Swear". We wrote, "I Don't Wanna Do Wrong", that, you know, we don't get paid for. At Motown, I think, I think my sister [Gladys Knight] wrote some songs for some other--wrote songs for some other artists that Johnny Bristol was producing and recording. And I don't know whether she got her royalties from that or not. Speaker 2: Because, you know, I don't think even people think of her as, you know, writing songs, like there was a lot of creativity. The one thing about it, people were covering other people's songs. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: There was--because you had so many artists there. It was--I--weren't there other record companies like that where--I mean did this resemble anything you had been at before or since? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: It--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Fury Records. Speaker 2: Fury was like that. Speaker 1: It resembled--yeah, yep, Bobby Robinson. It resembled that, and, you know, it felt, it felt, it felt terrible because we had already been ripped off that way before (laughter). I'm going like, oh, here we go again. But it's, it's almost like you pay your way--like Jackie Wilson paid Jules Podell to go into the Copa [Copacabana in New York City, New York]. It was almost like, we're still trying to get our recording career off the ground. So if it takes us giving up certain rights in order to get that because we still have our personal appearances where if the records are big enough, and if it's an incentive enough for those people to push those records because it's their investment, they're gonna get money out of it as well, you sort of like, you pay like that, you know, you paid 'em off. So that's how we kinda looked at it as a business, from a business standpoint. Story_ID: 117357 Speaker 1: So now, when you go, so you, you decide--I mean we're gonna go back to Buddah [Buddah Records, later known as Buddha Records], so-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: You go, you go to Buddah, and what is your first hit? Speaker 2: Our first record that was released at Buddah Records was "Where Peaceful Waters Flow". And that came right after "Neither One of Us" [sic, "Neither One of Us (Wants to Be the First to Say Goodbye)"], which was a Grammy, one of the records at Motown that we received a Grammy for. And we also received a Grammy for--no, "Neither One of Us". We received a Grammy for "Neither One of Us", and right after "Neither One of Us" came out, we went to Buddah Records, and we recorded "Where Peaceful Waters Flow", which was the next record that came out after "Neither One of Us". And from, from the word that I heard, [HM] Berry Gordy didn't even know we weren't at the company because he was trying to get in touch with us to congratulate us on "Neither One of Us" being the number one record, and also getting a Grammy for it, you know--no, we hadn't gotten the Grammy. But he had called because the record had gone to number one, "Neither One of Us" had. And he was congratulating us, and that's when he found out from what I understand, that's when he found out we weren't with the company [Motown Records] anymore. And the word was, he hit the ceiling because Mr. Abner had--Mr. [Ewart] Abner and the rest of his lawyers and people like that, had let us go. So "Peaceful Waters" was right after "Neither One of Us" on Buddah Records which didn't do that well. It was okay, but it didn't--it wasn't the hit that we needed. And then we decided to record a record from, that Jim, another record that [James] Jim Weatherly had written. He wrote "Neither One of Us", and he also wrote "Midnight Train to Georgia", (simultaneous) Jim Weatherly. Speaker 1: Okay, so, I had, I think I had read that Jim Weatherly, but I wasn't sure. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Where does he come in the picture because he's more of a country songwriter, so where is he--where--is he doing other things at Motown or that's something, because you did, you were still at Motown when you did "Neither One of Us". Speaker 2: Yes, Joe Porter, Joe Porter, which--who was the producer for "Neither One of Us" at that time--actually, we, we co-produced just about every record that we did over there because we made up the backgrounds. Gladys would sing it in her way. So the producers--nah, I can't, I don't wanna take anything away from them, so I won't say that. But we had a lot of influence in how our records were made and how they sound. "Neither One of Us" was produced by Joe Porter. That was the first time we had recorded a record by Jim Weatherly. When we left Motown, we liked the writing of "Neither One of Us" so well, when we got to Buddah Records, we say, "Hey, what about this guy, Jim Weatherly who wrote 'Neither One of Us', which was perfect. That's our match." That's our marriage right there that we've been looking for, with a writer. We didn't have the producer, but we had the writer. And we knew in ourselves that we was doing a lot of the producing ourselves. So if we get the material, we know what to do with it. We'll make it ours, like we did "I Heard It Through the Grapevine", like we did "Neither One of Us". We'll make it ours. Story_ID: 117358 Speaker 1: So, here comes "Midnight Train to Georgia", that was presented to us from the [James] Jim Weatherly publishing company. Oh, we have other songs, "Midnight Train to Georgia", "Best Thing That Ever Happened to Me", all these songs were Jim Weatherly's songs out of his publishing company. So we're going like, okay, give 'em to us. So we took "Midnight Train to Georgia" and we, we went to a producer by the name of Tony Camillo. Tony Camillo was out of New Jersey. And Sid Seidenberg and Floyd Lieberman introduced us to Tony Camillo. Tony Camillo made a track for "Midnight Train to Georgia". This was after "Peaceful Waters Flow" [sic, "Where Peaceful Waters Flow"]. The marriage between Tony Camillo and Gladys Knight and the Pips became magical. He made a track for "Midnight Train to Georgia". He sent the track on the road where we were performing. And we listened to the track. And the first track that he sent to us didn't have that, the bite as producers that we wanted on that track. So we sent it back. Gladys said, "Let's send it back to him." So Gladys sent it back and, and told Tony Camillo, "Put some of that, put some, put some funk, something funk on this thing," you know, 'cause it was kind of, really kind of lightweight (laughter). And, and she, she--I can hear Gladys telling him, say, "Get some of that Al Green feel on this record, give us some of that Al Green feel." So Tony went back in the studio, and the next track he sent to us had (singing the beat), dagga, dagga, dagga (singing track), had that bite (laughter) that we could work with. So when we got into Jersey, we went to Tony's studio--nope, take that back. It wasn't Tony's studio. Tony brought the track to Detroit [Michigan]. And Sid Seidenberg and Floyd and Tony Camillo had booked this, this studio in this guy's garage. And so we drove up in his garage in the car at--after Sid and them told us where to come--we went to this address and drove into this guy's garage, got out and parked our cars and went in this guy's house. It was in the studio. And we went in there, and we laid down the backgrounds that we had made up. Tony Camillo was in there. We made up (singing) "Leaving, hoo, hoo", all of that, all of that that's on "Midnight Train to Georgia". We went in the studio, we put the backgrounds down. Gladys went in the studio, hit that big bad boy with one take, one take. (Singing) "L.A. proved too much for the man", did the whole thing. And down at, at the end of "Midnight Train to Georgia", it was kind of fading out (singing). So I punched the call-back button, and I said, I say, "Gladys, Gladys do, right here at the end, at the fade-out, there's, (singing) "Unh, I got to go, I got to go, hey, hey, hey, I got--" and he put that--I said, run that back. And so he put the track, he put the track on, and punched Gladys saying "I got to go, I got to go, I got to go", and that's what you hear on "Midnight Train to Georgia" (laughter). So we produced-- Speaker 2: You produced it. Story_ID: 117359 Speaker 1: Yeah, Cecil, Cecil Holmes was in top administration [at Buddah Records, later known as Buddha Records]. And, yeah, I can tell you about our friendship lasted and went over into Casablanca [Records]. Speaker 2: I see. Cecil, you and Cecil. Speaker 1: Cecil Holmes. Speaker 2: Okay,--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: And Ron Wisner, I mean Cecil Holmes and Neil Bogart, Neil Bogart. Speaker 2: Went over into Casablanca. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Neil Bogart started Casablanca--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: So they--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --with Donna Summer and all of them-- Speaker 2: So they made a, they put a lot behind you-- Speaker 1: Oh, my gosh. Speaker 2: --because you were-- Speaker 1: Oh, my gosh. Speaker 2: For you to get, for them to, for them to get you, that puts them in the record business. Speaker 1: You got it. Speaker 2: Okay, but who else comes over--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Buddah Records. Speaker 2: Who else comes over to Buddah? Speaker 1: That's a good question. Buddah Records. You know what I, I, I--we were, we were pretty much it (laughter). Speaker 2: Pretty much it. Speaker 1: We were pretty much "it". That's a good question because I don't remember the other acts that came behind us at Buddah Records. I, I really don't. Speaker 2: Didn't the Miracles come later? Speaker 1: No. Did they really? Speaker 2: They did. Speaker 1: Did they? Speaker 2: I was reading that. Speaker 1: Get out of here. Speaker 2: They got the Miracles, not Smokey [HM Smokey Robinson]. Speaker 1: Okay, Bobby Robinson [sic, HM Robert "Bobby" Rogers] and them, Bobby Robinson. Speaker 2: He--(unclear) um-hum. Speaker 1: Bobby Robinson and Pete [HM Warren "Pete" Moore] and Ronnie [Ronald "Ronnie" White], oh, my goodness. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, go ahead. Speaker 2: So I think people were--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: I tell, I tell you one thing happened that we didn't go over, but at one point, when the Temptations left Motown [Records], they--[Sidney] Sid Seidenberg managed them at one point for a brief moment, for a brief moment. But I know they was over, they were over there at the company. Speaker 2: So people are really, what they're finding is that they can get paid more, but I mean there is an unequal thing, you know, a black company is not gonna have the access that a white company has, right? Is it? Speaker 1: [HM] Berry Gordy had some pretty good connections, no, man, he knocked over, Berry Gordy knocked over a lot of--Berry Gordy opened-- Speaker 2: A lot of doors. Speaker 1: Lots of doors, lots of doors, European, you know, the Europeans, London [England], all over there. He broke open a lot of doors. Speaker 2: Yeah, what he did was really, I mean it's amazing what he did-- Speaker 1: Amazing, amazing what, what Mr. Gordy could do with what he had to work with. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: My God, yeah. Story_ID: 117360 Speaker 1: So, so let's talk about this period with Buddah [Buddah Records, later known as Buddha Records]-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --because you do, you're there for how long? See, that's the thing, you're there for--how long are you at Buddah? You're at Buddah, wait a minute. Speaker 2: Yeah, how long did we spend at Buddah before we went to Casablanca [Records] 'cause Neil and Cecil left Buddah and started their own record company, Casablanca in California [in 1973]. Speaker 1: Oh, no, 1978. Speaker 2: Okay, '78 [1978]. Speaker 1: So you're there five years. Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy-eight [1978], five years [1973 until 1978], okay. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: And then when, then Gladys [Knight] left Buddah and-- Speaker 1: Right, she left. Speaker 2: Yeah, she left and this, this was one of the times when we broke up. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: She left and, and we continued to be the Pips at Casablanca Records where Neil Bogart and Cecil Holmes went. And they, they had Donna Summer, the Village People. They had great, they had super acts over there. And Cecil, we went up under Cecil's umbrella. Cecil took us there, and that's where we recorded two albums, "The Pips At Last" [sic, "At Last...The Pips", 1977] is one of the titles, of one of the albums, and, oh, God, the other album was "The Pips Calling" [sic "Callin", 1978], yeah. Story_ID: 117361 Speaker 1: But before we go to Casablanca [Records], what is significant about Buddah Records [Buddah Records, later known as Buddha Records] though, the other things that sort of happened because, oh, oh, wait a minute. "Daddy Could Swear" ["Daddy Could Swear, I Declare"], I didn't--I thought this--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: "Daddy Could Swear", that was Motown [Records]. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: That's when they came in and stopped us from recording because Suzanne's assistant--Suzanne de Passe's assistant, Tony. That's his name, Tony, Tony came in and told us the session is off unless you sign your rights over to Jobete. Speaker 1: Okay, so that was on the verge of you leaving? Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: That's all--okay, so you have two, two big hits at the verge of leaving Motown. Speaker 2: Yeah, our big--"Neither One of Us" [sic, "Neither One of Us (Wants to Be the First to Say Goodbye)"] was the big, big one (laughter), "Neither One of Us". Speaker 1: And so, but you all--what about "I Got to Use My Imagination" and "Best Thing That Ever Happened" [sic, Best Thing That ever Happened to Me"]. Speaker 2: Oh, you're talking, you talking Buddah Records now. Speaker 1: Right, that's Buddah, and "On and On", that's all Buddah? Speaker 2: Buddah, Buddah Records. Speaker 1: "On and On"? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Buddah Records. Speaker 1: But this is--is--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: "On and On" movie, soundtrack for "Claudine". Speaker 1: For "Claudine", okay, Speaker 2: Uh-huh, go ahead. Speaker 1: But this is, this is--whose guiding the set? Who's your team? Your team is-- Speaker 2: Sid Seidenberg, Floyd Lieberman, Art Kass, Neil Bogart, Cecil Holmes, Ron Wisner, [Milton] Milt Sincoff, Tony Camillo (laugher). Story_ID: 117362 Speaker 1: And you're saying, what do you wanna be? What is your--because, one, you, the first--is that the first Grammy [Grammy Award] you win there, of course. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So can you describe the night of the Grammy's that you find out you win, you win? Speaker 2: Oh, my God. Speaker 1: Can you describe that? Speaker 2: Yeah, we went--yes. We went to the Grammy's knowing that we were nominated. We had been nominated before, for like, "If I Were Your Woman" and I think "I Don't Wanna Do Wrong". We had been nominated quite a few times before we went. This time when we went to the Grammy's, we were nominated in the Best Group--Vocal Group category. And "Neither One of Us" ["Neither One of Us (Wants to Be the First to Say Goodbye)"] was nominated, and "Midnight Train" ["Midnight Train to Georgia"] was nominated for an award as well. One was for pop and one was for soul, okay. So, we went to the Grammy's not expecting really to win 'cause we had been nominated before and never--anyway, long story short, we went that night. And I remember Moms Mabley [Jackie "Moms" Mabley] was there and Kris Kristofferson came on. And they came on to introduce our category, and Mom had, oh, man, she had people cracking up. She took her teeth out, oh, God, I'm gon' say, "Mom's up to her old tricks again". And I was dying. I was dying in that audience, man. And, and she said, "And the winner is baby, Baby, the winner is, Gladys Knight and the Pips, Gladys Knight and the Pips. I'm going like, "Oh, whoa." And we went up, and Kris Kristofferson and Moms Mabley gave us the Grammy. It's like, God, we're getting there, all the decisions, the business decisions and all the time and the sweat that we put into this thing, we're getting there, we're getting there, man. And that was such a thrill. Then we went back to our seats, all hyped up and everything, you know, we went back to the press room in the hotel, went back to our seats. And then the Jacksons came on to announce another category that we were in. And Michael [Jackson] and them were going like, "And the winner is, and the winner is, Gladys Knight and the Pips". Man, we went up there, oh, God, won two Grammy's that night. And I remember going back into the press room and holding two Grammy's. I'm going like I feel so good. I felt so proud of our accomplishment and our family and everybody who supported us all this time. And my mom, especially, mama Knight [Sarah Elizabeth Woods Knight], whew. She made it possible because she took over the children. She helped us stay out there and do the things that we, as parents would have had to do if we had been home, and my wife, Kathleen [Knight], gotta give her credit. Kathy, whew, helped raise those children, boy. Ma Dear and her mother, Connie [ph.], all of 'em. Anyway, holding those Grammy's, holding those two Grammy's, I felt a sense of pride that I really can't put into words. And I was just smiling, man, and they, they took a picture of that, and my smile just tells it all. I was so proud. Story_ID: 117363 Speaker 1: And after that, things started really, really opening up, TV, all, everything started happening. And we, had our summer replacement show, on NBC, yeah. It was just--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: You had your own show? Speaker 1: Yeah, we had a Gladys Knight and the Pips summer replacement show ["Gladys Knight and the Pips Show"]. It was like a, an audition for the network to either pick it up or not pick it up, and Captain and Tennille had four weeks, I think, yeah, Captain and Tennille had four shows. Gladys Knight and the Pips had four shows, and, oh, I think it was one, one other act that had four shows. But we did those, those four replacement shows. And they came out really, really well. But we didn't get, we didn't get picked up as a, as a series. So that was great. Story_ID: 117364 Speaker 1: So who, who else was there that night besides the group that--were there--was your wife there? Were there, you know, was Gladys'--oh, no, she was-- Speaker 2: Wait a minute. That is one good question. Speaker 1: Was she [Gladys Knight] married to Barry Hankerson? Speaker 2: "Neither One of Us" ["Neither One of Us (Wants to Be the First to Say Goodbye)"], "Midnight Train to Georgia", we were still with Mo--we were still with Buddah [Records, latter known as Buddha Records]. Weren't we still with Buddah? Speaker 1: You were with Buddah. Speaker 2: We were still with Buddah at that time, and she--yeah, she was still married. Speaker 1: She's married to-- Speaker 2: She was still married to Bar-- Speaker 1: To Barry Hankerson. Speaker 2: Or they were getting married. Speaker 1: They were getting married. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: They were on the verge of getting married, but they were dating, Barry Hankerson, yeah. And, and--oh, yeah, because the next break up that we had, Gladys had her son, Shanga [Hankerson]. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Yep, and that's when-- Speaker 1: You mean when you had the break up, but-- Speaker 2: What is that, the third break up or if I'm losing track? Speaker 1: No, no, you haven't had a break up yet (laughter). You're pick--you wanted, you're trying to get to the break up. What I mean but a lot of the things--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: No, we were, we were broke up. That was the second--we were broke up when we were with Bobby Robinson, when she had her first child--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Oh, that's right, okay. So this-- Speaker 2: --Jimmy [Jimmy Newman]. That's the first break up [1962]. Speaker 1: That's right. I'm sorry. Speaker 2: And now we getting to-- Speaker 1: Almost to number two. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Now, we're getting to the second break up. Speaker 1: Right, right. But that--so, but what I'm just--what does this period mean for you though? You're very popular in, in England, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Very popular in England. Speaker 2: That, that period was, in my opinion, the, the period that really launched "Gladys Knight and the Pips". [Sydney] Sid Seidenberg became a brilliant manager during that time, not just an accountant, a brilliant, brilliant manager. He took what we had accomplished and embellished it with where we needed to go. His whole thing was, you don't--you wanna, I want you guys, and I know you want you guys to be a world-wide group, not just a group here in America. So we're headed over the sea--we're headed across the water. We're going to England. He, Sid Seidenberg hooked us up in England, Paris [France], New Zealand, Australia. We went around the world with Sid. Sid made us an international group, Japan, China. He made us an international group. He doesn't get the credibility and the, the--he doesn't get the-- Speaker 1: Credit, the-- Speaker 2: The credit, yeah, the credit and the, and the-- Speaker 1: Accolades. Speaker 2: Accolades, that's the word I'm looking for. Speaker 1: Is he still alive? Speaker 2: No. Sid passed, and I sung at his funeral, which a lot of people--a lot of people were there, but a lot of people weren't there that I thought that should be there. But anyway, that's neither here nor there. I was there. That was what was important to me because of his being my mentor and my teacher. Speaker 1: So what did he say he wanted you to do? What was the vision that he laid out for you? Speaker 2: For the group? Speaker 1: Yeah, for the group. His-- Speaker 2: He wanted us to be known around the world, like the Beatles, like the Supremes. He wanted us to be in that category. He wanted us to be at that level. And that's where he, he--that's where he made his plans in the role that he could play with us as a manager. That's where he made his plans for us to be there and even bigger, if he could work it. Speaker 1: So the shows you're doing are the "Ed Sullivan Show", the "Tonight Show", you're getting all these--were you doing these when you were at Motown [Records]? Speaker 2: Motown. We did "Ed--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: These are Motown, these--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh, we did Ed Sullivan Show when we were at Motown. Speaker 1: In Motown, okay. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: 'Cause we did "If I Were Your Woman" on Ed Sullivan and-- Speaker 1: So, his contribution was really more, I mean he was with you at Motown, but his contribution was making you the international tours. Were you doing those at Motown? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Un-un. That's Sid, that's Sid Seidenberg right there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Motown, at that particular time, Sid and Floyd [Lieberman] were more consultants and accountants. They played, they, they held that role down. And, and because I told you, we had ITMI [International Talent Management, Inc.] as a manager. We had Sid Seidenberg and Floyd Lieberman as consultant managers. And we had--Motown was the record company, and, yeah, that was the management company and the accountants and- Story_ID: 117365 Speaker 1: Oh, I left out one very important person, a person called Irwin, his name was Irwin Spiegel. But his, he did a, a history of family kind of a thing. And he found out his name was Irwin Spiegel Osher. And that's, that's his name now, Irwin Osher. And he was the attorney. He was the attorney for, for Cher and Sonny [Bono] Speaker 2: Sonny and Cher. Speaker 1: Sonny and Cher. Irwin was their lawyer, and Irwin became like a mentor to me as well. He would teach me things about law. He would give me contracts. He taught me about--what you call it? Palimony, you remember when palimony was popular? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: (Laughter) That's when Kate and I, we had broken up after the first marriage. We had broken up so there was a, there was a period in there that, that I was dating. And Irwin, he was like my--he was like, I was like his son. Irwin called me over to his office and he would, he would draw up agreements for me to have my girlfriends (laughter) to sign off on. And did it just because he loved me like a, like a son. Speaker 2: So he didn't want anything to happen. Speaker 1: Didn't want anything to happen to me. Speaker 2: So when he--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: And Irwin--I gotta say this. Irwin is the reason that we still collect from Motown today. Sid Seidenberg, Floyd Lieberman and Irwin Osher. Speaker 2: So they went in and did some renegotiating? Speaker 1: They went in and got--yep. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Irwin, yep. Story_ID: 117366 Speaker 1: Now, so, what are you--so your money situation is changing at this point. How do you share the money? Are you, isn't Gladys [Knight] getting paid more? Speaker 2: Not, not at, not during that particular time. Speaker 1: During the whole Buddah Records [later known as Buddha Records]? Speaker 2: No, when we got to Buddah [1973], things changed. Speaker 1: They changed, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, things changed when we got to Buddah (laughter). Speaker 1: So, so--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well, well, not the first part of Buddah, but the latter part, the latter part, when the break up and stuff was coming, things--the, the--'cause we, we always felt like this. Okay, we all have a role to play in this thing. And we all in it together. We're all putting money in. We're all putting the time, the sweat. Gladys didn't, you know, she didn't come to no rehearsals. That's Pip stuff (laughter), that's Pip stuff, grinding it out, right. Anyway, but Gladys had a role because we knew that she had the best vocal of all of us. And we could get to where we needed to get to with her being the vocal, and with her--with us making the, the, the part of the group that's visual. We were visual part of the group. Gladys was the vocal part of the group. And the combination with the two made Gladys Knight and the Pips. People would come to our concerts and say, I don't know who to watch because the Pips are over there doing their, bam, doing their thing and Gladys is doing her thing. So it's like a tennis match. We go from the Pips to Gladys, from Gladys to the Pips and the Pips to Gladys. So the combination of, of us together made for us being successful in this business. So, she had a role to play. We got a role to play. Speaker 1: But then her, her husband-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: --didn't he make things more difficult. He became a ma--didn't he? Barry Hankerson? Speaker 2: Yeah, actually, our, our--the percentages-- Speaker 1: Changed. Speaker 2: --changed during that era. Speaker 1: So who made the change? Who instigated that? Speaker 2: I, I--you know, I really don't wanna give-- Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: -- credit to--because when you're not in the bedroom or you're not sleeping or you're not, you're not in that personal space. So you don't know. You just have to speculate and assume. All I do know, the fact is, is that the percentages changed. It became--and I don't have a problem with that because I feel like that my sister deserves everything she gets, everything she's got because without her, excuse me--we did make some inroads, and we did have some success, some successes with the Pips alone, but with Gladys Knight and the Pips, they were bigger. On that same token, I'll turn that around. Gladys Knight had some successes with her solo career, but with Gladys Knight and the Pips, they were never, in my personal opinion, they were never of the magnitude, recording wise, of "Neither One of Us" [sic, "Neither One of Us (Wants to Be the First to Say Goodbye)"], "Midnight Train to Georgia", "Imagination" [sic, "I've Got to Use My Imagination"]. Those songs that we made together are the foundation for Gladys Knight and the Pips and the foundation for her solo career because when people go to see Gladys Knight, they wanna hear "Neither One of Us". They wanna hear "Midnight Train to Georgia", they wanna hear "Best Thing that Ever Happened" [sic, "Best Thing That Ever Happened to Me"], "Love Overboard", all of these songs that are the, the foundation and the--they're in stone. These songs are carved in stone, and when you hear Gladys Knight, you know, people were really disappointed when, when we broke up. They're going like aww, man. Speaker 1: Well, because it, it app--well, you didn't want the Gladys Knight without the Pips. Speaker 2: Right-- Speaker 1: Or one (unclear) (simultaneous) one and the same. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, but, I did--you know, my sister has a, has a very successful, solo career, and I applaud her for it, and I'm one of her biggest fans, and I'll support her in every way. And I'm always there for her when she needs me. And, but with Gladys Knight and the Pips, personally, I feel that that was more successful than--record wise, than her solo career, records that she record alone. Story_ID: 117367 Speaker 1: But I did read about Barry Hankerson, that there was some, you know--I don't know. Speaker 2: Well, he became a successful manager. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, he became a very successful manager, and he, he's managed a lot of big-named groups like the Winans and the--what's the--Toni Braxton. He managed Toni Braxton. He managed--he had some big names that he managed. I don't know whether he's still doing it or not now because I don't really keep up with his career. But, you know, as far as Gladys Knight and the Pips are concerned, that's over, you know. Speaker 1: But what happened with Columbia [Records]. See, that's what-- Speaker 2: Columbia Records? Speaker 1: Yes, because it says you were forced to record separately due to legal problems with Buddah [Records, later known as Buddha Records]. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And something about Columbia. What happened there? That's what I'm trying--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well, this is, this is part of the thing. When, when Gladys [Knight] had her, her solo management--let me put it like that, Ron Wisner and I think Barry Hankerson, and I don't, I don't know for sure, but I think Ron and Barry took Gladys to Columbia Records. She signed with Columbia, with [HM] Larkin Arnold and them, over at Columbia Records. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: And she put--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Larkin was taking--now, that's, he was, he was taking, you know, 'cause he was taking everyone. Speaker 2: Larkin Arnold. Speaker 1: Larkin Arnold. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: No, he was taking, he got, he was going after the Jackson Five-- Speaker 2: Yeah, he had the Jacksons, he had, yeah-- Speaker 1: He had--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --Larkin was--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: 'Cause [HM] Berry Gordy doesn't like Larkin Arnold (laughter). He went after everyone. Speaker 2: Yeah, Larkin kind of took over, I mean, you know, he was "the man" in I think what they call R&B music or whatever. But Gladys went to Columbia Records, and I think Ron Wisner set that deal up. And when she went to Columbia Records, her records really didn't take off, her solo records like, like I was saying. Her solo records didn't take off. We were at Columbia Records [sic, Casablanca Records]. I had gotten a deal with Neil Bogart and Cecil Holmes for the Pips to record alone. We're like, we were like diehards, you know, okay, so you leave. But we're not dying. So we were at Columbia-Casablanca [Records]. We put out two albums over there which did okay, but they weren't successful, successful. Gladys was putting out music at Columbia, which were okay, but not successful, successful. So we decided, the strength, the strengths in our organization is for us to be together, Gladys Knight and the Pips. That's what, that's what people are buying, Gladys Knight and the Pips. So business wise, again, I'm figuring like, okay let's talk about going over to Columbia Records with Gladys, if she wants it. So I went to Ron Wisner, "You know, Ron, okay, this is the deal. You're not doing all that great without us. Let's see if we could do better together." So that's when we signed--we went over to Columbia Records, went to Columbia Records and this, and walked into a situation where Gladys was already--I mean her records didn't really sell that much. So we knew that we were walking into a situation of debt, like Larry Maxwell, was trying to get us to do, not to do when we went to Motown [Records]. Larry was trying to keep them from--but we knew we were walking into a situation like that. But, walking into a situation like--situation like that and like I was telling you, sometimes you gotta pay. The Pips paid that cost. We jumped on Gladys' contract in debt. But we wanted to pay that cost in order to be together. And we figured like, as long as we're together, maybe we could make a big difference and bring this up to the point, well, maybe we can pull her out of debt. Story_ID: 117368 Speaker 1: Columbia Records was not good for us. We signed with-[HM] Larkin Arnold had us to sign with Ashford--Nick [Nickolas Ashford] and Valerie [HM Valerie Simpson], Speaker 2: Ash-- Speaker 1: Nick and Valerie because they had a--they had a track record. So we signed with Nick and Valerie, and that's when we recorded "The Landlord", (singing) "The landlord is the keeper of our love, dah, dah, dah. And we did two, two albums with Valerie and Nick. They weren't music, they weren't musically successful. The albums didn't really sell like we wanted 'em to. Now, I-- Speaker 2: Now, when you say you were signed with them, meaning, what were they-- Speaker 1: Larkin Arnold put us with them to produce us. Speaker 2: Oh, they were producing you. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: Okay, I see. Speaker 1: As producers and songwriters. Speaker 2: I see. Speaker 1: You know, and, you know, I love Valerie, and I love Nick, loved him, God rest his soul. They were very good to us, good people, loved their music, loved what they wrote. But they didn't supply us with the kind of hits that we needed, and, and, you know what? I have to say this-- Speaker 2: They have a different style than you had been singing. Speaker 1: Yeah, but, but it was, it could have matched. Now, I can't say that what we did together were not hit material. What I will say is that we recorded, and we had a chemistry, we felt, that we were recording some really, really good music. But you have to have a combination of the artists, the producers, the writers and the record company. And I kind of point the needle more so at Larkin Arnold and them, not coming to the party more so than what we did in the studio as a producer and as writers and artists because I felt like we put our heart and soul into those songs. And I think Valerie and Nick did the same thing. But we didn't have the backing of Larkin Arnold and them at Columbia Records in order to put the records where they could have been, that we felt. So, that was a bust. Then we went with Sam Dees and Knight--Dees and Knight, which is our production company. We said, okay, let's do our own thing. And, and Sam Dees, Gladys Knight and me, we produced some records that, like "Save those--not "Save the--I'm getting confused about that, the records that we did. Speaker 2: And maybe, are you sure it's not, 'cause "Save the Overtime"--"Save the Overtime (For Me)". Speaker 1: "Save the Overtime" [sic, "Save the Overtime (For Me)"]--yeah, "Save the Overtime" and-- Speaker 2: "Love Overboard", but "Love Overboard"-- Speaker 1: "Love Overboard" was produced by-- Speaker 2: By MCA. Speaker 1: Yeah, we were at MCA [Records] then. Speaker 2: MCA by then, okay. Speaker 1: Oh, wait a minute. Am I confusing--no, no, no. Speaker 2: See, they, they, don't they--"I Will Fight," and I-- Speaker 1: Yeah, that was Valerie and Nick. Speaker 2: Right, that's Valerie. Speaker 1: "I Will Fight", and, and "Landlord", gheez, I'm drawing sort of-- Speaker 2: "About Love", well, "Landlord",-- Speaker 1: Yeah, "About Love", that was one album. Speaker 2: "Taste of Bitter Love". Speaker 1: "Taste of Bitter Love", all of those songs that we recorded now, we felt like, oh, man, the chemistry is working between us and the producers, is not working with the record company. So, that, that didn't work out. And then Larkin Arnold got, he put, he called in "Save the Overtime", (humming melody). Speaker 2: Well, "Save the Overtime" went gold, right? Speaker 1: Yeah, I'm trying to think of, think of the--who? Oh, Leon Silvers, whew. Oooh, boy that hurt. Leon (laughter) Sylvers, Larkin Arnold got Leon Sylvers [III] and we did, we recorded some songs along with Sam Dees and Gladys, Gladys Knight, Leon Sylvers and me. We got to collab--we got to get together and collaborated on some of Leon's tracks, which "Save the Overtime (For Me)" was one of the--I'm a tell you--and Kate [Knight's wife, Kathleen Knight] doesn't know this. But that title "Save the Overtime (For Me)", was when Kate and I were, were not together. And when I walked in the room and me, Gladys and Sam was working on this track, and when I came in the room, I was thinking about Kate, you know. And I was going like, "She back there working at Ford and all that kind of stuff. Man, I wish she would save that overtime for me, you know." And that's how that, that line came, came about. And I, I happened to mention it to Gladys and Sam. They said, okay, that's it. That's where we going with it (laughter). That's where-- Speaker 2: So that's how you got the song. Speaker 1: "Save the Overtime (For Me)", it was about my wife, I mean--she wasn't my wife then, but I still loved her. Speaker 2: She was always your wife. Speaker 1: She was always (laughter)-- Story_ID: 117369 Speaker 1: Going back to Valerie [HM Valerie Simpson] and Nick [Nickolas Ashford] and Columbia Records, we got with Leon Sylvers [III], and we shared a album together, and, and the album was one, the album was titled, one of Sam Dees' songs, "All Our Love". Sam wrote "All Our Love" [sic, "It's Gonna Take All Our Love"], Sam Dees (singing). That, you know, Sam was a writer. Sam, by the way, wrote "One in a Million You". That's where Sam got his, really his big writing credit was when he wrote "One in A Million You" for--he used to sing with Sly Stone, the bass player [Larry Graham]. I'm sorry, man, I can't remember. I know your name, but--anyway, that was Sam. And we teamed up, didn't work out. We had "Love Overboard"--I mean "Save the Overtime (For Me)". And I, I have to say that [HM] Larkin Arnold and Columbia Records dropped the ball again because that was some good music we did with Leon. I was trying to think of that one song that was on, on that "All Our Love" album that Leon wrote and produced that Larkin was so in love with. It, you know--I know the name of it right now. "You're Number One", "You're Number One (In My Book)" [sic, "You're Number One (In My Book)" is on the 1983 album "Visions" and not the 1987 MCA Records album "All Our Love"]. That was Leon. And Larkin loved that song. I said, well, if you love it so much, why don't you put it out. And he said, that's, that is the song that's moving the album. Speaker 2: So he didn't put it out. Speaker 1: He didn't put it out [sic, "You're Number One (In My Book)" was released as a single in 1983]. Speaker 2: But what is he getting--what is he paying attention to at that point? Speaker 1: I have no idea, even to this point. Story_ID: 117370 Speaker 1: Oh, let me tell you this. Sam Dees, Gladys Knight and I went down to Nashville [Tennessee]. We drove, we rented our own car. We went down to Nashville because Sam brought this track over to, to my house on Ogden, when we were in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] and told me that, he said, "Bubba, come out--you gotta come out to my car", 'cause he had the tape recorder in his car. I went out there, and I went and sat in the car with Sam. And Sam played me this song. And he said, "Bubba, do you hear what I hear?" I said, "My Lord, man, if that ain't a hit record, I don't know what a hit record is." And I said, "Come on, let's go get Gladys" (laughter). We got Gladys, we got her to listen to this song. We jumped in the car, and I'm holding this in suspense for the title--we jumped into the car (laughter), and we drove down to Nashville, Tennessee, got in the studio and we recorded this song called (singing) "Must have been cold there in my shadow, could never have sunlight on your face", "Wind Beneath My Wings" [recorded by Gladys Knight and the Pips as "Hero" in 1983]. Man, when I heard that song, Gladys heard that song that Sam Dees had brought to us, and we, we got in the car, we said, "We ain't letting nobody mess this up. We're doing ourselves" (laughter). We paid our own money and everything (laughter), went down there and recorded "Wind Beneath my Wings". We got in the car. We drove back to L.A., couldn't wait for Columbia Records, for [HM] Larkin Arnold to get into the office. We went in there, and our motto was, "just drop the needle. Let the song speak for itself. Don't say anything about your music, just let it speak for itself." We went in there, and put that song on that we had recorded down in Nashville, played it for Larkin Arnold, and we, we're sitting there like, "I know this is gonna kill him right here 'cause this it." Larkin Arnold said, "I don't hear that". I could a just fell through the sofa. I'm, my mouth, my mouth was open. I'm going like, "Larkin, you don't hear this, this record, 'Wind Beneath My Wings'"? And he said, "Nah, I don't hear it." And Johnny Mathis' producer--I can't think of his name right now, but Johnny Mathis' producer was walking down the hall, and--Jack somebody. Anyway, and Larkin called him in the room. And he said--I think his name is Jack, he said, "Jack, listen to this." Larkin Arnold played it again, and Jack was like, I'm, I'm thinking, okay, he--I know, I know he can hear this. Jack, "It's all right." Man, I was just, I was done. I was done. I said, "I don't believe, I don't believe this." Anyway, we took our music back, and we went home. I think we took ourselves out to dinner or something (laughter) 'cause we were so depressed that (laughter) they couldn't hear, "Wind Beneath My Wings". Anyway. Story_ID: 117371 Speaker 1: This is the killer. The next time, I'm--we're at Clive Davis' party in L.A. Speaker 2: This is his party he does around the Grammy's [Grammy Awards]. Speaker 1: Yep. We're at Clive's party. Who comes up to me but my buddy, Lou Rawls. "Bubba, Bubba, Bubba, Bubba, man, you won't believe what I just recorded, oh, man. I recorded this thing that, that 'Wind Beneath My Wings'". "Wind Beneath My--" I'm going like, "What?" He said, "I recorded 'Wind Beneath My Wings', and I put another kind a feel on it." I'm going like, "No, you didn't, Lou." I said, "That's--" he said, "Nah, I did the number." I went back the next day. We called a meeting with [HM] Larkin Arnold, and I told Larkin, I said, "Hey, man, you couldn't hear this. Remember?" You know what he told me? "Lou needed a hit." Lou needed a hit record. Man, I was done (laughter), I was done. I said, I don't believe this, all of that we put into this, and used our record for him to sell the song (laughter). Oh, man, this business, boy, this record business, man, it killed me. I'm going like, okay. Okay, let's move on (laughter), yep. That's what happened, "Wind Beneath My Wings". So we put it on the album--he did let us put it on the album, and we titled it "Hero", titled it "Hero". It wasn't even "Wind Beneath My Wings". But anyway, that's another story. Speaker 2: Wait a minute, was it Sam [Dees]? Who wrote the song? Speaker 1: No, no, it was a writer [Jeff Silbar and Larry Henley] from Nashville [Tennessee]. Speaker 2: Nashville. Speaker 1: No, Sam didn't write it. We just produced it. Speaker 2: Right, but let me ask you. So to do that song, are they then going to that writer at that point, behind your back? Are they, did they find the writer? I'm just trying to understand-- Speaker 1: Oh, you know what? What I really think happened, what I really think happened was that our ver-- because why would Lou come up there to say, I put another spin on it or I--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Because-- Speaker 1: --I put another feel on it. Why would he say that if he hadn't heard ours? Speaker 2: Oh, he heard yours, no, he heard yours. Speaker 1: He had to hear ours. So my, my head is going like, "You used our record and what we had, what Sam, Gladys [Knight] and I did down in Nashville to push this song. You played it for Lou Rawls, and he liked it, yeah, he liked it well enough to record it. And you let him do it, but you couldn't hear it when we brought it in there. When we brought it to you, you couldn't hear it. Come on, man." Story_ID: 117372 Speaker 1: You left Columbia [Records] right after that, didn't-- Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: You had to, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, we, we left. And this is the thing. Our contract was running out with Columbia. We still didn't make any money with it. And this is what, another thing that really, really pissed me off--oh, did I--I'm sorry. But this really ticked me off, okay, was when Gladys [Knight], Sam [Dees] and I produced these songs and all of that, we never got paid. And the other thing is that I feel terrible about it because we had a company, Knight Dees and Knight and Sam had to suffer financially because of something that, you know, from the debt that I had signed on with my sister, that that debt, the records didn't support paying that debt off. And Sam got burned along with that, and that I regret. I regret that 'cause Sam--Sam wasn't no part of that. He still should a gotten paid, even if they didn't pay Gladys, Gladys and me; should have paid Sam. And so, anyway. Speaker 1: God, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter). Speaker 1: Wow, so but where is, where is--where are your protectors [Sidney Seidenberg and Floyd Lieberman]? I mean where are they? Speaker 2: Oh, (laughter), yeah. Speaker 1: What happened to them? Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: No, no, no, seriously. What happened to them? What happened to the gang? Speaker 2: They were with us, the Pips, but-- Speaker 1: They couldn't go over to the deal with Columbia? No? Speaker 2: Because--it, the water started to get muddy--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: --after we left Buddah [Records, later known as Buddha Records]. The water really got muddy, and that's what I wanna say about that. So our guys, our guys that were supporting us, the team-- Speaker 1: The team. Speaker 2: The team got fragmented, the team got fragmented. When we were a whole, couldn't beat us--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: You were strong. Speaker 2: Couldn't beat us. When we got fragmented, you know, like my mom [Elizabeth Woods Knight] said, "A divided house cannot stand". And she said that "You're stronger with numbers." Our numbers got fragmented. And I'll leave it at that. But, hey, and then we, you know, we were in a tailspin. Speaker 1: And, you know, and the truth be told also, around--so you--is this, now you do this tour though. Is that around the same time that you do the tour, before you, you know, before you're gonna retire, officially retire or there's time to this, when she becomes a solo act and you're gonna retire? Speaker 2: Yeah, we went, we went to--after we got back together, then we decided to go to another record company which was Casablanca. Speaker 1: Oh--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I'm, I'm sorry, I'm sorry, not Casablanca [Records]. We went to MCA [Records]. Speaker 1: I didn't--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: After Columbia, we went to MCA. Speaker 1: Oh, after--so you went to MCA afterwards? Speaker 2: After we left, after our contract--after Gladys' contract ran out--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Ran out at Columbia. Speaker 2: --at Columbia, then we started talking to MCA Records. Story_ID: 117373 Speaker 1: In between that, we had a, a conversation, once again, with Clive Davis. I gotta backtrack a little bit. Before we left Buddah Records [later known as Buddha Records], Clive--they were, Art Kass was gonna sign us over to Clive Davis before Gladys went to Columbia. That was nullified. So that was buried, which would a been a great move. He was-- Speaker 2: At (unclear)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --he was with Aris-Arista [Records]? Speaker 2: Arista. Speaker 1: Arista. He, Clive was Arista at that time. Okay, after that didn't happen and my sister [Gladys Knight] went to Columbia, we went to Columbia. After the Columbia era with [HM] Larkin [Arnold] and them ended, in between, in between MCA [Records], Clive came back to the table. And Gladys and I went and had a meeting with Clive at the Beverly Hills [California], and he was saying that, you know, we could, you know, we could pick up where we left off at this point, since you guys are away from Columbia. And we had a meeting, and this is a, one of the decisions, business decisions that I made that I'm not very proud of. It was a bad decision that I made, and I--my calculations were way off; had the meeting with Clive. We had a chance to go with Clive. Then our partner, Gerald Busby came to the table. Gerald wanted us to go with MCA. He wanted us to go there. And Gerald came to the house. We had a meeting up at my place in California. We talked about it and the whole shot, and my thinking at that time, I was thinking right, but my decision was wrong. I'm going like, "Now, why would I go with Gerald over here at MCA and he has to report to somebody else and not go with Clive when he's his own person that he--Clive is it. Why would I do that?" Gerald offered us, after coming out of Columbia, Gerald offered us money to go with MCA. Now, that's clouding my thinking. Clive wasn't giving up anything. You go with Clive, you go with Clive 'cause he's the man. (Excuse me). Gerald came up with a money offer. Now, I'm thinking I could pay off this. I could use this to further our--we got money to go to work, uniforms, all of that, you know. So I started leaning towards the money. Wrong, bad. And we decided to sign with MCA over with Gerald Busby. Now, I--and I'm feeling like Gerald is okay. I'm saying that ain't a bad choice 'cause it could be all right, being over there with Gerald. In the meantime, Gladys recorded a record with Ray Charles. They did a duet in between this thing, did a duet with Ray Charles, and Ray wanted to know, "Okay, what are you doing business wise, Bubba?" I said, "Well, I'm considering going with MCA or Clive Davis, one of the two." He said, "Well, why don't you sign with me?" (Laughter) I'm going like, "No, Ray" (laughter). And so I, I told him that, "Nah, no. I'm, I'm gonna go with, I'm gonna go with MCA right now." He said, "Well, what you could do is you could use me as a, a bargaining chip, you know, if I feel like, you know, you'll sign with me. You could use me as a bargaining chip and if they don't meet the offer, then you go with me." So I'll think about it, Ray. I didn't think about that much. But, anyway, he was right as far as that was concerned, business wise, he was really right. So I decided that--I went back, and we had a meeting, and we decided to go with Gerald, 'cause Gerald, Gerald was gonna be there for us. So I called Gerald, and Gladys called Clive and told him we had decided to go with, with Gerald Busby, and we're going to MCA 'cause they're offering us a really good deal. Story_ID: 117374 Speaker 1: Okay, now MCA [Records] was--Gerald [Busby] got us over there, and he got--who did, who were we recording with? Oh, Calloway Brothers [Reginald Calloway and Vincent Calloway], "Love Overboard", the Calloway Brothers. We went and recorded that. He put it out. It didn't do what we thought that it was gonna do record wise. In the meantime, I'm going back over to meet with Gerald Busby. Come to find out Gerald isn't with the company anymore. What? (laughter) "Oh, you didn't know? Gerald went over and signed with Berry [HM Berry Gordy]-Motown [Records]." I'm going like, no, no, no, he didn't. No, he didn't leave, pull me over here like this and, and leave me with Lowell Silas 'cause he left Lowell Silas in charge. Now, I'm really ticked. Gerald's gone, and I said, wait till I have the chance to speak to Gerald. He left us with Lowell Silas. Okay, I'm gon' make this story short. Lowell Silas said--we had one more album on our contract over at MCA, one more, Gladys Knight and the Pips contract--album. And I'm going like, "Okay, Lowell, we got one more record with you." So I wanna record Gladys Knight and the Pips on this. He said, "No, you need to go talk to your family." I'm going like, "What?" (Laughter) He said, "Yeah, you got one more album over here at MCA, but it ain't gon' be a Gladys Knight and the Pips album." I'm going like, "Well, what are you talking about?" He said, "Nah, man, Gladys going solo." (Laughter) I said, "No, you didn't say that, Lowell." He said, "You need to go talk to your family, man" (laughter). So my sister took that last--Lowell gave, gave--he said, "I ain't got but one album, and I ain't giving it to y'all. I'm giving it to Gladys." I said, "Okay." So I swallowed that pill. So I called the lawyers. I called Sid [Sidney Seidenberg], and I told them to get me--oh, no, I called Irwin. I called Irwin [Spiegel] Osher, and I said, "Irwin, I got a problem over here at MCA Records. And I'm so upset. I don't want them to have nothing to do with my name on it. Clean me up, get me out of that." I said, "I don't care what. Get me away from MCA." And so Irwin got me a release from MCA, me and the Pips. That was the name of that tune. It was over then. Then we went on this "Love Overboard" tour, and let me see. I think that was the end, that was when we broke up after that tour. Speaker 2: That's--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Nineteen eighty-nine [1989] or something like that. Speaker 2: It's 1989. Speaker 1: Nineteen eight-nine [1989]. Nineteen eight-nine [1989], we did the "Love Overboard" tour together. Oh, man, it was a smash too, ooh, "Love Overboard" tour was great, "Budfest". We was out with Al Haymon and "Budfest". And I had this character that I was doing called "Purple", and I would dress up like Prince. I had the hair and the whole shot, a purple outfit and the stuff. And we were doing, we did this song called "Baby I'm a Star", and I got this from Little Richard. I had my sons [Merald Knight, III and Craig Knight] and Gladys' son to come on stage with me with these, with these outfits on, leather outfights, and they were my bodyguards (laughter), got that from Little Richard. Remember, I was telling you. And it worked beautifully, man. And we did, we did part of Prince's choreography. I did part of that, but I added our own choreography on the end where we're going together and stuff. And it was a smash. We did that for a long, long time, and it was great. But right after that, at the Waldorf Astoria in 1989 is when the, the break up was finished. Story_ID: 117375 Speaker 1: Was that hard? I mean--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: --all these things happened, and then you have a great tour, and then you're breaking up in the, anyway. Speaker 2: And we had won all kind of awards that year too. I mean we, we won a soul--we won a, let me see. I think we had one of our Grammy's [Grammy Awards], and we won "American Music Awards", and we-- Speaker 1: You won all--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --we won (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: You won the "Georgia Music Hall of Fame". Speaker 2: Yeah, (laughter) the Georgia Music Hall of Fame, all of that stuff, man, inducted in the Rock and Roll, I think by this time we were inducted in the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame [sic, Gladys Knight and the Pips were inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 1996], and all of that. Man, we were, we were sailing. And I did ask my sister [Gladys Knight], I said, Sis, I love you, you know that, and I'm a always--I'm gon' always love her. I don't care what she does or what she doesn't do. It doesn't matter, you know. My love for my sister is gonna be there regardless. So anyway, but I did ask her, I said, "Why--we won every award. I mean we, we're there (laughter). We're there, little Sis." She said, "Yeah. I got the momentum" (laughter). So, you know, and I understood that as a business move because she could sring--she could springboard off of where we had gotten her. We were the platform. We were the platform, and she could really do a high dive off of that, which she did. And it was great. And I was at her first solo--I was there with her, with her first solo performance. Dionne, I think [HM] Dionne Warwick was there. I was there. I helped her with her show and stuff. Hey, you know, what I'm say. But that was it. Speaker 1: What--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: And then Edward [Patten] passed [in 2005]--I'm sorry? Speaker 1: Right. What was going on in her head? You think because people were saying, well, you, you know, you're the lead, you know, you--or, or did she wanna try something different? Speaker 2: No, it wasn't that. It was more so that she wanted to spread her wings like do acting. She wanted--and she didn't want to--in my opinion, she didn't want to be obligated to be responsible for, for keeping, keeping us going along with it because that was my presentation to her. I said, "Business wise," I said, "Think about this, now. Business wise--" you know, we always tried to make the best business decisions, "business wise, you would really, really be a super, super, super kind of star if you did, say three or four months--" 'cause we got this successful tour going, "do three or four months, months with Gladys Knight and the Pips and then take the other six months and be a solo." I said, "Think about it." I said, "That's a win, win situation for you, not just for us, but for you and for our fans. Everybody who, who has supported us all of these years, win, win, win win." But she didn't wanna confuse the two, and I can understand that as well. She had to make the statement to everybody "That I am solo now," which was great. And you see what her solo career has done. She's great, and she still pulls, she still pulls them in. And I love her for honoring what she told me that night in 1989. She said, "Although I'm going solo, you're always welcome to come on my stage, you, any time you want". She said that. She said, "Bubba, come any time you wanna come." Yep, and till today, like I leave tomorrow morning going down to Fort Lauderdale [Florida], and it's a time that I wanna be on her stage so I'm going, (laughter) I'm going to perform. Yep, its' great. I love that kid, man. I love her, yep. Story_ID: 117376 Speaker 1: So she [Gladys Knight] said everybody's thinking of the Pips when they think of her songs (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly. Speaker 1: --I'm just saying. Speaker 2: She--well, my sister, I don't think that she will ever be able to do a performance without doing even one or two or three of those songs that we made as a unit. And our success was because of our chemistry and because we were all going in the same direction and like my mom [Elizabeth Woods Knight] said, "We were not a divided house". That's what Mama Knight told us, "A divided house, you can't break up a divided house. It will not stand." And as a unit, you couldn't really beat us. And I always say this, there were better singers, there were better dancers, there were better groups, all of that kind of stuff, but the chemistry and the love that we had for each other and the direction that we all were going into, because we were all pointed up this way, up to the top, to the clouds. That was us. And with our prayers and with Heavenly Father blessing us the way the He did and still do, Gladys Knight and the Pips are winners (laughter). No matter how you cut it, we won. Story_ID: 117377 Speaker 1: I loved it. Everything I did, everything we did together, we said--our motto was, "We're either gonna make it or break it together, but if we go down, we gon' go down like this". We're gon' go down like this so. Story_ID: 117378 Speaker 1: Now, so, Bubba, so you then, you retract, right? Don't you--that happens, and then what are you wanting to do then 'cause you--that's when you start getting into real estate, is it? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: I mean do you sort of take a break, like are--I mean 'cause there are a series of disappointments that have happened? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Right? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yep. Speaker 1: Well-- Speaker 2: What I wanna do is, I'm gonna make my life be the happiest that I can make it. And I wanna do things that inspire me to accomplish like, teaching myself piano, like my second marriage [1996] with my wife, Kathleen [Knight], oh, man. That's, to me, that makes my life whole and complete because I know her better now than I knew her when I--we were married the first time. There are certain things that I know that we can do together now, that we couldn't do before. So when Heavenly Father allowed us to go our separate ways at a time, it was a time for the both of us to grow and a time for us to realize the value that we had in each other in being together. Now, we can live that out, and there are certain things that I wanna do--like my wife was a teach--Kate has degrees in teaching. That's one of the things that I fall short in because I didn't go to--I didn't complete my education, like my Uncle Clarence wanted me to do and like that I wanted to do, but I had to make a choice. But my wife has that ability to teach me things and to help me to learn things that I would have learned if I had gone to college or finished my college education. She's a, she's got that, and she loves me enough and she's--she has a way of teaching that I'm learning things although I'm not in school, I am in school. And I love her for that because she brings that to the table. And she brings a trust and a flexibility to our marriage that with us being flexible, we can overcome--to me, in my opinion, there are no obstacles that we can't overcome, me and Kate. (Simultaneous) Speaker 1: So- Story_ID: 117379 Speaker 1: So talk about Kate, Kathleen. Speaker 2: Kathleen (laughter). Speaker 1: Let's talk--talk about her and when she came in your life the first time and what attracted you about her and then the second time--'cause you were apart for how many years? Speaker 2: I think it was seven, six or seven years, Speaker 1: (KATHLEEN KNIGHT:) Fifteen. Speaker 2: We were apart, fifteen years. We were, we were separated fifteen years. We were apart fifteen years. When I first met Kate, or Kathleen--I'm a call her Kate. Y'all know who I'm talking about. But when I first met my Kate was at--excuse me, at a club in Milwaukee [Wisconsin]. And I had had this dream when I was in, on Chesterfield--when I was a little boy. This dream came to me, and this lady came to me--and I was sleep. And this lady came to me in my dream and I recognized her. I don't know what it was, but I recognized her. And when I saw Kate that night at this club when we had finished performing in Milwaukee, I'm going like, "Oh, my God, that's the lady, that's the--that is the lady in my dream, man." And it blew my mind--I couldn't believe it. And there she was in the flesh. And that was when I fell in--I fell in love with her in my dream. But when I saw her, it became a reality. She was real. And then when--I don't party. I don't go--I didn't, that wasn't my thing. My cousins, Edward Patten and William Guest, now, on the other hand, that's a different thing with them. But that night, that night one of Kate's girlfriends was asking us how do we like Milwaukee. And, we--Milwaukee, I'm ready to get out of here. That's how, how we felt before I met her. And then they, Edward and William were telling these girls that, "We don't really like Milwaukee, and we ready to go". Then they said, "You don't like Milwaukee because you haven't met the right people", right. So that was their answer. And they said, "Well, we're going over to Miss Alberta's house for a birthday party. She having a birthday party. Y'all wanna go with us?" And so Edward and Babe Brother, "Yeah." And after I had seen Kate, I'm going, like, "Okay, party." I'm going (laughter). So we had to go to the hotel, get changed, and we were all in this one car that Kate and them were in, right. And we had to--we--and the girls had to sit on our laps because there was no room. So I got in the back seat, and I'm going like, "Why don't you come on (laughter), come on over?" So Kate sat on my lap. We got to the party. When we got to the party, I couldn't keep my eyes off of her. I mean, oh, my God, I can't believe this. I see this lady in my dream. And I went in the kitchen to get something. She came into the kitchen, and when she came in the kitchen, I told her, I said, "You know, I'm gon' marry you." And she went back out there and told her girlfriends, "Got a nut in the kitchen. (Laughter) This guy over there talking about he gon' marry me." And so she came back in the kitchen, and I kissed her, oh, man, I planted--whew, I planted one on her like, I think she could just feel me, just coming, all that love (laughter). She could feel all that love just coming out of me (laughter). So I told her, I said, "I'm a marry you." And then some of the other guys at the party, they were trying to hit on her and stuff. I'm going like, oh, boy, here we go. But I got her phone number. And from that point on, I would call her, and she didn't--I didn't think she thought I was gonna call her, but I called her on the phone. And Milwaukee became a whole nother kind of city for me, yep, from that point on. I would call her every night 'cause I just loved her, I loved her so I would call her. Wherever I was, I would give her a call on the--we ran up the phone bills. My mother-in-law said, "We, we need to buy some stock in, in Ma Bell, AT&T (laughter) 'cause y'all stay on the phone". (Laughter) love my mom-in-law, man, rest her soul, Ma Turner. Anyway, that's how we, we met, and we continued to keep in touch with each other. Story_ID: 117380 Speaker 1: And she [Kathleen Knight] came to, I think it was either New York [New York City, New York] or when was it? The first time we were together, I think it was New York, and I had her to come over to my hotel to have dinner. And at that time, when I knew that there was a chance that we could, we could really start having a, you know, boyfriend-girlfriend relationship, man, I was so excited. I was nervous too. I didn't never tell her that, but I was nervous 'cause I didn't think that Little Bubba, Little Bubba would have such a beautiful, intelligent, smart, classy, freakin' lady like this as my girlfriend. Get outta here (laughter). So I was just, man, I was just, I was just--I was unconscious with her. And after we met that time, I think she was, I think she was engaged at the time to, to somebody in either Chicago [Illinois] or New York or somewhere. Anyway, I, I'm trying to think of when, when I proposed. I know we were at the Waldorf [Waldorf Astoria in New York City, New York], she came to the Waldorf with me. And, and, you know those horses outside of the Waldorf in the Plaza Hotel, in between shows at the, at the--no, it wasn't the Waldorf. Speaker 2: (KATHLEEN KNIGHT:) Copa Speaker 1: It was the Copacabana [New York City, New York], Copacabana, yeah. Copacabana, and I told, I told Kate, I said, I've always wanted to get on one of those carriages, 'cause I seen it--I've seen it in the movies. And I got one of those--I hired one of those carriages for him to ride us around Central Park, in between my break at the Copacabana show. And we came around, and when we came back to the Plaza Hotel with that fountain in the middle, I made a wish that, that Kate would marry me. And I threw money in that pond out there. I threw money in there, and my wish came true. She, she said, okay, she'd marry me. And we, we dated for like a year or two years, something like that. And we went on the Tom Jones Tour, Tom Jones' first American tour, and I took Kate with me on that tour. And 'cause she was trying, she was trying to make money. She was working for my sister, Gladys [Knight] then. She was helping Gladys with her wardrobe and everything. And Kate was trying to save up money because we were gonna get married. Yeah, and she saved the money up, and I had the money, and Papa Turner and I put our monies together and we had a awesome wedding, man. Oh, God, it was great. And the Emotions came down and sung at our wedding 'cause my best--one of my best friend at the time was Paul--Paul--Pervis Staples with, and Pop Staples [Roebuck "Pops" Staples] and, and Yvonne [Staples] and them. And so we married, we got married, and the Emotions sung at my wedding, and then we moved to Detroit [Michigan]. Story_ID: 117381 Speaker 1: You [Knight and his wife, Kathleen Knight] separated when, then? You divorced. Speaker 2: We got divorced, I--I don't remember the year, but we were married for like, how many years were we married? Speaker 1: Let's see, I have it. Speaker 2: Eleven, we were married eleven years, and then we got divorced. And we were divorced for fifteen years, and then I was at the Kentucky Derby. Gladys [Knight] was the--what you call them people that ride around--Gladys was the what you call 'em, the-- Speaker 1: I've never been to a Derby. Speaker 2: You know, yeah, she was the-- Speaker 1: Mascot--I don't know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Anyway, she was in the car. Yeah, yeah-- Speaker 1: (KATHLEEN KNIGHT:) Grand Marshal. Speaker 2: Grand Marshal. Speaker 1: Yeah, Gladys was the Grand Marshal [1993], and I went to, to Milwaukee [Wisconsin]--I mean to Kentucky with Gladys 'cause I was her road manager then. And they told me that Gladys--was that, that Gladys--that Kate, she told me that Kate had been, had been married and for all this--not all this time, but she had been married 'cause she had called me and asked me if it was okay if she got married. And I told her, "Yeah, you know, you got my blessings if that's what you wanna do. I just want you to be happy, you know. And it's not working here with us due to all of the things that's surrounding us and all the turmoil and the--" Speaker 2: You think it was too much, the business-- Speaker 1: Of course. Speaker 2: --the business was too much. Speaker 1: It was too much. It was too much for Kate, and we were getting like threats and all of those kinds of things, and, you know, some (unclear), some gunfire and stuff was happening. I won't go into a lot of details, but a lot of things were happening around me and Kate when, when--during that time, when, when the Columbia [Records] era and all of that, a lot of bad things were happening to us. And we were having some problems from some people talking about they knew where we lived and all of that kinda stuff, okay. So all of this was taking a toll on our marriage, and also, it was putting me in a position where, when I would go out of town, I would have to have my father-in-law to come and stay with wife because I was in fear of her life and her well-being. So it got really bad. It got really, really bad, to the point where when it was taking a toll on our marriage, I was at the point of maybe this divorce thing won't be so bad because if they're gonna come after me, then they will come after "me". And they won't hurt my wife whom I, I love dearly. I don't wanna see nothing happen to her. So when the divorce came about, I'm going like, okay, I wasn't too upset about that. I hated losing my wife and the woman that I love, but it was like if she's not in the picture, if she's away from the picture, then they can't hurt her. It won't benefit them by hurting her to get to me. Then they could just come right after me, and I can deal with that. So, anyway, Kate and I went down to our lawyer friend's office--we had a friend. His name was Dicky White. And we went down to his office and told him that we wanted to get a divorce, and we needed for him to do the paperwork and all of that kind of stuff in order for it to be legal. And I remember Kate and I sitting up in Dicky's office, holding hands (laughter). And he was a good friend of ours (laughter), and he's going like, "Bubba, Kathy, y'all sure y'all wanna do this" (laughter). I said, "Dicky, write--get the papers, man, get it, get it to the judge, write it up, please." And he said, "Man, this is against my better judgment, but I'll do it for y'all." So he got the proper papers for us to be divorced. And we went home--Kate, man, she cried all the way back to the house, you know. Story_ID: 117382 Speaker 1: But anyway, so I packed up and then this thing kept coming into my head about "Go West, young man, go West" (laughter). So, so I got me a flight out to California, and I moved to California. I never wanted Kathy [Kathleen Knight] to be, to have to be subject to any other man coming in and her having to need anything from him. So I said, "I can make it. I mean I've been out there in the street, on the road, whatever." So I left her the house. I left her both cars. I left everything to her because I loved her that much, and I didn't wanna see her being taken advantage of. And she didn't have to unless she wanted to, you know. So I packed up, moved, left, and I went to California and got a room at the--oh, God, what is this hotel I was staying in, in Brent--in Westwood [Los Angeles, California]? Anyway, I got a room up there, and I stayed there for the long--. And the rent was killing me, by the week. It was killing, just eating up all my pocket money. I'm going like, "This doesn't make sense." So I'm going like, "Come on, Bubba, you know better than this." So I went, got me a real estate person, and I said, well, what I'm paying, I could pay for a house note. So I bought a triplex over there in the Wilshire District [Los Angeles, California]. And it had three, it had a back house and upstairs and downstairs on Ogden Drive. So that's where I resided, and an old friend, Cecil Holmes who was at Casablanca [Records], but I wasn't with the company, you know--wait a minute, yeah. Speaker 2: No, you had to be. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's where I went, that's Cecil--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: That's where you went to--(unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --Cecil, Cecil, that was out there with Cecil. Yep, Cecil hooked me up, man. And I bought a house, I bought a home 'cause we had, we were gonna--the Pips were gonna record these two albums at Casablanca. So I'm going like, okay, here we go. And then fifteen years went past, and you know, the middle part of what happened with my career. Story_ID: 117383 Speaker 1: But then I was in, I'll get back to--I was at the Kentucky Derby and Gladys [Knight] was the Grand Marshal [1993]. I went back to the hotel, and I went back to my suite, and my girlfriend, Katie, who was very dear friend of Kathy's [Kathleen Knight], I mean just like this, she was our sister. Speaker 2: Wait a minute, Kathy--you call Kathy, Kate, and then then there's Katie? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: Katie was her best friend. Speaker 2: She's a different--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, but Katie and I, and, and--we were friends before I left Detroit [Michigan]. And when, when [excuse me], when Katie fell on hard times, she came and Kate, my wife, Kathy, took her into our house that I left for her and helped her, helped our girlfriend 'cause she was on hard times. Anyway, long story short, Katie came to my hotel room after the Kentucky Derby and told me that Kate, my wife, my ex-wife, was having some difficulty in her marriage. And she was getting out. And Katie told me that, you know, "You could really lift her spirits if you gave her a call." So she gave me the number, and I called Kate, and I was leaving town the next day. And I told her my flight time was at dah, dah, dah, dah, and I was leaving the airport. And I would love to see her and, if we could have some lunch or something 'cause she was working at that time, at the Ford [Ford Motor Company] plant. And so I'm getting ready to board my flight. No Kate. I said, well, oh, well. And by the time flight time, here she come. I'm going like, oh, my God. That's, I hadn't seen her in so long, man. And I just hugged her. I just held onto her and just hugged her, man. And I really didn't wanna leave, but I know she had to go back to work, plus, I didn't know how her marriage thing--we hadn't talked, so I didn't know how, that was gone or whatever. And then she--we talked some more after I left town. I called her, and she told me that she was getting her own place in Kentucky. And I said, "Well, if I'm in the area, you know, I'll stop by and see you some time. Maybe we could have some lunch and stuff or dinner or whatever." So it, you know, I, I made a point--I wasn't working there, but I got on me a plane and I went to Louisville [Kentucky] (laughter). I wasn't (unclear), I wasn't gon' miss this opportunity, man. And if there was a chance that I could get my wife back, then so be it, 'cause a lot of things had cooled off over fifteen years, you know, a lot of the threats and the gun shots, and the, all of that, meat packing and all that kind of stuff had, you know, it was behind me. So, anyway, that's--then I--she had an apartment and I would go to stay with her in her apartment so we could get to know each other again. And then she got this job in Detroit, back at the main Ford plant. And she had this offer, and she decided to move back to Detroit. She moved back to Detroit, and we got a unit there in Detroit. And from that point on, I came back to Las Vegas [Nevada], and I bought a, I bought a compound, my mom [Elizabeth Woods Knight] and I, Mama Knight and I bought a compound over there on Mayfair. I bought four--we bought four houses 'cause we always wanted a compound where the family could be together. And I bought two houses and my mom bought two houses. And the house next door to us, I was just gon' keep it as land, and so I could have a big house with a lot of land, right. And the builder said, "Well, as much as you're paying for the land, we may as well put a structure on it." So I had the house built. And that's when I brought my mother- and father-in-law out to Las Vegas, Kate's parents, Mama and Papa Turner, and my mom was living in the back in the house behind us. Story_ID: 117384 Speaker 1: So, anyway, long story short, brought them out. I, I gave a big birthday party for Kate in Milwaukee [Wisconsin], big birthday party I, I hired a boat, I mean to go out on the lake. We went out on the lake. That was part of it, and then when the boat brought us back after the little cruise that we were on, I had, I had rented this, this restaurant, the whole restaurant, and I had all of her friends that she was really close to, I had all of them to come to her birthday party. And that night, I had bought this ring, me and Papa Turner--Papa Turner and I went out. And I had bought this ring, and I told him, I said, "Pop, I'm gonna spring it on her tonight and see what happens." (Laughter) So while she was celebrating all at the party and everything, I took my jacket off, and gave it to Ma 'cause she was cold, put it around Ma Turner. And we got a picture of this too, somewhere, but I was standing up in my tuxedo shirt and--'cause we all dressed up 'cause her friends had told her we were going to one of the kids' birthday party or some kind of concert or something that they were having. But that was a lie. That was just to get Kate out the house and dressed up. Anyway, when she--after she had started opening up some of her gifts and everything, we were standing there. And then I had the ring, and I said--I was telling her, I said, this isn't a pressure situation. You can think about it. You can do whatever you want to with, but whenever you feel like that you wanna marry me again, put that on (laughter). Speaker 2: Was that in front of everyone? Speaker 1: Everybody (laughter), all her friends, they're going like, whoa (laughter). It was great, it was great, man. It was wonderful. And Kate, man, she--that was it. So I bought this house and, for her, 'cause I was living in another house on Pescados [sic, Pescado], but I moved into that house for us. And we got married in front our fireplace over there on Mayfair [in 1996], had all our friends over there, sitting around in chairs and stuff. And we had the pastor to come, and my brother, David [Knight], before he passed, was my best man. Oh, man, it was great. Wow. Golly, I'm so blessed. Speaker 2: That's a true love story. Speaker 1: I'm so blessed, man, and golly. I tell yah, I--I can't ask for anything more, you know. Even like right now with the real estate market fall--bottoming out, falling out and everything, and your home is half of what it was (laughter) when you bought it, all of that, all of that doesn't faze me with the happiness and with the blessing that I've had over the years since I've, since I came into this world. Wow, and my mom [Elizabeth Woods Knight] is looking down on us right now. Gram--we called her Gram, well, my mom is looking down on us, and whenever I feel like an inkling of not being appreciative, I can feel my mom, saying, "Un-un, Merald, Jr., don't you go there, don't you go there. You are so blessed." That's what Gladys [Knight] and I feel all the time, when we're riding on the bus, we just count our blessings. My baby sister. I'll see her tomorrow, God willing. Story_ID: 117385 Speaker 1: And Gladys [Knight] and I, when we go on that stage and people are sitting there, and people are applauding what we're doing, that is priceless, priceless. And I--like my mom, [Sarah] Elizabeth [Woods] Knight, she says, "Don't ever take things like that for granted. You're blessed to have 'em." And I prayed for these things for you guys, and you prayed for 'em, and He's showering you with these blessings that a whole lot of other people are not getting and don't have." And boy, she--my mom, man, my mom was a teacher. Oh, my God, was she a teacher. And my dad [Merald Knight, Sr.], my dad. You know one thing. I think about my dad, and I think about how he was a pioneer. And like I was talking about Mr. [Maurice] King and Pop, Cholly Atkins [Charles "Cholly" Atkins] and them, not getting their proper due, my dad never got his either. He was one of the first black postmen in Atlanta, Georgia. And I remember stealing away, one night I ran away from home because he worked three jobs. My dad was a workaholic, but he was providing for his family. All he wanted my mom to do was raise his children. He'll provide the money, and we learned that from him. But my dad, I remember I ran away from home one night, and I hid in his car, up under his rain slicks. And, and he was, he drove to the post office, and when he got to the post office, I took the rain slicks off and said, I said, "Dad" and scared, I mean scared (laughter). I frightened--he said, "You almost scared me to death, Merald, Jr. What are you doing--what are you doing?" I said, "Dad, I just, I just wanted to spend some time with you." And he said, "No, no, you can't do it this way." He said, "your mother--does anybody know that you're here with me?" I said, "No, sir." He said, but you can't do that. I,--and phones, you know, you gotta find a phone booth back in those days to call. He said, "Okay, I'll go into the post office, and I'll call your mother and let 'em know where you are. You ran away?" I said, "Yeah, dad, but I just wanted to spend some time with you" because I missed my dad. He was always working and providing for us, but working. And he went in the post office. He called my mom, told my mom where I was. And he said, "I don't have time to take you back home right now. I can't take you back home right now because I'm on the clock." So he said, "You stay back in this back seat till I go get the truck." He went and got the mail truck. And he drove around. He said, don't let anybody see you. And I, and he pulled the truck around where I could get in the truck. And I got in the truck, and, and we, we started going to the different houses that he had to go to. And I felt him not being so angry at me, and he told me, he said, "Okay, this is what we're gonna do." He said, "I'm gon' pull up to the house and I wanna give you this package. I want you to go knock on the door and said, and you tell the people, 'Mailman, Special Delivery, mailman, Special Delivery'". So (laughter) so I got out of the truck and I went and knocked on the door. I said, "Mailman, Special Delivery", and they're going like "What? (Laughter) Little boy (laughter), delivering a package, man." And so I got back in the car, and I, oh, man, I felt so good, just being with my dad, man. Story_ID: 117386 Speaker 1: It was just such a wonderful, wonderful time for me because we didn't get a chance to spend a lot of time because he [Merald Knight, Sr.] was working. And I understood that, you know. Speaker 2: And that created some conflict with your parents, though, right? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: That created conflict because my mom [Elizabeth Woods Knight] was a today kind of woman. She was a, like a Anthony B--Susan B. Anthony kind of a woman, like she wants the right to vote, you know, which was great, you know, but my mom wanted to work to help. She wanted to get out and get a job to help provide, but dad wanted her to stay at home to raise us. And we used to have dinner. We used to sit at the dinner table, say grace and the whole shot. We had a real family life at first. But then it started falling apart. And, and my dad, being a workaholic, it started affecting his health. And my dad started going downhill, health wise, and my dad started having accidents in the truck and in the car, and those kinds of things 'cause he was staying up all the time, making these jobs 'cause he wanted mom to stay at home. And it took a toll on him to the point where they, they fired my dad because they would tell him, you have one more accident, you're outta here. So he lost that job at the post office. Then he was working at the drugstore, drugstore, delivering packages, medicine and stuff. God, I liked to said the name of the drugstore, but it didn't--that's okay. And he had a lawn service that he used to cut people's grass on the weekend. Dad then got a job down at Rich's Department Store [Atlanta, Georgia]. And he was the supervisor that you (unclear), he was the supervisor down there at Rich's Department Store. And dad got me a job down there at Rich's, and that's when we were there when they had the sit-in's, when the Ku Klux Klan was marching and stuff outside at Peachtree Street, and they had the sit-in's. And I've told you that story about how we served, me, Edward [Patten], everybody got fired (laughter) 'cause we served the students that we wasn't supposed to serve. Anyway, that was our little contribution. Story_ID: 117387 Speaker 1: So you're saying everybody came out here [Las Vegas, Nevada] then. You had this compound. Was your father [Merald Knight, Sr.]-- Speaker 2: No, he had passed. Speaker 1: He had passed so-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So it's your mother [Elizabeth Woods Knight] and-- Speaker 2: My sister, Brenda [Knight], my brother, David [Knight] and all of the children (laughter), all of the children 'cause Gram had 'em all in school over at Gorman, [Bishop] Gorman High School [Las Vegas, Nevada]. She had 'em there, she had 'em in--she had the ones in elementary school and the ones in high school. And my sister, Brenda, was working for the banks at that time. So she had finished her schooling. Gladys [Knight] and I were still on the road working and Gram took care of--Mom took care of all the children. She took care of the children where Gladys and I could continue our career on the road. She raised the children, all ours, mine, Bren's, Gladys, all of us. And, and David--and David was on the road with us as well. Speaker 1: That's your youngest brother? Speaker 2: Uh-huh, that's my youngest brother. Yep, so this became home for all of us, and it was basically because we could all be together and be a family. And we bought that house on La Mirada [Las Vegas, Nevada] where we had enough room--what is it, five or 6,000 square feet or something like that, that we had enough room for everybody to springboard off of that property. And that's what we did. We all individually got our own places, but that was the, that was the, the spring--that was the foundation (laughter). Speaker 1: And you provided that. Story_ID: 117388 Speaker 1: So I wanna talk about you on your sister's [Gladys Knight's] show, you know, as the Pip, making these appearances. Speaker 2: Oh, now? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: And, Bubba, there's so--like I was saying, you fill up, like you fill up the stage. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: And it's your comedy, it's--so how did that come about because the Pips were quiet. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I mean they would have some interchange, but they were quiet and sophisticated. It was all sophisticated, sort of-- Speaker 2: Yep, we were choreographed. And it came about because I, I used to insert humor--I'll go back a little bit for--. I used to insert humor in the show when Gladys used to introduce all of us, and she would leave me out. I would be the last one. And I would go up to Gladys, I'd say, "You forgot somebody" (laughter). And folks would just crack up, man. They would die. And then when, and then that build because after I said, "You forgot somebody", she said, "Oh, yeah, yeah, and my big brother, Merald 'Bubba' Knight", and when she did that I used to have Joe Guercio or, I forget who was our musical conductor at that time, I would have them to play the "Jesus Christ Superstar" number. He'd have the whole band, all the horns (unclear) and (imitating a big band playing "Jesus Christ Superstar"), right. (imitating a big band playing "Jesus Christ Superstar"). And when they would play that music, I would run across the stage and throw kisses (laughter) to people in the audience (singing), you know, that was my show business thing coming out (laughter). And it was really funny. And folk ate that up. I mean they ate it up, man, they loved it. And that was part of my comedic thing coming out in me 'cause my mom always told me, Gram--Elizabeth Knight always told me, she said--when she saw me doing all those little--she said, "Merald, Jr., you missed your calling. You're a comic." She said, "Merald, Jr., you missed your calling." And Gladys will tell you that, all--because she heard mom always telling us and her that, you know, "Merald, Jr. missed his calling. He's, he's funny, he's a comic." Story_ID: 117389 Speaker 1: Anyway, from that little piece, when Gladys asked me to come back and join her on her show, after I had gone to UNLV [University of Las Vegas, Nevada] for a year and a half, to be her road manager. She needed somebody to trust with her money, and she knew she could trust me. So I, I played that role of her road manager during that period. We went and played the White House [Washington, D.C.] one time when President Bill Clinton was in office. And we had, Gladys was mentoring Serena Williams--not Serena Williams. That's the tennis player (laughter). I mean, no, no, not Serena Williams, Serena Henry. That was one of Gladys--she was mentoring her and bringing her on. She sings with Smokey [HM Smokey Robinson] right now. She's a backup singer for Smokey. Anyway, Serena was performing a duet with Gladys at the White House on the lawn, and when they finished, the people were just clapping, oh, great, great, great, great. And when Serena came off stage, I took her microphone, and I sat her microphone over here by the steps that led to the stage. And Gladys started talking to the people and dah, dah, dah, dah, and then they went into [singing band noises], "Midnight Train to Georgia". I don't know to the day what happened to me, but it was like a punch drunk boxer when the bell goes off, you go like, ding, he goes like--when that intro came on, I picked up this, Serena's microphone. I went up there on the stage and got into my place where I usually stand as the Pip and went into "Midnight Train to Georgia", leaned back, I was singing right along with the rest of 'em. And I was doing the choreography that we, that we made up for "Midnight Train to Georgia". I'm going like "Woo, woo". I did the whole thing before I knew it, man. [HM] Maxine Waters, all the Congress people were sitting out there, you know. And when we finished, we said, "Midnight train to Georgia [singing]. And when they did that, I went on, before I knew it, I grabbed Gladys' hand like we used to do when we were a group and took her bow (laughter), and took a freaking bow, man. And, and Maxine, President Clinton, all of 'em, stood, gave a standing ovation, man. And I'm going, "whoa". And President Clinton came on stage, and he was just clapping, and he said, "I love that duet number that you were doing with the little girl, Serena", and, and he said, he said, "Bubba, you should run for office" (laughter). I'm going like, oh, man, what have I done? But, you know, after that, I apologized to Gladys. I said, I don't know what happened, but something just pulled me up there on that stage, man, like where I was before. Speaker 2: Well, you were missing it probably too. Speaker 1: Yeah, so. And, and, she said, oh, man, don't mind, I told you, you could join me any time you want to. I said, well, that wasn't one of those times (laughter) that I wanted to. Story_ID: 117390 Speaker 1: But this is different then, though, because when I saw you in, in Chicago [Illinois], I mean I had never seen you like that. That's what I'm saying. Speaker 2: Yeah, it grew. Speaker 1: And it's such, oh, it's wonderful. Speaker 2: Thank you. But it grew from that point on, and Gladys [Knight] started giving a portion of her show to come out and do "Bubba Knight", and I love her for it 'cause she gives me total freedom to do whatever I wanted. So all the stuff that you see now on stage are things that I've made up along with Gladys, us bouncing off of each other and working with each other. None of it was written--none of what you see that Gladys and I do, it's all improvisation. It's an improv. So, and it's growing. And it's grown to where it is right now. And, you know, I can come on stage now and I've witnessed people giving me a standing ovation when they bring--when Gladys bring me out. And, and the audience and our fans still respond to me like I could talk to them, and they still respond to me. And that's such a blessing. Like I told you, that's a blessing. Story_ID: 117391 Speaker 1: So your relationship with your sister [Gladys Knight], you've been protector, you've been business manager, you've been-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: --negotiator, you've been forgiver, you've been (laugher), I mean because she's had up and down, a lot of up and down's. Speaker 2: Yes, she has. Speaker 1: A lot of up and down's. Speaker 2: Lots of up and down's and, and she knows whenever she has a down, I'm there for her like I am when she's up, and she knows that. That's how--you know, I feel like that's part of my calling, to be there for, for my family. That's part of my calling, and that's what, that's what makes me feel good, that I can be there for them, all of 'em. My oldest sister, Brenda [Knight], Gladys, I was there for David [Knight], even my little brother, when he went, you know. Yep. That's my calling. I'm blessed. Story_ID: 117392 Speaker 1: So can you share some favorite--now, who was the music--before I get to that, the music, who was your music director all the time? How many different music directors did you have? Speaker 2: We had, we had Mr. King, first of all, Maurice King. In between him, we had Al Thompson, who used to be Stevie Wonder's drummer for a long time. Oh, before Mr. King we had Stanley Lucas, Stanley Lucas was--no, good grief. And, you know, talking to you brings back so many memories. Our first music director was [James] Jimmy Newman, my sister's [Gladys Knight's] first husband. He was a saxophonist, and he could play that saxophone. Jimmy, he, he missed his too 'cause he was great. Jimmy Newman, Stanley Lucas, Stanley Lucas, Al Thompson, what was it, Al Thompson. Oh, God, it was a guy out of, out of Detroit [Michigan] was our musical director at one time. I see his face. I can't call his name. Anyway, after Allen Thompson, it was this--Maurice King off and on. Maurice King came back. Then Joe Guercio, [HM] Benjamin Wright, who was with us a long time, loved Benjamin Wright. He was great, Benjamin Wright. And then after Benjamin (excuse me), after Benjamin, it was Matthew Pittman, and then Damion Hall who is Gladys' musical director right now, yeah. I rolled that off pretty good (laughter). Story_ID: 117393 Speaker 1: So do you have any favorite stories of your fellow Pips? Do you have any, any favorite stories? Speaker 2: William Guest-- Speaker 1: William Guest. Speaker 2: --Edward Patten? Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: I, I have a-- Speaker 1: 'Cause you haven't told, you haven't told stories about them. Speaker 2: Right, I have a story about my cousin, Edward Patten, whom I loved dearly, and God rest his soul. That's my cousin who passed away, you know-- Speaker 1: He had diabetes, did he-- Speaker 2: Yeah, he had a, he had a lot of things wrong with him, and he had a stroke. And, and in his latter years, Edward wasn't the Edward that we came to know, the vivacious, the lively, the, the go for it, Edward Patten, that we came to know and love. And loyal to Gladys Knight and the Pips--all four, all four members, loyal. Edward Patten, William Guest, Gladys Knight and me. We, we, we were the ones that made it go to where it went to. But I have a story about Edward Patten. Edward, when processes were in, when you had conk, conks. Okay. Edward Patten had some of the best graded hair that you ever wanna see on anybody, and William Guest. Now, me I had the, I had the little knots that was fighting each other. When I comb my hair, it was oh, oh (straining sound), with my Afro pick and stuff (laughter). But Edward and William had a great grade of hair, all right, excuse me. And, but Edward, Edward liked, he wanted to be, he wanted to live up to the name they had given him. His nickname was "Fast Eddie", and "Little Lord Fauntleroy". He had names like that. Little--yeah, Fast Eddie, Little Eddie, Little Lord, and so he was like in the circuit as Eddie Patten is the one, you know, he's, he's a forefront. He's a leader, he's a--everybody wanna be a Edward Patten, right. And Edward put this stuff in his hair so you have the waves and all of that like the rest of the art--like the rest of the entertainers, like Jackie Wilson and all the, all the guys, right. So Edward got his hair fixed, and in doing that it took his hair out (laughter). His hair came out. So he got, so he got bald. He lost all that pretty hair he had up top, right. And so the group had a meeting, and we decided to buy Edward a toupee, a toup (laughter). And we found these people in Baltimore [Maryland] who were really, really good. And they made hair pieces that you, you couldn't tell on whether--unless you knew that it was a hair piece. They were good, they used human hair and stuff. And so they would, they would come and put tape and stuff on Edward's hair, and they put his hair piece on, and he looked great. I mean Edward looked great, man, and he would go on stage. He thinks they didn't know. We were playing in Puerto Rico one time and (laughter), we were playing with this, this group called the Chieftones. They were a Indian [First Nations] group, the Chieftones. One of my best friends came out of that group, Vince, Vince Clifford [Vincent "Billy ThunderKloud" Clifford]. I never will forget him. Anyway, Edward--we were all out in the pool and we were playing, we were playing ball in the pool, you know, throwing the football and stuff, and we're running around the pool. And Edward came out of his, his bungalow and they said, "Come on in, Eddie, come on. We're having, play ball, I need--we need some more people." And Edward jumped in that pool, and it (laughter) his hair flew (laughter) 'cause they told him, they told him he could swim in it (laughter). And Edward's hair flew up like that, and all of my Indian friends were going like, "Whoa, whoa, look at look at Little Eddie's hair, looking at his hair, he got scalped (laughter). That was so funny, man, and everybody just died laughing, man, they just died laughing. That was one of the stories that was really funny, that I remember about Edward, Edward Patten. Story_ID: 117394 Speaker 1: And what ones can I remember about William [Guest]? Oh, I remember one funny one about William. We were on a Henry Wynn's tour [Supersonic Attractions], and we had a car full of, it was Gladys Knight and the Pips and Barbara and the Dellos [ph.] in this one Cadillac, all of us stacked on top of each other. Mr. Wynn was sending us to Washington, D.C. to do a date. And the driver's name, and the driver's name was "Big Baby". Big Baby was driving the car. We had stopped to a restaurant so everybody could use the bathroom, got back in the car and was driving up the road, and Gladys [Gladys Knight] said, "I gotta go to the bathroom." Well, (unclear) "Well, we just stopped. Wait a minute, we just stopped;" said, "But I got to go." So we pulled into this service station, right. Big Baby pulls into this service station. We get out of the car, and this white guy comes out of there, and says, "No niggers in my bathroom, can't use my bathroom". All right, aw-- Here we go again with this. So we said, but she's gotta go to the bathroom. And so, we went around the back of his place and we held up our coats and stuff so Gladys could, so Gladys could go. And--[phone ringing], oh, God. So Gladys could go. So she went. When we got ready to go back to the car that was parked by the pumps, the car, the paint started peeling on the hood of the car. It started peeling, bubbling up and stuff. And before you know it, before we got back in the car, the car blew up. It caught on fire, poof. And the car was just burning, man. And I'm going like, "Oh, my God, what happened?" And Gladys--because we were out of the car, nobody was in the car because we got out for Gladys to go to the bathroom. And this is what was funny as far as William was concerned, the accident and the way that, that service station was, service station owner was treating us, that wasn't funny at all. But Babe Brother, I never will forget him. He ran over to the car and said, "What you doing, boy?" And Babe Brother said, "Man, my cinnamon rolls are in the back of that car (laughter), my cinnamon roll burning up" (laughter). I'm going like, "Yeah, but the car--I mean we could have been killed, and you're talking about your cinnamon rolls." So that was one, one thing-- Speaker 2: But why, but you call Babe Brother. Speaker 1: Yeah, that was his--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: But why was--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: William Guest, we all called him Babe Brother. Speaker 2: Why, where did that nickname come from? Speaker 1: We never knew anything but Babe Brother, every since we were-- Speaker 2: Little. Speaker 1: Little boys and stuff. It was Babe Brother. Very few people called him William, you know. Everybody knew him as Babe Brother, like they knew me as Bubba. They knew me as Bubba, they knew him as Babe Brother. Gladys is Gladys and Brenda [Knight] was Bren, Eleanor [Guest], Eleanor, Ella. So that was one of the funny, funny ones that I, that I knew about Babe Brother. But we got a ton--I mean there's a ton of 'em, but I just can't think of a whole lot of 'em right now. Story_ID: 117395 Speaker 1: But William [Guest] and Edward [Patten], we spent more time together, and William will tell you, he said, you know, I spent more time with y'all than I, than I've done with my whole family. And that was true. We spent more time together than any members of our family, and it was great. And that was because of the loyalty and the stick-to-it-tiveness that we had as a, as a group and as a--and we wanted to get to where we were trying to get to. We were trying to reach that goal, and, you know, man, and, you know, that's, that's one of the things that I admire about the Four Tops. One of the things I admire about the Four Tops--and I hate to switch like this, but I give Levi [Levi Stubbs] credit, a whole lot of credit for sticking with the Four Tops until they started passing away. The Four Tops were the Four Tops. And I respect and I love them for that, man. I love 'em for it. And, and the Dells, Marvin Junior and them. They were original all the way through. And one of the things that happened when Gladys [Knight] went solo was people came to me in the business who wanted me to talk to William and Edward about putting another female in the group or adding some more people to the Pips. To, to, today, that was one thing I always wanted be like, when I went out of this business, I wanted to be like Levi and the Four Tops or Marvin Junior and them and the Dells and not to have our name watered down like, you got Drifters all over the place, you got Coasters everywhere. You got Temptations all over, everywhere. And I love Otis [HM Otis Williams] and I understand his business thinking, and his business move, and all of that, but I wanted us to be original. It's just, you know, that's just the way I feel about it. You got Temptations flying all over the place, you know. Story_ID: 117396 Speaker 1: As a matter of fact, I don't know whether I told you or not, but at one time James [James Brown] was playing the Apollo Theater [New York City, New York], and Gladys [Knight] had gone solo, one of those times--one of, the first time, when she had little Jimmy [James Newman]. Babe Brother [William Guest], Edward [Patten] and I went to New York, and, and we were determined to make it. And James Brown heard about--in the street, that the Pips were in New York. He sent the boys after us. They came and got us and said, "James wanna see y'all." So we went over to the Apollo, went upstairs in James' dressing room. And he said, "Babe Brother, Babe Brother (imitating James Brown), been thinking about it. I want you and the Pips to be my Flames (laughter). I (unclear) Y'all got a good dancing act, y'all choreographed and everything. I want y'all to be my Flames". I'm going like, well, let us think about it, James (laughter). So we had a meeting (laughter), we went back to our one room that we had two beds, and we had to share one of the beds. We went back there, and with the rats and the roaches, naturally. And we had a meeting, and we talked about it. And James, we loved James, but James had a reputation of, if you didn't do what, you know--James is the boss. And if you're a musician or if you--whatever, if you don't do what James tell you to do, James will find you and excuse the expression, but James will kick your ass (laughter). So, so we going like, well, that's our homey, but--ugh, well, let's continue to try to do it by ourselves (laughter). So I thanked him for the offer, you know, but that was, that was good of James 'cause he knew that--he wanted to keep us, he wanted us to stay in the business 'cause he knew how hard we had worked to get where we, we had gotten And I don't know, and, man, Jackie Wilson, James Brown, Sam Cooke, all of 'em--we weren't as close to Sam as we were with Jackie and [HM] B.B. King and-- Story_ID: 117397 Speaker 1: That's what, 'cause [HM] B.B. King, all this time he's being, is he being managed by the same management the whole time, Floyd Lieberman? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: He wasn't? Speaker 2: Yeah, well, no, no, no. [Sidney] Sid Seidenberg and Floyd Lieberman were managing B.B. King at the same time. Speaker 1: The whole time? Speaker 2: Yeah, but when, when Sid passed, when Sid passed, then Floyd, Floyd--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Took over. Speaker 2: --took over the management of Uncle B.B., of B.B. King. And after Floyd retired--I don't know who's managing B.B. King now. Speaker 1: I don't know, maybe he's not managed anymore. Speaker 2: I have no, I have no idea. I think it's a new company that-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --came in and is handling him now. Speaker 1: It is. Speaker 2: I don't know though (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: It's amazing. He's still traveling. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I went to his opening. He had the B.B. King Restaurant here in Las Vegas [Nevada] at the Mandalay Bay, is it? [The Mirage] Wherever the B.B. King Restaurant [B.B. King's Blues Club] is, I went, and that, that was--no, that wasn't the last time I saw Uncle B.B., but I went there to support him. And he, he, he had a lot of people on that show, and it was great. The food, I didn't like the food that well though. It was uhh. But anyway, it was great. The last time I saw Uncle B.B., was we played the AARP Convention in Florida at the Convention Center. As far as you could see was people, oh, my--they had rows and rows of people. You, you couldn't even see the back of the room it was so--and they had video, video screens at like--it looked as though there were about four rows of video screens. This row, the next row, that next row, and way back in the back, so people could see 'cause people were like that, "that". And anyway, we were on the show with Uncle B.B., and Uncle B.B. opened the show--no, or did he close? Did we come on first? Then he came on? I don't remember. Anyway, we were on the same show, great show, great show. They liked both of us. It was great. And as Uncle B.B. was going--oh, no, we closed 'cause Uncle B.B. was on his golf cart. They were taking him back to his dressing, dressing room or were they bringing him to the stage. Anyway, that was the last time I hugged Uncle B.B. That was the last time I saw him. Speaker 1: How long ago was that? Was that a few years ago? Speaker 2: That was like a year or two years ago or something like that. Speaker 1: I was gonna say, yeah--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, about two, about two years ago. Speaker 1: That's amazing. He's still, I mean-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I don't think he knows anything but the road, though. Speaker 2: Well, he always told Floyd and all of us that, that's the way he wanted to go out. Speaker 1: I'm telling you, I--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: That's the way he wants to leave here, just like that, just like that. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: And, hey, love you Uncle B.B. That's his world, that's his--that's, that's B.B.'s. That's him, man. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 117398 Speaker 1: I don't know whether it was because they were our shows and our room, and there was total creative freedom for personally, to grow and, and create. That's why I have to choose the Flamingo [Las Vegas Hotel and Casino in Las Vegas, Nevada] and the Tropicana [Las Vegas Hotel and Resort in Las Vegas, Nevada] as the two places that I enjoy performing the most. Yeah, and it was personal. I think I grew as a, as an artist. I think I grew as a person, during those performances and my somewhat solo career was born and enhanced there more so than any other place. Speaker 2: What years are we talking about? Speaker 1: Oh, let me see. Now, we were at the Flamingo for five years. That was in 200- and two [2002], three [2003], four [2004] and five [2005], I think, maybe, yeah. I think two, [2002], three [2003], four [2004], five [2005] and six [2006], I think. Speaker 2: Well, you also, you did Smokey Joe's Speaker 1: Whoa, "Smokey Joe's Cafe". Speaker 2: Right, and you did that. Wasn't that around the time or was that a little later? Was that 2009, 2000--no. Speaker 1: What, what-- Speaker 2: Smokey Joe's-- Speaker 1: What year was it? Smokey Joe's Cafe. Speaker 2: I was trying to see. Speaker 1: Two thousand and what. Let me see. Speaker 2: Wait a minute. Speaker 1: Smokey Joe's, Smokey Joe's. Speaker 2: No, no, 2000. Speaker 1: Smokey Joe's was in 2000? Speaker 2: It's in 2000. Speaker 1: So, let me see. Did I do Smokey Joe's before, before the Flamingo? Let me see, Smokey Joe's? Speaker 2: 'Cause I have--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, that's right. Yeah, Smokey Joe's was before the Flamingo. So the Flamingo was probably, the Flamingo was probably 2001, 2002, 2003 through 2004 and 2005. Story_ID: 117399 Speaker 1: Smokey Joe's was in 2000, yes. And that was quite a shock to me because I had never done theatrical work before in that capacity. My theatrical work was always something that I wanted to do (laughter), some of our songs and things like that. But Smokey Joe's was quite a learning experience for me, and I enjoyed it too because it took me out of the norm. It took me, it made me stretch myself to the point whereas, I had--to the point where I had to, I had to be restricted. I had to do what the script called for. I had to sing according to what the producers and dance to the way the producers wanted me to do it. And that was, that was foreign for me 'cause I was so used to being like a Pip (laughter). It was great. I enjoyed Smokey Joe's. It was really good. And, you know what? One of the other things is that when I sung "Spanish Harlem" in Smokey Joe's, and I had to follow my sister. After my little sister-Gladys [Knight] had nailed "I Who Have Nothing", and getting a standing ovation, and then they're rolling me on this, these steps, this stairway, and, and I'm going like (imitating the music) (singing), "There is a rose in Spanish Harlem", I'm going like, and, you know what it did for me? It made me think what Sammy Davis [Jr.] taught us a long time ago. These people were applauding and standing up and hollering and yelling and yelling and yelling. And the producers gave them a time, gave the audience to settle down a bit. But they were still kind of clamoring a little bit when, when they started my music. And so what I learned from Sammy, Sammy taught us, said, if you ever wanna get the attention of an audience who are not settled, speak with a lower tone or sing with a lower tone, and the people around them will make them shut up, to listen to what you're doing or what you're saying. So when they played my music, I said, (singing) "There is a rose in Spanish Harlem" and they would calm down and calm down, and then (singing) "A rose up in Spanish Harlem". Then I'd--so I used that to--and, you know, I was amazed that I could get that kind of applause and that kind of response from them after I finished my song. I don't know why I didn't think they were gonna clap for me (laughter). But they did, and it turned out really good, man. That was a great thing 'cause to me, that helped my, my confidence in being a solo performer because coming after my sister nailed 'em, laid in the aisles (laughter). Yeah, that was quite an accomplishment for me. Story_ID: 117400 Speaker 1: How did that, how did that come about, that whole project? Speaker 2: Smokey Joe's [Cafe]? Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: They had booked my sister [Gladys Knight] in it. She had, she had appeared on Broadway [New York City, New York] with the original cast, I think. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Yeah, she had appeared with the original cast [sic, Gladys Knight did not perform with the original cast in 1995, but did perform during the show's original Broadway run in 1999]. Then they wanted to build a Smokey Joe's around my sister because the people in Las Vegas [Nevada] would book it as long as my sister was the headliner. And that--they wanted to come to Vegas with Smokey--with Smokey Joe's. And that was a way for them to get into Vegas, and however, Gladys had stipulations in her deal with them. And she said that she wanted me to audition--she didn't want them to give me the role, but she wanted them to provide an audition for me for Smokey Joe's. And so I went to audition in New York. And I, apparently, I did okay. I didn't do well on the ballet dancing part where you lift the girl up in "Spanish Harlem", where you lift her up and dance and fly across the--I didn't do so well in that category (laughter), that category. The choreographer said, "Have you ever did any--have you ever done any ballroom dancing, Bubba?" I said, "No". And, and so they said, "Okay, well, we'll teach you." And when they were teaching me what I was to do with picking the girl up and everything, I was so embarrassed 'cause where I was supposed to grab her--I grabbed her--I grabbed her in the chest, and I was picking her up with her breast in my hand, and she's going, "Oh, no, oh, no, this will, this will never do" (laughter). So I, I was kind of embarrassed, but I didn't know, by not doing ballroom dancing or anything like that, I didn't know where to grab her. So I just grabbed the first--anyway, that didn't work out so well. So, what they did was, they worked around that and the rest of it that they taught me, like the Broadway, (singing the music), they taught me all of that in that one session. And I did that, apparently, I did it okay 'cause, long story short, I passed. They put me in the show. And it was quite an experience. Oh, I gotta tell you about this. The first night that we performed Smokey Joe's, I mean the first night that I was going in the show, because they let, they had me to rehearse behind stage while the person who was doing my role was still doing it. So I was rehearsing behind stage, and, and well, I learned my part and everything. And then the night that they told me that I had to go on, I was so excited, and I'm, yeah. It was at Caesar's Palace [Las Vegas Hotel and Casino in Las Vegas, Nevada]. And I went on, and I was doing great, the first half. And I went off to do one of the changes that they had, and my wardrobe person--and, you know, I don't put no blame on her, but my wardrobe person didn't have the change that I was supposed to have on because, you know, in theater, it's--you don't miss ques. You go. And she didn't have the outfit that she was supposed to have for me to put my outfit on. She had another outfit that came later in the show. And when I didn't go out there, the producers and the directors ran backstage, "Bubba, what's the problem?" And I'm going like, oh, no. I missed my que. I don't have my clothes. I'm standing there with my draws on. I don't have no clothes--I don't have clothes to put on. And the wardrobe lady that was working with me, she just started boohooing and boohooing and boo. So they, they told me said, "That's okay. Just get ready for your next spot in the show." So I got ready for that, but she was just crying and crying because she knew she had missed a wardrobe que. And it messed me up. And so they forgave me (laughter), but they really let--they locked in, if you can't do the job. So. Speaker 1: So she was gone. Speaker 2: Yep. Story_ID: 117401 Speaker 1: So Bubba-- Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter). Speaker 1: What do you think, you know, 'cause you know what, what--it strikes me is that in telling your story, and especially with Gladys Knight and the Pips, I mean when you took in your own hands, sort of like, you know, when you were doing our own music and things in different places, it was more successful. Speaker 2: When I was-- Speaker 1: When, when--the group always functioned as a group, but sometimes, like, you know, a lot of your hits, you actually took control of those things, and you were more successful, like your songs (unclear)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh, you mean in creating and, and creating like licks and backgrounds and all those kinds of things in coming together, you're right. Speaker 1: When you look back on it (unclear). Speaker 2: Yeah, when I look back on it, and I'm a tell you one thing. When we were at Casablanca Records, and we recorded that, that album, the first album that we did with Art Wright [Arthur Wright], our musical producer and conductor at that time, we did a song called, "If I Could Bring Back Yesterday" [1977], that I led. That was the best lead vocal, I feel like, that I ever laid down. And I'll tell you why. It's because, once again, I thought about my wife, Kathy [Kathleen Knight], and Kate--when I was singing that song, I, I was singing it to Kate 'cause we were sep--we were apart then. And I think she was even married by then. And the lyrics, the lyrics to the song was, "If I could bring back yesterday, I'd be a happy man". Boy, I sung that song and if, if anybody get a chance to play that particular song of the Pips on that album, and I think it was "At Last", the "At Last" album, you play "Bring Back Yesterday", and when I finished recording that song, I went in the studio, and I sat down--I was exhausted. And I sat down in the studio, and the producer came over to me, Art Wright, he said, he said, "Bubba, boy, you had some hurt on you". (Laughter) He said, "I can tell you had some hurt on you, Bubba Knight". And that's what came out on the record. Man, I was, I was missing Kathy, I was missing Gladys [Knight], I was missing my group. Ah, and that song, "Bring Back Yesterday, I'll be a Happy Man", I'll never forget that, 'cause, you know what, if anybody ask me what my favorite song was (laughter), I think I'd tell 'em, "Bring Back Yesterday". You never heard of it (laughter), but it's my favorite song. (simultaneous) Speaker 1: Can you sing a few bars of that? Do you know the-- Speaker 2: (Singing) "Yesterday, [let me see], you were mine, baby, I was so very glad, you brought sunshine into my life, oh, what a good time we had, but oh, whoa, baby, I'm such a lonely man. The heartache, pain and misery, it crept into my life again, life again, but oh, oh, oh, baby". Oh, God, just a part right there, and then it gets to, and then the hook is, (singing) "If I could bring back yesterday, I'd be a happy man, oh, oh, if I could bring back yesterday, I'd be a happy man (beat, beat, beat), the heartache, pain and misery--" I can't remember all of it. It's been so long (laughter). That was part of it, but I loved that song, man. And you know what? That was so long ago, I'm gonna go back, and I'm gonna, I'm gonna listen to that song and learn it all over again because I don't know, I may record that, I may record that record again. Speaker 1: You know, Bubba--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh, God. Speaker 1: Because talking to you-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Story_ID: 117402 Speaker 1: It's because you seem so young and vibrant, and still planning and doing lots of things like-- Speaker 2: That's right, and I'm gonna keep on moving. I'm gonna, I'm teaching myself to play guitar. Well, you know who my mentor is, [HM] B.B. King. And when I heard that, when I was little, when I heard Uncle B.B. say that he taught himself to play guitar, and he can play like that, I can too. So I'm teaching myself guitar. I'm teaching myself to play the piano and read music because I'm not a great reader. I can, I can read a little bit, but I'm teaching myself to be a better reader, and I told this to [HM] Benjamin Wright. I told Benjamin Wright, I said, one day, Benjamin Wright, who was our music conductor, I said, "One of these days, you're gonna do--you're gonna call me, and you're gonna have me to sit in as a musician like you do the rest of these musicians who sit down there, and you put a piece of music in front of 'em and say, 'Okay, one, two, three, four'--[mimicking music]. That's what I wanna do." And I wanna be a public speaker. I wanna be able to speak in public and speak in a way that has technique, where I can deliver an opening, a middle and a conclusion where the audience that I'm speaking to will get a lot out of what I'm trying to say. And I wanna explain to 'em in a way where they will get what I'm saying, what I'm speaking about. And I wanna do that because so many people come to me and ask me to, if I would speak at their functions. My wife, Kathy [Kathleen Knight], is a member of the Delta's [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority] and The Links [Inc.], and the Girl Friends [Incorporated] and all of those organizations know me, all of the people. They know me, and they have different functions and they ask me to be a part of those functions, like the Deltas, I was their first honoree at their Tribute Awards. It was wonderful. It was wonderful. I, I--but I wanna be able to speak at these functions if they should ask me, and I've been invited to emcee some shows that they're gonna have and things like that. And I don't wanna turn 'em down. Speaker 1: So this is what you're looking for in this part of your life then? Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 117403 Speaker 1: So let me ask you, what do you--what is our whole thought about the entertainment business, and, and maybe the changes that have happened with it? I mean now there're only two--I think there're only two record companies, labels? Universal [Music Group] and-- Speaker 2: I don't--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --something else. Speaker 2: Yeah, you know what? I'm at a loss for what's happening as far as the record business is concerned, the entertainment business, all of that. I'm at a loss, and that's one of the reasons I feel so blessed when we go to any venue and there are people still there to see us, let's me know that what we did in the past, the "Midnight Train to Georgia", the "Neither One of Us" [sic, "Neither One of Us (Wants to Be the First to Say Goodbye)"], "The Best that's Ever Happened" [sic, "Best Thing That Ever Happened to Me"], all of those things are still alive today, and these people are still wanting to hear them performed and see them performed. And, because the business now, I don't know--I wouldn't even know how to put a record out right now, with YouTube and the Internet and all of that kind--I, I don't, I don't know. There are no record stores. I'll go to Barnes & Noble, you know, the book store, to pick up "Blurred Lines", Robin Thicke's new record, you know. And, and I, I went to Target, Target and picked up a old CD of Marvin Gaye's 'cause I wanted to compare the two songs because they're such--there's such a controversy about "Blurred Lines" and, and, and one of, part--let me see, what's the name of it? Speaker 1: "What's Going On"? Speaker 2: No, no, no, not "What's Going On". It's (singing) Party, give it up." "Give It Up" [sic, "Got to Give it Up"], that's the name of it. There's a controversy about "Give It Up" and "Blurred Lines" and they're saying that, the word is that "Blurred Lines" are plagiarizing "Give It Up" from Marvin Gaye. So I bought both of 'em. And I'm listening to both of them, right before we had this interview. I haven't had a chance to really make a close comparison, but "Blurred Lines" does have a, a "Give It Up" feel to it, (imitating the music). It has that feel to it, but I don't know if it's too close to be considered plagiarism, plagiarism or not, you know. So, I'm gonna listen to them, but it's such a good feel on "Blurred Lines". They, they've added a lot of things in "Blurred Lines" like that (high pitched holler). That's, that's Michael [Jackson], that holler, that hollering thing. I don't--they probably sampled, sampled that from one of Michael's records. I don't know. But it's a good record. I like it. I don't particularly like some of the lyrical content. Story_ID: 117404 Speaker 1: And that's [lyrical content] a problem for me with some of the music today. I don't like using the "B" word and the "N" word and the, all that. I, I--that, I think, you know, I feel like you can be creative enough to get your point across without going there, with those negatives, and making it, and making those words become words that's okay for everybody to say. That's my problem with using those words. And that was part of my problem with some of the comics and some of the people in our business in using the "N" word. That was a problem to me, you know. I know I'm old school, and all of that, but coming up from the South, and those words being directed at us, for our skin color, and in a negative, in a negative way, it's hard for me to be okay with anybody, my people, them, whoever, using the word. So, I don't know. I probably get a lot of flak from some of the young comics and those kind of things who use it like, you know, like nothing. But I, I feel like if they had come from where we came from with it, they'd have more of a sense of, "Nah, well, I'm not gonna help them". I'm not gonna give them a license to use that against me, just because I use it. I was so upset with my children when I went over to Gorman [Bishop Gorman High School in Las Vegas, Nevada], predominantly white school that we sent the kids to. And my, my nephew, my son, both of my nephews and my son were stars on the football team over there. And they had a lot of white friends. And they used to come over to the house, and that whole kind of thing. And I would hear my, my nephews and my son using the "N" word, like brotherly. I pulled 'em off to the side, I said, "No, do not do that because you're giving a license to some people who have used that in a negative con--in a negative way against me, your mom, your grandmother, your--all of those people. That's negative. Don't give them that license because if you do it, what's gonna be said is that, 'Well, you say it. It's all right for me to say it'. And that's where you're taking it to. You can't do that, man. You're taking us back, you're taking us back by doing that. And I don't want my children and my family to be a part of taking us back as hard as your auntie and your mama and I have worked in order to get past them calling us the "N" word down South with our music and running us out of town because of the color of our skin and that kind of thing and telling us after the concert is over, y'all gotta get outta town. You can't sleep in our hotels. You know, so don't give them license to put us back. And that's what you're doing when you do that." So. Story_ID: 117405 Speaker 1: When you look at the contributions of black people to American music, can you talk about that? Speaker 2: Yes, the contributions to black music has been a tremendous, tremendous, solid foundation to the music industry, period, because all the music now that is created, is created from that foundation that black music has made, everything, gospel, blues, all of the hip-hop and everything that's, that's on the air, that's out there now, came from that same mold of black music. And you know what, I was thinking about the song, "Amazing Grace, how sweet the sound, save a wretch like me", now that had to come from--in my opinion, that was somebody out there singing and humming, singing and humming and it was picked up on and made into what it is today, a song that everybody knows, that's gonna go on forever, that this person says that he wrote, you know. And, and I don't know. I don't wanna be--but that's what I feel. That's my person--personal opinion. Everything that we've done--I remember when [Morris] Mac Davis used to tell us that--he used to come to the Royal Peacock [Atlanta, Georgia] and watch performers. Elvis Presley watched Jackie Wilson and them. Every, all of 'em. Black music is the foundation. But somewhere, the Beatles. They'll tell you Little Richard and Chuck Berry, and all of those guys gave them what they have as far as musicians, as far as artists, as far as any of the, the white artists who are out here. You know, to me it all came from humming in the fields, and us making our music that, you know, they take and blow up and become super, super, super, super, super, super stars. Example, I was telling you a story about "The Way We Were" [sic, "Hero", also known as "Wind Beneath My Wings], that [HM] Larkin Arnold and Jack couldn't hear. Lou Rawls put it out, we put it out, Bette Midler put it out (laughter), and I love Bette, I love Bette Midler. That's my buddy, but Bette put it out and, poom, you know. So black music is a foundation for all music in my opinion. And I'm happy and proud to be a part of it to make my little drop-in-the-bucket contribution (laughter). Story_ID: 117406 Speaker 1: Bubba, so what do you want your legacy to be? Speaker 2: You know, I haven't really given it a whole lot of thought, but I would like to be remembered as a subliminal force behind a successful organization that reached a pinnacle and that will be remembered as long as there's music and as long as people like Sammy Davis, Jr. will be remembered. I wanna be remembered like that, as a contributor, as a person who made a difference in the music industry and helped us to get to where, where we wanted to be. Most of us all, I wanna be remembered as one of the best husbands somebody could ever have, my wife [Kathleen Knight]. I wanna be remembered as the best dad, the best grandpa, the best family man who used every ounce of his strength to keep cohesiveness and to keep a family together and to hold the group together and I don't know. That's just top, coming off the top of my head right now. It'll be great if I was remembered as a great musician and a great orator and a great guitar player (laughter) and a great artist, like the Sammy Davis, Jr.'s of the world. Man, if I could be remembered like that, you know, 'cause Sammy was--he had it all, he could do it all. And I think that's one of the things that inspire me to do all these different musical things because you could call on Sammy and ask Sammy to, "Hey, Sammy, dance a little". He'd dance. "Sammy, play the drums a little", played the drums. "Sammy, sing." He would sing. Sammy could act. He could do all of those things, man. I wanna be--I wanna be like, like that, and then they'd say, "Bubba Knight could do it all, man. He did (laughter), he did it all, you know. He was a good businessman as well." So all of those things. So I guess that's a collage of things that I wanna be remembered by. Most of all, I think they'd say "He loved people". I want 'em to say, "Bubba Knight loved people, man. He was a peaceful man and people loved him." That's a lot, huh (laughter). I wanna be remembered in a good way. Oh, boy. Golly. Merald, Jr. Elizabeth, Elizabeth Knight's boy. Yep. Speaker 1: That's it...