 Story_ID: 101079 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: Jemadari Omowale Kamara, that's J-E-M-A-D-A-R-I, Omowale, O-M-O-W-A-L-E, Kamara, K-A-M-A-R-A. Speaker 1: Okay, now is there a story behind your name? Speaker 2: Yes, there is (laughing). Well, first of all, Jemadari is a name that I have taken, I was born William Cyrus Swan, II. And Omowale is actually the first name that I was given and it was--it means "child who has returned home." I was given to me by a family in Abeokuta, Nigeria upon my visit there in 1970, during a period of about a year, a little more than a year that I spent in Africa, when I was traveling and studying and perhaps I can explain more later. Speaker 1: Yes, right, we'll get in detail later, but - (simultaneous) Speaker 2: Kamara is a traditional surname is in West Africa that I assumed with my family. It is variously Bambera, Mandinka and from West Africa region, has various interpretations including "one who is a teacher." Jemadari is a Swahili--actually a title, literally a title, in Swahili. And I had participated in a large extended family that was based on the east coast between Boston and Philadelphia and its part of the extended family. This is a name that was given to me, it literally the name would be used a title as one who is a General or a Leader of a legion. But the implication was one who is a leader in the struggle. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And what is your--oh can you spell William Cyrus Swan for us so we can get that right? Speaker 2: William, W-I- (laughing) William, Cyrus is C-Y-R-U-S, and Swan, S-W-A-N. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and what is your--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: And that's "the Second." Speaker 1: Okay. Most--lot people use "Junior" instead of "Second" is there a reason why you used "the second" instead of "Junior"? Speaker 2: Yes, because I was actually named for my grandfather, not my father, so in skipping a generation, I was given the name "the Second." And it was also, my brother, who's Edward McAllen Swan, Jr., was named for my father, and his brother's name was William, but we have a different middle name, so it's to distinguish that they used Second. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Detroit, Michigan and November 25, 1948, Thanksgiving Day. Speaker 1: Okay, 1948? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, sir what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm a teacher (laughing) Speaker 1: Okay and you have a position though, so you should tell us. Speaker 2: Yes. I'm Chairman of the Africana Studies Department, currently at the University of Massachusetts, Boston. I'm also Director of--Founding Director of the Center for African Caribbean and Community Development at the University of Massachusetts, Boston. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, what is today's date? Speaker 2: September 11, 2007. Speaker 1: And where are we, at the present time? Speaker 2: We're at the African American Master Artists-In-Residence Program, 76 Atherton Street in Jamaica Plain, [Boston,] Massachusetts. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 101080 Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that management compels me to ask and they only require a short answer. First question is, do you have a favorite food and what is it? Speaker 2: Favorite food (laughing) favorite food, I--it would be chicken, I guess. I, I like peanut (laughing) peanut stew, peanut soup chicken. Speaker 1: Okay, that's a West African dish (unclear). Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Ground Nut Stew. Speaker 2: Yes, Ground Nut Stew. Mafe is what it's called in--. Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Favorite color, probably a burnt orange, burnt orange. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Earth tone. Speaker 1: You have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Fall. Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: When I can get away, Africa (laughing) and particularly West Africa. Speaker 1: Okay and the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Favorite phrase or saying, I'm not sure it's a favorite, I mean there's so many particularly that come from the African tradition which has strongly influenced my life. But my favorite one, the, you know, in each of our lives we, we all attempt to plan, to guide our lives and to lay out the course it's only when we understand that it's not our plan, and we submit, that we can open ourselves to the real direction and course of our lives. Story_ID: 101081 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, I'm gonna ask you about your family history. Now I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side, but we'll start with your mother's side. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell for us, please? Speaker 2: Elizabeth, maiden name Mae, M-A-E, Stokes [Swan]. Speaker 1: Okay and what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: May 18, 1910, Cleveland, Ohio. Speaker 1: Okay. Now what do you know about your mother's side of the family? How far back can you trace the ancestors on that side and what are the stories on that side? Speaker 2: Guess we can go back three generations, I don't know that much actually, I have some photos which I can share with you perhaps later. Her family--there were two generations in Cleveland and before that, they came from Kentucky. Speaker 1: What part of Kentucky, do you know? Speaker 2: Don't know. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Her father [John Thomas Stokes, Sr.] was the eldest of ten children, she had one sibling. Her grandmother [Mary Hannah Stokes], her grandmother was, was maternal, I think, grandmother half Native American. Speaker 1: You know what group that was there any tradition as to what group she was from? Speaker 2: No, but I always told that they were Blackfoot, but (laughing) I don't, I don't know. Speaker 1: That always get a big laugh from genealogist, people say that but its-- Speaker 2: I'm not sure. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But you know other than, it's not a lot of history of the family. Speaker 1: So it's not a story about why they came up from Kentucky now? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Now four generations back, this that places--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Three, three generations. Speaker 1: Three, okay. Speaker 2: That I would know far--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: That they would be in Kentucky three generations back? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Does that place us in, near the end of the Civil War or--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, so--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Her father was a chauffeur. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The mother [Lillian Stokes], as far as I know was a homemaker. Speaker 1: Did her father drive anybody famous around or? Speaker 2: I don't know how famous, they were rich though. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Speaker 2: (Laughing) I seen the car they had, they had a picture of them with the car and everything and he would take the people south. And we he'd go south, he'd send them back photographs and postcards. They make these photographs look like a postcard, and he'd send those back. But because of, I guess the relationship he had developed with them; they allowed her to use their address to go to school. And she sent to Cleveland Heights High School, and which is an all white community. And was through that and her--and I think her mother's real inspiration, encouraged to go on to college. Story_ID: 101082 Speaker 1: So she [Elizabeth Mae Stokes Swan] was the first person in the family to attend college, your mother? (simultaneous) Speaker 2: Her family. (simultaneous) Speaker 1: In her family, yeah. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She went to Howard [University in Washington, D.C.] for a year, then returned home and her mother became--was ill. Speaker 1: So this is about 1928, '27 [1927], '28 [1928]? Speaker 2: That's right, this is yeah, late, late twenties, yeah, about '28 [1928], '29 [1929] in there, '30 [1930]. Mother encouraged her to go on to school, she was--she worked when she came home in the park with young people. She was very outdoors, athletic type person, and she wanted to go into physical education, was encouraged by some people who worked in the Recreation Department to do that. The best school, at that point, allegedly in that area was called Sergeant [College], which was the Physical Education School at Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: At? Speaker 2: Boston University. Speaker 1: Okay. I'm confused now, was your mother was in--she went back to Cleveland [Ohio]. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And then. Speaker 2: But she was encouraged to go into the field of--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: Oh, okay go to Boston to--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Yeah, to school, but she could not go to Sergeant at that time because of discrimination, she wound up going to school in Ypsilanti, Michigan. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: At what was Eastern Norm-at-- (simultaneous) Speaker 1: Eastern Michigan. Speaker 2: Michigan Normal. Speaker 1: Oh, it's Michigan Normal then? Speaker 2: Michigan Normal [Michigan State Normal College, now Eastern Michigan University in Ypsilanti, Michigan]. Speaker 1: Normal school is a teacher's school, right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And she went for teacher, physical education. It's there that she met my father [Edward McCallan Swan, Sr.] and in the facilities there, you know they could not--blacks couldn't live in dormitories and there were homes in the community and there was a residential home for where people in the community would open it up and--like a boarding house for students. And there was one for the girls--for the black girls and one for the black boys, and that's where they met. My--well so that's where they met, my parents. Speaker 1: This was about 1930 then, I guess? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: There about, okay, all right. Story_ID: 101083 Speaker 1: Now did your mother [Elizabeth Mae Stokes Swan] have, have stories about--is there a story about how your parents met that your mother tells or did that they both--or do they both agree on a story of how they met and first started dating? Speaker 2: Not really, my mother, my mother really didn't talk very much about her family. As I said, she had one sibling whom I never met. When--after she had married, she went home, her mother was sick, eventually died, her father was elderly, and she took care of him. And when she got married, she moved to Detroit [Michigan], and apparently the brother, who was in Cleveland [Ohio], she felt did not live up to his obligations as a son to the father and she ultimately brought her father to Detroit to live with her. After sometime, he, I think, was lonely for his family, he had--had had nine siblings, himself who were all in Cleveland. And she felt taking him away from that environment at that age was just unfair to him. And was ultimately, he went home to one of the sisters and died, but she became estranged from her brother. Because she felt he did not live up to those obligations, I never met him, and she did not have a close relationship with her aunts and uncles. Speaker 1: So you don't know where--you never met him or haven't had any contact with him--you don't know if he's still alive right now or? Speaker 2: Whom? Speaker 1: The brother, the uncle, I guess, your uncle? Speaker 2: He's dead. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I had no relationship with him. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I did with cousins, they were her cousins who had moved to Detroit [Michigan] and so we had a relationship and she--she just recently died within the last couple of years at 95. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so she was the matriarch, really of that part of the family. And so the cousins who are in Detroit and so forth she had a close relationship with. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But not the other part of the family. Story_ID: 101084 Speaker 1: All right, now, can--did your mother [Elizabeth Mae Stokes Swan] have any stories about Howard [University in Washington, D.C.] or--now she was involved in physical education, you said. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: That's what the field she went into. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: She was only there for a year. I gather she enjoyed it and so forth and partied hard. And but that was, in an kind of academic environment for her, I think the first all-black experience. Because she been to this white high school in Cleveland [Ohio], so I don't know if it was her decision or her parent's decision that she come home after that year (laughing) but I think it was mixed part, because of her mother's illness. Speaker 1: Well I ask because you know because you know Howard was exciting school to go to you know then and now, a lot of interesting personalities on campus. Oh, and one more thing about your mother's side of the family, are the Stokes related to any of the--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Other famous Stokes in-- Speaker 2: The Carl and so forth? Speaker 1: Yeah, you got Carl Stokes, you got Speaker 2: Not to our knowledge. Speaker 1: You got the Rembert Stokes down in Wilberforce [Ohio] and you know. Speaker 2: Yeah, not to our knowledge. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: But I don't know, I have not done tracing through the Kentucky way or who got you know who got linked with whom, so I'm not sure of that. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 101085 Speaker 1: Now can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Edward McCallan Swan, M-C-C-A-L-L-A-N, Sr. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: March 26, 1910, Detroit, Michigan. Speaker 1: And what do you know about your father's side of the family, do they have a tradition of always being in Detroit or did they come for some other place? Speaker 2: My father's father [William Cyrus Swan] came to Detroit from Bermuda. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Came to Michigan from Bermuda. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: To attend University of Michigan Law School [Ann Arbor, Michigan] and he graduated from there in 1896 or 1897. Speaker 1: Now he would've of been, I would imagine one of the few black lawyers in the city of Detroit. Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: In those days, 1896, 1897 there weren't a whole lot of black lawyers in Detroit. So are there stories about him that,--there's gotta be some good stories about him coming from Bermuda, any Bermuda stories, first of all about what his family was doing in Bermuda, and their background? Speaker 2: This is interesting, because--well first of all, I never knew him, he died when my father was three. And so my father really didn't know him, my--his mother, after he graduated from Law School, he returned to Bermuda, married my father's mother [Natalie Perinchief Swan], brought her to Detroit where she stayed until her death, which was when my father was eighteen. And--so my father and he had one brother from that point on really raised themselves. They worked their way through school, my grandfather's law practice was at that point, obviously he was three, he did not know very much about that, and was not in practice that long during that period. Because it was in 1913 that he died. Speaker 1: That'd give him about fifteen years, I guess, to have practiced. Speaker 2: Yeah about, that's right, about fifteen years. Speaker 1: Are there any stories about those days and what was going on in Detroit? Speaker 2: Not, not from my father or through--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: Those were those days of black bottom in Detroit. Speaker 2: Oh yes, was he--was emerging during this time, now. Story_ID: 101086 Speaker 1: The stories that I have are those that I have acquired by actually doing research on that part of the family. This year [2007], you know is the 200th Anniversary of the Abolition of the Slave Trade by the English. And because of that, the English records archival records tend to be much better, certainly than those in the United States. And in Bermuda, the archival record was maintained by the church, and so I have gone to Bermuda and gone back through the records that are now held in the National Archives. And because of the segregation in the churches, they churches maintained those in the Anglican Church, they were members of that Anglican Parrish. And have been able to go back about prior to my father, five generations. Until the records are basically in the archives, it simply says "Willie, Slave Male" and it gives the age. I've not been able to then go back and try and trace the you know the slave ship logs and that, I've not been able to do that. Speaker 2: Well that's remarkable though that, I mean, well, for a lot of people who didn't--don't they can trace their family back that far, I mean that's, that's something to be able to do that. Speaker 1: It is and it--I need to do further documentation on it and have been able to go back through largely marriages or death records and just try to put the pieces together. Sometime--English weren't really creative with names so you get a lot of "Williams" and "Edwards" and (laughing) you know the names get repeated a lot. But you have to try and you know seam the pieces together. But it obviously in doing that, and not having a lot of stories to accompany it, it also raises a lot of questions. One of which for me is that how coming from a British colony, the size of Bermuda, which is like 20, 26 miles long, it's not a big place. Could a black male [Kamara's paternal grandfather, William Cyrus Swan] be prepared in the 1890s be prepared to go to the University of Michigan Law School [Ann Arbor, Michigan], to even get in. Now I can only assume that first of all, they didn't know he was black and with a name like that, coming from Bermuda probably assumed he wasn't black. They probably never even thought that he would be black, that's my first assumption. Story_ID: 101087 Speaker 1: Are there any stories of discrimination of him [Kamara's paternal grandfather, William Cyrus Swan] struggling to get in, or finding you know--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Well remember now too this is you know Plessy, Plessy v. Ferguson, 1896, I mean understanding the nature of American society in the way racism had become both de facto established and by this point de jure institutionalized the--that is an assumption that I have made in relationship to Bermuda. But I wanna know how did he get prepared [for the University of Michigan Law School in Ann Arbor, Michigan]? Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because there's no universities in Bermuda. Now in going through the records, what I've found that there is a tradition of independent black institutions on the island, through secondary level, that were very good. In fact, my great grandfather was on--great, great, I guess, grandfather was on the board of one--of the founding board of one of these institutions on the island. So I can see that there was this tradition of education, autonomous black education on the island. Secondly, I do know that he was an active member of the Episcopal Church, which is the corollary of the Anglican- Speaker 1: Anglican, yeah. Speaker 2: --Church. And so was my father [Edward McCallan Swan, Sr.], my father was very active in one of the black parishes. The home that I grew up in, until I was late in elementary school, was my grandfather's home that he had built there. And where my father grew up and in that neighborhood, there were two black parishes, Episcopal parishes. And I think that it is a linkage through the Anglican Church that got him to Michigan. Speaker 1: Now where-- Okay, okay. Speaker 2: And subsequently--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: Yeah, what neighborhood is that, is that east side or-- Speaker 2: West side. Speaker 1: West, okay. Speaker 2: West side, mid-west side, Grand River, right at Northwestern High School. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My father went into Northwestern, along with my uncle, they were outstanding athletes, all state track and football, which is how they went to Michigan Normal [Michigan State Normal College, now Eastern Michigan University in Ypsilanti, Michigan], at the time. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They were athletes there and by the-that time I--my grandmother [Natalie Perinchief Swan] had died and they would work on the lake freighters, stevedores and so forth, to pay their way through school. Story_ID: 101088 Speaker 1: Now, your father [Edward McCallan Swan, Sr.] went to Northwestern High School [Detroit, Michigan], you said. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And is that the same neighborhood that [HM] Damon [J.] Keith and you know a lot of notable Detroit--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: West Side, yes, yes, West Side. Speaker 1: That particular Old West Side neighborhood. Speaker 2: Old West Side neighborhood, that's right. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: Over by McGraw and West Grand Boulevard, Grand River area, yes. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Tireman. Speaker 1: So, but nobody in the family knows where your grandfather [William Cyrus Swan] went to college or anything you know but-- Speaker 2: No, I don't, and it's just more research that I have to do. I went to--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: And in the 1890s could it not be that you could pass an exam and get into a Law School by passing an exam. I mean it could've been in those days you know 'cause things have changed. Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm sure he did. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I'm sure he did, I'm sure he was qualified, you just passed the exam. When he showed up, I don't know what happened but (laughing) he got through, he graduated. Speaker 1: It wasn't but thirty years before that that a man could study the law books and pass the bar. Speaker 2: Pass the bar. Speaker 1: To become like, like [President Abraham] Lincoln did, he never went to law school. Speaker 2: Um-hum, yeah, that's true. Speaker 1: So. Speaker 2: But I don't know again, I did the Baccalaureate, and when I went to the Law School, their current archive only went back to like 1898 and before that, I don't know they I think were buried somewhere. So I just won't--could not get access to it and I've not been able to pursue it further, but I need to. Speaker 1: Yeah, it's interesting, there are some connections at University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] though even to Africa, there were some Professor that Martin Delaney met at University of Michigan on his way to Abeokuta [Nigeria] in 1859 believe it or not. Maybe we'll talk about that later (laughing). Speaker 2: No, I'd like to. Speaker 1: There's somebody there that knew something, you know it was doing Missionary work over there and been there at the University of Michigan. So it's funny how now these connections can come up. Story_ID: 101089 Speaker 1: But so now did your father [Edward McCallan Swan, Sr.] talk about growing up in Detroit [Michigan] and what it was like for him growing up there with his father [William Cyrus Swan] as a lawyer and all that? Speaker 2: Yes, he did. And it wasn't particular easy, because his father, again his father died when he was very young and so it was his mother with who whom he grew up. She was a hairdresser and they continued to have a relationship with the family--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: Okay, so your father's about five, I'm sorry when your--his father died I guess, right? Speaker 2: Excuse me? Speaker 1: His father died when he was in 195--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Three. Speaker 1: He was three? Speaker 2: Three. Speaker 1: So his father died in 19? Speaker 2: Thirteen [1913]. Speaker 1: Thirteen, okay, '13, all right, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. He really didn't have a relationship with him. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The--but they continued to have the relationship with the family through the mother in Bermuda, and so it is really with her family that I have continued to have a relationship with the Perinchiefs. Speaker 1: How do you spell that name? Speaker 2: P-E-R-I-N-C-H-I-E-F, Perinchief. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The Perinchiefs and the Robinsons, which is that side of the family. From the records, it seems as if my father had a--my grandfather had a brother; I can find no record though of him either being married or what happened with him, so I, I just don't know. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My--through my mother's family, we've had rather close relationships with them and continued, their all cousins. And my one cousin who is Lois Perinchief, who is the daughter of my wife's, my wife's sister and cousin, 'cause there's intermarriage on the island, which is rather common, became the first female Mayor in St. George's on the island. And she retired a few years ago, but still lives on the island. Speaker 1: Okay, she's the Mayor of St. George? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Story_ID: 101090 Speaker 1: Now, when did your father [Edward McCallan Swan, Sr.]--your father graduated from east--well Michigan Normal School [Michigan State Normal College, now Eastern Michigan University in Ypsilanti, Michigan], right and then--I know he became active in the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], but what did he do for a living, I mean? Speaker 2: Well, he--after graduation, I gather went to work for the Governor of the State of Michigan in some position. And subsequently became the Executive Secretary of the NAACP, staff position, which is in the 40s [1940s]. After that and I gathered he did some you know some very important work during that time. Speaker 1: Now. Speaker 2: I'm sorry between working for the Governor and the NAACP; he was the Director of FEPC [Fair Employment Practice Committee], during the war. And then after the war, went with the NAACP. Speaker 1: Okay, so after the war he got involved with the NAACP? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so he's in his 40's I guess then, right, no, he's in his 30's. Speaker 2: Thirties. Speaker 1: He's in his thirties. Speaker 2: Thirties. Speaker 1: Thirties. Speaker 2: And you know really helped to build that Chapter in Detroit [Michigan]. Speaker 1: Now, now that's significant because NAACP in Detroit is a powerful organization, it's--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Largest chapter in the country. Speaker 1: They have the largest fund raiser in the country with three rostrums I think now and I don't know how many thousands of people show up for the dinner, I mean you know it's, it's something. You talk about Detroit NAACP, so it's not a-- Speaker 2: And about that there were a lot of stories. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so you were exposed all this growing up, yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: And because the region my father's region was was Michigan, Indiana and Kentucky, and he would have to go out on different cases and so forth. And I was very, very young, but he would tell me stories later about what it was he did and what the NAACP did and why it existed. And what discrimination was and you know, so I you know growing up, I was well aware of what that dynamic was about and what he did. And why he felt it was important to both serve and defend on the interest of black folks. And they talked about you know lynching and what lynching was about and what their role had been in the--they also talked about the difficulty in getting, particularly members of what was perceived the black professional class to support the organization. And the doctors and the lawyers and who was supporting and who wouldn't support it and why. And kind of lip service that was given, and the difficulty in building that base, for the organization, of support. Speaker 1: Now, now- Speaker 2: There are a couple of big incidents I think before you were born, right, just before you were born with--Dr. Ossian Sweet case. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Where his house was mobbed, this is in the '40s [1940s]. Speaker 1: Forties [1940s] Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: It's before I was born. Speaker 2: And then the riot. Speaker 1: Riots. Speaker 2: Just before you were born in '46 [1946] or '47 [1947], I think. Speaker 1: Yes, the riots. Speaker 2: Supposedly babies thrown off the Belle Isle Bridge [MacArthur Bridge]. Speaker 1: The Belle Isle Bridge, exactly, exactly, yes. And He told me stories about that in the race riots. Both then and told--in the earlier periods in 1919 Riots and so forth. So he did discuss those kinds of things with me. Speaker 2: Now did you meet some of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] luminaries like [Supreme Court Justice] Thurgood Marshall and others. Speaker 1: No, I did not. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I did not, no, not growing up. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. So I know some people we interviewed that some of these guys come--some of these brothers would come to their homes. Speaker 1: Their house, no, I did not. Speaker 2: That sort of thing, okay. But--now how long did he stay as the head? Speaker 1: Oh, I don't know the exact number of years. Speaker 2: But it was into your childhood that he was-- Speaker 1: Yes, into my childhood, early, and then subsequently he left that to go into the private sector. Story_ID: 101091 Speaker 1: And [Kamara's father, Edward McCallan Swan, Sr.] took a position as the manager of one of the two hotels where blacks could go. Speaker 2: Now what where the two, the--? Speaker 1: One was called The Gotham [Hotel] the other the one was called The Carlton Plaza. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And he was the manager of The Carlton Plaza, they're both on John R [Street] in Detroit [Michigan], and so he worked there for a number of years as manager of hotel. It was the hot spot; I mean (laughing) down on John R was like (laughing) you know it was real, very alive (laughing). Speaker 2: Now this was, was it a social was it an entertainment facility. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: The and--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: I mean John R was it's where they had the bars and the clubs between from John R, John R's one block east of Woodward. And from there going east you go into Black Bottom it's John R, Brush, and St. Antoine. Speaker 2: This, this is what you Paradise Valley? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. The hotel was on that Paradise Valley strip, the next block over when you start going to Brush then you going into Black Bottom, it's all there together. Speaker 2: Now all that is pretty much destroyed these days. Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, that's gone, that's gone. Speaker 2: Devastated and paved over and everything. Speaker 1: Yeah, it's gone. Speaker 2: Now, they're doing some revitalization stuff in Detroit. Now Detroit (unclear)--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: They are now coming out from those stadiums that they built and they have some around the corner from where that was I said--I saw the other day, they had some like condos or something up on Woodward--but that's all been taken out of there. Speaker 2: Yeah, I saw, I saw a play back in February about Paradise Valley and so people--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: Oh, really? Speaker 2: Who lived through are trying to keep the memories alive, at least by through art and that sort of thing. Speaker 1: Well the stories are important The Flame Show Bar was right down the street because The Flame was between The Gotham and The Carlton Plaza, so The Flame Show Bar was there and--you know [HM] Della Reese [Reese-Lett]? Della Reese was his telephone operator (laughing) in the hotel. Speaker 2: Della Reese? Speaker 1: Della Reese, was my father said, she was the telephone operator, 'cause they had, you know that had the, the--switchboard, it was a switchboard where you put the plugs into the board, have you ever seen one like that? That was (laughing) and so he would take me down to the hotel sometimes and they had a bar and a restaurant in the hotel in the basement. That was a big thing to go down there so to be able to sit there and have a pink lemonade (laughing). Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 101092 Speaker 1: So I'm gonna get some of these stories in a minute, but right now, when you think about your parents' personalities, your mother [Elizabeth Mae Stokes Swan] and your father [Edward McCallan Swan, Sr.], who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: Who do I take after the most, interesting question, probably my father's activism, certainly, but my mother's patience. I guess in temperament, some of both, some of both in terms of temperament. You know one of the things about my father that I just found unique about individuals, I never heard anyone say anything bad about my father negative, not never. And when, when, when he died, I was twenty, I guess, when he died, and he had previously series of heart attacks, he smoked, a smoker. And at the funeral, at the wake really, it was a man who came--after he had left the hotel [The Carlton Plaza] subsequently worked for a food, a big food chain as the Director of Community Relations. And this is a young brother who had as I came to find out, he had given an opportunity to and he had, I guess messed up and he gave him a second chance. And he did a very good job and had become a manager of the store and I didn't know all that, but I saw this man, young man who came to the wake and he began to cry at my father's wake. And I'm twenty and you know I didn't exactly understand everything that was going on about that. But it is one of the things that impacted me about his life, how other people perceived him. And how I saw him live his life, kind of commitment that he had to, to community and to creating access for other blacks. When he left the hotel, he went with this food company and he was the first black executive in the company. And I can remember him--he and my mother talking about the decision to do this, whether he should or whether he shouldn't. And he agreed to do and as I gather, again I'm just a child and I'm sort of hearing the conversation, there was a commitment made that--well you would enter the company and in order to really be involved with community relations, you need to know all dimensions of the company. So he worked in administration for a while then he went to the actual supermarket worked in the supermarket, stocking things and so forth, becoming a manager and learn all the dimensions of the firm. Well, and then I gather he had been told so within a short period of time, then you will be moved to this Executive position. Well a short period of time turned into much longer period of time, and they--he was being restricted to you know a position almost like being a stock boy, and that didn't sit well. And he ultimately challenged them on this and ultimately was moved to the executive position. But I remember those conversations about how to manage this situation, the treatment that he was receiving that what he had been told wasn't was act-being actualized in that relationship. But then when he finally did acquire the executive position, the kind of leverage he was abled in order to make access for other blacks to enter into the company. And this was the first food chain store in the Detroit area, that had blacks working in any kind of either managerial or assistant manager positions. Speaker 1: Okay. What chain was that? Speaker 2: It was Wrigley Stores [Wrigley's Supermarkets]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Who get--bought by somebody else through (laughing) yeah. Story_ID: 101093 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, I'm gonna go back to your early childhood, do you have an early childhood--an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: Earliest, earliest, well my early--I guess the earliest are at my home which is on Roosevelt Street, 6527 Roosevelt (laughing) which is the home that my grandfather [William Cyrus Swan] had built and where my father [Edward McCallan Swan, Sr.] grew up down the street from Marr [Elementary School], I remember that very well. It was a wood frame home, about two blocks, two, three blocks from the school on the Westside of Detroit. We had a pear tree, a cherry tree and a plum tree in the back yard that he had, all of which that he had planted (laughing), my grandfather, yeah, I remember that well. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Family dinners and big porch in the front of the house and a big glider sat on the porch. And because I didn't, didn't have grandparents, we had some neighbors whose name was Otis and Marie Guy [ph.], who lived right next door. And they were older, in fact they had moved to that neighborhood when my father was a child, so they had seen him grow up and knew his mother and had did not have natural children of their own. They ultimately adopted a daughter, and the--they actually became surrogate grandparents for me. And I would go and you know stay at their home all the time, be in and out of their--and they had come from Georgia, I think, Georgia. And he was a mechanic for a, it was a sugar, people who owned a sugar warehouse company. And so I would spend a lot of time with them at the house and just like--it was for me very much like having grandparents, I was fortunate in that sense. Story_ID: 101094 Speaker 1: Okay, now what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Of? Speaker 1: Of growing up. Sights and sounds and smells. Speaker 2: Sights and sounds and smells, automobiles, I mean Detroit's [Michigan] cars, you yeah, cars are real important part of (laughing) my life. Speaker 1: Did you know all the models? Speaker 2: Oh, yes, all of them, DeSoto, Dodge, my father had gotten a when we were very young, a Chrysler, dark green Chrysler which was a big hit 'cause it wasn't black, before that, we had a black Plymouth or something. He got a Chrysler and it was dark green, four door, oh, that was big deal (laughing). I knew all the models, so cars are real important part of life in Detroit. Speaker 1: Yeah, people knew the models in those days. Speaker 2: Oh yes. Speaker 1: They knew, they could look at a car and tell what year, what model, what edition and all. Speaker 2: Oh I can tell you the year, I can tell you what went on the fins style or the grill, I can tell you the year, the model, the make, engine size (laughing), oh, no, it was very much into cars. And when I turned sixteen, I only wanted one thing for my birthday, my license (laughing) so that was, it's was just an important part of the culture. That and music in Detroit were real important parts of the culture. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Smells, lemon meringue pie, cherry pie, which Marie [Guy (ph.)], who is like my grandmother, would make. She was a homemaker and excellent cook, you know from down home, right, and just a wonderful spirit. And Thanksgiving dinner, 'cause--I was born Thanksgiving, so that was always kind of a special day for me. And my mother [Elizabeth Mae Stokes Swan] would always cook Thanksgiving dinner, and we'd have a big dinner with family and friends. Aunt Fran's rolls (laughing), Aunt Fran was really my brother's Godmother, but you know, our Aunt. She lived till,--she just died not too long ago at 102, and she was one of the early, I guess the first, Directors of the Y in Black Bottom, the YMCA, cafeteria. And subsequently a Home Economics Teacher in the school, and so her gift to everyone at around Christmas time was she would make a tray of these rolls, which were to die for (chuckling), yeah, those were (laughing) smells and sounds from Detroit. Speaker 1: Now sounds, what kind of music did you like? Speaker 2: Music, music. Speaker 1: What kind of music were you into? Speaker 2: Motown (laughing) what other, the only kind of music Motown. Speaker 1: Detroit has a jazz, big jazz tradition. Speaker 2: No, for me personally, I grew into jazz, but I grew up on Motown. As I went into college and would come home, you know I got into jazz. Speaker 1: So Motown cranks up what about 1960 or something, so you're about eleven? Speaker 2: Yup, yeah. Story_ID: 101095 Speaker 1: At--I was involved with the church, the Episcopal Church. Speaker 2: Now which one did you go to, attend? Speaker 1: Well, my father [Edward McCallan Swan, Sr.] was a Deacon at St. Cyprian's [Episcopal] Church [Detroit, Michigan]. But when, when I was about eight or nine, we moved from that family home near Northwestern [High School] to an area called the Boston-Edison area, we lived on Edison and moved to Edison. Speaker 2: Now that's a fairly affluent part of Detroit. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: I think [HM] Berry Gordy had a house on Boston. Speaker 1: Up on, up there on the other part, yes. It is--its right in the middle of Detroit, I went to Central High School [Detroit, Michigan] subsequently. And it's right on the Central part of the West Side but it is a community that was--because of the strength of its neighborhood association, until today, really, very well preserved neighborhood. Between the streets of Edison, Boston, Linwood, and Woodward, that whole area, which, is fairly maybe couple of square miles. And so moving there you know things did change, so it was nice homes, nice street, nice neighborhood. But I then shifted the church where I was, which was, and I went to Grace Episcopal Church. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And member of the youth choir and acolyte and confirmed and all of that. But it also had a very strong youth association. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And member of that, [HM] Kenneth Reeves who is the Mayor, only black Mayor in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts was in the youth choir with me in Detroit. So it was very active, so we have a lot of social activities, from Junior High School, which was you know very healthy. And we'd have dances and the gym so forth. Speaker 2: Now what town was Kenneth Reeves the Mayor of? Speaker 1: He's Mayor of Cambridge. Speaker 2: Mayor of Cambridge, okay. Speaker 1: Massachusetts, yeah, today. Speaker 2: Okay, all right, I wanna make sure, I have a handicap not being from around here. Speaker 1: Oh, no, certainly someone if you don't have him, you should definitely have Ken, Ken Reeves. (simultaneous) Speaker 2: Okay. (simultaneous) Story_ID: 101096 Speaker 1: When you moved to the Boston-Edison neighborhood [Detroit, Michigan] you changed churches, but did you change a significant group of friends too when you moved over there? Did you? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes. And I went from Marr Elementary School to Brady Elementary School and the whole new network of, of friends for me largely because it was too far for me to be able to go as a youngster back to the old neighborhood. Speaker 1: Okay. So you started off at Marr Elementary School? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And M-A-R? Speaker 2: R, double R. Speaker 1: M-A-R-R, okay. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Marr is on, I guess in the 20s or so at in Detroit, they built schools in campuses so that they would build an elementary school, a middle school and a high school on a campus kind of complex with large playfields and everything around it. So Northwestern where we lived over on Roosevelt had an elementary school, Marr and McMichael Junior High School on the complex with Northwestern [High School]. When I moved to Edison, in the Central area, Central had its own complex, but Brady was the school closest to me which is why I went to Brady. But Central High School had Roosevelt as an elementary school, Durfee the middle school. Speaker 1: Yeah, I've heard of Durfee. Speaker 2: And Central is the high school, which is where I went to both Durfee for middle school and Central High School. Speaker 1: How do you spell Durfee, that's-- Speaker 2: D-U-R-F-E-E. Speaker 1: Okay. A lot of schools in Detroit are closing now, there trying to close--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Almost half of them, now. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, Central High School. Now, well when you were at Marr, where they any special teachers or acquaintances there that you--that are worth mentioning here? Speaker 2: At Marr? Speaker 1: Yeah, back at Marr? Speaker 2: No, I mean this is through like the third grade maybe, Miss Ireland (laughing) Miss Ireland, and when I went to Brady, Mr. Wolf [ph.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Mr. Wolf was the--really the only black male teacher I can remember having in elementary school. Story_ID: 101097 Speaker 1: Now when you were in school, how did they treat the teaching of Africa? Speaker 2: Africa? Speaker 1: Did you learn anything about Africa in grade school? Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: Or just, I mean you know just think about what you're doing now and looking back, what were your impressions of Africa when you were in grade school, say, you know what was the general impression of Africa? I know, I know people had Tarzan movies and that sort of thing, that was some kind, and they were like sometime you see Lowell Thomas on television on or something maybe, but what did you-- Speaker 2: I grew up with all those images like most of us in our community, Tarzan and all of that, but something very important did happen to me. Which was during this time, when I was probably in middle school, I guess by this time. Probably by the time I was in Durfee [Junior High School in Detroit, Michigan]. My parents [Elizabeth Mae Stokes Swan and Edward McCallan Swan, Sr.] belonged to something called The Couples Club, which was just couples (laughing) who would get together once a month and go to various people's homes and they have, it was just Sunday afternoon dinner and they play pinochle or cards and have dinner and have a good time, good time. And it would rotate to different people's homes, and then occasionally, at each gathering there might be some special activity, might be. But most of the time it's just having dinner and relaxing, you know. At one of the meetings, which was actually at our house, I think, one of the members of the club had been away and came back to the meeting, and 'cause they had returned. They had been out of the country, and the couple was Dr. and Mrs. Alvin Loving, and Dr. Loving was the first tenured black Professor at Michigan State University College of Education [East Lansing, Michigan]. And he had been called by a man named Nnamdi Azikiwe to Nigeria to help set up a place called the University of Nigeria at Nsukka. At the meeting, he showed these slides of Africa and it was the first time for me that I had a different kind of perspective on what Africa was like. And he began to show these slides that night, and I mean I will never forget it, 'cause I'm sitting, I'm just a fly on the wall. I just a child, I'm just sitting watching these pictures and he's showing what this--them building this university in Africa. And he had gone with a team with Michigan State to work with these African colleagues to build this school, this university. I was, I was shocked, but I saw them constructing the dorms in the new buildings, and he explained about the College of Education in Nsukka and Igbos and Yoruba and different ethnic groups. And because of the way in which he presented it, it gave me a whole different kind of sense of what Africa was about. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That what I had seen on TV or what I even thought Africa was before that. Speaker 1: So Dr. Loving in education at--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay at Michigan, Michigan State. Speaker 2: He went to--it was at Michigan, University of Michigan [Ann Arbor] and then went on this team from Michigan State. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: University. Speaker 1: All right, okay. Now it's interesting now Nnamdi Azikiwe, you know, was a student of William Leo Hansbury. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Who's actually at Howard [University in Washington, D.C.] when your mother [Elizabeth Mae Stokes Swan] was there, but I don't know if she remembers anything about him, but he did teach African, the first African Studies courses there. And named a library after him, Hansbury at the University of Nigeria subsequently, you know. But that's interesting, you know, yeah. So--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: So that became, as I thought about it later, sort of influential in terms of opening me up to become more receptive to a different kind of perspective in that which I was receiving through the sort of popular media about what Africa was about. So I'd seen a different kind of image and a different outlook and understanding about what Africans were doing. Story_ID: 101098 Speaker 1: Now, now the African Independence Movement, well, a number of states were becoming independent in the early '60s [1960s], did your family discuss that kind of thing, or did you see it on the news and? Speaker 2: No, oh, well, yes, actually we did. And in, I forget the year, exact year, but the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] has a kind of graduate branch through, through the Rackham College [Horace H. Rackham School of Graduate Studies] in Detroit [Michigan]. And I remember that there was a forum that was held there and it was very--my parents [Elizabeth Mae Stokes Swan and Edward McCallan Swan, Sr.] were very enthused about this African leader who was going to come and speak. And so they took me to a forum, this is in the early '60s [1960s], and there was a young man, very young man who was coming to speak there, and his name was Tom Mboya, who was from Kenya. And so they took me down that evening with them to hear him speak, and of course, I was (unclear), I thought it was an old man coming from Africa, he was young. And he was dynamic and he was talking about the independence that was--the independence movement in Kenya and what they were doing in order to build liberation on the Continent. And I, again, was, I was enthralled, and it was something that, again tuned me into this dynamic of the liberation experiences that were going on. Speaker 1: Yeah Tom Mboya was subsequently assassinated [in 1969]. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: But when he was still young. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: That was--so you heard Tom, that's something. You're about what 11 or 12, I think? Speaker 2: This must've been early '60s [1960s], so-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Again I was, yes, I was probably middle school, I guess. Speaker 1: I know that assassination was covered on the news in those days, but it was also the Congo crisis was in the news quite a bit in those days. Did you, did you--were you aware of that when that was going down? Speaker 2: Was I aware of that? I can't honestly say when I first knew about [Patrice] Lumumba 'cause I'm so conscious of it now, I don't know when I first, that first entered my consciousness. But I was certainly aware of the dynamic of the independence movements going on in Africa. And the pride that my parents and black people in Detroit seem to be taking in these new African countries and the identification with Africa. And this, we're talking about late '50s [1950s] early '60s [1960s] that this is happening in Detroit. There was a pride of identifying with them; there were these African Galas that was held at the Art Museum in Detroit. Before the, you know Wright Museum [Charles H. Wright Museum of African American History], so there was this pride in that community. Speaker 1: Detroit Institute for the Arts? Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yes, yes, had a significant African art collection and I went there with my parents. It took you know, took me to the museum and saw the African art there along you know with other things. Story_ID: 101099 Speaker 1: Okay, so now did you have a favorite subject in school, in grade school? Speaker 2: Geography. Speaker 1: Geography, okay. Speaker 2: That's interesting, I hadn't thought about it, yeah. But if I, I'd immediately tell you geography, yeah, I like geography, like maps (laughing). Speaker 1: Did, did you like the travel shows? Speaker 2: Yep, love them, love them. Speaker 1: Okay, I know Lowell Thomas was I think--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Lowell Thomas (laughing). Speaker 1: That's the one I keep thinking about. Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: Actually I think we're about the same age like Jack Paar even went to Africa once and came back and showed his-- Speaker 2: Yes, he did. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I remember looking at that you know. Speaker 2: I loved, I think its part of my spirit too, but the whole sense of adventure and travel and but I loved learning about other places. Speaker 1: They used to have those bring em back alive type shows where a couple would go or a guy would go to Africa someplace and shoot some animal. Speaker 2: Animals, yes. Speaker 1: And bring em, you know those kinds of things. Speaker 2: And the television depicted--depiction of Africa tended to be around safari and that kind of thing. I guess just--I was fortunate in that I had this other kind of dynamic going on that, that helped to balance that in my own mind as to what Africa was. Speaker 1: "King Solomon's Mines" with the "Watusi" thing. Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: Was came out around '59 [1959] or '60 [1960]. Speaker 2: Sixty [1960], that's right. Speaker 1: And you had a the movie "Zulu" came out and that seem to influence the vocabulary of kids my age in some way 'cause there was some kids who got the name Zulu. Speaker 2: Zulu, that's right, that's right (laughter) yeah. And, and the identification that we had with Africa with no understanding, you talking like about 600 you know ethnic groups and thousands of languages. No, no, no, it's Zulu and Chaka and all you know that's what you knew, right (laughing) and that's Africa. And we talked about Africa as if it was you know a country (laughing). Speaker 1: Yeah or some place you could just go to and see it all. Speaker 2: Yeah, see it all, right, and you gonna see the animals and everything, right (laughing)? But I had, I was sensitized that you know there's different countries; you know it's not like all one country. But it was only later that I, I really came into contact, but I know why I was open to, to those experiences. Story_ID: 101100 Speaker 1: Now were you a good student in school? Speaker 2: In Detroit [Michigan], I was an excellent student and that later became challenged (laughing). Speaker 1: So you gotta qualify that, in Detroit did you have an opinion of the educational system there that, in retrospect? Speaker 2: Yes that the, the system was I think, a traditional urban public educational system that, as I came to understand education was more focused on schooling than education. And-- (simultaneous) Speaker 1: So what, what, explain what you mean by that. Speaker 2: That people in the system were being trained to fulfill basic rudimentary literacy skill levels so that could provide service to the auto industry. And the vast majority of students, certainly in my neighborhood, were not being educated with the intent of going on to some higher education. The expectation was that you leave literate and be able to fulfill some role in the plantation economy of the auto industry, and that's what most people wanted to do. And that in a school like Central [High School] or Northern [High School] or even Northwestern [High school], the college preparatory track in the school, there were tracks was the smaller of the other tracks. You had a business track; you know sort of secretarial track and college prep track. And you take certain courses if you were going college prep and you take college courses if you were in business or the tech. Now there's shop you know, I liked shop but that wasn't the track I wanted to be on. And the majority of those students were not in a college preparatory track. And ultimately what happened was that my brother [Edward McAllen Swan, Jr.] had also gone to Detroit public schools, done very well, exceptionally well. And when we moved to the new neighborhood did not go to Central, but went on to the school that, that--'cause he was in high school, he stayed at the high school where he had initially begun. That school's primary orientation was culinary arts, but it did have a small college prep track, in which he was in. And he was, 'cause he did so well accepted into Tufts University, which is here in Boston [sic, Medford, Massachusetts]. And he came to Tufts and he almost flunked out, and his roommate was a brother who had gone to Andover [Phillips Academy Andover in Andover, Massachusetts] and--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: That's a big prep school--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Here. Speaker 1: Here in Massachusetts. Speaker 2: Exactly, here in Massachusetts. And it was the, the first time that he really understood what a prep school was, he didn't know what a prep school was, you know (laughing), and the difference and the opportunities that were available through those schools. And he came home and told my parents, "listen, you know I did really well in these schools here and I'm just hanging on by a thread. You need to get him out of these schools 'cause he's not gonna be ready to go to a school of the caliber of a place called Tufts." And it was at that point then that my parents [Elizabeth Mae Stokes Swan and Edward McCallan Swan, Sr.] began to kind of look around at various options for preparatory school. They weren't really, one we couldn't afford to send me to a prep school, because with this boy in college and I don't think they were really ready to send the 13 year old, the 14 year old away yet to school. So--but we began to look at it and I was, I was ready, say I can go away to school? And they send you these brochures in the mail and they got--they had all these ball fields and the swimming pools and the--I'll go there (laughing). Story_ID: 101101 Speaker 1: And so I was ready, and subsequently we were able to identify a school where I was accepted. But there was a caveat, and the caveat was that I would have to repeat a year in school. Well, I'm all basically all A, couple B student you know, doing very well. I don't want, if stupid kids, if you fail you have to repeat, why I have to repeat the year? I didn't like that idea, but begrudgingly, that was the condition to go away. I said well, "Well maybe if I go then it's gone be you know easy, that'll be cookie year, I'll be. Okay you want me to repeat the year, all right, cool, I'll do that. It's gone be cookie, right?" Before the fall semester was over, everything I had learned at Central [High School in Detroit, Michigan] we had done at this school I went to. Before the fall semester was over, and I said "Oh, I get the picture now (laughing) I understand." And it was then for four years that I spent at a place called Western Reserve Academy [Hudson, Ohio]. At the school there were maybe seven black students, small prep school in Ohio, right outside of Cleveland. In fact it's the original site of Western Reserve University, original site. Before it moved into Cleveland they left this in Hudson as a secondary school. Of the seven black folks, probably two of them were passing, but I knew who they were, so it was, it was that kind of environment, culturally vacuous, but intellectually and academically rigorous. The most rigorous academic experience I've had, ever had through the Ph.D. Probably except for the quantitative courses and actually writing the dissertation, the most difficult academic experience. And I can honestly say it was there, at that school that I learned how to think. And--so it was very challenging, and it was--you had this, this mix both of the academic challenge, but there was this, this cultural edge that placed me in a, in a situation where if I had not had the kind of family background, I'd have been totally lost. Because the, the school structured to produce a white upper class elite for this country, that's what it did. It produce students to go to premiere liberal arts colleges in the country. Whether they be mid-western like a Denison [University in Granville, Ohio] or something or to you know Harvard [University in Cambridge, Massachusetts], Yale [University in New Haven, Connecticut], Tufts [University in Medford, Massachusetts], Brandeis [University in Waltham, Massachusetts] you know, those kind of places. And culturally you had no grounding. So I was fortunate, I think, to one be able to have that experience but to come out, to come out of it in the period that I did. Story_ID: 101102 Speaker 1: I just want you to give me an example of a cultural type of gap you're talking about in terms of--or what kind of thing--do you have a story about a cultural experience that or--I know it's probably aggregate of things. Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean aggregate of from what, what you're required to read, what are the you know in, in English literature. What are the essential pieces of literature must, one must have to be an educated young man by the time you're a senior. From that, and how even what you read is interpreted, to what you sing when you go to the required music class. To the kinds of music that you hear in the dormitory every night that the cool guys are listening to. To what is played at the dance, the two or three dances that you might have during the course of the, the academic year. To the girls that you might be able to invite to the dance, 'cause you don't see any black girls, because you're linked to these, the white female prep schools, so who you gone invite to the dance? And you only get like two or three weekend passes, it wasn't military school, but it was relatively strict. And I couldn't afford to come home to Detroit [Michigan], so I was very fortunate to have my family I could go to visit in Cleveland [Ohio]. But you can only go like two, three times a semester to catch the bus up. And whom I'm gone relate to anyway, 'cause you only meet the students at the girls school. And they're on,--the white girls at the girls school, and they listen to whatever that kind of music was. So you're taking out--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: They weren't listening to Motown then, they weren't, okay. Speaker 2: You couldn't even get--I couldn't get Cleveland on the radio (laughing) you know, it's in Hudson [Ohio]; I couldn't get it on the radio. It's all of that that put together; the--it's just all that combination. And so you get you know there's a couple of guys you know like who heard of [John] Coltrane, and that was one of my black partners, right, who heard of Coltrane. Man, come listen to this, so you slip up to this room and y'all put this music on (laughing) that's like totally you know from somewhere else. On a different kind of experience, and it wasn't, it wasn't necessarily that people would reject you know Sonny Rollins or, or Wes Montgomery or Coltrane, they didn't know (laughing) it wasn't, just was not in, in sync with that pers--cultural perspective or world view. Speaker 1: Likewise the music that they played, did you have any--did you ever, did you ever been exposed to them? Speaker 2: Had I been exposed---I heard-- you know part of the dynamic of African American Culture is that you live in a white world; I mean, you know you see all that. I heard white--I heard country music, I wasn't into country, I, but I heard it. Did I become more exposed by virtue of having that experience, yes; did I become more exposed to classical music by virtue of that experience, yes. Did I become more exposed to classical art, yes, and heard about people or world religions that I knew, yes. Yeah, I became more exposed because of that, but I didn't become more grounded in who I was as an African American male of 14 or 15, did not become rooted in, in that sense. Speaker 1: Now did you start to think about that more as a result of that isolation? Speaker 2: No. Well did I think about it more, I thought about it, I think in a social way, not in an academic really or an intellectual way. I didn't think about in the course in World Religions why we didn't study Vodun; I didn't know what Vodun was. Speaker 1: Yeah, it wasn't mentioned in (unclear), Speaker 2: Certainly not as a religion, you talking about Voodoo and sticking pins in, naw man (laughing) again it's as totally abstract, we talked about Buddhism and you know Confucianism. The East talked about Christianity and Islam. No, not any Vodun. Story_ID: 101103 Speaker 1: All right so you--we were talking about you know--you couldn't think about African religion really because it wasn't presented [at Western Reserve Academy in Hudson, Ohio], right? Speaker 2: No. I mean it simply was not within the framework of the presentation or the perspective within the institution. And so there was very little in that experience that would root me or ground me in my own culture. And it wasn't something malicious, just was not established for that purpose nor was its orientation. Speaker 1: Okay. Now were-you're in high school during the height of a lot of the Civil Rights activity you know. The Freedom Summer '64 [1964], Birmingham [Alabama] '63 [1963] the Selma [Alabama] of '65 [1965], did, did you--did they discuss the Civil Rights Movement on the campus at all? I mean did the white professors, academics discuss what was going on or talk about it as a political phenomenon. Speaker 2: Not the Civil Rights Movement. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But you read the paper I mean one of the things they do, they teach you to read and you're encouraged to read, so you can't help but see this is going on. Story_ID: 101104 Speaker 1: And one interesting very interesting experience happens in that during this time, there was a new initiative coming out of the Great Society programs called Upward Bound. And there was a--an adjunct faculty person who had applied for a grant, and one, one of the first awards for an Upward Bound program. And he was a minister in a community there, and set up this--one of the prototypes of the Upward Bound Program for junior high school students and hired the high school students from Western Reserve [Academy in Hudson, Ohio] to serve as counselors in this program, which I did. And we worked with young people from neighboring communities and we took some field trips, and this is right after the Hough Riots in Detroit [1966], I'm sorry, in Cleveland [Ohio]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: We took the young people into meet other young people there, and it was really the first time I became exposed to the communities around Hudson [Ohio], 'cause basically, I mean I would go when I left there either directly to my, sort of my twin family's home in Cleveland for the weekend. Or I'd go you know to athletic events with the team on the team bus, or I'd walk around Hudson wherever you could walk to, that's, that was sort of the radius of my world, at that time. About five miles from Hudson was a place called Twinsburg, Ohio, Twinsburg was the sight of a General Motor--I think it was General Motors plant. And it was the closest community that had any kind of significant black community. So some of these young people came from Twinsburg, well they actually came from Twinsburg Heights. Twinsburg Heights was the adjacent township to Twinsburg, which sat outside the gates of this plant on the backside of the plant. And as you know many of these industrial facilities, there's a huge track of land that's over this open space, I guess for security purposes it surrounds these plants. And they had this community called Twinsburg Heights, which is really where the black people lived. And in taking some young people home, was the first time I'd ever been there. You know university van, we took them home. Well Twinsburg Heights had been subdivided and there were series of streets there that the kids lived on. They had Oxford Street, Harvard Street, Yale Street, none of which were paved. And as they began to explain this to me, Twinsburg Heights was a community in which these families had been recruited from Mississippi. And they were recruited to come up as cheap labor for the industry. And they would be told they were gonna live on Oxford Street on Harvard Street in this community, that was very close and adjacent to the plant, you won't have to go very far, and this is what they got. And that really began to open my eyes 'cause when I saw the names of the street and where they were living where they wasn't any street, it was just dirt. I said, "What is this?" Then we took the young people into Cleveland. There was a community center in Cleveland, right in the midst of the area where they had the Hough Rebellion. And it was a very interesting and eye opening experience for me because this is going to a community very similar to one I grew up in Detroit [Michigan]. But I'm now coming back as this counselor with the young people, but I'm feeling a sense of alienation in the whole process. And it was--I can recall that, that summer you know it was a learning and growing experience for me. But I was feeling the, the dynamic of the tension of both coming from that community but being in this all white boarding school, and what was happening to me. Speaker 2: Yeah, Hough Riots they made them famous in the movie "Uptight" back in '68 [1968} I think, even made a movie about them. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, it was rough, rough area one of the--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: It was. Speaker 2: Places in the U.S. Story_ID: 101105 Speaker 1: So, so this is like 1960 what? This is--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: This is '65 [1965], '66 [1966]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Sixty-six [1966], I guess. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now were you involved in sports when you were in school [Western Reserve Academy in Hudson, Ohio]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Involved in football, played football four years, track and we had--each season you participate in something. Football, I was okay, I mean I started--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: What did you play? Speaker 2: Played defensive back. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Loved it, got it out of my system (laughing) 'cause I had to play football. I love football, I like athletics and sports. I probably should've played soccer, which is what I subsequently played in university. I'd been much better if I had played in high school and you know been able to continue. But had to play football, so I did, you know, I did okay. In the winter, there was basketball and wrestling, they had all these different athletics, and in the spring, ran track. Story_ID: 101106 Speaker 1: Okay. Now okay, now was there any special teachers at--that you really reflect on who took an interest in you and-- Speaker 2: At Western Reserve [Academy in Hudson, Ohio]? Yes probably two, Professor Roberts, Mr. Roberts and Mr. [James] Gramentine. Gramentine was the wrestling coach, had gone to Western Reserve as a student in the early '50s [1950s] come back, taught. And I, I wrestled for a year or so, year or two, but they were very--the team was good, they were very serious about it and wrest, wrestling there was kind of like boxing I mean you had all these weight classes. And so you'd come out of football season into wresting, And you know I'm not that big, but there's all these categories, so if you were 1-- say 60, 65 in football, then to maximize your strength and all your ability and all, they want you to wrestle at like 148. So you got to sweat this, this pound off and, you know I wasn't into all that, it wasn't that serious to me (laughing) to do all of that. So ultimately in my senior I wound of being the, the manager of the wrestling team (laughing). And but Mr. Gramentine was, who was the coach, I think he really sort to a liking to me and was very supportive of me during that period and subsequently when I left there. And in years later, he became the Headmaster of another school and I, as Director of one of the African Afro American Studies Programs, went and spoke to Black History Month activities and so forth at his school and we continued the relationship. Mr. Roberts was English Teacher and this community was a--it's an upper middle class white community where the school was. Mr. Roberts was, at least a Liberal Democrat, (laughing) you can tell from his conversation, which was in some ways you know being a flaming radical (laughing) in this community. And very progressive, very helpful and open and someone who would give counsel and whom you could just sit and talk with about a whole range of different things. And so I found him to be very supportive of me during that time. Story_ID: 101107 Speaker 1: Okay, now-(simultaneous) Speaker 2: One of the things that did occur there [Western Reserve Academy in Hudson, Ohio] was linked to a set of activities that they had during the years. They were--there were various ways for you to be able to express yourself whether it was the arts or music or athletics. And they had a debate team that, an oratorical contest that I had been involved with at Central [High School in Detroit, Michigan] and was interested in that kind of thing, public speaking. And so there was an annual set or oratorical contest and one of which was an extemporaneous speaking contest, the other was a declamation contest, one in the fall, one in the spring. So my freshman year, the extemporaneous contest they would basically say in the morning, at breakfast, you know, "The contest is today. And the theme is butterflies, okay, want you to speak about butterflies and you have five minutes, or three minutes," whatever it was. And the different cat--you know it's upper level, lower level. So you in the afternoon come and they would have judges and you'd make your presentation on butterflies. Well, when we did extemporaneous speaking in Detroit, you would be allowed to have a note card, and you'd have one note card and you could speak from your card in the contest. So I went to the contest and I had my note card and I stood up to speak and one of--there was an old English teacher who was sort of the Headmaster, who was Associate Headmaster of the, of the school and chairing the English Department who ran these contest. And almost a classic caricature of what you think of as a, of a prep school teacher. I mean bald in the middle, white hair coming out, tweed coat, you know khaki pants, I mean caricature. So he says "Young man," and he didn't know who I was, 'cause I was new. "Young man, you can't have notes," I said well "In Detroit (laughing) you can have them with note cards," and he said "Well not here, so we'll let you sit down, the others can go and then you can come again, if you wish, try again." So I have to go back and try and memorize my notes and get it together. And of course now I'm flustered and I went tried again, and stumbled through my presentation. And of course I didn't win anything, and I was, I was crushed. I said man--and I didn't think it was fair, that was the other thing. Because they, they had not said that, and they assumed I knew and I said, "Well you should've said what the rules are, right?" So, okay, I said all right, and in the spring, they had the declamation contest, which is you know prepared presentation. And so I prepared my presentation and I was excellent, and I won. And I had said to myself after that fall, I'm not gonna lose again, not at this. And so the next year when they had the extemporaneous speaking contest, and they gave us the topic, I don't know, it was blackbirds, I nailed it, so I won. And I was--so this was for me a sense of being able to express my identity in the context of, you know, the various dimensions of expression at this institution. Story_ID: 101108 Speaker 1: The last year, senior year, I had won every contest, since I had been there. And the spring of my senior year was the final declamation contest, I had been extremely impacted by [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.]'s "I Have A Dream" speech you know the March on Washington and--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: So this is like three years later? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Sixty-six [1966]? Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And I had decided I think I wanna do that speech, because that was a really a powerful speech. And I went to Mr. Roberts to talk with him about it. Just say, this is what I'm thinking about you know coming up in the spring. And he said to me "That's a really, that's a powerful speech." He said "but you know the, the judges come from town," when he said that, that was you know, there was this kind of town/gown division there, they come from town (laughing). "And there's, you might wanna think about just some options." Well, I knew what he was saying; he didn't have to detail it any further. In this town, I had been through a series of other kinds of experiences. I went you know it's in 1960, I went to get my hair cut, and you know it a lot of--there's a glare, do you see the glare coming, we need to pull the shades down. Let me just pull these shades here, we can finish up your hair. I went home with a friend, a family that was been very nice to me 'cause some of the students lived in town, you know rest of us lived on campus. And they were very nice to me and I spent a long weekend with them. And there was an event going on that the a lot of the kids from the school were going to at the country club, Hudson Country Club [Country Club of Hudson, Ohio] on the weekend, and they were members of the club. And so I knew that this was going on there, but they explained to me that we couldn't go, but we're gonna do something else. And then they explained to me why we couldn't go 'cause I couldn't go, and they couldn't go with me. But that was just, we'll, we'll do something else. So I'd been through these experiences and I knew what Hudson was about and I was--this is my senior year. I wanted to win. And so I went through a series of other options and there was a poem called "Babi Yar" which is about the killing fields of Jews in, in Russia. It's a very powerful poem by a name by [Yevgeni] Yevtushenko and when I read it, I said--because of the power of the poem, I, I knew I could present that well. And I made the decision to do that, and I won, and that was very important to me. And after that experience, it, it really later challenged me to think about what, what is the price of winning? I won, we got the prize, but it wasn't what I wanted to do, nor did it express anything about me or my values. And in fact, I had to shelf my values because of a concern that somebody else might not accept that. I mean Dr. King's speech, I Have A Dream didn't, then wasn't like what it is today. Everybody says it now, you didn't say that then. And everybody didn't hear that the same way, and I made a choice but it really, throughout my life, that's challenged me. Terms of what, what will comprises will I make in order to win, in order to succeed, in order to get ahead? It was a very challenging experience for me, as I've reflected on that. Story_ID: 101109 Speaker 1: Okay. Now when, when you were a senior [at Western Reserve Academy in Hudson, Ohio], what, what were your college plans at that point? You, you knew you were going to college but had, had plans been made to attend a specific college? Speaker 2: In fact between my junior and senior year, my brother [Edward McAllen Swan, Jr.] came home and took me on a college tour. Through--I had a short list of schools and we went from Washington [D.C.] to Boston [Massachusetts]. In fact went by Mr. Roberts' home, he lived in West--Eastern Pennsylvania, and looked at some, Dickinson [College in Carlisle, Pennsylvania] and some other schools and, I had a short list. That included Tufts [University in Medford, Massachusetts], which is where my brother had gone, and I was accepted there, and decided to go to Tufts. Speaker 1: Okay. So were there any--before we leave Western Reserve, were there any other stores about your senior year that you want to share with us, or any circumstances surrounding your graduation. Well, well how many graduated, how many black students? Speaker 2: Black students? Speaker 1: Yeah, were there when you, I mean graduated with you? Speaker 2: With me? None. Speaker 1: Okay, you were the only one? Speaker 2: Yeah, in my class, yeah I was hmm, yeah, I was the only black student. There were--yeah, there were two, let's see, three in the class ahead of me, two in the class you know before that. I know one or two behind me, and so yeah. I guess yeah. Story_ID: 101110 Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So how did you find Tufts you know, Tufts University here in Boston [sic, Medford, Massachusetts]? Speaker 2: Tufts (laughing). Tufts was--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: This is in 1966 or seven? Speaker 2: Seven. Speaker 1: Sixty-seven [1967] okay. Speaker 2: Tufts was an interesting experience in that time to be in Boston. You know it's a tumultuous period in the country; my class coming into Tufts doubles the size of the black population in the whole university (laughing). Which tells you how many people there were (laughing). Speaker 1: Now did you think it was--did you, in those days did you think, well it's a good idea to go to a school where there's only one--I'm gone be the only one or were you-'cause some people were like you know, once they get out of the experience where they're only one, only black student in the school, go right to Howard [University in Washington, D.C.] or some place and go some place where they can see (unclear)--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: And one of my colleagues at Western Reserve [Western Reserve Academy in Hudson, Ohio] had gone to Howard. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: In fact from Columbus [Ohio]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And subsequent he went to Howard, he was extremely happy, and I've been in touch with him and checked out Howard and as I did the tour, and he left, he did three, five or something at Howard and ultimately went to Harvard Law [School in Cambridge, Massachusetts]. I mean that was the path that he chose, another brother from Toledo [Ohio], went to Antioch (laughing) two of them in fact went to Antioch [University in Ohio]. You know they were sort of went that way, and in part I was you know following my big brother's [Edward McAllen Swan, Jr.'s] footsteps, you know that was part of that, I think for me. Part I didn't consciously feel as if I was being assimilated, even though I knew there was a tension, I felt I was negotiating that. So I didn't have this--"White school, okay I go there, and I'll do what I'm gonna do, right, I'll be all right." And I was fortunate to have a strong enough foundation I think to be able to do that. Even though I wouldn't say I was--had any sort of afro-centric orientation, but it was a strong cultural base. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Strong enough to survive that, I'll put it that way. Speaker 1: So by you going to this school, it doubled the black population of the school (laughing) at Tufts? Speaker 2: No, no, no, I'm saying my class, not me. Speaker 1: Oh your class, okay. Speaker 2: There was about, when I came into Tufts, there were about maybe in my class 15, 20 of us, maybe who came in my class. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Maybe. No, oh I didn't, I wasn't alone, no, no, no. Speaker 1: I know what you meant, okay. Speaker 2: No, there were about, I said my class, so it's about 15 to 20 of us something like that, who doubled the total population. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So it was about 30 something. Speaker 1: On the campus period? Speaker 2: On the campus, yeah. And I was very well prepared, first year was very easy, had a great time. Life was good, and I played--went played soccer, I wasn't gonna play football. Played soccer for the first year, freshman and had a good time. Got into Boston [Massachusetts] a little bit, but in the, at the end of my first year, my grades began to slip a little. Second year, I came back and in the fall, I decided to pledge Fraternity, Alpha Phi Alpha. But in Boston, it's a City-Wide Chapter, so there were brothers on line from BC [Boston College in Chestnut Hill, Massachusetts], BU [Boston University in Boston, Massachusetts], Harvard [University in Cambridge, Massachusetts] whatnot, Tufts. It was a very good experience, that kind of interaction in and so forth in a city really got into the city. But series of other dynamics happened that year. First of all, when I came back for the soccer team, I fell out with the coach. Coach said, "To play on my team, you can't have a beard or mustache," I said, "Well first of all that's got nothing to do with me playing, my ability to play soccer. Second of all my father has a mustache, I mean what's that have to do with anything?" Well he was very crew cut military type person. And I said, "Well look, I'm, I'm out of here, see you later, 'cause I'm not doing that." And it gave me, all of a sudden all this time, one, I decided I was going to pledge which takes up time. But I turned to the black community to say "Well what's going on in Boston, let me really get into Boston some more." And during this time, then I went to some community meetings and there was this dy-- Story_ID: 101111 Speaker 1: Okay, so you, you began to venture out into the black community, and what, what did you find going on here in Boston [Massachusetts]? Speaker 2: Found Boston to be, first of all it was very, I it found it to be segregated, I mean there was a very unique and identifiable black community. I mean it's like you want black folks, that's you go right over here, you find them, Roxbury, that were folks were. Speaker 1: Now did that surprise you, you know--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: National, I think view of Massachusetts, the home of the Kennedy's and the and some liberal image. Did you--did that kind of-- Speaker 2: It did, and the more I got into and understanding of the history of the dynamic, I found it even more unique. Through the contact with the community, I came into contact with a young man who I'd gone to hear his presentation. He was a young State Representative, dynamic and his name was Michael Haynes. And when I heard him speak and talk about the issues going on in the community, he stimulated me to be, want to be more involved. And so I approached him and said that I was interested in, in doing some work study, if he had some opportunities. And he told me he did and so I began to work for him at the State House, and Haynes was also a Reverend, so Reverend Michael Haynes. And he was part of a small group of black state reps in the legislature at that time. By virtue of that experience and also the exposure just in town, I began to understand the dynamics of the movement of the historic black community from Beacon Hill through the South End into that community. Which is now called Roxbury. As I began to do more you know, historical research and understand how that community became created, and then some of the historic tensions between those who lived up on top of the hill and those who lived at the bottom of the hill. And those who had been here and those who came here from the South and all those subsequent dynamics that has created what is really a very unique community, here in Boston. And with the success of then migrations of West Indians and so forth who come here. His family was Bajan and so it began to give me some insight into the dynamics of this Boston community. Speaker 1: Yeah the Barbados community is a, is a very significant here in Boston. Speaker 2: It is very significant, and had taken a significant entrepreneurial and social position in the black community. This is unique for me because coming from Detroit [Michigan], even though my father's [Edward McCallan Swan, Sr.'s] family is from Bermuda, when you talk about black community, that's African Americans from here, from was like some place in the south, that's who you're talking about. Speaker 1: Alabama. Speaker 2: Yeah, you know. Speaker 1: Primarily then Georgia and--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: You know and all the Bajans and Jamaicans and the, this is--those is, and understanding those distensions as distinct divisions, I wasn't used to that. Something different about this black community here, but that was a ver--positive growing experience for me. And I worked for him through 1969. Story_ID: 101112 Speaker 1: Now do the people who--now Boston's [Massachusetts] a city that is unique in that there black people that can trace their roots all the way back to the 1700s in the city. Speaker 2: Oh yeah, oh yes. Speaker 1: It's one of few urban cities that have that kind of--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: That's right that has that legacy of a black free--freeman's experience of families here. And it is unique, but it is also then created certain kinds of intracommunity tensions between the later successive waves of blacks who migrated from the South. And the second and third generation of those who have migrated from the West Indies, whether it's direct or through New York. And then that has become now compounded with those of a foreign language descent, whether it be Haitian or some Hispanic descent who've now come here, largely successively through, through New York. Boston is the third largest Haitian community in the country, you've got you know Dominicans and Panamanians and all different types of groups of blacks who come here in successive waves. Which means you got this very heterogeneous black community that is seeking to participate in the social, cultural, and political life of this city. And so that gave me some exposure working in constituent services and so forth to understand the dynamics of the community. What was going on within the various neighborhoods, issues people had in terms of their social and economic concerns. Schooling issues with regard to the, you know bussing questions and so forth, all can't come up during that period when I'm here. Story_ID: 101113 Speaker 1: Now the other dynamic that happens in '68 [1968], '69 [1969] period that becomes important--well two other pieces--is that as I'm doing all of this now, I'm, I'm still a student but my attention is being divided and it's also not quite as easy as it was before. And particularly in one area which was a required subject, which was French. And I had to have this French class in order to graduate, and I'm taking language requirement because I have to. It's required and I need it to get, get out of school, and the, and this year you had literature, so I--you have to read Voltaire and all of that in French and I wasn't doing very well in this. And as it turned out, I wasn't alone. There's a professor who fortunately was sensitive to this issue and a number of those students who weren't doing well were black students. And he set up a special French literature course on the Negritude Movement. Well this was my first exposure to anything like this, and I began to get into this Aime Cesaire, right and this guy--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Let's pause a second. Story_ID: 101114 Speaker 1: All right, so Negritude, we're talking. Speaker 2: Negritude, right. The, this course he set up as a vehicle to deal with literature but it really then opened me up to just a world of literature and culture to which--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: Had you ever heard of any black writers of French expression before? Speaker 2: No, no. And so to become exposed to that, was just eye-opening for me. At the end of the year, '68 [1968], I went home, (unclear), my father [Edward McCallan Swan, Sr.] was in the hospital, he had another heart attack. It was over the Christmas vacation, and he had a heart attacks before so, you know it's tough to celebrate the holidays you know with any loved one in the hospital. But figured he'd you know recuperate and come home, and he never did. He died on New Year's Day, 1969, and that was, that was a difficult period. 'Cause it then really you know forces me to sort of reconsider everything going on in my life, what am I doing in school, what, or I mean what am I doing now, and what's happening with me? And I knew I wasn't studying hard and I wasn't sure where I was going, and I went back to school, I was taking this course. And at this school at Tufts [University in Medford, Massachusetts], they had a very extensive set of programs for study abroad. And the programs were in London [England] in Tubingen in Italy and, I didn't want to go to London, but I knew I wanna--like to travel but I wanted to go to Africa. Well, (laughing) when I told them that, they said "We don't have a program in Africa, it's a nice idea but we don't have a program." And well I said, "Well how can I, but I, that's where I'd like to go, how can we do this?" And at Tufts, they had just set up something called the Experimental College, through which you can do any kind of innovative or experimental program including designing Independent Majors. So I went to them and I told them what I wanted to do, and that I was really interested in the African studies, issues. And that I designed wanted to design a major around that, and so they said "Well write a proposal," so I said "Well how long," they said "A few pages." I said "Okay," and I went and wrote a proposal. And it was to do an Interdisciplinary Undergraduate major in African Studies, in which I would go to Africa for a year and then write and undergraduate theses in my senior year. And so they said, "But well you need some kind of--you can't just go to Africa, I mean you have to be in the university or some kind of situation." I said "Okay, all right," so I designed the program so that I would go to Africa for--to an African University for three months. I would travel for three months, and I would go south, starting the north and go south, and then the southern hemisphere the, you know, the academic year begins from March to December. So I would go to a university in March until June and then travel for another three months. And they said, "Well this is interesting program and an interesting option, but you have to--what, what university you gonna go to? You have to be accepted at a university," I said "Okay," so I wrote--went to the library, got a list of universities, wrote to the universities and applied. And unlike here in Af--in most African countries, when the K through 12 or you know through secondary school, you pay for, but university is free in Africa. Story_ID: 101115 Speaker 1: And so I applied to these universities and I got two that accepted that accepted me, Fourah Bay College which is a university in [Freetown] Sierra Leone, the oldest contemporary university in West Africa, founded in the 1820s. Speaker 2: How do you spell that? Speaker 1: F-O-U-R-A-H, Fourah Bay, B-A-Y College. And the University of Zambia in Lusaka [Zambia] accepted me and I took those to the university, and that was the basis for my study abroad program. The end of that academic year in '69 [1969], I went home to Detroit [Michigan], worked in the factory, and stayed with my mother [Elizabeth Mae Stokes Swan] who you know my father had died. And I had a Fellowship which was external to the university, between what I saved at home during the summer and the Fellowship, bought a ticket. Went to France on the way to Africa and subsequently went to Africa. During the course of the year, I went from Dakar [Senegal] to Dar es Salaam [Tanzania] basically by land, went to fifteen countries over the course--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: That's quite a trip by land. Speaker 1: Well, it was, it was land by land. It was life transforming, the, the experience it's no other way. I mean we don't have enough tape for me to tell you the stories of that. Story_ID: 101116 Speaker 1: Is there one story that--one good story that you can tell us of this trip. Because this is an epic journey, Dakar [Senegal] to Dar es Salaam [Tanzania]. Speaker 2: Well, I mean even the story of the first day I mean was. I can tell you se--I'll tell you several--maybe just a couple of the stories. When I get there, the first day, I came from Paris [France], and I landed in Fourah Bay [Sierra Leone] early in the morning. And I'd come from you know Paris and I had on my blazer, my grey slacks, white, you know, sweater. And when I got to Freetown [Sierra Leone] at the airport, we landed and it was still dark, it was early in the morning. Maybe I don't know like maybe four or five in the morning. And there was only one light on the terminal building, which was facing out on the plane, a big flood light, flooding the plane. And so when we opened--they opened the door and we got off the plane, and all I could see between the airplane and the building 'cause really couldn't see the terminal, was steam rising from the, tarmac 'cause it just obviously just rained. And it was all you could see was this steam and when you stepped out of the plane; I mean it felt like I was in the exhaust of the engine, and so I walked down the stairs. I said "Well let me just get out of the exhaust of this engine you know 'cause it's hot," you know. And I walked down to the tarmac to then really realized, the engine was off (laughing) it was hot (laughing) and all I could think of, with my Western Reserve [Academy in Hudson, Ohio] background, was Joseph Conrad, the "Heart of Darkness." It's nothing you couldn't see anything, but pitch black steam coming from the airport this one spotlight, it was cla--it was out of Joseph Conrad. I said "Oh my goodness, (laughing) what am I into?" Well finally get into--we go into the terminal and there's no one there you know to meet you, and the--Freetown is set on a series of peninsulas. And the airport is across this bay area, so finally get a bus and the bus finally comes and get us to the other side of town and you enter Freetown. Which is very much you know it's a British colony it's very much like say a Kingston [Jamaica] or if you're familiar with that. British sort of British colonial architecture but Sierra Leone means "Mountains of the Lions." And Freetown the--set on these peninsulas with this mountains that go up behind the city, immediately behind the city about a thousand feet. And the--in the rainy season, the water runs off these mountains down into the city and it floods the city. And it has open sewage, so that they have this huge gutters along the city streets that you know to carry the water right out to the sea. And there's a rainy season and a dry season, and this is the very end of the rainy season, when I came. And so you got these huge gutters, this open sewage thing in this city, which means that the city has its own fragrance. You talked about the sights and smells; well you go to Africa, sights and smells. And in the center of town, there is a huge cotton tree and part of the African cosmology is linked to nature, it's linked to mountains and rivers and trees and so forth. And so this sits in the middle of town and it can't be cut, you can't cut this tree down. So they had to build the road around it. Story_ID: 101117 Speaker 1: And so I go into town and subsequently later on I'm met by some people who take me to the university. University, was Fourah Bay College [Freetown, Sierra Leone], sits about two maybe three quarters of the way up the side of this mountain, on the side of the mountain. And some students meet me there and they're introducing me around and they want me to meet the, the Dean of Students, 'cause he's the one who has to give me my room and so forth and get me situated, so okay. So once I finally get up there and they say but, the, the sense that I'm getting from them is they're really intimidated by this, this person. I guess he's the Disciplinarian of the campus, okay. So I go to meet him and everyone sort of intimidated by this person and I meet him and "How are you sir?" "Fine." Well he and I begin to talk and I'm looking at the other students because they're not, they're all stepped back, right? And so we begin to talk and I find out well the brother went to Lincoln University. I said, "Oh, great" and we begin to talk and have a great conversation; he takes me to my room. Now the room is a single room in the dormitory this male dormitory that it it's a single room with a balcony, that is now overlooking the city here three-quarters of the way, up the mountain side, looking down over this town, gorgeous view. I mean this is what people pay you know hundreds of dollars for, for a Hilton room; this is dorm room at the university. So I say "Hmm," well I meet some other young people who take me into town, and I get settled into room and go to town. And they begin--they take me to a local restaurant and I begin--I get introduced to local food on this first day. And then that evening, there's a social activity with a musical--a band that's playing and we go back up to the university. When we go back up, there--one of the things they have there is, is night market, but the electricity is very sparse. So they use these candles that are lit with oil in these tins, like almost a tomato tin can with this wick that is running on the oil. And when you go up all you see all over town is these candles all over town when you're looking down. And in, in the evening once dusk sets, the traditional societies come out and you begin hear drums from the various communities and they echo up the side of the mountain. And virtually every evening, you'd hear these drums after sunset that would begin to roll well into the morning, depending on which traditional society was having an activity. It was like this for virtually an entire year that I was there. It's extraordinary, the place, and that was my introduction, the first day. Story_ID: 101118 Speaker 1: Another experience was actually in the Congo, we were mentioning the Congo. I'd gone to the Congo and met--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Halfway to Dar es Salaam [Tanzania], I guess, from Sierra Leone. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: It's about halfway? Speaker 1: The real--really the only placed I flew was across the Congo to get from part to the other, I mean the Congo is like--and that was an incredible flight itself. Because I went from Kinshasa [Congo] to Kisangani which is in the northeastern part of Congo which was--in fact Lumumba's home that where [Patrice] Lumumba was from. But when you fly, you're--it's like flying over the United States from say New York [New York City, New York] to, to St. Louis [Missouri] and there's nothing but trees, nothing but forest. And the tributaries of the Congo River, no people, you don't see--sporadically you'll see a scattered--as you're looking down site of a village, that's it. No road, nothing, but trees, it's this enormous forest. And so I flew from Kising--Kinshasa where I, I had come and I stayed there for couple of weeks 'cause my intention was just pass right through Congo. Well that was like (laughing) ambitious, so that's why I wound up having to fly up to Kisangani at least to get on the eastern side of Africa. And I had some friends from Detroit [Michigan], a friend who was doing her dissertation research there in Kisangani at the university. And so I stayed with her and another person who was on the faculty, when I was there, the block, the housing block for the faculty was just on the outskirts of the city. And I'd been there maybe a week, and I was at home with them in the afternoon, it was a Saturday. And a woman came to the door, there was knock on the door and there was a woman who asked in the, their local language, she had a child with her, it was on her back. And she said she was looking for the doctor and then my friend who is the professor there came to the door. I opened the door, I saw the woman and called her, and she then asked the woman well where, "Where you coming from?" The woman said that she had been walking for a day and a half from her village, she'd walked. And that she needed to see the doctor because her child was ill and so the--traditionally carry children in a cloth, there's a cloth in which the child rides on the mother's back. And then we looked at the child, and she, she took the child down and gave us the child and the child was dead. And I mean the, the, the power of that experience, I mean there was--there was nothing you could say. Directed the woman to where the doctor was, but in that experience was one that I mean, I can never forget that. Story_ID: 101119 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, will you please state your full name and spell it for us, please. Speaker 2: Jemadari Kamara, J-E-M-A-D-A-R-I, Kamara, K-A-M-A-R-A. Speaker 1: And sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: It's November 25, 1948 in Detroit, Michigan. Speaker 1: And what is your occupation and title? Speaker 2: I'm currently on the faculty at the University Massachusetts, Boston, and I serve as Director for the Center for African, Caribbean, and Community Development. Speaker 1: All right, and what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is October the tenth, 19--2012. Speaker 1: And where are we, at the present time? Speaker 2: We're in Brockton, Massachusetts and in my home. Speaker 1: Okay. Now we are continuing an interview that we started in 2007, correct? Speaker 2: Correct, yes. Speaker 1: All right, okay. Story_ID: 101120 Speaker 1: And so where we left off, we left--you were on your way to Africa for the first time. I think you were already there. We had begun to talk about your experiences in Africa. So, so I don't think we talked about Congo, of all the experiences you had. I know--I don't think we talked about the Congo so could you tell us what your experiences were in Congo. Speaker 2: Congo was-- (simultaneous) Speaker 1: This is 1960 between 1969 and 1971, right? Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Congo was in 1970. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was a particularly interesting experience. During this time, I traveled from Dakar, Senegal to Dar es Salaam [Tanzania] and did the bulk of this by land, whatever was going or boat or truck, car, whatever was moving. When I reached the Congo, however, I did traverse from Kinshasa to Kisangani which is in the north by air, I flew to Kisangani. I intended to really just cross Congo as quickly as possible to get to east Africa, but I wound up staying there for almost six weeks. It was extraordinarily interesting and a--it was an important experience. I left Kinshasa going to Kisangani where I actually met colleagues who were at the university in Kisangani who were teaching there. And during that visit, I had some important experiences, one of which I'll share with you. We were in the housing block at the university, which is on the edge of town, I'd been there for a few days and someone came to the door while we were there. And I opened the door and it was a woman who was with a child and she was looking for the clinic. And she said that her child was ill, and she--the child was on her back, 'cause women normally carried their child. And she explained that she had been walking for a day and a half to get to the clinic. And she took the child off and gave me the child and the child was dead. And the persons with whom I was staying there, who were teaching at the university, they came forward and then directed the woman to the clinic. I mean it wasn't anything we could really do at that point. But it was one of those kind of jarring experiences that jar you into understanding the reality of people's lives in this context. I wound up leaving there and instead of going to east Africa, I went further north with another friend, to the border with Sudan, the very northern part of Congo. Story_ID: 101121 Speaker 1: Before we go there, I just wanted to ask you--now Congo has such a dramatic history and you're like nine years--you were there like nine years after the assassination of Patrice Lumumba, I guess nine years after the independence what was your assessment of what was going on there? Did you have--did you have expectations what Congo was gonna be like before you went or did you see all of this kind of new? Speaker 2: I didn't know what to expect, really, I did not, no. Let me explain what happens. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So when I go north to this border town, I went with a friend whose brother was the Chief of this community. We were met there and went from the airport in Isiro [Congo] to the--their home village, it's about 35 kilometers, it took seven hours. And the road literally ended in front of the compound, the road was nothing but a bush track, really to get there. The Chief, the brother, was about thirty-five and I was very inquisitive as to how could the Chief be thirty-five, I mean that's very young. Well, as it was told to me, their father had been the Chief but the father had been killed in the Simba revolts [Simba Rebellion in 1964] that had occurred during this period after the assassination of [Patrice] Lumumba. And so it was the Chief who was now guiding the development of this community and linking it to other traditional Chiefs in this area. But the Chief was affectively was the judge, the jury, the police, he had his own sort of paramilitary gendarme. He-- once a week he would hold court, and it was an open compound and there was one portion that had a cover over it. There he would hold court, he would resolve local disputes between families, it's extraordinarily interesting, but he had come to assume this authority--this role and authority because of the revolts that had occurred among the Simbas. So I had an immediate sense of the kind of conflicts intentions that continued and this is almost a decade after Lumumba's assassination. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 101122 Speaker 1: I left there [Isiro, Congo] finally after several weeks being there, and went with them because the Chief held in common a huge coffee plantation. It was a beautiful area and it sort of rolling hills and for--as far as the eye could see was just coffee plantation that everyone worked in common. And the Chief took the coffee then to--was taking it to a border town to sell the coffee so, I hopped in the truck and rode with them. Three days through the Ituri Rainforest which is the home of the [Mbuti] pygmies, and we rode through there. And I'll tell you all kinds of stories about that, but finally - (simultaneous) Speaker 2: Is there one good story that - Speaker 1: Oh yes, well we were along the road we were about a day, first day when we rode out; we actually met some pygmies along the road. And so they wanted--they were going to their village because pygmies are not sedentary, they are hunters and they will tend to trade their game for among the more sedentary farmers and that's how they, they survive. Speaker 2: So you're saying they're constantly on the move and--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: Constantly on the move. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And so they were had hunted, had game and were going home to the village. And so we gave them a ride, they hopped in the truck. Second day, the truck--again the road is this two tire tracks through the forest. So we go out and on the second day and there is this huge mud (laughing) spot we come to and we get stuck in the mud. Now this is a huge Bedford truck carrying coffee to the--packed to the top pygmies on top with the coffee (laughing). And truck stuck in the mud, so, but they were prepared, and they had these huge like two by six planks. So everybody hops out of the truck, drop the planks in the mud and we're now are pushing this truck out of the mud, knee deep in mud, everybody's pushing the truck. Finally, we rock and finally get the truck out of the mud, everybody hops back in. You know you kind of (laughing) push the mud off, keep going and then we're you know, you're deep into the forest and hear (knocking) on the truck say what's up? So and they sit--and the pygmies say what, "Hey we're home." Now there's nothing, but forest (laughing) out here. You said what? So they hop out of the truck and they follow this path and they begin to go deep into the forest. And then you realize further off in the forest is where their village was. And we just continued on, they went on home into the village. And the third day, we stop that night and the third day we, we wound up at the border town, where we were going, which was on the border with Uganda. It's too late to cross the border so I wound up sleeping in a warehouse that night and that's just symbolic of the way this whole year went, it was an extraordinarily year. And it transformed my life, my vision, my understanding of the continent, but most importantly, my understanding of myself. Story_ID: 101123 Speaker 1: Now I would think, now you were raised in Detroit [Michigan] had been a college student, had some dormitory life but did anything that happened on this side of the ocean prepare you for that kind of a trip where you would be staying in a warehouse or outdoors at some points. Or I don't know what did were you ready for that, or did it take you a long time to get used to it? Speaker 2: Didn't take a long time to get used to it, I didn't actually know what to expect. I tend to be a pretty flexible person and so that was helpful, (chuckling) that was very helpful. When I first went to Sierra Leone, which is the first country I came to, certain things there-- it was good that it was English speaking. And I met people there who had experiences in the U.S. so they, some of them understood what where I was coming from and helped to ease me into that experience. Freetown, Sierra Leone is much like Caribbean, Jamaica those English speaking islands, so that was a, a positive transitional adjustment for you. And you'd go into town and have experiences like, for example, they have this really tasty meat on a steep--stick, and I used like, used to eat meat like that and just grilled on the stick. And I say hmm this I really good and I eat it with my friends and if you know. Particularly if you're having a beer, wash it down and it's very spicy, so I asked one of my friends, "Well what, what kind of meat is this? Is this beef or what kind--" and my friend looked at me and said "What did he say?" "He said its meat on a stick;" he said "That's what it is." So you learn: "Taste good, it's not gone kill you (laughing) it's meat on a stick." You probably don't wanna know what kind of meat it is but (laughing) you learn to adjust to your environment. You learn to be flexible and you learn not to make assumptions about context, people, but to be observant. Look before you speak, listen before you have anything to say. Story_ID: 101124 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, so were you in Africa for three years? Speaker 2: No, during this trip, it was a little more than a year that I spent on that trip. Speaker 1: So 1969 and '70 [1970]? Speaker 2: Yes, '69 [1969] and '70 [1970]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I returned to the university and I returned to com--actually complete my baccalaureate and its part of the program [the Experimental College at Tufts University in Medford, Massachusetts] I had to do an undergraduate theses. Which was called "A Colonial Analogy," and it was a comparison of the colonial experiences of the English Colonies, or former English Colonies--former French Colonies and I used the case of our experience here as a Domestic Colony, I did a comparative analysis. Speaker 1: Okay, A Colonial, I'm sorry. Speaker 2: Colonial Analogy. Speaker 1: Analogy, okay, all right. So, now you were at Tufts University, right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay, and your degree was - your Bachelor Degree is in? Speaker 2: It's in Interdisciplinary. Speaker 1: Interdisciplinary. Speaker 2: Degree and I actually designed study. Because at that point, there was no--they did not have African Studies or Black Studies Program. And I through a new College that they had created, which was called The Experimental College, actually designed this major. And then at Tufts, so when I came back, I completed that and then went on and actually did graduate work in Political Science for a year. Did not take the degree because I didn't complete my theses, but I did all the course work. And as it turned out during that period, I was very--became very involved in the community locally, and was taking courses at other institutions. Focusing on issues of African development, and one of those was a course that I took on Frantz Fanon. And as it turned out the person who taught the course, I did well in the course, was the Director of the African and African American Studies Program at Brandeis [University in Waltham, Massachusetts] and after the course, fortunately he offered me a job. Speaker 1: Now who, who was this? Speaker 2: Hussein Adam. Speaker 1: Hussein? Speaker 2: Hussein Adam. Speaker 1: Adam, okay. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Story_ID: 101125 Speaker 1: And so I began teaching in 1972 at Brandeis [University in Waltham, Massachusetts]. I was teaching courses on Community Development and simultaneously was very involved in the local community. I had become active with the Congress of Afrikan People [CAP], and it was in 1972 that CAP was one of the initiators of the National Black Political Convention [National Black Political Assembly] in Gary [Indiana], and was very involved in helping to organize that, since CAP was one of the central organizers of it. And upon returning, one of the participants locally decided that he was so vigorated by this--Black Political Convention that he wanted to run for office. And came to us and ultimately we decided to support him and I became his Campaign Manager. Speaker 2: This is Ron Daniels, right? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: No, okay, okay. Speaker 1: This is young man at that point who was a former businessman--well was a businessman, his name was [William] Bill Owens. Speaker 2: Okay, so this is in, in? Speaker 1: In Boston. Speaker 2: Boston area, okay. Speaker 1: He ran for State Representative and he won the election. Speaker 2: Now before we go further, I just wanna ask you about, to describe for us Congress of Afrikan People, what, what was Congress of Afrikan Pe--, People and how was it founded and for the sake of history, so. Speaker 1: Okay. Congress of Afrikan People was an organization that grew out of the Black Power Movement in the late 1960s. It brought together a set of interest emerging out of the, really the Black Nationalist Movement. There were black humanists; there were socialist all involved in this organization that 1970, along with more traditional community activist organizations created this Congress in Atlanta, in the fall of 1970. Speaker 2: So this was actually like a meeting of a lot of different groups--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: Huge meeting, over 5,000 folks came together to create the Congress, and the organization that emerged from that had the charge of continuing the work. The body of work that had been delineated through the initial Congress meetings that were laid out in a series of areas. Everything from agriculture to development, education, cultural initiatives, spirituality, economic development and political empowerment. The, the organization developed unevenly, because, the, the mission to move forward in each of those areas--was some people were very energetic others sort of fell by the wayside. The follow-up organization and the headquarters of Congress--of the congress became based in Boston, which is how I actually became involved. And the--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Now this is in 19? Speaker 1: This is in 1970, because--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Seventy [1970], Oh, okay. Speaker 1: I didn't, I did not go to the Congress, but I became involved afterwards, because when I returned to Boston, the National Headquarters was here. Following up that meeting, and there was a lot of energy, national energy in supporting this mission, and it's through that, that I became involved. And the resources to support that follow-up activity that had brought these black elected officials and the nationalist and socialists all together, was coming out of the movement that had been led by Forman in 1968, that created the Black Manifesto. Speaker 2: This is [HM] James Forman? Speaker 1: James Forman. Speaker 2: He used to be at SNCC, he used to be the Chairman of SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee]. Speaker 1: And had presented this charge to the ecumenical community to come up with resources to support the movement. And so in Boston, the Black Universalist-[Black] Unitarian Universalist Caucus or BUUC was based here, and became a major supporter of the Congress activity. And it was because of the link of those resources--and it allowed us to have a headquarters office and so forth. That--it is through that linkage that I actually became involved. Story_ID: 101126 Speaker 1: Now you have not mentioned Imamu [Amiri] Baraka and I--now was he--I know he was involved from the--at the beginning of Congress of Afrikan People but--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Baraka was very involved. There were a number of different centers of sort of power and focus within the organization. Baraka and his movement around Newark [New Jersey] was one of those central forces. Those who had been involved in the Black Unitarian Universalist Caucus were another force; they were based in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and in Boston [Massachusetts]. And then there were other foci around the country of people who linked to this. And the principal focus then became to energize both the African Liberation Day activity that occurred in May of '72 [May 27, 1972] and the National Black Political Convention. Those became the two central kind of follow-up activities to the Congress. Story_ID: 101127 Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, so how, so you helped [William] Bill Owens in his campaign, now what was Bill Owens running for? Speaker 2: State Representative. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In one of the districts in Boston [Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We ran the campaign, he won as a--during that period a redistricting occurred during his first term as a Representative, the redistricting based upon 1970 Census. That created the first Black Senatorial District in the history of Massachusetts. He decided he was gonna run for the Senatorial District, and the organization that we put together in part based upon the cadre that came out of CAP [Congress of Afrikan People] and others in the broader community agreed to support him in that effort. I ran his campaign and he was elected as the first black State Senator in the history of Massachusetts in '74 [1974]. Story_ID: 101128 Speaker 1: Okay. Now I know there was a relation--some relationship between--I know there was a lot of reaction to--I'm not sure that relation was in Newark [New Jersey] between Imamu [Amiri] Baraka and Kenneth Gibson. Gibson won as a result or CAP [Congress of Afrikan People] activity or--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: CAP took a very active role in that initial period through and organ--national organization called the National Black Political Assembly that grew out of the '72 [1972] Black Political Convention. That was the follow-up vehicle, and through, through the, through the '70s [1970s] the Organization existed, there was a second National Black Political Convention in Little Rock [Arkansas in March of 1974]. And then there was a campaign to push forward [HM Ronald] Dellums and others for the Presidency and so forth. But the local activism in local communities came through the Assembly of which the Congress of Afrikan People joined with a number of other organizations in these local communities to create the structure, which was the Assembly. But it had socialist and cultural nationalist; all kinds of groups were involved in that. In Newark, their local political activism is what helped to empower Ken Gibson and brought him to power. Speaker 1: Okay CAP Chapters are all over the country? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Active Chapters doing things? Speaker 2: All over the country during that period. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so it was through that, that and the Black Political Assembly that I then became associated with, as you mentioned, with Ron Daniels and then subsequently in '77 [1977] ran his campaign, his local campaign in Youngstown for mayor in Youngstown [Ohio]. Story_ID: 101129 Speaker 1: So [William] Bill Owens was elected [as a State Senator in Massachusetts] and served and did--how did he do, you know? Speaker 2: He did well; Bill served seven terms as a Senate here in Massachusetts. You know after '75 [1975, sic, 1974], that campaign in '75 [1975], I subsequently left Boston [Massachusetts] and went to the University Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan]. So and that's how I then became involved with Ron [Daniels] and his campaign and activities in Youngstown [Ohio], that was the one campaign I lost. But during the middle of that campaign in '77 [1977] I--and during the middle of the campaign, there was a rather shocking event that occurred. Which was that the largest industrial plant closing in the history of the country, up to that time, occurred. In which the Youngstown Sheet and Tube Corporation [Youngstown Iron Sheet and Tube Company], seventh largest steel company, and the only locally owned company at that point remaining. Announced on Monday that it was going to close its plant on Friday, terminated 4,000 workers in one week, and the events surrounding the closing of Sheet and Tube eventually became the basis for my Ph.D. dissertation. Speaker 1: Now this is catastrophic labor event that still haunts Youngstown as half of the city is depopulated. Speaker 2: That's exactly right, destroyed the economic base of the town until today. But one of the interesting phenomena around the closing of Sheet and Tube was that subsequently afterwards, the workers decided they wanted to try to buy the plant. They came to realize that the plant did not close because it wasn't profitable, the plant was actually profitable, plant was making about six percent return per year. But during this period which is, which there was pretty rapid growth and expansion within the economy, the investors who had bought the plant, which was the Lykes Corporation [Lykes Brothers Steamship Company], had subsequently drained it. The concept that you learn in business school is called a "cash cow," and it had sucked the capital out of the firm and was then reinvesting in other businesses where they could get 12 to 18 percent profit. And so they drained the, the steel company and the workers said "Well look, if we can run the business, as we were for six percent, that's fine for us, plus we have jobs." And they turned to the Federal Government to get support in actually buying out the plant. Federal Government ultimately refused to give guarantees, and they weren't able to do it. But as part of their research and exploration, what they found was that in the pension fund for the workers at this particular plant, there were more resources in the pension fund than the total assets of the corporation. Story_ID: 101130 Speaker 1: Seventy-nine [1979] okay, so you're at the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan]--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Yes, but I want to finish telling you about the, the steel industry there [Youngstown Iron Sheet and Tube Company in Youngstown, Ohio]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because the interesting thing was that when the workers found that they had more assets in their pension fund than the total assets of the corporation, but the problem was they couldn't get them. Because in the contract, there's a clause which called the Management Prerogative Clause, which, in which the workers have granted to management the prerogative to invest their pension fund. Because of course workers aren't smart enough to invest their own money, so they give to management the right to invest the--their pension fund and they could not get access to their own money. Therefore they could not leverage that to buyout the corporation. And that's why, until today, Youngstown looks the way it is, lesson learned. Story_ID: 101131 Speaker 1: Yeah. So, now, well, tell us how you made the move to, to the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan]. What happened, was there someone who advised you or about that or somebody you know from there called you to--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: No, I'm from Detroit [Michigan]. Prior to going to Africa in '69 [1969], and in fact, January the first, 1969, my father [Edward McCallan Swan, Sr.] died. My mother [Elizabeth Mae Stokes Swan] was home alone; I'd been away for years, first to school in Ohio [Western Reserve Academy in Hudson, Ohio] then to Boston [Tufts University in Medford, Massachusetts]. I'm looking for graduate school and University of Michigan became an option, and as it turned out as I looked around the country I was looking for an applied field. I did not want to become a political scientist, I didn't want to become an economist, I knew that. And my own interdisciplinary background was one that had me looking for something that would, would really be an interdisciplinary applied field. But I also knew I had to have the Ph.D., because my experience at Brandeis [University in Waltham, Massachusetts] was such that I, I knew I wanted to teach in higher education, and I had to have a Ph.D. to do that. Speaker 1: Now applied field you mean some occupation that would allow you to build something or create something that--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: That's right, exactly. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so planning was something that became, it was very interesting to me, area around urban planning. And I'd look at a number of different programs, University of North Carolina [Chapel Hill, North Carolina], UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles], others. There was a, a unique program, however at the University of Michigan, which was a Ph.D. only program. I had already done graduate work, actually at Tufts, and the program was in Urban Technological and Environmental Planning. It was an interdisciplinary program that drew on faculty from the environmental area, geography, geology, political science, economics, it's tailored made for me. And it was in Michigan a few minutes from home, that's why I wound up there. Speaker 1: Now what--did your experiences in the political--as a political campaign manager and as an organizer as such like influence this decisions and--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Yes, absolutely. And it grounded me with a focus on urban community development issues. I knew that was the perspective that I wanted to have and to bring to whatever body of work I was going to be engaged in. And when I say "applied," I wanted to be able to take the theory and to be able to apply that in community. So praxis become very important for me--to be able to link theory with that whole process of community development, whether it be political or economic and so. Story_ID: 101132 Speaker 1: Okay now during some period of time in the '70s [1970s] you changed your name, I don't know when it was but, we had a have hazy idea in the outline when it was in the '70s [1970s] but when was it, was it before you went to the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was during the period when I returned from Africa and was part of the Congress of Afrikan People and became involved in a much larger extended family. Which was part of the Black Humanist Fellowship and it was during that period that I formerly as part of the extended family changed my name and that of my family. Speaker 1: Now the Black Humanist Fellowship is that, I know you mentioned the UUs [Unitarian Universalists], or was it part of the Universal U--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: A number of the members where, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. But it wasn't an official part of that? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But a number of them were. Speaker 1: So it's called the Black Humanist Fellowship? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And who provided--who was the leader? Speaker 2: Well there were--the actual Director of the Congress of Afrikan People at that time was Hayward Henry, who is now Mtangulizi Sanyika. He was based in Boston [Massachusetts] and there was another branch of the group based in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and then other people moved various places in the country, Atlanta [Georgia] and subsequently Ohio, Chicago [Illinois] and so forth. But those were the central basis of the organization in the family. Speaker 1: Okay. This is named the Black Humanist Fellowship you know implies it wasn't gonna be a religious organization, I guess on some level? Speaker 2: Spiritual, certainly there was a spiritual component to the engagement and the rooting of the family, the emergence of Kwanzaa and the seven principals is kind of guiding force. And spiritual base Kawaida which you know was linked up became the west coast kind of dimension of what was happening in the Congress and the link between [HM Maulana] Karenga and [Amiri] Baraka and so forth. Was all part of what was going on during that period, and the humanist ideas were central to the philosophy and the spiritual base of the social relationships in the family. Speaker 1: Okay, so now did you, did your name change occur as part of a, a it was a part of a mandate of the, of CAP or--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: No, no. It was not a mandate, not of CAP at all, no, not at all. But it, it grew out of my own personal beliefs and spiritual transition then at that point. When I returned from Africa, I was deeply immersed in sort of African Nationalism and what on this side had become a cultural nationalism movement. So I was very heavily involved in that. Speaker 1: Now, what does your name mean and what culture does it come from? Speaker 2: Kamara is a traditional West African name. Bambara is various places it has different meanings, but it's a traditional name. From Senegal through Cote d'Ivoire you'll hear that name, even sometimes in East Africa. And in some places as in Cote d'Ivoire it has a sense of being teacher but it's one of the traditional surnames or clan names. Jemadari is actually an East African name, it's Swahili, literally in Swahili, it'd be a title, one who leads an army or general or one who is a leader and that is that framework. It was intentionally Pan-African in its focus given that, don't know really where we are from in our source. But we do know its African and philosophically I'm deeply committed to the ideals of Pan-Africanism. Speaker 1: Okay. Now as many people who, who took African names in those days how did it affect your family and was, was it tough for people to accept the different name or was it easy? Speaker 2: For my mother [Elizabeth Mae Stokes Swan], I think it was more difficult, my brother's [Edward McAllen Swan, Jr.] been very accepting, and understanding that's where I was and that's what my commitment was to. My mother was more, more difficult, different generation, and of course by at this period, my, my father had already passed. Story_ID: 101133 Speaker 1: Okay, all right. I'd thought I'd explore that, but I know that black studies is often criticized as being too esoteric and that sort of thing, for having nothing to do with the practical world. But you know as you're discussing here you know talking about the political campaigns and political organizing, now you're talking about applied approach to you know your life's work, so. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And the--you know the wide variety of the models of Black Studies programs in the, in the country and how they have developed and their relationship to the local communities. Many of which were instrumental in their creation and formation out of the demand for greater services access to these institutions. And support from those institutions for the very process of community development has helped to shape my commitment to those programs and the relationship of the programs that I've been involved in. Whether it's in Flint, Michigan or Ypsilanti [Eastern Michigan University in Ypsilanti, Michigan], where I taught or University Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] or even here in Boston [Massachusetts], that a dimension of my work will always be linked to that local community. Here for instance at the University of Massachusetts in Boston, the Black Studies Program changed its name, probably two decades ago now. To become an Africana Studies Program, with a more conscious and we felt more clear orientation to the Pan-African vision that we had of the program. And a conscious effort to orient our courses to those that dealt with African Studies, Caribbean Studies and African American Studies. Story_ID: 101134 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, now you're at the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] from '75 [1975] to '79 [1979] is that true? Speaker 2: Michigan, '75 [1975] to '88 [1988]. Speaker 1: Eighty-eight [1988] okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Off and on in various relationships there, but yes, I was in Michigan during that time. I left to go abroad and so forth but-- Speaker 1: So you were able to interact with your family in Detroit [Michigan]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: The whole time? Speaker 2: Very important period, my chil--my children were born during that time, my son was born in-- while I was in Ann Arbor, my daughter was born in Africa, when I had gone for an interim period to teach in West Africa, so that was an important period in the '80s [1980s]. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So the experience in Youngstown [Ohio] informed your Ph.D. dissertation or? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And--so what was your dissertation title and just tell us I guess a little about it. Speaker 2: It was called "Planning Plant Closings and Public Policy." And it was about the very experience that we just talked about with the closing of Sheet and Tube [Youngstown Iron Sheet and Tube Company factory in Youngstown, Ohio] that was central to it. And the struggle of workers to reshape their lives to and to attempt to take over the corporation, which they were unsuccessful doing. One of the ironies of the entire process is that even though workers were not able to take over the corporation they built this movement in attempt to do that. In the midst of this in Youngstown, the city, which is now been devastated agrees to send several hundred thousand, I forget the exact number. Hundred thousand dollars back to the Federal Government from HUD [United States Department of Housing and Urban Development] because they refused to integrate one of the neighborhoods. And HUD said, "We will not give you the money for the housing," they send the money back as opposed to integrating the neighborhood, that's how deep racism is. Speaker 1: Now in terms of Ron Daniels' campaign, now back in '77 [1977] did, did, was there a reasonable chance for him to become Mayor, I mean in regards to the black population in--of Youngstown [Ohio]. I don't know how much it was an all that--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: I mean numeric--numerically we calculated that with the black community base, and some liberal swing votes, there was not a majority black in the town, and in a three way race, he could possibly win, but he didn't. I mean Sheet and Tube went down and (chuckling) and all of that went out the window, and he, he lost, he lost at that time. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 101135 Speaker 1: But during that period something else also happened that was very in--instructive and influential for me. Because I had an opportunity having worked to--through CAP [Congress of Afrikan People] with independent community based activities and organizations. And one of which was an independent community school where my son had gone in Detroit [Michigan]. And with that group, I had an opportunity to go to China. Speaker 2: Okay now is this Aisha Shule [Aisha Shule/W.E.B. DuBois Preparatory Academy] or? Speaker 1: Well, yes. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Actually, yes. Speaker 2: It's the Humphreys. Speaker 1: Yes, exactly, Imani [Humphrey], right. I had served on the board and had been an advisor to them, and represented them as part of the group of independent black institutions that was the first such group to go China in 1977. Speaker 2: That's a CIBI [Council of Independent Black Institutions], yeah. Speaker 1: That's right, exactly, and that was really influential trip for me. Because I had never been in a context that was, was so foreign even in Africa, there were things you could relate to. This was just totally different experience and it was just at the period where the Gang of Four was being blamed for all of the, the failures of the system and Deng Xiaoping was rising to power and really extremely interesting experience for me. Speaker 2: China had just been opened up to travelers from the West. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: In 1974 by [President] Richard Nixon. Speaker 1: Exactly. Speaker 2: And so. Speaker 1: So this was right after that. Speaker 2: I think that maybe before '74 [1974] maybe in--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: It was two, '72 [1972]. Speaker 2: Seventy-two [1972] right. Speaker 1: With Nixon, that's exactly right. Speaker 2: It's still like five years, you know. And so this is--was this the first large group of African Americans to go to China? Speaker 1: Yes, correct, it was very, very interesting. And helped to--again open me up more to my thinking and understanding of the nature of the world and what was going on. Speaker 2: You know, it's interesting I think, I've heard people describe it--you know I think the leader--the wife--former wife [Jiang Qing] of Mao Zedong. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: Who, who been a leader--she was an actress and the Cultural Revolution was on trial. Speaker 1: That's right, she was one of--she was one of the members of the Gang of Four who were being blamed for all of the failures of the state. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: That's exactly right. Speaker 2: I know it resounded with cultural nationalists 'cause they were thinking about you know trying to change cul--culture you know how one of those dynamics. Speaker 1: And the, the use of culture, I mean for us we're in now in the midst of building the National Black Political Assembly here. We had failed in the initial attempt in '76 [1976] now to have a national presidential candidate and so, but culture is, is central to what, this movement. We're building this base of Kwanzaa now, this is new. And now we see what's going on in China because Mao was very influential. The role of, of culture that had been put forward under Mao Zedong, and now you're seeing this being challenged and, yeah, makes you question. Speaker 2: Now what was the biggest, I guess the thing that you learned that have stays with you the most about that trip? Speaker 1: About that particular trip? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Discipline, discipline, the discipline of that society. Whether one felt that it was you know ordered, centrally ordered or but discipline and the intense pressure for agricultural development. Because only twenty-five percent of the land in China is aeratable and so, like here you have front lawn and backyard. In China, if you got a yard, you grow, you grow food (laughing), front yard, backyard, they grew food. Triple cropped, we had a chance to go as we moved to various communities by train, very good experience. Because you get to see what's going on in the rural communities and the terrace farming the intense triple cropping of that, how they did the irrigation. The differential between sort of--the agricultural peasant lifestyle with that of urban communities, you got to see the comparisons. You got to meet people, and yes it was very controlled because unlike other places in Africa, if I move I can talk to them. If I you know--at least converse it in French, so I can speak to people, I don't need to have the interpreter. In China you know it's whatever he said they said (laughing), but still you get to see, you hear. The--that the intensity of the agriculture, the discipline and order of the society, were really impressive to me. Story_ID: 101136 Speaker 1: Okay, now you earned your Ph.D. in 1983 in technological and environmental planning, so--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: It's urban technological and environmental planning. Speaker 1: Oh, I'm sorry, urban technological and environmental planning. Okay, now are there any figures from the University Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] that stand out I guess today as--when you look back as mentors or role models for you? Speaker 2: Oh at the University, well I had the opportunity there to work with Ali Mazrui and [HM] Niara Sudarkasa, they were both--I was teaching in the department there, in the Center for African and Afroamerican Studies [now the Department of Afroamerican and African Studies]. They were both very supportive colleagues in, in that process. Speaker 1: Okay. I think. Speaker 2: Harold Cruse was there at that time and you know. Speaker 1: Did you have much interaction with Harold Cruse? Speaker 2: I had some, Cruse was not in the department that I was in, nor was he actually in the Center. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But you know sure you sit down have a glass of wine with Harold; he'll tell you all kinds of stories (laughing). Speaker 1: A real icon, a lot of people, you know read his book again and again, "The Crisis of the Negro Intellectual." Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Now what about then my memories bolting now but the failure that husband and wife they started the, I almost had it there. They founded the Black Educators Organization [National Alliance of Black School Educators], the Moody's, yeah the Moody's. Speaker 2: Oh, Chuck Moody [HM Charles D. Moody], sure, yeah. Chuck was there; he was in Education, but yes and then took an administrative position. Was very, very active in the community there, certainly, and helped the institution begin to establish its relationships with South Africa. He's the one that initiated that. Speaker 1: Charles Moody. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Right. Story_ID: 101137 Speaker 1: So, okay, so in '83 [1983], you took a position as Assistant Professor of Resource and Community Sciences at the University Michigan at Flint [Michigan], right? Speaker 2: Right. You know I continued to teach at in the Center [Center for Afroamerican and African Studies at the University of Michigan] in Ann Arbor; John Lockhart was there, the artist with, with us. But I took the position in Flint because it allowed me to really begin to ground my, my work in African and Afroamerican Studies in an urban community. And much like Detroit [Michigan], I mean Flint is that same kind of community and having then just recently done that work on planning and plant closings, I mean it was an ideal kind of situation for me. Speaker 1: Okay, so you became the Chairman of the African/Afro-American Studies Department there, right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Did, did you establish the department? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No, I actually followed couple of people, Tony Martin had been there previously and he had at that point moved on to--he was here at Wellesley [College in Wellesley, Massachusetts], come to Wellesley, and I think there was on director before between us. But the, the work was very positive, very positive. It's a tough town, it's a working class town, it's my kind of town, it's Detroit. And I was, I related to people well there, the students, I didn't feel that the university really supported the work that we were doing; least in the way that you know I felt was most beneficial given the size and significance of that local black community in Flint. And the devastation that it was experiencing, but I was able to do some things there. And one of those was in hosting a conference on socially responsible investment, and that was, that was very positive. We produced a volume from that around issues of socially responsible investment and economic development in urban communities. And there was a very positive exchange between the unions, some of the foundations, particularly Mott [Charles Stewart Mott Foundation] that's based in, in Flint. And institutional actors looking at the questions of economic and community development in communities that were being devastated by this industrial transformation incurring in the country. Speaker 1: Now this the time Flint was in a crisis that's depicted in "Roger and Me." The film. Speaker 2: That's right; in fact Michael, Michael Moore was there. Michael Moore was there in town, we did some shows with him, and about those very issues going on there. Speaker 1: And Mott Foundation is applesauce people, right? Mott's Apple--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: No, that's General Motors. Speaker 1: No Mott. Speaker 2: Mott is General Motors. Speaker 1: Mott, M-O-T-T? Speaker 2: M-O-T-T, General Motors. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: That's where General Motors started, that's their basis, Buick is the base there, that's who Mott is. Speaker 1: Okay, I thought it was--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Charles Stewart Mott. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Is General Motors. Speaker 1: Oh, okay, all right, all right, all right, okay. I'm glad you cleared that up. (unclear) But yeah, Charles Steward Mott, okay, all right. Story_ID: 101138 Speaker 1: So okay, so you're in Flint [Michigan] through 1986, right? Speaker 2: No, I was there through '88 [1988], I--but in that period, I took a Fulbright Fellowship from 1985 to '87 [1987] and I did that Fulbright in the Republic of Benin in West Africa. During the prior few years, the Center for African and African American Studies [sic, Center for Afroamerican and African Studies] at the University Michigan in Ann Arbor where I was teaching had established a partnership relationship with the university which was called the Universite Nationale du Benin [National University of Benin]. And [HM] Niara Sudarkasa who was the Associate Director there and subsequently went on to become the President of Lincoln University [Oxford, Pennsylvania], had initiated this car--relationship with colleagues from Universite Nationale du Benin. And out of the exchanges I developed a cordial relationship with a number of colleagues there and so for the Fulbright, I applied to work with them. And went to Cotonou [Benin], lived there for two years, my daughter was born there, and actually until today, have maintained rather close relationships in the Republic. Speaker 1: Okay. Now Benin is closely related to Ghana, right, I mean the people aren't they? Speaker 2: They related it's even closer relationships with Yoruba. Speaker 1: Oh Yoruba, yeah. Speaker 2: In, in Western Nigeria, because the, the Yoruba and the Egun basically the same people and the Fon are their cousins and then Igbomina are their cousins going into Togo, all of the people along in that coastal forest zone are related, all the way down. Story_ID: 101139 Speaker 1: Now how is this Fulbright Scholarship [to the Republic of Benin in 1985] different from your first trip in Africa? Speaker 2: Interesting. I had refused to go back to Africa after 1970, had several offers, and I did so because I could not find a way emotionally and spiritually to go back to Africa for two weeks and come back, after what I had been through during that first experience. And so it was not until I really had an opportunity to have an extended stay there that I chose to go. And I wanted to be able to take my family, and so this opportunity happed to work out well, the timing was good. I'd finished my, my academic work and it allowed me to have the time that I really needed to engage the continent again. I think that as we--certainly as I have reflected on my own career, there has been a tension and I've struggled to at this point, I think, create a healthy balance in the tension between the work that I do in Africa and that in the African American experience here. But there's always been back and forth and for the first part, there were long periods in which one, I'd get deeply focused on urban development here running political campaigns, I'm urban focus here. And then from this period I'll go back, I live in Africa for two years and then become more involved in that. I will come back when I return from West Africa, I can go back to Flint [Michigan] for a year, and then subsequently will come to, to Boston. And that grew out of relationships that I'd developed actually before I left around the Socially Responsible Investment Activity Industrial Policy [sic, "Socially Responsible Investment and Economic Development"]. And there was a position open here focusing on community development and an opportunity to really lead a school that had that as its mission. Which is brought me in '88 [1988] back to Boston at University of Massachusetts. But during this period in, in West Africa, I become involved with development issues there. One of the important dimensions of that was the work that I did with a small group of young people who were dealing with some cutting edge in--innovative approaches to applied uses of technologies. It's called SATAD but it was an organization that dealt with the application of appropriate technology for development there. Speaker 1: How do you spell that? Speaker 2: S-A-T-A-D, it's an acronym. Speaker 1: And that stands for? Speaker 2: Societe, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It's in French. Speaker 1: Societe. Speaker 2: Societe, Africaine. Speaker 1: Africaine. Speaker 2: de Technologie Appropriee de Developpement or SATAD. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, it's important. So you were--one thing you were there as a student before that year and you're, you're back as a professional for the--now how, how long did you stay for the Fulbright? Speaker 2: Two years. Speaker 1: Two years, okay. So you're there for two years this time, okay. Speaker 2: And it was it was wonderful experience. My daughter was born there, homebirth, my son began school in French and he was placed in an environment where no one in the school spoke English, so he had to learn French. And till today, he speaks with a more natural native accent than I do. And it was a it was a very good experience. Story_ID: 101140 Speaker 1: So now I did not ask you about getting married [to Makeda Millett Kamara]. Now can you tell us how you met your wife and how you-- Speaker 2: Actually I met my wife, at that time, through CAP [Congress of Afrikan People], I was involved in community organizing and she was working with some community organizations and I met through that environment. She also happened to be--had been a student at Brandeis [University in Waltham, Massachusetts], which was where I was going to be teaching. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right. So, so you got married and what, what year? Speaker 2: Seventy-seven [1977]. Speaker 1: Okay, 1977. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So I had a note that your mike--that your wife became a midwife. Speaker 2: Yes. She very well educated, she has-she--while I was at [University of] Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] she took a Masters in Public Health at Michigan and became very involved with--through the health area issues of both public health and women's issues, decided that she wanted to go on in that field. And when I moved to, to Boston [Massachusetts], at the university here [University of Massachusetts in Boston], she went back to school to take a nursing degree, well Bachelors in Nursing and then subsequently a Masters--second Masters in Public Health, but in Midwifery. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: 'Cause very committed to that field. Speaker 1: Okay. And it seems, there seem to be a you know, we're about the same age and living through that period of time of black counterculture that developed when women were becoming midwives and you know people were taking African names. A lot of things were-diets were changing and you know social customs Kwanzaa was established, other things were going on, all these things were going on around the same time. I just wanted to say that (laughing). Speaker 2: Well we were very involved and influenced by those dynamics, both during that initial period while being in the community here in Boston and then being in a community like we were in Ann Arbor. I--I lived in Ann Arbor, even though I was from Detroit [Michigan] and was there all the time, but we still lived in Ann Arbor and that's a very strong counterculture there, cooperative movements. And that in certainly influenced our thinking in the kind of programs that I was engaged in influenced that. And so I think that's very true. Story_ID: 101141 Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so, okay, so in '88 [1988] you came back to Massachusetts, right or yes, right. Okay and tell us, so what, what brought you back to Massachusetts? Speaker 2: The opportunity to actually administer the College of Public and Community Services at the University of Massachusetts. I had no intention of coming back to Boston when I left in '75 [1975], I was gone (laughing). But this was structured as the non-traditional college, if you will at the University of Massachusetts, Boston. Its focus was on service, the commitment to community service, it had a non-traditional student body mean age of our students was thirty-six, there no grades, it was a competency based institution. All of which I found attractive, and it was right in the heart of Boston. And so I was very attractive by that and made that decision to return. Having done that, you will recall '88 [1988] was in the midst of the [Michael] Dukakis campaign. I came late in the summer to come adjusted to the institution, Dukakis loses the election, in the process, it becomes clear that the "Massachusetts Miracle," which was the thing that had thrust him into the, the National limelight that the Massachusetts miracle was really a myth. And that the resources that it was suggested were there were not. In the first thirty-three months that I was the Dean, I had 11 reversions in my budget, wound up having to release people that I brought on. The college which was in the center of the city was forced to move to the central campus, which and being in the central city, allowed us to have a, a certain kind of mix of our students on an integrity of the unit that we really lost when we moved the Harbor Campus. So it was a very difficult period. Speaker 1: Where did the school move to? Speaker 2: To the Harbor, it's right on the Harbor where they, sort of main campus was, but this college was in town and--it had been in the offices where the president of the university system was lodged right downtown. It's a wonderful location given the mission of the institution. Story_ID: 101142 Speaker 1: And so did that for five years and said, I want to go back to be able to do the work that I really came here to do. And so I went back to the Black Studies Program at that point, and through the--that department, we moved to ultimately set up the Center for African, Caribbean, and Community Development, which is the community research and service arm of that Africana Studies Department. Speaker 2: So this is in 1993, right? Speaker 1: Yes, that the, I guess the Center ul--get set up during the '90s [1990s] and there's a body of work that we begin to do focusing initially on community development issues. We had something called the Community Action Information Network, or CAIN Project, which brought university resources together to see how we could put those at the service of community organizers. In a wide variety of different kinds of community based organizations. Some were health centers, community housing agencies or community organizing centers, and so forth. Story_ID: 101143 Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, let's see and you published, you were publishing during this period too. You published "Innovative Approaches to Education and Community Service: Models and Strategies for Change and Empowerment" and this is a--is this a standalone book? Speaker 2: Yes, that's a, a book that was--I co-edited with colleagues at the College of Public and Community Service [University of Massachusetts in Boston, Massachusetts], really about the competency model. As an innovative approach to education, how can competency-based education be used as a vehicle for community development. In a range of disciplines, the college had five different components dealing with law, only undergraduate law program really in the city. We had Community Planning Department, Human Services, Gerontology and so forth. So how can it be applied in this range of areas at the service of communities and that's what that book is about. With the CAIN Project [Community Action Information Network], which lasted almost a decade, we would have a series of community retreats. And based upon the work that the community based organizations were doing, we published a series of monographs. Which were entitled "Race, Space, and Policy Issues," they grew out of the work of those various community based organizations. And in fact, that's work that has continued through the center in different forms and there is a book of that title that in fact I'm working on right now. Grappling with those questions of the intersection of both "Race and Space," both structurally and metaphorically with race. Actually looking questions, of, of demographics, space looking at geographic questions and public policy issues, and what's the nature of that intersection. Story_ID: 101144 Speaker 1: Okay, during this period of time you were also involved in a project with the government of Cape Verde, right? Speaker 2: Yes. The Center [Center for African, Caribbean, and Community Development at the University of Massachusetts in Boston] is very small, number of faculty with no institutional support, so we're--have to generate our own funds and to support the projects. And one of those was--grew out of our relationship with the local Cape Verdean community, there's a Consulate here in Boston. And we were asked to explore the possibilities for the use of renewable energy to become a vehicle for economic development for the Islands. This is in the mid '90s [1990s]. So I put a team together that included some of the technical engineers from our campus in Lowell [Massachusetts] and a group of young African engineers out of MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology in Cambridge, Massachusetts] who had created something called the African Technology Forum in a team and we went to Cape Verde. And we looked at that question and produced a report for the government. And one of the interesting things that was a consequence of study for me, because I had become engaged in Benin in looking at this question application of appropriate technologies, renewable energy being one of them. That technology was not the real issue or impediment in Cape Verde, it was rather the question of access to credit within the, the Islands. And the vision of the state or entrepreneurs whoever was going to make the initiative to look at the market as not solely being the Islands, but to look at it in the context of regional integration through ECOWAS [Economic Community of West African States]. If West Africa is seen as your market, ECOWAS breaks down those trade barriers and its free trade within that zone. Then in fact now your market is e-enormous. Until today, to my knowledge, there is not one producer, assembler or anyone that fabricates renewable energy on the continent of Africa. All of it is imported, the bulk in the last decade has be--has been imported from China. Prior to that, the market was controlled, its dominated by Germans, Siemens, but of the U.S. manufacturers took a share and had it particular approach they engaged in after 2000. But no one assembles them on the continent of Africa. So everyone has to import from somewhere, and till now remains an opportunity. Speaker 1: Yeah that's something that's. Speaker 2: And there in Cape Verde, there was in interesting mix, because they also had engaged in a series of experimental site, sites that had implemented wind energy in the Islands. So the mix of both wind and solar in hybrid forms, could be a significant source of power for them and energy. Story_ID: 101145 Speaker 1: Okay, so in '93 [1993] you became a professor in the Africana Studies Department [at the University of Massachusetts in Boston]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So you moved from the, the College of Public and Community Service to Africana Studies. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And, and why again does that--did you make that move? Speaker 2: Well to really get back to my base of implementing programs through Africana Studies. And it was just a more comfortable space for me to do that work. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and, okay. So you continued to publish and let's see in, okay, well some of the publications here, I guess we should mention. "State of the Race" was published in 1994, which is say, it's a--I don't know why I'm so stupid today, but--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Right. No, it's a--that was a monograph, it's interesting that you're--when you raise these things because they, they're, they're these threads in my work such as the, the "Race, Space and Public Policy Issues". Those are publishes monographs, much of this work in the '90s [1990s] is--are monographs, and--but that work I'm now coming back to de put into book form. Same thing with the "State of the Race," they're series of monographs that we did that were linked to conferences held at Sojourner-Douglass College [Baltimore, Maryland]-(simultaneous) Speaker 1: Yeah, searching for the word anthology, is an anthology of, of works? Speaker 2: Well that anthology gets, actually put together, these are monographs, I think its 94 [1994], 96 [1996] that we do those monographs. It is in 2004 that we put together the anthology and entitled "State of the Race," which came out as in book form. And I'm very proud of that, we won the Charshee McIntyre Award with that and there were some twenty-five contributors from eight different countries in that volume "State of the Race. Speaker 1: This is just a chapter--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Those, those are monographs, those are, those are taken from the conference where there were contributors at the conference who put them together in monograph form and published them through the, the Center [Center for African, Caribbean, and Community Development at the University of Massachusetts in Boston] as monographs. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Story_ID: 101146 Speaker 1: So, so what has been I guess, you became the Chair of the Africana Studies Department [at the University of Massachusetts in Boston] when--when was it? Speaker 2: The first time, I'm not, I'm not sure even sure the date, it was in the '90s [1990s], was it '96 [1996] maybe till 2000 until I went on the second Fulbright that I did in Senegal. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I, I served off and on for two or three times as Chair of the Africana Studies Department. And I did that up until 2000 when I then left to go to, to Senegal on a Fulbright Fellowship. Speaker 1: Well the question I have is, is since I guess since its inception, Africana Studies Black Studies, African Studies, African Studies, African American, Afro Studies, all these departments and black cultural centers all over the country that were formed in the late '60s [1960s] early '70s [1970s] had been under some kind of attack there. They're never fully comfortable on a campus, not like the English Department or something you know or the Physics Department or something, they're always seem to be under attack. And how--how have you as Chairman of this department, at least twice, dealt with the attacks and, and continue to move forward and be productive? Speaker 2: Very good question, one of the important components for us is trying never to lose the sense of mission as to how and why the department was established, and to maintain a link and a grounding with that community. The academy can be very isolating in--in fact that's part of the way in fact it functions based upon individualism. You as an individual through your individual work a struggle to acquire your tenure or your promotion individually. And it can be very isolating because that which we would consider community service or applied research is not really a priority of the institution. And will be given subservient value as they look at the overall profile. So there's a tension there and you have to continue to struggle with that, but you also have to deal with the institution on its terms. You have to have so many majors; you have to continue to produce research in some form. And its attention that continues, I'm dealing with that and confronting that right now in the university. Our department has had to continue to struggle that and from that period which I was suggesting around [Michael] Dukakis [1988] when all the cuts came and so forth, the department was decimated. It was brought to, there 1.5 persons from a department that had had seven or eight lines. So then it was we just had to rebuild, rebuild very systematically getting one line at a time. You waited couple more; you get another line back and just systematically building it back, but hopefully doing so now on a stronger foundation that will allow you to be able to confront those sort of external forces more solidly. And that's where we are now, we've gotten new lines, new line this year, hopefully a new line next year, so systematically it's coming back. And we now have, I guess probably at least six to seven lines. Story_ID: 101147 Speaker 1: Do you have a, a strong community support for what you're doing? Speaker 2: Not strong enough, it's--we do good work, we do good work. The Center that we set up, Center for African, Caribbean, and Community Development [at the University of Massachusetts in Boston], I think has been helpful. We need to do more, we need to do more with our alumni, but the Center has allowed us to take this global African world and to more systematically focus on building bridges to specific communities that are based here. And to build, and, and deepen our roots and our work within those communities, for example, in looking at the Caribbean. I mean with all the Islands there, how do you decided whether you gone focus on Jamaica or Barbados or, and get the Cubans mad or you know people from Haiti or what? How do you decide? Well, we did an assessment; we said that Boston is unique, in that it has the third largest Haitian community in the country. There were a group of people in the community who had begun an association of Haitians scholars and were looking for a base, and we said "We'll work with you." And so with the Haitians Studies Association, we established through--with the university a Haitian Studies Project. And that has become the base then of our engagement with the Caribbean, we were fortunate to be able to have some of our study abroad programs endowed. And we got a small endowment that would help student support them in their study and their travel abroad. So we did a study abroad in Haiti and then we did Jamaica and Haiti, then we did Cuba. And now--and there was a group that was doing languages, the Creole language to support and sustain the culture. Now for almost eighteen years, we've run the Haitian Creole Language and Culture [Summer] Institute and it is one of the premiere such institutes in the country. People from NGO's [Non-governmental organizations] or Ph.D.'s or from the Haitian community come to learn Creole; we offer everything from Basic Introductory Haitian Creole to translation. So we systematically focused and based our re--our work on our linkages to the local community. For the last fifteen years, on [Reverend] Dr. Martin Luther King's, Jr.'s, birthday, we have linked Dr. King's birthday to the Cape Verdean community because the leader of their revolution in PAIGC [African Party for the Independence of Guinea and Cape Verde] was Amilcar Cabral and he was assassinated the same week as Dr. King's birthday. So we have hosted the Martin Luther King Jr./Amilcar Cabral Commemorative Program for fifteen years. We have several hundred young people coming to campus, engaging with ideas, culture around that, a daylong set of activities. And next year, through our study abroad program in West Africa, we'll now engage that program for the first time in Africa with the Amilcar Cabral Foundation which now headed by the former President Pedro Pires. So it's that way, engaging the community, working with them doing the study for the government, rooting it in community that allows us then to broaden and deepen that work. So it's, it's very systematic on our part and there is a reason why we focus on these communities, and it is the reengagement of that triangle, very consciously, that we're attempting to do. Story_ID: 101281 Speaker 1: Now there, there are a lot, I don't know correct if I'm wrong, but there seems to be just by doing these interviews seem to be a, quite a few people from Barbados in the Boston [Massachusetts] area. Speaker 2: There's a very, it's a very large Bajan community and I'm finding more and more people who have roots in Barbados here that didn't know before that. So it's a large community of people from Barbados and Jamaica who are in Boston. Speaker 1: Yeah, I think most of our interviews, the--if they had--if it's West Indian ancestry it's Barbados. I don't, I don't--it kind of surprises me because I didn't really know that before. Speaker 2: Well, Boston is a very interesting community in that sense. And I think it; it's one of the reasons why it provides such an interesting model for the country. Because unlike the community where I grew up, if you are black, that meant you're African American, and that's who you were. And if you were Latino, you're Mexican, I mean that's the way it was and everybody else was white (laughing), that's where, where I grew up. When I came here, they talked about "people of color" and well what do you mean? Well the black community but when they talked about the black community, come to find out that barely half the black community is African American, that they're really Jamaican, they're from Barbados, they're from Panama they're from all these other places, here in Boston. Haitian and that's been eye-opening, but it is also forced us to begin to engage a set of conversations. And we don't do it enough, but its beginning across these ethnicities. One of the, in fact articles that is in the first "State of the Race" volume, it's a very interesting, and I think important one that talks about "racenicity." And this is linkage between the questions of ethnicity and race and how they become manifest within group and between groups. And the nature of the kinds of conversations that are required. And as more and more people from Africa have now come and you're producing this significant first gener--or second generation born here of people of direct African decent, who coming from Nigeria, largely here. But even some other African countries, but who have children who are born here, who are truly African American. They're intragroup culture tensions, many of them don't speak Yoruba or Ebo, the parents want them to, they wanna be African American, they wanna listen to Hip Hop, they wanna you know. They don't wanna wear traditional garb, and so there these tensions, but they're proud of their Yoruba name. So there these tensions that are going on in conversations that we within the black community need to have more crisply and more sharply because there are things that people feel that they don't say. And until we say it and we put it on the table, we confront some of those issues, I don't think that we will have the, the ability to move forward in--with the kind of unity that we need. And Boston offers us a kind of laboratory to engage those issues, and the communities. We have established here something called the Boston Pan-African Forum, which is a group that attempts to do that. To bring people together, both in, in social ways for collaboration and cultural exchange but also to begin to have exchange of ideas. Around contemporary issues and those of, of history that have brought us to this point. And I think we need to have more of that kind of dialogue and interaction. Story_ID: 101282 Speaker 1: Now, you know some people would say and I heard it recently just earlier this week, someone we interviewed said you know we should be striving for integration. They--it pains them to see black people congregating together you know in--on a college setting or other you know we should be you know disbursing ourselves and because that's ultimately the future anyway. We just fail to recognize it, but do you have any thoughts about that type of critique? Speaker 2: Yes, strong thoughts. I teach a course on the Civil Rights Movement and one of the things I ask, generally halfway through the course, afte--I use "Eyes on the Prize" as a critical part of that. And I ask the issue of "Let's look at the issue of integration. Is integration the means or the end? Is the Civil Rights Movement was it about integration or was it about something else?" And I, I begin the course by talking about a set of different concepts and in engaging them, I suggest that there're certain things that we used terms that we use as synonyms that really aren't. So I ask "Is integration the same as desegregation, are those the same thing? But if, if they aren't, then what's the difference and what is this movement that we've been studying about?" Last year I had an opportunity to teach, in fact a couple of times, that course to a group of Chinese students only Chinese. University of Massachusetts has become one of the schools in the forefront of linkages with China. It was, I think, the first U.S. institution to penetrate China online, and is now gained a significant reputation. So we have a lot of Chinese students who are coming, so much so that we have a special campus to helps to transition them in. And so I use this course because it has a lot of videos with subtitles and so forth and for me it was an opportunity to, you know relate to those young people who had significant influence on me, as I was just telling you before. My experiences there to help them better understand this from a perspective, a historical perspective that they'll never get anywhere else. And so it's only Chinese students in this course on this Civil Rights Movement, and the kinds of questions that they ask are extraordinary. Never once have I said "Tiananmen Square" in the class, but by the end of the class, they get it, they raise the question. And they raise the issue, and in discussing this question of integration, and I ask them the same issues 'cause I teach the same course. And helping them understand the difference between desegregation and integration and, and then I asked about assimilation, are those the same thing? This notion of becoming integrated into America means a consequent transformation for what America is. It's not that you melt away; it's that your presence transforms the nature of the whole, it becomes something else. Hopefully, more rich more nuanced, more complex than it was before, doesn't mean that you assimilate or you become that, that's all that's about. Or it doesn't mean you just be cut--get a seat in the corner and so you stay over there. And so this idea I think we lose, we've lost the substance of what that really means and what the nature of our presence means to the whole. And--but our engagement with our own community first that conversation among the Bajans and Jamaicans who want to talk about them, Cubans how come they can't speak English and that (laughing) we have to have that conversation first among ourselves, so that we are clearer. Story_ID: 101283 Speaker 1: I physically see it all the time, I can't, I can't remember now, I'm sad to say, I can't remember when I've had a dominate class of African Americans. Even though virtually, except for the class I teach with specifically with Chinese students, all my class are, are predominately black. But I can't remember when one was dominated by African Americans. They are Haitians, Nigerians, a Jamaican, Cape Verdian, not African American. And the most rare among all of those groups is an African American male, sad to say. And part of what we're doing with our community engagement in, through the Center [Center for African, Caribbean, and Community Development at the University of Massachusetts in Boston, has emerged out of recent statistic that of the ninth grade males in the Boston public school, African American males, nine percent will ever graduate from a University, in the Boston Public Schools. There are more than sixty I think the number is now more than sixty institutions of higher education in the greater Boston area it's an industry. Less than ten percent will ever graduate from a university, we have got to engage our community. We got to be, be responsible for helping to deal with that kind of an issue, that's part of our responsibility, and it has to be part of our mission. And so that's part of the challenge that we're specifically engaged in certainly through our department in a small way helping to contribute to that. Story_ID: 101284 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, is there a specific--is there a certain project that you hope to launch in the near future or are the projects you really want to launch all launched in terms of the Africana Studies Program [University of Massachusetts in Boston]? Speaker 2: Well there certainly some initiatives that we are intending to support at our university and some other things we'd like to do. One of those is a program which is called Success Boston; this has been now I guess launched over the last couple of years. Supported by five million dollars from local foundations linked to, I think they're five major institutions of higher education that are attempting to deal with this problem I just pointed to [low college graduation rates among African American males from Boston Public Schools]. We now have about 150 you people who've come to campus through this program that community based organizations run in the high schools to help prepare them for entry and success at the university level. And so we now have programs on the campus to help deal with questions of retention from the Boston Public Schools, I think the figure is like thirty-six percent of the students who enter University of Massachusetts, Boston graduate, that retention is terrible. So our intent is over the next five years to try to double that, and this program is helping to facilitate that. And so we're working with that and we have some innovative kinds of program. In fact, one of which we're trying to initiate is using the arts more effectively as a support mechanism to help them in this process. Story_ID: 101285 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, oh, tell us about the YES Program [Youth Education and Sports]. Speaker 2: Yeah. This is an initiative that grew out of the combined work that I had been doing throughout the years in West Africa, largely. And looking at the applications of appropriate technology for development, working with young people there at the institutions. And a colleague, who is the head basketball coach and athletic director at the University [University of Massachusetts in Boston] and also happens to be the Vice Chancellor [for Athletics and Recreation]. Who had several players who were from Africa on his team and went to Africa in the '90s [1990s] to do a basketball camp. And at one point, I went to observe what they were doing at this basketball camp and said, "This is great, I like what you're doing but it has to be more than basketball." And so we put our energies together to develop a program focusing on leadership development in West Africa and it is called YES, Youth Education and Sports. There are five components to it which athletics is a kind of core but organizing tool. We have health education, environmental awareness; we use the cultural arts and technology in the program. And students are engaged in these five areas, and it's about creating new cadres of leadership in West Africa. We began this in 1999, he has--we've used the training the trainers' model where we took a team of trainers and each of those areas to West Africa who worked with local colleagues there. And so now they run the program and are pushing it to be more sustainable. We have a tripartite model in that there is an NGO, Non-governmental organization, created in each country that will then work with both the public sector and the private sector to help to sustain the program activities. Over the years, he's trained oh, well over 200 coaches who then go back to their local communities and train other people. And then more than two thousand young people have been through the program, it's targeted young people ages seven to about 19, roughly 50/50, maybe 60/40 gender split because it's important that young girls be involved in this initiative as well. And we've had a number of colleagues who have other initiatives in Africa using basketball several of them, I mean they're looking for the next [Hakeem] Olajuwon or, that's not our intention Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know a couple of them--ours have gone to those sort of premier programs, but we're looking to develop leadership and to broaden the base and understanding of young people and their conception of what leadership is about, the kind of skills that they have. And so I've very pleased with the work that we've have done and now we're looking, having worked in two countries over the last decade, we're now looking to expand to some other countries. Story_ID: 101286 Speaker 1: So, so are students from the Africana Studies Department [University of Massachusetts in Boston] involved in this? Speaker 2: Very few have from this side. This is primarily been working with African youth in leadership development there. We have taken a small number of students from here there, but it's very expensive. The, the travel component of it is very expensive. One of the things that we are doing is that in West Africa, I have done some study abroad programs. And in 2008, we did a study abroad initiative with students who were then linked with the YES students and we took to them to Ghana, Togo, and Benin. And in Benin with the YES students, and students from the university there [National University of Benin in Cotonou, Benin], we sponsored a conference on Multi-Culturalism Democracy and Development. Which was an excellent experience for I think everyone involved in that and that worked very well. And out of our community linkages that we developed here locally with the King/Cabral Programs [Martin Luther King Jr./Amilcar Cabral Commemorative Program]. Next year in 2013, we will do a second study abroad program that will link students to the two international conferences. One on Leopold [Sedar] Senghor in Senegal in the--during the first week of January and then the third week, we will go on and have the King/Cabral celebrations in Cape Verde in Africa for the first time. So students will go and they will link with students from the YES Program in Senegal who'll participate in Senegal and will go on to, to Cape Verde. Story_ID: 101287 Speaker 1: Okay. Now in 2001, you had your, this is the second Fulbright Fellowship, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: You're a Fulbright Professor and--at the Universite Gaston Berger at Saint-Louis, Senegal [Gaston Berger University]. Speaker 2: Yes. That grew out of some exchanges that we had with colleagues again who had come here and there was some community work going on that they saw. We were engaged in here when they came to Boston [Massachusetts] and asked if we could help them have their university more involved in community development and activity there. Universite Gaston Berger is one of the, the real premiere institutions in Senegal, it is only about six thousand students, but it is highly competitive, the most highly competitive of all the schools. But most of the students do not come from Saint-Louis, they come from other parts of Senegal, they, they are resident on campus. And the university had little engagement with its local community and surroundings. So one of the things in fact that we wound up doing was initiating the YES Program, this Youth Education and Sports Program at the university. And we took students from the eleven surrounding, really villages around the university and included them in that first cohort of young people. We helped the university during the time that I was there, developed a communion initiative around a community center that they wanted to establish. And brought the university, the students off the campus took them into the community, they worked with people there and this is totally foreign to the French system, it was very theoretical and hierarchical. So that kind of an initiative formed a positive bridge with that local community. And that was the kind of work that I did there in Saint-Louis and we continued that relationship. In fact next year, when we go to Senegal, we will go to Gaston Berger and ironically the current Rector of the university there was like the Chancellor, his children were in the YES Program (laughing). So he understands what we're trying to do with it. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 101288 Speaker 1: Now 2004 now here it is, is what I was trying to get to before the "State of the Race," the book, the anthology, "Creating Our 21st Century, Where Do We Go From Here" by yourself, Jemadari Kamara, and Tony Menelik Van Der Meer. Speaker 2: That is a, a piece of work, collected anthology, that I'm really am very proud of. After the series of the State of the Race conferences in 1990s, in 2000, I think it was 2000 [sic, 2001], the Institute of the Black World restructured itself becoming the Institute of the Black World 21st Century. And it hosted the first State of the Black World Conference in Atlanta [Georgia]. And it was out of the, the energy and work that was being done there, that we took up the mantel of really recasting those ideas that had been shaped during the 1990s and then crystallized through the State of the Black World Conference and put them into a volume. They talked about our experience as people of African descent and, and Africans on the continent and put that into a kind of global context for the 21st Century. Assata Shakur, who wrote the Forward to the volume, then we have contributors from, as I said eight different countries, with a wide range of perspectives. They're five components to that volume, the first deals with questions of culture and identity, the second section deals with issues of spirituality and culture, the third section deals with the process of community building and looking at critical public policy issues. The fourth section focused on the National Summit on Africa, which you may recall occurred in 1990--I guess '99 [1999], 2000. And brought delegates from all over the country together to focus on an agenda of impacting U.S. policy toward Africa for the 21st Century. And the last section deals with the issue of personal community and systemic transformation. And it was been very well received, we won the Charshee McIntyre prize from the African Heritage Studies Association for the book. And it's been reasonably, has reasonable distribution for the volume. The Institute or the IBW hosted a second such Conference State of the Black World in New Orleans in the mid-2000s [2008]. And this fall in November, will host the third only State of the Black World Conference in Washington [D.C.] at Howard University. And so it is our intention next year to publish a second volume of the "State of the Race." Story_ID: 101289 Speaker 1: Okay. Now you are involved in a number of organizational affiliations, African Studies Association, Boston Pan-African Forum, the Black Community Information Center, Freedom House, Haitian Support Project, Impumelelo, the Journal of African Sports, Institute of the Black World, West African Research Association, soon the National Council for Black Studies, I don't know. Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: But I would think, yeah. Speaker 2: Yes, that's right. Speaker 1: All right. And probably many, many more, I you know I--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Right, there are (laughing). Speaker 1: So what are some of the--do you think that--I mean what's your feeling about some of the organizations you're involved in and what you're trying to do here? Speaker 2: I think there's some; some of them have created interesting models for this process of community development, the Black Community Information Center, for example. This is an organization that's community people, workers and so forth with no resources that linked with actually the, the Black Veteran's Organization that had created a development corporation. And over a period of years, built a senior citizen development house, took an old community house in Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts], transformed that, renovated it, million dollar project. Yeah, I mean BCIC might have two nickels (chuckling) but built this project to systematically working at it. Being able to put together funding packages and so forth, and I think it really done a significant job in impacting and building housing units. I think there 10, 10, 9 or 10 seniors that are resident in this facility now, low moderate income, BCIC has its offices there, community site. Just done very, very good work, but sticking it out for the long haul. The West African Research Association is an organization that has through the contribution of the Senegalese government established a West African Research Center. Again, working in the long haul, focusing over a period of years, taking just the twenty-five dollars and the ten dollars people contributed with their fees, and their memberships. So that now we have a million dollar budget to do research, to support research in West Africa. Physical facility that we're now expanding to provide greater services to people doing research throughout West Africa. Today, in fact, there is a fund raising campaign which is a matching campaign through one of the local foundations here in town, where people call in. If you put up fifty cents, it's gonna get matched, and can help us leverage more resources. But very systematically, over twenty something years now, this organization's built itself in a coloration to be able to help support and foster research by African scholars with Africanists here focusing on the entire region of, of West Africa. And now bridging there's special project that they've done with linking scholars from North Africa across the Sahara. It's called cross Sahara conversations and crossing in those boundaries. It's another example, Freedom House, another example, this has been in the forefront of the whole process of desegregation in Boston and we're working very closely with them because one of the basis for the Success Boston Project, I referred to earlier, comes out of the Freedom House. And we're now looking at the potential for bridging the work of our [University of Massachusetts in Boston] Center for African Caribbean and Community Development with the work of the Freedom House and doing things structurally together. One of the initiatives that we have done over the last couple years, was a set of programs called the Communiversity, which we had based at the Freedom House and are continuing to try to, to develop that. As you know there are other models of Communiversities around the country, but we're trying to bridge those ideas and the link between the university and communities. Freedom House is one of the critical sources for that. So its building models you know staying the long haul in this struggle, but to try to institutionalize its work, the Boston Pan-African Forum, in Boston grew out of the work of TransAfrica. But when TransAfrica nationally made the decision that it would no longer support member branch organizations, we said, "Okay, that's what you wanna do, but we're gonna continue this work here." And we reformulated the organization and this is the residual of that, but continuing that work around this Pan-African vision of community development. Story_ID: 101587 Speaker 1: Where, are--is your project headed now? You know what you said earlier, I mean the title of the next volume of "State of the Race," reflects back on what IBW [Institute of the Black World, now Institute of the Black World 21st Century] did, did back in 1974, they had the Conference called "Where Do We Go From Here?" Walter Rodney was there [William] Bill Strickland, lot of people. And I just, you know I can see this connection you know as you talk about the different--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Well, absolutely Bill you know has been a long time mentor and IBW for me greatly influenced my work when I came back from Africa. And I had met Walter at the University of Dar es Salaam [Tanzania] when he was there, and so the work that they were doing at IBW was really important for me in shaping my conception of the ideas and ways in which we should be moving. And as we have engaged this work now in the beginning of the 21st Century, stepping back to reflect on what we've done the last two decades and where we are, I think it's very important that we now produce a second volume of the "State of the Race." And so that's a challenge we will take up and the--that separate body of work that had grown out of our local community development of work around "Race, Space and Public Policy" issues is a second volume that we will be--I'm doing editing on that right now, as we speak. So that will come out next year, as well. Story_ID: 101588 Speaker 1: The HistoryMakers has been funded by National Science Foundation to interview scientists. We've been doing mostly scientists this week, physicists and engineersm, and one thing I said to an engineer the other day was about Walter Rodney, just by raising it again that's come up again the fact that his book, "How Europe Underdeveloped Africa," used statistics and was really impressive at the time that these statistics used to defend you know African people. And did--as a social scientist how important are statistics and good statistics to what you are trying to do? Speaker 2: Necessary but insufficient. We have to be able to engage statistical analysis and quantitative evaluation of our work, but we can't be reliant upon that. I think we have to use that where appropriate to advance our arguments and or to defend ourselves, because you had asked about for example, the, the work of the department. I mean one of the things that always come--come at us "You don't have enough majors" and "What is the number that you're graduating and so forth." Well, that's not the--if we have to try to compete with Political Science and Economics and English in numbers of majors, we're gonna always lose. So we have to find other ways in which we begin to use that. We've raised almost a million dollars for these community development projects, so what I would like to do is have a per capita quantification of what department raises how much per capita? And one of the things that happened at the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] is I spent three summers at Institute for Social Research, so if you want crunched numbers, I'll crunch numbers. But I'm not gonna do that on ground in which the, the terms of the debate don't put me, at least on equal footing. And if it just on the question of majors, I can't win there, but if we're talking about funding, we have a track record; we raised more than a million dollars in funding. And we're small department, handful of people, so let's divide per capita the ratio of dollars brought into the institution. You change the terms of the debate. So we have to be able to use a quantitative analysis where it is effective. Just last evening, I was looking at a video done by a colleague who's talking about the numbers, there was a quantitative analysis of the transfer of human, humans over the first 300 years, from 1492, when [Christopher] Columbus got lost (chuckling) over the first three hundred years. And I think the figure was 6.5 million people came to the New World of which 5 million were African--were of African descent. 5.5 million, I think it was, but the point was this it the enormous so where did all those Africans people go (laughing)? And the point was, they went all over, and we are very ethnocentric about the terminology of ourselves as African Americans. When in fact we are not the largest group of African Americans in the Americas or people of African descent. 'Cause there more of people of African descent in Brazil than there are here, so why are we, The African Americans, capital T, we're not. But we have no idea about those who are in Suriname or Guyana or Venezuela or Brazil or Honduras. No conception of the, the numbers and the multitude of people of African descent in those areas. In part because the colonial history and language barriers and so forth, but we owe that to ourselves. And if we're about building bridges of unity and identification, and really it just clear understanding of who we are. We've got to do better in school ourselves in different kinds of ways, and that's part of our responsibility, and it's what we're trying to do there. And to understand what those numbers are, how do you use those and there, if you gonna engage public policy, you have to be able to use some kind of quantifiable analysis. Even in measuring your success and we have to do that. Speaker 1: You're also saying that we have to know what the numbers are about really before we can use an effectively (unclear)? Speaker 2: That's right, absolutely, absolutely, we have to have that kind of understanding and be able to engage those who are in those disciplines as well, to use those in an effective way. Story_ID: 101589 Speaker 1: Okay. Now when, when you look on everything you've done to this point in life, is there a major step that you would try to redo or undo, if you could? Speaker 2: A major step that I would redo or undo. Probably not, I don't think so; we all make mistakes along the way. And I've made my share, that's for sure. But the path, the path is one that I'm; I'm extraordinarily blessed to have followed. I learned along the way that while we have goals and objectives, things that we want to try to achieve, where contributions that we'd like to make is not my plan. And I very much understand myself to be a tool and I try to set clear goals and targets and objectives, but--and make them achievable, but where I'm led, I tend to follow. Speaker 1: Now do you have a specific religious belief? Speaker 2: Not as in the construct of some denominational religion, no. But I certainly have been deeply influenced by spirituality; I grew up in the Christian church. And came to understand the significance of traditional religions on the continent of Africa and the connection with a universal force and I believe in that. Story_ID: 101590 Speaker 1: Okay. Now we always ask this question too-- what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? As if you haven't told us about 'em (laughing) already. But we always ask that question like that, so? Speaker 2: Well, I think greate--greatest challenge is our young people, greatest challenge. That we now have a generation who--to whom we need to be deeply committed and with whom we need to work in order to strengthen our foundation for the future. I have found that the linkage between our young people as African Americans and those with whom I'm engaged on the continent, that there're bridges that need to be built. There's far too little genuine understanding by one of the other and in, in some ways they understand us, better than we understand them. But that comes through a projection, a distorted projection of who we are that they're getting from the media and so forth. But building these bridges and a strong foundation of culture and consciousness and spiritual and economic roots, that's part of our challenge. That's part of our challenge and we will see what legacy we leave. But it is to that, that I'm most deeply committed. Story_ID: 101591 Speaker 1: Okay. Ironically, this next question is: What today would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: Legacy, well I'm trying to do some work in these areas around youth leadership development. The work that we're doing with this YES [Youth Education and Sports] Program has already impacted some young people. And I wanna be able to impact more. The work that we're doing in building these institutions with the Institute of the Black World [now the Institute of the Black World 21st Century] through the Africana Studies Program [at the University of Massachusetts in Boston], I wanna to be able to leave that, a legacy there. Or I, I spoke about some of those tensions that I feel, not only between the work that I'm doing here and the work in other places, but in the Academy, there is a tension as, as a scholar/activist. Which is the way I perceive myself, and over the last set of years, I've been probably a bit more activist than scholar. And I so I wanna do more writing and I will the next couple of years, I'm gonna do a lot more writing, and pull back a little bit. But I think I've something to write about now (laughing). I have some experiences to reflect on, I understand there's some things we've done, done right, we've done them well. And there's some things, we've made some big mistakes and I want to be able to document both sets of those. And that's why I refer to the several sets, or bodies of work that I wanna tie together. And it's interesting the conversations been actually helpful 'cause it caused me to think about some things in, in certain kinds of ways I hadn't really before. And to speak about some of the things I have thought about. And we will be doing that, I've already laid out some plans to, to pull some of those together. As you've noticed there, some of the topics even come out of monographs that we've produced and that were only disseminated in a limited way. And so now we're gonna have broader dissemination of that through volumes. But it will allow me to bring this, this scholarship together with this activism to hopefully share those experiences, those lessons. And to leave that as a kind of record, as a marker, at this historical point, you know this is what we did, these are some of the things we've been successful. This is the direction we're going, this is why we engage it in this way, so that, as I transition others will be able "Oh, okay they did do this," and maybe we can carry it forward. Story_ID: 101592 Speaker 1: Okay. Now tell us something about your family. I know you have at least two children I've heard about so far. How many do, do you have? Speaker 2: I have two (laughing) only two (laughing) only two children, yes. And they're both doing well, I'm very proud of both of them. They have subsequently graduated both of them graduated from the university. My son [Sizwe Kamara] went to University of Massachusetts at Amherst, was in business and followed in the footsteps of his uncle [Edward McAllen Swan, Jr.] to finance and business affairs, and so he works for Morgan Stanley in New York [New York City, New York]. My daughter [Bai Kamara] who is actually born in Benin, has gone into International Affairs and she went to Wellesley [College in Wellesley, Massachusetts] and then graduated from Brandeis [University in Waltham, Massachusetts] in a program in international sustainable development [sic, Sustainable International Development (SID)] and she works for the International Youth Foundation. And they're doing a series of, in fact youth assessments of youth programs in eight African countries, so she's working on that now, and she's based in Washington [D.C.]. Story_ID: 101593 Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now is there anything we need to discuss before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: Anything? Speaker 1: Else. Speaker 2: No, you've been very comprehensive (laughing) in these questions. I don't think so, I think that you've covered most of the things as well as sort of where we're going. Speaker 1: Okay. We can always come back in twenty years I guess? Speaker 2: (Laughing) okay, twenty years Insha'Allah (laughing) Speaker 1: Well the last question is similar to legacy but a little bit different. Sir, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Hum, how? A committed supportive father, a loving brother and partner and a person who is deeply committed to his community and to the development of that community and ideas to produce a better quality of life for our future. Speaker 1: Okay, well that's good enough. Story_ID: 101594 Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE: Go ahead and tell us about this. Go ahead tell us about this photo, please. Speaker 2: Okay, this is young men who are participating in the Youth Education and Sports [YES] Program in Senegal. This is from Saint-Louis, Senegal and this must've been ooh, 2008 or so. Speaker 1: This is 2004, I can read, from the back. Speaker 2: Okay 2004, this is a Health Congress that was run in conjunction with the Youth Education and Sports Program in Dakar, Senegal as a component of the program with the, the College of San Marie [Le Cours Sainte-Marie de Hann] and Prometra [ph.] they were co-sponsored by Community Based Organizations. Speaker 1: This is a photo of young people who are part of the YES Program, again in Saint-Louis, Senegal. Speaker 2: This is members of the YES Program in the middle is Coach Charlie Titus who is now also the Vice Chancellor of the University of Massachusetts, Boston. And it is a training session both for coaches. Some of those young men are coaches and he's using the players. Speaker 1: This is me at the Conference held in 2008 in Cotonou, Benin on Multiculturalism, Democracy and Development. Speaker 2: This is also at the conference where I received a--an award at the same conference Multiculturalism, Democracy and Development. In this case, I'm actually giving this person an award. Speaker 1: These are colleagues at the conference on the right is Professor Joyce Hope Scott, who teaches at Wheelock College in Boston. In the middle is a Professor who is--teaches at the University (unclear) in the background is Professor Al Hope who teaches at Babson College [Babson Park, Massachusetts] and myself. Speaker 2: Here is at the same conference in Contonou in 2008 and I'm receiving this mask as a gift from conference participants. Speaker 1: This is the group of students and faculty both from schools in the United States and from the Universite d'Abomey-Calavi who are assembled with the Rector of the Universite Nationale du Benin. In the front--at the front table is Professor Joyce Hope Scott; seated next to her is Jackie Jenkins Scott who is the President of Wheelock College. Next to her is the Rector of the Universite d'Abomey-Calavi in Benin, and next to him seated is Mr. James Scott, the husband of Jackie Jenkins Scott. Speaker 2: This is members--select members from that group who have come to pay a visit with the King of Porto-Novo, who is standing second to the left in the front row, next to Professor Joyce Hope Scott. Speaker 1: How about this one? Speaker 2: This is a photograph of my father [Edward McCallan Swan, Sr.] on his football team at Northwestern High School in Detroit, Michigan, this was taken about 1928. He is seated on the front right, and was the quarterback on that team, and was All-State in high school. Speaker 1: This is a photograph of my father taken in the last years of his life about 1960 ooh '66 [1966] or '67 [1967]. Speaker 2: What's his name again? Speaker 1: Edward Swan, Sr. Speaker 2: This is a photograph of my uncle, William Swan, who was the Coach of the Roosevelt High School Football Team in Gary, Indiana and the Athletic Director at Westside High School, where the National Black Political Convention in Gary, Indiana was actually held. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: This is a picture of my family, with my son at his graduation from the University of Massachusetts Amhurst, my daughter forefront and Makeda Kamara. Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE: Okay we need your children's name please. Speaker 2: Oh, my son's name is Sizwe who graduated, my daughter's name is Bai Kamara and their mother is Makeda Kamara. Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE: Okay, might ask you to spell them for the person typing they may not. Speaker 2: Sizwe, S-I-Z-W-E, which is a Bantu name, means the Spirit of the Nation. Ba Bai, B-A-, and there are two dots on the . It is a Fon name, which means "Girl Born on Saturday." And Makeda, M-A-K-E-D-A, which is the original name of the Queen of Sheba. Speaker 1: This is a photograph of my paternal family from Bermuda. On the left and the right are my great grandparents with their two daughters. In the middle, in the front is my grandmother. Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE: Okay, we need everybody's names. Speaker 1: Yes (laughing) in the middle is my grandmother [Natalie Perinchief Swan] and her child who is William Swan, whom you saw in the other picture. And standing behind her is my grandfather who is Williams Cyrus Swan, the son; the baby is William Perinchief Swan. Standing next to my grandfather is his sister in-law or the sister of the woman seated there, who is Louise Robinson Perinchief. Okay? Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE: Um-hum. Speaker 1: This is the certificate of registration for the bar; you can't see it very well, but for William Cyrus Swan who came to Michigan, passed the Bar in Washtenaw County in 1893. Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE: Do you want to do all of these or just certain ones? Speaker 1: Yeah, let's doo of them, but I gotta-this is gone be work (laughing). I got notes on this one (laughing). Okay, can you get all of them? Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE: Um-hum. Speaker 1: This is John Thomas Stokes, Sr. who is my maternal grandfather. Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE: Okay. Speaker 1: This is my maternal great grandmother with from left to right; the short person in the front (chucking) short little person is Elizabeth [Mae] Stokes who is my mother. And the other little person with Mary Hannah Stokes is George Stokes, the little fella, and my great grandmother is Mary Hannah Stokes. Speaker 2: So that's her right here? Speaker 1: No, my great-grandmother, yes. Standing is Freda Stokes, Mary Stokes and Delman Stokes [ph.]. Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE: All right. Speaker 1: This picture is my grandmother seated, Lillian Stokes with my mother, Betty Stokes. Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE: Okay, and straight down from there. Speaker 1: This is my great-grandmother, who is my mother's, mother's mother, (laughing) right, Mary Candice Harmon Jones. Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE: Okay. Speaker 1: This is my grand aunts and cousins, Louise Robinson Perinchief, Amy Robinson Perinchief, Babs Perinchief and Lois Perinchief, in Bermuda. Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE: Okay. Speaker 1: This is my mother and father in Detroit in the early 1930s, Edward Swan and Elizabeth Stokes Swan. Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE: Okay. Speaker 1: This my mother's family, that is my mother at the very bottom, seated on the ground. And her brother on the far left, John Thomas Stokes, Jr., in the middle her mother, Lillian Stokes and her father, John Thomas Stokes, Sr. Speaker 2: This is taken in Detroit, Michigan with my brother at the very bottom, Edward McCallan Swan, Jr., and the from the left, are Mr. and Mrs. Timbers who are my aunt's parents. My aunt in the middle who is Vera Timbers Swan, the next person, the second to the right is my father, Edward McCallan Swan, Sr., and to the far right is William Perinchief Swan, my uncle...