 Story_ID: 609870 Speaker 1: Well, we're gonna get started with our HistoryMakers interview. My name is Cheryl Butler, I'll be conducting the interview today. We're also joined by Scott Stearns who's the videographer, and I'd like you to say your full name and spell it. Speaker 2: Loann Julia Honesty King, L-O small A N-N, one word, Julia, J-U-L-I-A, Honesty, which is my maiden name, H-O-N-E-S-T-Y, and my last name is King, K-I-N-G [HistoryMaker Loann Honesty King], and it is not hyphenated. Speaker 1: When were you born and where? Speaker 2: Okay I was born in Chicago, Illinois, December 10th, 1940. Speaker 1: What's today's date? Speaker 2: February the 6th, 2008. Speaker 1: And where are we conducting this interview today? Speaker 2: In the offices of The HistoryMakers. Speaker 1: In what city? Speaker 2: Chicago, Illinois. Speaker 1: And what is your profession? Speaker 2: Currently I'm a retired administrator from City Colleges of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], specifically I retired as vice president of student services and enrollment management from Kennedy-King College [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: And what has been your role in the national or international Alpha Kappa Alpha board [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.]? Speaker 2: Nationally and internationally, well basically they're interchangeable, I have served as the central regional director and I have served as supreme tamiouchos or the international treasurer of Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority. I have also served on several committees on the national level and the local level. And currently I am serving as the centennial international program chairman. Story_ID: 609871 Speaker 1: All right just a few People magazine style questions for you. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: What is your favorite color? Speaker 2: Really it's not a color (laughter). It's really black and white, but of course I think I need to say pink and green (laughter). Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Yes and it's really ordinary. Speaker 1: What is it? Speaker 2: It's a hamburger. Speaker 1: Hamburger from? Speaker 2: I love hamburgers (laughter). Speaker 1: From any particular restaurant? Speaker 2: No, not particularly, just a very good well made hamburger. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite season? Speaker 2: You know I really kind of like fall because you know the leaves are changing, things are changing, and it's a period when transition is apparent in the weather. Being a Chicagoan, I don't have a problem with our winters as most people do, but it's fine. Speaker 1: Do you have a (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But I would say fall. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Yeah, the favorite de- destination was, of course, at one point it was Bahamas, Nassau in particular. My husband [HistoryMaker Paul J. King] and I have a place there, and we've had it for several years. I haven't been able to go recently in the last few years because of busy schedule, but that would be number one and second, of course, would be Las Vegas, Nevada. Speaker 1: Do you like to gamble? Speaker 2: Yes, I love slot machines (laughter). Speaker 1: Are you a big winner? Speaker 2: Yes and no. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite quote or saying? Speaker 2: Let me see favorite quote or saying. No, no I guess I really don't. There are so many things that influence me that people say that--if there was anything I guess maybe if I had to choose it would be the power of one. I've heard the power of one and, and I really believe that one person can make a difference. Story_ID: 609872 Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit about your family background. Tell me your mother's full name including her maiden name. Speaker 2: Okay Elizabeth Chipchase Honesty. Speaker 1: Can you spell that, Chip- (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Chipchase? Yes, C-H-I-P-C-H-A-S-E, Honesty of course her married name. Speaker 1: Do you know when she was born and where? Speaker 2: Yeah, she was born in 1924, and she was born in Tennessee, Denmark was the name of the area, but she came to Chicago [Illinois] at a very young age. Speaker 1: Do you know the names of your maternal grandparents, her parents? Speaker 2: Her mother's name was Callie. Speaker 1: Spell that. Speaker 2: Spence- C-A-L-L-I-E, Spencer was her last married name [Callie Bond Spencer (ph.)]. Her father's name was Deberry, D-E-B-E-R-R-Y. The--on my father's [Edward Honesty, Sr.] side it was--oh, you're on my mother. Okay. Speaker 1: Well, I just wanted to find out a little bit about your mother's background. Did she tell you stories about growing up? Speaker 2: Yes she did. And as I said she told me stories that were very interesting about her growing up in the South and going back there at the time. Her grandfather was Caucasian. Her grandmother was a freed slave, and we just recently discovered through an African ancestry project that I've been involved in and the sorority [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] is currently involved in that her heritage was Nigerian, which we didn't know prior to my DNA being tested and found out that she was actually Nigerian. Speaker 1: Do you know your (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We knew she was African, but we weren't sure-- Speaker 1: So the great, your great-grandfather was Caucasian? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Do you know his name? Speaker 2: Bond, John. Speaker 1: John Bond [ph.]? Speaker 2: B-O-N-D. Speaker 1: Do you know what he did for a living? Speaker 2: Landowner. And there's an interesting story that I could tell, but I don't know if we want that part of The HistoryMakers. Speaker 1: Sure. Speaker 2: Well, my mother did relay some stories about her grandfather, John Bond, who was married apparently to my great-grandmother; I guess it would be great-great, or great- well. Speaker 1: What was her name? Speaker 2: I'm not sure. I, I can't remember right. Speaker 1: But, she's a free slave? Speaker 2: Yes, and they were apparently married and there were like twelve children to the union. And my mother remembers him at the time when she was small in the South. She claims that a gentleman used to come to the house in the middle of the night on horses, and he had a white horse she recalls and he would join them, get on his horse and he would join them and she went as far as to say they had torches, but she never could really claim that he was a member of maybe the Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK]. Speaker 1: That John Bond-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Although he was married to a black woman. Speaker 2: Although he was yes, yes. And because of his status and their status, the boys, my grandmother's brothers, they kind of had a special status in the area that they were allowed to get away with a lot of things that other blacks could not have done during that time or that period of time. Speaker 1: Because they had a white father (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Strictly because that was their father who was influential with the city council and the people in the area. Story_ID: 609873 Speaker 1: And you mentioned he was a landowner. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Did he, did he have slaves? Speaker 2: No, no this is--he didn't have indentured slaves or slaves, no, unh-uh. This was past slaves being freed. Speaker 1: Did he have crops (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. He had crops. Yeah they tended, they had stock, livestock and they tended the farm or the area or whatever it is. Speaker 1: Are there any stor- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My, my memory is kind of limited of that. My knowledge of that is kind of limited because as I said my mother [Elizabeth Chipchase Honesty] came to Chicago [Illinois] like when she was like six permanently, and--six years old, so hers only comes from going back visiting or going back with my grandmother. And my grandmother, Callie [Callie Bond Spencer (ph.)], really never talked about it. Speaker 1: Did anyone in the family pass down stories about your great-grandmother who was the freed slave? How did, who freed her? Speaker 2: Other than she was just a beautiful person and a beautiful woman. Speaker 1: Did, could the kids of John Bond [ph.] could they pass for white? Speaker 2: They were the color spectrum from straight hair to natural straight hair, from high, which my grandmother was, high yellow--as they say--complected to medium brown. Speaker 1: But they were given some special treatment in town. Speaker 2: Yeah just because they were the Bond boys. Speaker 1: And what about Callie and Deberry, what did they do for a living? Speaker 2: I don't believe my grandmother worked at the time when she was in Denmark [Tennessee]. He also worked on a land or farm. Speaker 1: Okay, and did your mother tell you any other stories about growing up in Tennessee-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --before she moved to Chicago? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Did she talk to you about her move from Tennessee to Chicago? Speaker 2: No, she used to joke about they used to, the place was so small where she was born. When they went back to visit, they didn't have a train stop, so they used to have to jump off the train when they got to the spot and rolled down a hill (laughter). I'm not sure how much of that is true. Speaker 1: And she had, did your mother have siblings? Speaker 2: She has one sister. Speaker 1: What's her sister's name? Speaker 2: Katheryn Deberry. Speaker 1: Katheryn with a C? Speaker 2: Yeah, Katheryn with a K. K-A-T-H-E-R-Y-N. And it's Katheryn Duke now, that was her married name [Katheryn Deberry Duke], but she was Katheryn Deberry up until that time. Story_ID: 609874 Speaker 1: And tell me a little bit about your father and his side of the family. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: What's his name? Speaker 2: My father's name is Edward Franklin Honesty [Edward Honesty, Sr.]. Speaker 1: And when was he born and where? Speaker 2: My father was born in, he had to be like '18 [1918]. He was five years older than my mother [Elizabeth Chipchase Honesty], '19 [1919] maybe 1919 and he was born here in Chicago, Illinois. Speaker 1: Did he come from a big family? Speaker 2: Nope just him. Speaker 1: What are his parents' names? Speaker 2: His mother's name is Julia Hellens [Julia Honesty Hellens], and I never knew his father. Speaker 1: What did Julia do for a living? Speaker 2: Julia was a housekeeper. Speaker 1: For white families in Chicago (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: Did your father tell you stories about growing up? Speaker 2: No, not really. Speaker 1: What side of the city? Speaker 2: South Side. We've always been predominantly South Side. Story_ID: 609875 Speaker 1: Wanna find out just a little bit about your own childhood. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Did you have siblings? Speaker 2: I have one brother fourteen years younger. Speaker 1: What's his name (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And his name is Edward Franklin Honesty, Jr. [Edward Honesty, Jr.]. He is currently in Kansas City, Kansas--Leawood, Kansas to be specific. He operates Best Harvest Bakeries. He started off as corporate attorney for McDonald's [McDonald's Corporation] and from that went into a venture with one of the board members and started b- secured several bakeries and he operates the one in Kansas City. And of course they make buns for McDonald's and other agencies and organizations. Story_ID: 609876 Speaker 1: Tell me about your childhood. What's your earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: My earliest childhood memory is sitting on the floor playing jacks with my mother [Elizabeth Chipchase Honesty]. Speaker 1: And where did you live? Speaker 2: We lived at 56th [Street] and Indiana [Avenue], Chicago South Side [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: What do you recall about playing jacks with your mother? Speaker 2: Just, just that she was always like a friend or big sister as opposed to a mother, and the relationship was always like that, and it was just always the competition. I mean she did- she didn't give me any slack because I was her daughter, and so she wanted me to be the best and to really, you know, see if I could beat her. Speaker 1: Did your mother work? Speaker 2: Yeah she did. She worked for several jobs, small jobs, but then she worked for a currency exchange on 56th, it was Bronzeville [Chicago, Illinois] I believe was the name at the time, as a cashier teller and basic manager of the currency exchange for several years. She eventually purchased that business and became the first African American or black woman to own a currency exchange in City of Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 1: Do you know what year that was approximately? Speaker 2: Got to be '80 [1980]? Late '70s [1970s], early '80s [1980s]. Speaker 1: And what about your father [Edward Honesty, Sr.], what did he do? Speaker 2: He was self employed. He owned a barbershop, pool room on 58th, well 58th Street is what they used to refer to it right off of Indiana between Indiana/Prairie [Avenue]. Speaker 1: What was the name of it? Speaker 2: You know that's a good question. I can't recall. Speaker 1: Were your parents college educated? Speaker 2: No, neither. My father finished high school [Englewood High School, Chicago, Illinois]. I don't believe my mother--she went back and later got equivalent of a GED [General Educational Development] and a--through Cortez Business College [Cortez W. Peters Business College, Chicago, Illinois] she got a, you know, associate business degree, degree in business. Story_ID: 609877 Speaker 1: Take me around your neighborhood growing up. What do you remember seeing, hearing, smelling? Speaker 2: My neighborhood growing up I remember, I remember hearing the ice trucks and seeing the ice trucks, and the kids chasing them waiting for the ice to fall off. I remember the trucks that sold fresh fruit, primarily watermelons coming through horse drawn, some of them. I remember the old stores and candy shops and of course one of our favorite hangouts was, was little far from my home, but within walking distance of my elementary school [William W. Carter Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] was like a soda shop where kids used to hang out and I used to just die to not have to come home for lunch and to be able to have my lunch there. So, those are some of the things I remember, and friends in the neighborhood that I grew up with. Speaker 1: Was this a black neighborhood? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Did you venture to the white neighborhoods in Chicago [Illinois]? Speaker 2: No. I guess when I, after I married [HistoryMaker Paul J. King] and we secured our home in what is referred to as Pill Hill of Chicago at the time there may have been a few whites still there, but it's predominantly a black neighborhood now. Speaker 1: And you grew up in Pill Hill? Speaker 2: No, that was after I was married. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I grew up (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Englewood [Chicago, Illinois], were you living in Englewood during the time you lived? Speaker 2: I didn't live in Englewood, but my, 56th [Street] and Indiana [Avenue] at the time was Englewood High School's district, part of the district and that's where I went to high school. Speaker 1: Englewood High School [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Story_ID: 609878 Speaker 1: And where did you go to elementary school? Speaker 2: Carter Elementary [William W. Carter Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois]. It was 58th [Street] and, it's at Michigan [Avenue] I believe. Speaker 1: Do you have any memories of Carter, Carter Elementary? Speaker 2: Yeah, it was the only one that had a swimming pool (laughter). That, so we had, I was a part of the swim team, and learned how to do synchronized swimming and diving and competition in terms of swimming, so that's the biggest thought that I have. One memory I do have is not such a pleasant one. I do remember one Halloween my mother [Elizabeth Chipchase Honesty] had bought me a Halloween outfit and it was supposed to be a shamrock, I was supposed to be a shamrock, and it had the little green oilcloth shamrock for a hat and a lovely little white dress, fluffy with little shamrocks on it. And I went to school and a teacher at the time that I had told me that I couldn't have that costume on because I couldn't be a shamrock. And I didn't understand why I couldn't be a shamrock at the time, but I went home and my mother used to have--the kids and we used to do the dunk the apples at the lunchtime and I deliberately wet the costume up so I wouldn't have to wear it back to school that afternoon. So, she was upset that I had messed up the costume, but she quickly put together something and I went back as a gypsy. So, when I went back as a gypsy, that was quite acceptable to the instructor at the time. Speaker 1: Was this (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My teacher at the time. Speaker 1: Was this a white teacher? Speaker 2: Sure, white Irish. Speaker 1: Did you recognize that race was at the core? Speaker 2: You know I knew it was something, but I didn't quite tie it together. It was maybe a few years later that I really realized the whole situation of what was going on. Story_ID: 609879 Speaker 1: What are some of the sounds you remember from your elementary school days [at William W. Carter Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: I remember the, and you know I can't remember what they called them, but in the playground on the bars where you held each end and you went up and down and flew up and down on the, on the bars, and I can't remember what they called them now, forgive me, but I remember the play- playground and-- Speaker 1: The monkey bars. Speaker 2: Yeah, the monkey bars and, but that's it. Speaker 1: And the sound of what? Children playing? Speaker 2: Yeah, basically the sound of playing. Speaker 1: And the, what about the smells inside your home. What do you remember? Speaker 2: Oh cooking fantastic food smells. Speaker 1: Like what? Speaker 2: Well they--my grandmother used to make fresh bread. I remember the smell of fresh bread. They were, and some of the negative smells I do remember because both of my, my grandmother, father's mother [Julia Honesty Hellens], and her husband at the time, which I always considered the only grandfather I really knew on that side, Frank Hellens, they were huntsmen and sportsmen and they used to go hunting for deer, rabbit, et cetera, and so I remember cooking and smelling the rabbit being cooked and venison being cooked. And those are some of the different ones that I had, so it was quite an experience. Story_ID: 609880 Speaker 1: And then you went onto Englewood High School [Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: What was that experience like? Speaker 2: Englewood High School was wonderful. And I guess it was very interesting because I did well, probably not as well as I could have, but I ended up graduating maybe third in the class. Probably could have been first or second. Speaker 1: Out of how many students? Speaker 2: Oh, at the time we had a graduation class of maybe four hundred. But, according to one of my instructors, who--that I still see, you know, on occasion was a history instructor at Englewood at the time, I was really running with the wrong crowd and if I didn't stop running with that crowd then I was probably never gonna make it or do anything. But I-- Speaker 1: Describe your crowd. Speaker 2: Well, it was just, we were, I mean we were just kind of you know, how do you say it, fast and loose I guess (laughter). Speaker 1: Were you the popular girls? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, kind of yeah. Speaker 1: Did you go to a lot of parties? Speaker 2: We were the popular girls, but we weren't the group that was the cheerleader, that group. We weren't the sadity, nose in the air, that popular girl. We were the other popular girl that they--everybody said they better not cross. Speaker 1: (Laughter) You had a little edge. Speaker 2: Yeah, we had a little edge to us, so. Speaker 1: Did you party a lot? Did you go to a lot of parties? Speaker 2: No, mostly never 'cause I had too restrict- restrictions, home restrictions. Speaker 1: What were you restrictions at home? Speaker 2: I mean, you know, had to be in at a certain time. It wasn't any hanging out late. I mean I remember one time we were, me and my girlfriends were coming, we had overstayed the time we were supposed to be home and we were walking from where we, from, from the party to get home at rapid pace and look up and here come our parents towards us because they were on their way to get us and that was not a pleasant memory. But, no we had curfews that were really enforced and we did it, so it wasn't a whole lot of hanging out. Speaker 1: Did you belong to clubs at school? Speaker 2: Yeah, we used to have a little club called the Busy Bee Club [ph.]. I did, that was childhood kind of thing. It was always a clu- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What was that, the Busy Bee Club? Speaker 2: It was just a group of young girls in the neighborhood that got together that wanted to call themselves a club you know. Speaker 1: Did you do activities? Speaker 2: Yeah, certain things we did. We did little bake sales, maybe sold some little lemonade every now and then. But, it was really just a social thing to just say you belonged to this. Speaker 1: So did you always-- Speaker 2: It was more a sense of belonging. Speaker 1: Did you like this idea of belonging to clubs and sis- being a part of a sisterhood? Speaker 2: Yes, absolutely, because as I said I was fourteen years old before my brother [Edward Honesty, Jr.] was born, so I was the only child up to fourteen years old. So, the whole growing up process I didn't have sisters, I didn't know what it was, even though my mother's [Elizabeth Chipchase Honesty] and I relationship was close she was still my mother. And it was kind of a longing to be a part of a group of sister- you know, women coming together to be able to share common thoughts and ideas (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How were some of the members of your group growing up, your sisterhood? Speaker 2: Oh, they were just local neighborhood friends who have gone on. Three of them were the Tri sisters [ph.]--that was their name at the time, two of them were in the club. One was older, so she wasn't a part. She used to like be the advisor over, looking and seeing what these little crazy girls are doing, yeah. Story_ID: 609881 Speaker 1: Were you a leader in high school? Speaker 2: I guess I would say yes. I would say yes. Speaker 1: In what way? Speaker 2: Well, I belonged to clubs at school and always got into some role, maybe not the top role of responsibility, but it was always something where I could plan something or do something, charge of an event or party that we were having or something of that nature. Speaker 1: Do you remember which clubs? Speaker 2: Oh I belonged to several in high school, yes. I can't specifically name them now. I was part of student government. I was in the business club and the various things, names that they have which kind of escape me now. But, I was honored by the fact that I was inducted into the Englewood High School hall of fame and so that was-- Speaker 1: What year was that? Speaker 2: Eighty--let me see '93 [1993] I believe. Speaker 1: Okay and at the time you were at Englewood High School [Chicago, Illinois] what was the racial makeup of the school? Speaker 2: It was integrated. I would say we may have just at that time may have started moving towards predominately African American. Speaker 1: Because there was this phenomenon of white flight in the area (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes in the area. Speaker 1: What did you think about that, of the population change from about 10 percent black to 90 percent black by seventy-- Speaker 2: I didn't think anything about it, I really didn't. I, only thing I remember is it would have been fine with me if it had been all black because you know my idea was the fact that--when got there I said it, it was basically almost there anyway, Englewood was. But, it was like then I don't have to compete and I don't have to think that favoritism is being played because I'm not, you know, I mean they're white and I get expectations that are put on me or standards are put on me that are not fair because I'm black. Speaker 1: When did you feel that way? Speaker 2: Oh when I first went into high school, so-- Speaker 1: Is there a specific incident that stands out in your mind? Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: How were race relations at Englewood High School? Speaker 2: Pretty good, 'cause as I said we were, were in the minority--I mean in the majority at that point. Story_ID: 609882 Speaker 1: Do you remember any of the political activity that was going on outside of school, beginning of civil rights and? Speaker 2: No, I was a little before that, in high school [Englewood High School, Chicago, Illinois] a little bit before that, yeah, so. No, that really-- Speaker 1: You were in high school the mid-'50s [1950s]. Speaker 2: Yes, through '58 [1958]. Speaker 1: So in the South some of the rumbling had started? Speaker 2: Yes, well I mean we remember Emmett Till. You know and I remember my mother [Elizabeth Chipchase Honesty] saying, "That's why I didn't ever send you down south." That's one of the reasons. Because I used to ask her, go back to childhood, I used to ask her, "How come I never get to go to Tennessee to visit, you know, the family down there," or whatever or why don't you send me there for summer or whatever, whatever. She says, "Because I'm afraid you wouldn't come back because of your personality," because I guess I was never taught to take low as they say to anyone and to speak my mind, which may or may not be a good thing. But, she didn't think that I could succumb to the role that basically she felt blacks had to play in the South, young teenagers has to play in the South. Speaker 1: Do you remember standing up to any authority figures in particular here in Chicago [Illinois]? Speaker 2: No, I don't think the occasion ever arose. I, I've always been a fighter for what I believe was right. I didn't ever really feel that anyone was better than I was and really couldn't understand why anybody felt that way. Story_ID: 609883 Speaker 1: What year did you graduate from Englewood High School [Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: June 1958. Speaker 1: And at that time, were you aware of Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.]? Speaker 2: Absolutely not. (Laughter) I was not aware of any sororities, all that whole Greek life, and I was just off to college 'cause I was actually the--only second person in my family who had even gone to college at the time. Speaker 1: Who was the first? Speaker 2: The first was a cousin who had gone to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], Sidney Perry, who ended up coming back and opened up a pharmacy here in Chicago [Illinois], but-- Speaker 1: And what college did you decide to go to? Speaker 2: Well, I really wanted to go to Michigan State [Michigan State University of Agriculture and Applied Science; Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan], or I wanted, that's primarily where I wanted to go because my mother [Elizabeth Chipchase Honesty] would have none of that, and she said, no, I would have to go to college here. I even figured out how I would establish residency because we did have family who lived in Mi- South Bend [Indiana]; Michigan, New Haven area. And I said I can go there, you know. "No, you need to be here." And then of course the goal was, if you're gonna be a school teacher, which was about as high as our aspirations could reach at that particular time, or possible, rather, of achievement, it was thought, so I said, they said this is the best place to go 'cause everybody who goes away anywhere else comes back and has to take courses at Chicago Teachers College [Chicago State University, Chicago, Illinois] in order to pass the exams. Okay, so that was the end of that, that's where I went. Speaker 1: Chicago Teachers College? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: In 1958? Speaker 2: Yep. Story_ID: 609884 Speaker 1: Who introduced the idea of AKA to you? Speaker 2: Okay. Well, when I--my first year there, semester actually, I received a call from a friend of the family who I later found out was a member of Alpha Kappa Alpha [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.], her name was Aleta Davenport [ph.]. And she gave me a call and she said, "My sorority is having a pledge party and I'd like for you to attend." And I said, "Okay," you know. "So I'm gonna send you an invitation to--," what it was and where with the information. I said, "Oh okay." So I, I won't forget my father [Edward Honesty, Sr.] drove me down. It was in the old Chicago Defender Building [Chicago, Illinois]; that's a memory that I will never forget. My father drove me down, dropped me off, I was by myself, I went up the stairs to where they were having the event, and evidently Alpha Kappa Alpha was hosting it because they were on the table--or at the table taking names, et cetera. So, I told them who I was and they said, "Oh fine go in and help, you know, enjoy yourself." Well, the Greeks performed. All of the sororities and the fraternities, I guess it was their pledge groups at the time, performed that evening, and I was most impressed by the performance that was done by Alpha Kappa Alpha. Speaker 1: What did they do? Was it a step show? Speaker 2: Yeah, kind of step show, what we call step shows now. They weren't stepping then, they used to really just sing and strut in those days. It wasn't the hardcore elaborate stepping that you see nowadays. And that was a group, I mean it was a lot of them, they all looked good. They were, you know, I just got impressed by them. So, my father came back to pick me up when I, and we had a time for me to be downstairs which I did. So as I was leaving, one of the members said to me, "Would you be interested in learning more about the sorority?" And I don't know maybe the leader had said something to them or whatever, and I said, "Sure." And then I got an invitation to come to some other things that were an introduction to the sorority. The next thing I knew I was in what they called the Ivy Leaf Club [Ivy Leaf Pledge Club] then--okay and became--I stayed in the Ivy Leaf Club for, I think almost a year. Story_ID: 609885 Speaker 1: And it was a learning time where I really learned about the history of the sorority and the service that they did. As a matter fact, all of the young ladies in the Ivy Leaf Club [Ivy Leaf Pledge Club] had to perform service activities, and we had to plan and have these activities, social activities as well as service activities. Speaker 2: Do you remember some of your service activities at that time? Speaker 1: Oh sure, we did service for various church organizations. We donated to food pantries. We went out and solicit money for Urban League [Chicago Urban League, Chicago, Illinois], NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], tag days, other organizations. We served as volunteers for those. Those, that kind of activity. Speaker 2: And you said social as well. Speaker 1: Yeah, we used to have the same kind of little entertaining parties and entertained the Big Sisters of the [Big Brothers Big Sisters of America]--whatever, and actually they weren't Big Sisters then, and we still called them big sisters because we really had no obligation to the sorority then, and they really had no obligation to us. So, this was more of a learning time. Speaker 2: Learning the history of the organization. Speaker 1: Learning the history of the organization. Speaker 2: What impressed you about the history of the organization at that time? Speaker 1: I had the good fortune of going to--one of the activities when I was being introduced to sorority--of meeting and hearing the second national president of Alpha Kappa Alpha [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.], which was Loraine Richardson Green from Chicago [Illinois] who was married to Judge Green [Wendell Green]. I was so impressed that this was the lady who had been the second president of this massive organization in my mind of women and had led so many initiatives and had developed so many things during her administration that still the sorority has today, such as the Ivy Leaf magazine, and she was just a very impressive little betty--little bitty lady, but a ball of energy and inspiration. And the second person that I met was Carey Maddox Preston [Carey B. Maddox Preston] who was the executive director, was secretary then I believe, of the sorority, and I was just blown away. Speaker 2: By, what about her? Speaker 1: She was the most businesslike, organized, sure of herself individual that I had seen in that kind of position. I mean it was like she didn't hesitate for anything, and she knew everything she was talking about and, and she talked about the sorority and what it meant to her and I was just inspired, all inspired. And then of course, I was back again with a group of women that I could bond with and get to know and had sisters all over again. Story_ID: 609886 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What is one of the striking memories from your time in the Ivy Leaf Pledge Club? Speaker 2: Striking memory--I think one of the striking memories was that we came together in collaboration with the fraternities in terms of the Alphas [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity, Inc.], which were sanctioned at the time and Kappas [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity, Inc.] I think Strollers [ph.], but primarily Alphas. And we did joint projects together so that we would have a stronger force and a stronger voice in being able to achieve what we were trying to achieve. And it was that whole collaborative partnership of everybody working together, male/female, and toward a common goal. Those were some of the activities. Speaker 1: Was the experience positive? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So hazing wasn't a part of it? Speaker 2: None of that, of course I haven't pledged [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] yet. But no, no that whole year experience had not--it was not hazing, none of that was involved. It was all a learning, growing experience. And you had the decision, you had time to make the decision yourself as to whether or not this was really what you want because you didn't have to go further if you chose not to. Speaker 1: How many people were in the Ivy Leaf Club with you? Speaker 2: When I originally started we had maybe sixty. And then they would have initiations I think spring and fall, so some of the individuals were eligible and they would get initiated if they were eligible to be initiated and then other groups, so it was kind of a transition. You had a certain group, but you did have a turnover, and depending on how long you stayed, but most people didn't stay more than two semesters. Speaker 1: What was the eligibility requirement? Speaker 2: Of the Ivy Leaf Club basically just an interest and potential for an academic--you, well you had, in order to be taken in you had to have a 3.0 [grade point average] at the time. So, you had to be near that to come into the Ivy Leaf Club so that you would have it when it came time for you to become--and you had to have thirty hours I believe. Story_ID: 609887 Speaker 1: And when did the initiation process begin? Speaker 2: At that time, it began once you reached thirty credit hours, college credit hours, 3.0 GPA, then you were voted on and based on your performance as an Ivy [Ivy Leaf Pledge Club] and what your contributions and potential that they saw. And then (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And for you when did that happen? Speaker 2: Well I was initiated in '59 [1959], so it had to happen in '59 [1959], fall of '59 [1959]. So, you see I went to summer school to get those credits to get, to make sure I had my thirty, 'cause I was very early on 'cause I was one of the few people that got initiated as a sophomore, just turned sophomore. But, we, then we went into what they called the pledge period and a term that I hope forever is eradicated called hell week (laughter) was at the end of it and there are no pleasant memories about that experience. Speaker 1: I know most of it is top secret. Are there any parts of the pledge period you can share? Did you dress alike on campus [Chicago Teachers College; Chicago State University, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: Yeah, well see we weren't on campus. I was Beta Chapter [of Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.], it's a citywide chapter, so my pledge sisters, as they call them, or my line, which I was voted HNIC of the line, which is a term--head person in charge, I'll change it--of the line and there was six of us and we were from all over in terms of college. Speaker 1: Who was on your line? Do you remember who was on your line? Speaker 2: Um-hm. There was Gloria Greene, she says Gloria Ann now, Johnson, Greene Johnson I believe is her married name [Gloria Greene Johnson (ph.)]. I may have that wrong, but Marva Lee [HistoryMaker Marva Lee Pitchford-Jolly], Carol Cartwright [ph.], Peggy Lubin, who recently was deceased. Did I give you six? Oh, Betty Ladde [ph.]. Speaker 1: And are there any rituals that you can share? I know a lot of it is secret, but things that people may have observed publicly? Speaker 2: No, just observed us publicly they used to--we had of course dressing alike. We had to dress alike. I think one of the most degrading things that we had to do, which may have, may or may have not--may be or may not be considered fun, they made us stand on a corner of, what was the--oh, the store that used to be--the black owned store that was on King Drive [South Parkway; Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive] and-- Speaker 1: What was the intersection King Drive and? Speaker 2: I think 47th Street. I can't remember the store. But anyway, we had to stand on the corner outside of store, we had our hair braided in twenty braids, which was an experience for me because my hair was long then, very long then, and so we had, and they all had to be the same length, so they had to figure out how to tie my hair up to make my braids the same length as the others. At least we were smart enough to know that I wasn't cutting my hair. (Laughter) And so anyway we tied it up and stuff and we had to stand out there and we had to sell sheets of toilet paper to people passing by for a penny. Speaker 1: How were you received? Speaker 2: Oh they thought it was biggest hilarious joke. I mean, you know, these young girls out there looking all crazy doing this. I mean it was received well. I mean it was, it was not the same kind of era, so it wasn't the danger, or the perceived danger wasn't there, you know us being out there, but it was kind of humiliating (laughter). But, there were some pleasant things that-- Speaker 1: Like what? Speaker 2: --that were done in terms of--just the encouragement that some of the big sisters then at the time gave you in secret, 'cause they couldn't obviously let everybody else they were knowing, but you'd get a call from somebody that says, "Hang in there," you know you need to do this and that and the other. Story_ID: 609888 Speaker 1: Did you sing and step? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Tell me about one of those experiences? Speaker 2: Oh, they were all fun. We thought we were the best thing going, yeah. Speaker 1: Describe it for me. Speaker 2: Oh it's performing in front of a group, other Greeks, male and female, and you put together a--as I said stepping was not as we see stepping today. It was not the s- women didn't do the stumping and all of that. And it was just basically singing and stepping and strolling and swaying type of things and we used to take popular songs, take the, you know, and change the lyrics to fit the, what we wanted to say about the sorority and perform. And it was fun, that part was fun. Speaker 1: Do you remember any of the songs? Speaker 2: Oh yes (laughter). Speaker 1: Can you give us a bar or two? Speaker 2: Oh my, I'm not the greatest singer in the world, but I know there was one we used to start off with, I had to start off by saying, "Aha," and it went, you know, or, "just to be an Alpha Kappa Alpha [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.], aha, just to be, to be an AKA." So, that's, that's the best I can do (laughter). Speaker 1: Well that's good, that's good. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Were there any other songs or kind of chants that you would do around campus [Chicago Teachers College; Chicago State University, Chicago, Illinois] that you remember? Speaker 2: No, we didn't do too much around campus, as I said because we weren't on the same campus and so it's not-- Speaker 1: Did you-- Speaker 2: --like campus life. Speaker 1: Did you ever travel though to the different campuses? Speaker 2: No, we never had to do that. We had our meetings off in the city, usually at, at one of the big sisters' homes, and that's how we met. So it was-- Speaker 1: And you eventually was initiated and became an AKA. Speaker 2: Yes, eventually initiated, became an AKA, served as president of the undergraduate chapter [Beta Chapter], transferred to the, immediately to the graduate chapter [Theta Omega Chapter]. Story_ID: 609889 Speaker 1: When were you present of the undergraduate chapter [Beta Chapter]? Speaker 2: Oh, it had to be, let's see, I would say '61 [1961], and I'm putting that out 'cause my, in the mean- I got married in '61 [1961]. Speaker 1: Who did you marry? Speaker 2: Paul King, Paul Joseph King, Jr. [HistoryMaker Paul J. King]. Speaker 1: Where did you two meet? Speaker 2: Actually we met going to--we were both from Chicago [Illinois], but we actually met for the first time on a joint train that the Alpha Kappa Alpha [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.]--right after I was initiated. We used to have, the sorority had conventions at winter, at Christmastime, December, before they went on the two year cycle that we're on now. And so I was initiated in November of '59 [1959]. There was a boule in Cincinnati, Ohio. Speaker 1: So that's the national convention. Speaker 2: Yes, the national convention. And the Alphas [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity, Inc.] was having their national convention also-- Speaker 1: And what was-- Speaker 2: --in Cincinnati at the same time. Speaker 1: So that was a big party? Speaker 2: Yeah, so it was a joint one. So my husband and I, not--my husband now, he was organizing the Alphas to take a train trip to their convention and talk to who was then our president of the undergraduate chapter to take a train to join them for better fares, you know a group fare. So, we did. So I met him actually there at Union Station [Chicago Union Station]. That's when I saw him for the first time. Speaker 1: Union Station in Chicago (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Chicago to get the train. And we had our fortieth anniversary at Union Station a few years back. Speaker 1: That's beautiful. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: Was it love at first sight? Speaker 2: I don't know if you call it love as such. There was an attraction there apparently. Story_ID: 609890 Speaker 1: And then you went on to Cincinnati [Ohio] for the boule. Speaker 2: Yeah, that was my first experience for a boule, which was very interesting. You know it was look at--that was my first glimpse into politics of sorority and fraternities. Speaker 1: What do you remember from that first convention? Speaker 2: I remember from the first convention that Larzette Hale [HistoryMaker Larzette Hale-Wilson] was running for whether--president elect or president, I can't remember what we called it at the time, and so was [HistoryMaker] Julia Purnell. And I remember I, I believed that Julia Purnell won that election and the reason given was because Larzette Hale's husband [William Hale] was president of A Phi A [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity, Inc.]--that I heard as an undergraduate and they didn't think it would be good to have a husband and wife team as president of both organizations at the same time. Well as time went on she came back, of course, and then became our supreme basileus later. But I do remember that 'cause that was my first real introduction to the politics of Alpha Kappa Alpha [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.]. Speaker 1: Was there a lot of campaigning going on at the convention? Speaker 2: Yeah, we could hear it, but as undergraduates you know you're kind of on the outskirts of stuff. But, I mean we got enough, I mean enough people talking to us that we could hear enough. Speaker 1: Was there a sea of pink and green the kind of thing you see-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: --today at boule? Speaker 2: You know not as much pink--pink and green was not worn as much as it is today in my memory. As a matter of fact, I have a picture of the folks from Beta Chapter at the formal dance or something from that boule and I don't think anyone has on pink or green. Speaker 1: Now that's a big change. Speaker 2: But of course I don't know 'cause it was black and white (laughter). Speaker 1: Were you as impressed by these Alpha Kappa Alpha women at this convention as you were a few years prior at the first event? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: What was it about them? Speaker 2: Well, it was be- it was just all of these women coming together and discussing issues and talking about things in my mind and, and all belonging to the same organization, and it was just like a, kind of an intense power that was there. Just the mere presence of all of these individuals coming together that I thought in my mind for one purpose and one cause, you know. Speaker 1: What were some of the issues being discussed at the boule? Speaker 2: I couldn't tell you one. You know I would have to go back and see, but, they all of them had to do with societal issues, things that were affecting women, things were affecting blacks or African Americans at the time. Speaker 1: So AKA was, was at least a part of the conversation, the national conversation on issues of discrimination? Speaker 2: Oh yes absolutely, absolutely. Speaker 1: Do you remember them bringing up you know Martin Luther King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] movement, the SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] and other groups? Speaker 2: A little later. Speaker 1: Okay. And after the convention what happened? Speaker 2: Oh, we returned back to our respective homes and I remember my mother [Elizabeth Chipchase Honesty] when I talked about the strict rules and regulations I remember I got put on punishment when I came back because I didn't call home. See I didn't know about the--check for messages and this kind of thing. You know, I mean the services now you know your phone lights up now in these hotels and things, but back then it didn't. Okay you had to go check the desk to see if you had any messages, and I didn't know that. And I didn't know I was supposed to call them when I got there. You know I'm thinking this is long distance call, this is a lot of money, why do this, you know I've gotta call collect. So, I didn't think about calling them. Well when my mother and father [Edward Honesty, Sr.] met me at the train station when we got back they immediately put me on punishment for not calling, and they had tried to reach me and I didn't know there was a message and you know they don't come, they didn't come to the room and say you got a message, so. I missed that (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So was this one of your first trips away with friends? Speaker 2: Yeah like that without them and stayed at a hotel. Speaker 1: Did you, did you behave or? Speaker 2: Yeah, we behaved as, as much as you can behave in those situations (laughter), yeah. Speaker 1: But you guys partied with the Alphas? Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Story_ID: 609891 Speaker 1: And you met your husband [HistoryMaker Paul J. King]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: When did--you got married shortly after? Speaker 2: Yeah, year. Well, we got married in '61 [1961]. Speaker 1: Okay, did you continue your leadership role in the sorority after that? Speaker 2: Well yeah I moved into, as I said I transferred into Theta Omega [Theta Omega Chapter] right after being initiated, graduating, and I moved into Theta Omega in-- Speaker 1: So you mentioned graduation, so you're talking about graduation from Chicago-- Speaker 2: From college. Speaker 1: --Teachers College [Chicago Teachers College; Chicago State University, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Were you active on campus in any other organizations? Speaker 2: No, not really, no. Speaker 1: Did you perform well academically? Speaker 2: So-so. Speaker 1: What was your major? Speaker 2: Business education with accounting minor. Speaker 1: And you knew you wanted to be a teacher? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Yeah. Speaker 1: And so you graduated in what year? Speaker 2: I graduated from Chicago State in, went in in '58 [1958], '62 [1962]. Speaker 1: So at this point did you start working? Speaker 2: I used to work part time with my mother [Elizabeth Chipchase Honesty] at the currency exchange, but no I didn't have a real job at such like, you know, just helping out there working at the currency exchange. Speaker 1: And what kind of work were you doing with AKAs [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.]? Speaker 2: Well I joined the committees at the graduate level. I got on several committees and just, I, I would say almost every aspect of a chapter responsibility-- Speaker 1: Were you an officer? Speaker 2: --involvement. Yeah I was financial secretary, and I ended up being president of the graduate chapter, Theta Omega. Speaker 1: Do you remember what year you were financial secretary? Speaker 2: No, I can't. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I've been, let, let me put it this way, this is my forty-ninth year as a member of Alpha Kappa Alpha. I have been an active financial member every day since I've been initiated. So, some of these things (laughter) are still kind of not in my mind. Story_ID: 609892 Speaker 1: What was your first teaching job in Chicago [Illinois] or academic job? Speaker 2: Yeah. My first job in Chicago was Chicago Public Schools, and I was a teacher at Parker High School [Paul Robeson High School, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: What did you teach? Speaker 2: I taught office occupations and commercial law. Speaker 1: Were there other black teachers? Speaker 2: Oh, yes, plenty. Yeah. It was not a situation--we're talking you know '62 [1962], '63 [1963], so it was not a situation where we were in any kind of minority. Speaker 1: Had the, the school was majority black? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Do you remember the-- Speaker 2: Probably about 100 percent at that time. Speaker 1: Do you remember the racial climate in the city at the time? Speaker 2: It was still--I mean it was okay, it was, you know it was okay. It was, you know soon--well it was after--I'm trying to put my timelines together. I know I was student teaching at Harlan High School [John Marshall Harlan High School; Harlan Community Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] when Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was assassinated because I remember the principal [J.J. Connery] was an African American--I mean was, I'm sorry, an Irish Catholic, and I thought he was just going to just literally die his self. Speaker 1: What was his name? Speaker 2: It escapes me. Speaker 1: Okay, but he was Irish Catholic? Speaker 2: I believe. Speaker 1: So, you remember being there during-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I remember-- Speaker 1: --Kennedy's assassination. Speaker 2: --being there during the Kennedy and then soon after, of course, was King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], and so then the riots and the whatever and so that was basically the climate that I remember. Story_ID: 609893 Speaker 1: In 1966, Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] marched through Englewood [Chicago, Illinois], and it was a pretty turbulent experience. Do you remember that? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: What do you recall? Speaker 2: Being a part of it, the march. Speaker 1: You attended the march? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So tell me about that day. Speaker 2: It was very, kind of frightening, you know, especially the Marquette Park [Chicago, Illinois] part. You know just in terms of--to just see the kind of to me unreasonable hate or dislike or resistance to what King was trying to achieve and you know civil rights and just to see the indi- the residents who were there and the people who were there just so adamantly against equal rights for all people. It, it was kind of really intense, and you know the thing that always that struck me through the whole Civil Rights Movement and still today and when there are any kind of protests, I, I can never understand women with small children and babies in their arms who are spouting emotionally and verbally all of these negative things against other people and other reasons and their beliefs, and I'm just wondering, you know, that's got to be translated, you know, into the children and-- Speaker 1: Did you see a lot of that back then? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah there was a lot of that. You know I--guess right now today I'm still disturbed by parents who carry themselves, especially our young black women, who carry themselves and act a certain way and use language that's so inappropriate and they've got small children on their arm and you know how do you expect them to behave or grow up if this is the example that they see, so same kind of thing. Speaker 1: So take me back to that day. Do you remember who, with whom did you attend the march? Were you with sorority sisters or? Speaker 2: No, it was not sor- that was an individual choice with a, one of our, actually the godmother of one of my children at the time. We were-- Speaker 1: Who was that? Speaker 2: Her name was Linda Smith [ph.]. She's no longer here. She's in California I believe. Speaker 1: So the two of you just decided to go over to the--? Speaker 2: Yeah, curiosity and to be a part of it. You know I was, I was very militant. Speaker 1: In what sense? Speaker 2: I mean I just thought this was the way to go. I mean, you know, my hair was chopped off. I had a natural (gesture) yeah big, and you know had to do some special treatment to my hair to get it that way and did all the things that was necessary to achieve the Afro. Speaker 1: So, that was a big deal cutting off all your hair. Speaker 2: Well, it was still big, but yeah it was cut off, yes. Speaker 1: Now how did your mom [Elizabeth Chipchase Honesty] respond? Speaker 2: Oh gosh they were all crazy. They thought I'd lost my mind, but especially my grandmother on my mother's side [Callie Bond Spencer (ph.)]. You know they just couldn't believe it. "Oh, what is wrong with you?" But, they grew to accept it 'cause it was me. Speaker 1: So, you went (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And they knew that it must, if I really did it I must have really believed in what I was doing. They've always instilled confidence, had confidence in me as well that you know I would be making the right decision. Story_ID: 609894 Speaker 1: So you and your girlfriend [Linda Smith (ph.)] went over to the march-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and you had your Afro and-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --Afro-centric. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: What do you--what were some of the first images you remember from that day? Speaker 2: I liked, the biggest thing I liked was the idea of just all of these young, old people just of my race-- Speaker 1: White and black? Speaker 2: Yeah, white and black they were, few white, but mostly black, coming together, just coming together and marching in unity, you know, for what is basically everybody's human right. And I was impressed. Speaker 1: Do you remember King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] speaking? Speaker 2: Yeah, I have been at a couple of his speeches, yes. Speaker 1: What do you recall? Speaker 2: Oh I mean just the sound of his voice is just, was just awe inspiring and inspirational, and he was truly a man of peace you know. And it was, in re- it was interesting because I was very much impressed by the Black Panthers [Black Panther Party] what they were doing and Skokie--or Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture] and that group. Speaker 1: Eldridge Cleaver-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and Hamilton [sic. Fred Hampton]. Speaker 2: Yeah, I liked all the things that they were saying, you know. I didn't like the violent part. You know I didn't think that taking up arms was a smart thing to do because just logically I figured that we would not, (laughter) we did not have the military might or the what for all to be able to overcome anybody from a violent approach. The philosophies that they had I, I did think a lot of them were good, and so King was that element that really brought it to the fact that you, you know, turn the other cheek and the Gandhi [Mahatma Gandhi] and you know the Bible and all of that he put it in, in terms of what can we achieve this way and proven to be true, and so that was a good match. Speaker 1: And where did you march that day? Speaker 2: (Cough) As I said, I may have the marches confused, because you said Englewood area [Chicago, Illinois]. The march that I was involved was through Marquette [Marquette Park, Chicago, Illinois], around Marquette area and my geography is not one of my strong suits either, but if that was the compass of that, that was the one that I was involved in (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, and you just remember people throwing things. Speaker 2: And then of course we did, I was in his march, King's march to the city hall [Chicago City Hall, Chicago, Illinois] when he came back about the housing situation and we were in the march from the, I think Grant Park [Chicago, Illinois] to city hall. Story_ID: 609895 Speaker 1: And where were you in 1968 upon his assassination? Speaker 2: In 1968 upon his (unclear)--assassination, I was actually home, and I was watching television, and-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: (TAPE INTERRUPTION) Speaker 1: I was actually home and the television was on, I wasn't actually watching it and I guess the television was on and the news came across and I heard King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] has been assassinated or shot and I was saying, oh, no I didn't hear that. And then that kind of went in and then flicked--'cause whatever it was it was like an announcement and then I kind of flicked and then I finally got the actual news channel and there it was and they mentioned how rioting had started. And my husband [HistoryMaker Paul J. King] was home, but he was asleep for some reason and I went and woke him up and told him, and he said, "Oh, no you--I don't believe that," you know. And I said, "Yes it is, it's true," and so that's the way it was. So, it was just, it was just crazy. Speaker 2: What happened in the city, what do you remember? Speaker 1: Oh, I remember riots starting I remember Englewood [Chicago, Illinois] going up, and the West Side [Chicago, Illinois] and you know that's all we could hear, you know. Actually in my area nothing much happened, but I wasn't in really a commercial area, but yeah. Speaker 2: What did you hear Englewood? Speaker 1: You know the store, the looting, the vandalism, the setting fires, general riot kind of stuff I guess. Speaker 2: What was the role of Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] at this time? Speaker 1: Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority at the time was basically engaged in many things in terms of human rights and civil rights as an organization. They had no direct role that I'm aware of in terms of once, you know, this kind of-- Speaker 2: This rioting stuff-- Speaker 1: --rioting started yeah. Speaker 2: --started or maybe any relief after the fact and helping families, anything? Speaker 1: Oh yeah, well they still had families that they helped who, who might have suffered, but that, but you know the interesting thing in Chicago [Illinois] that was not played up as much as it was the businesses and they quietly got rebuilt or went out of business and that kind of was not put out there as such through the media as such--as a need. You know that was, we was still doing our work through various churches and individually as well as collectively supporting organizations to helping people. Story_ID: 609896 Speaker 1: And through those years in the late '60s [1960s] into the '70s [1970s] you were teaching in the Chicago public school system [Chicago Public Schools]; what was your role professionally? Speaker 2: Um-hm. I was teaching. Speaker 1: What were some of the highlights? Speaker 2: Oh then I went into counseling and I was counselor and head of the counseling department at, at Parker High School [Paul Robeson High School, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: At which high school? Speaker 2: Parker. Speaker 1: So what do you remember about that experience? Speaker 2: I think it was a very good experience because my focus has always been on giving young people as much exposure to options in life and various careers and various avenues that they could pursue other than the normal what was expected and that you know if they want it, they could achieve, you know. Everybody always laughs at me, but I always say, you know, I, I definitely believe what Jesse says, if you can conceive, you can achieve it (laughter). And so that was always, you know, my philosophy. If you wanted it, and you were willing to work for it, then you could achieve it. Speaker 1: Did you know Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] at this time, or were you involved in Operation PUSH [Rainbow PUSH Coalition, Chicago, Illinois] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, not personally. I know Jesse Jackson, yes, well, but not at that particular time. It was just, you know that was just kind of a thing that always just stuck with me that fit, you know fit my own belief. Speaker 1: Give me some of the highlights from your first decade or so with the Chicago public school system. Speaker 2: Oh highlights, well I was, I was, I came through a very kind of turmoil period, all right. Was (unclear) the riots, the civil rights, the, you know, faculty was being divided into Oreo or non-Oreo; on the side of the students, not on the side of the students. I was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So who was--an Oreo, what was the definition of Oreo? Speaker 2: Well, that was the teacher who didn't, you know, was black on the outside but thought white on the inside, like an Oreo cookie. Speaker 1: Is that what they called you? Speaker 2: No, I was on the other side thank you (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) You were on the more militant side. Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause I have always been an advocate for student rights, you know, for anybody's rights (laughter). You know and I guess, so that put me on that side 'cause I was totally involved in the Civil Rights Movement. And I understood where they were coming from and some of the things they were asking for. So, we went through that and made it through that and tried to mediate that. I do remember one kind of scary experience was they had taken over the school, students. Speaker 1: And this is at Parker? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Parker High School? Speaker 2: The students has taken over the school primarily, and so the police came and so there was a group line, a front line like of students, and faculty went out--me and some other faculty members went out because coming across the field was this line of Chicago policemen to come to confront, and the students had decided to march out and confront the policemen. Well, we immediately, a group of us went out and got in front of the students because we felt as adults we could mediate and talk as opposed to it turning into a violent situation--situation. And fortunately we were able to and so it was calmed and there was no violence or no one was hurt; that was a good thing. Speaker 1: What year was that approximately? Speaker 2: Oh, I, I can't-- Speaker 1: Late '60s [1960s], early '70s [1970s]? Speaker 2: I would say yes. Story_ID: 609897 Speaker 1: How long were you at Parker [Parker High School; Paul Robeson High School, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: Fourteen years. Speaker 1: What were your different roles (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) About fourteen years. I started as a classroom instructor and then I went to what they call office occupations coordinator, which meant that I coordinated the career occupations for five schools in the district [Chicago Public Schools], high schools in the district. That was getting jobs and setting up employers for them to do shadowing and also to do some on job training. I did that and then I went from that and transferred to what they called the attendance office. I was over the attendance office, which means that we would call parents, believe or not, to say, "Your child is not in school today, where is he?" Which is something they should have never stopped (laughter), but anyway then I went from there to a counselor and then chairman of the counseling department, and I left there I was the counseling department, or I may have gone back to classroom at that point, I don't know. The whole kind of scenario gets a little confused, but I do remember those are the roles that I did have there. Speaker 1: So you were there from 1963 to 1977 or so? Speaker 2: Yeah, I would say. Speaker 1: You said fourteen years--let's see. Speaker 2: Yeah, I would say. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 609898 Speaker 1: Do you remember the women's rights movement? Speaker 2: No, to be honest, no. Speaker 1: No manifestation per se at Parker [Parker High School; Paul Robeson High School, Chicago, Illinois] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no manifestation per se. You know I've always believed--well I guess because of my upbringing what I said in terms of never thinking I was less than anyone else, I knew that you know there was a gender discrimination out there, but of course you know I never thought there was professionally or anything else there was a male--because they were male they were better than I. So, the female role and that might be 'cause of matriarch--you know, family background or whatever. It never really was first priority. It was my color that was first. So it was my rights as an African American first that took priority always over women rights, you know. Interesting question that's floating around now, you know, when you wake up in the morning do you think of yourself as a black first or a woman? Speaker 1: At this time of the election between Barack [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] and Hillary [Hillary Rodham Clinton] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Especially, especially now with Barack. So, it's really come to subject you know. Well mine has always been I thought of myself as black first and woman second. But, it is an issue and I guess it's just come to the forefront with this, with this election as you said. Story_ID: 609899 Speaker 1: Were you aware of the city politics in terms of like the Daleys being in office, Richard Daley-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: --the older Daley [Richard J. Daley]? Speaker 2: Yes I was there and I was there with Harold, and we had Greeks united for Harold Washington during the election. And as a matter of fact very interesting, [HistoryMaker] Barbara McKinzie who is now the supreme basileus, the centennial supreme basileus of Alpha Kappa Alpha [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] and I, when she was in Theta Omega [Theta Omega Chapter], were involved in organizing this event, the support for Harold Washington. Speaker 1: What year was this? Speaker 2: It had to be, as I tell you, you keep asking me these years and I'm terrible on years as I am with names. Speaker 1: But in the 1980s? Speaker 2: I would say yes, but he was around the time when she served as president of the graduate chapter Theta Omega as well, or it might have been a little before that. Speaker 1: And what do you recall about your activism, your work on the Harold Washington campaign? Speaker 2: Well, just getting out the vote, making sure everybody was voting, vote--you know was registered to vote and being involved from that, you know, actually sitting down being a voter registrar and encouraging all the students that I came in contact with, 'cause I was at the college level then, to vote and et cetera. So, that was, that was basically it. I remember going to his inaugural day and being down there. Speaker 1: Was this a big deal to have potentially a black mayor of the City of Chicago [Illinois]? Speaker 2: Oh yes, it was enormous to think that we could do that. And then to just see how we, you know as I said earlier, if I had a favorite statement it would have been the power of one. But the power of one even gets manifested even greater when it becomes a collective power of ones and to just see that whole unit collective power come together to push all groups coming together. I mean I remember there were buttons that had, you know, teens for Harold Washington who couldn't even vote. You know they had kindergartens for Harold Washington, you know, gardeners, whatever. But, it was just, these were just symbolistic that said, you know, we want this man and it was everyone coming together, unifying. And you saw the force of what could be done, yes. Story_ID: 609900 Speaker 1: I'm going to take you back just a little bit to when you were a consultant for the U.S. Department of Education [U.S. Department of Health, Education and Welfare; U.S. Department of Education]-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --in the mid-'70s [1970s]. What did you do in that capacity? Speaker 2: I was on a panel. It was a grant I guess that was given Northwestern University [Evanston, Illinois], and it was called the Triple T project, and it was the Training of Teacher Trainees [sic.], and they brought together various individuals in education from throughout the country to deal with the issue of whether teachers were being trained properly in these institutions to be able to go out and teach primarily in inner city schools. Speaker 1: So necessary work. Speaker 2: Yes. So, I, I participated on many of the discussions in bringing that kind of information, you know, to the table from my perspective and was nominated from the school [Parker High School; Paul Robeson High School, Chicago, Illinois]. Now part of it might have been based on my master's thesis, which had to do with the conspiracy of vocational education in the City of Chicago [Illinois], where I looked into how the vocational schools in the City of Chicago were taking the cream of the crop from the high schools and putting them into vocational career oriented schools as opposed to putting them into college bound education. So, I did a study on that, and that was what I did my master's thesis on. Speaker 1: What school? Speaker 2: Northeastern Illinois University, Center for Inner City Studies [Jacob H. Carruthers Center for Inner City Studies, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: And you got a master's degree in what? Speaker 2: An M.A., masters of arts in inner city studies. Speaker 1: Okay, and so this seems pretty revolutionary even using the word conspiracy. Speaker 2: I know. You know, I--it's just me, 'cause I really thought there was a plan. I mean I really thought, I didn't think it was just by coincidence that this was happening. I really felt this was a deliberate attempt to prevent the best of the best or at least proven academically from going into college careers. Now those schools that were predominately the vocational schools in Chicago at the time of course then began to say how they had these college curriculums, you know, and you could go to college as well because they were offering. But, they were not offering the advanced Englishes and literatures and the advanced math courses that would take to get all these college entrance exams and where you would need to score on the AA- SAT and the ACT scores. So, then why were you doing it, you know. Was it--my idea was it was to primarily get the better student because it was easier to educate the student who was academically achiever than it was the one who was not. So, the general high school, the general ed [general education] high schools were getting the middle to lower graduates, where the vocational schools were getting first choice and selling their schools to these parents who thought this was the place to be. Speaker 1: And so once you finished your master's thesis, what happened to these ideas? Did anyone sort of listen? Speaker 2: I, well as I said I think that's part of why I ended up with the Triple T kind of involvement with the Department of Education 'cause I did get called a couple of times to speak to the Department of Education on the issue of this thesis, so I think that's how they got my name; you know how that goes. Speaker 1: And you finished your master's at Northeastern (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: --in the early '70s [1970s]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Seventy-one [1971]. Story_ID: 609901 Speaker 1: Now at this time in the 1970s and then you also moved us into the '80s [1980s] with the Harold Washington campaign (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, right. Speaker 1: What kind of activity are you doing with the Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.]-- Speaker 2: Oh-- Speaker 1: --the Theta Omega Chapter? Speaker 2: Basically, I think at that point my career had started to look at national positions with the sorority. I believe that I felt that I could--my first attempt was of course as I said to become the supreme tamiouchos and international treasurer, and I believe I was elected that in '72 [sic. 1978]. Speaker 1: You became the supreme tamiouchos? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay, which is national treasurer? Speaker 2: Or maybe '76 [1976]. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you remember who was supreme basileus or-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --national president at that time? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Barbara K. Phillips [Barbara Kinard Phillips]. Speaker 1: So this was a big deal to be elected a national officer? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: How old were you at the time? Speaker 2: Well, if I knew the exact date I could do the exact math (laughter), but I had to be, well at least, I had to be thirty something. Speaker 1: Okay, that's pretty young. Speaker 2: Yeah, well. Speaker 1: Who inspired you to run for supreme tamiouchos? Speaker 2: You know I don't, I don't think, I can't really put my finger on who aspired--who inspired me. There was a lot of leadership that I looked to. I thought Larzette Hale [HistoryMaker Larzette Hale-Wilson] who had been a treasurer who ended up being also supreme basileus was a wonderful person; I really liked her. Speaker 1: What did you like about her? What was her influence? Speaker 2: Her basically her style, the way she presented herself and I was encouraged by another supreme basileus, [HistoryMaker] Julia Purnell, that--to go ahead and go for it, you know, and so that was with my philosophy you think you can do, go for it. So, that's basically what I did. Speaker 1: And you had been very active in the local chapter. Speaker 2: Oh yeah 'cause I had served as president of the local chapter and met all the qualifications that were required at the time (simultaneous). Speaker 1: When were you president at the local, when were you president at the local chapter? Speaker 2: All I know is I was the, I think the twenty-first president of Theta Omega, whatever that year was, you know. Speaker 1: Okay, so when you were in your twenties? Speaker 2: Yes, definitely that. Story_ID: 609902 Speaker 1: Did you attend the national convention on a regular basis, boule? Speaker 2: Every one they've had. I think since I've been active I've only missed two. Speaker 1: So where were some of these conventions? You mentioned Cincinnati [Ohio] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, all over the United States. All over the United States, I mean just name a state and we've probably been there if they're large enough to hold a convention, so. Speaker 1: The year you were elected supreme tamiouchos, national treasurer, where was the boule? Speaker 2: I believe we were in Detroit [Michigan] I think. Speaker 1: And who did you run against, do you remember? Speaker 2: No, I'll take that back we were not in Detroit. We were, I was elected in Houston, Texas. Yes I do remember there were several candidates, but I will--may get the names wrong in terms of which offices they were running for. I believe the person who was running for treasurer at the time, I know one was Eugenia [ph.] was a person from the Far Western Region. I can't remember them all now. Speaker 1: Tell me about your campaign. Speaker 2: Oh, it was a whirlwind. My sorority sisters from Theta Omega [Theta Omega Chapter] and the undergraduates [Beta Chapter] we hit Houston with a storm. We came up with, which they can't do anymore, actually, actually we came up with the first brochure that's known as a brochure. Prior to that time, I used to just send out little flyers saying I'm running or something to that na- or letters saying, and so we cre- I created and with a group of us created actually what they now call the brochure, your brochure and actually I did the first one, 'cause it was like a little passbook and it had the accounts in it and we just named all the things that you would have in your little passbook savings account at the time when they were using pen and pencil (laughter), and so it was set up on that model and so that was a big hit. So, we mailed that out to everybody and that was like, wow, you know we haven't seen anything like this, how creative that was. And then we had what we called money corsages. So, we took, one of our members took dollar bills and created them so they made a corsage, and you know everyone would say, "Oh, what's a corsage?" You know, "We're wearing the green for Loann King [HistoryMaker Loann Honesty King]," you know, like that. Speaker 1: Nice little rhyme. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, yeah, so that, that was that, so that was exciting. Story_ID: 609903 Speaker 1: So in 1976 you ran for supreme tamiouchos-- Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) national treasurer of Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.]. And you had this very creative campaign. Is there anything else about the campaign you recall? Speaker 2: Well, we were full of hope and we were up against named individuals who had been other officers who were running for the position who were more prominent on the national scene than of course I was, but it was, I guess the energy and the brochure and the corsage and the sheer numbers, because Theta Omega [Theta Omega Chapter] has always been a large chapter and a lot of our members went to that convention and we just sold it. Speaker 1: And do you remember election day, election night? When were you declared the winner? Speaker 2: Oh, well we, they do a process where you don't know. You know they have to count the ballots just like any other election and everything has to be accounted, and so they come and notify you whether or not you won. So, when we got the notification that we had won, we had a big party. Speaker 1: So was it after the convention they notified you or during? Speaker 2: Oh no, no, during, during. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And so somebody just came to your room and told you or they called you on the phone? Speaker 2: I believe at that time they kind of just called you on the phone (laughter). Speaker 1: So tell me about your celebration? Speaker 2: Or you have tellers as well you can that serve and so I, I'm not quite sure how the word got. I think the official word was called on the telephone though. Speaker 1: Tell me about your celebration. Speaker 2: Oh, well everybody was just so amazed, and we just had a big champagne party. Story_ID: 609904 Speaker 1: Do you remember what your vision was for the sorority in this capacity as treasurer? Speaker 2: To make sure that we were on sound financial footing, to look at investing for the future, to fulfill the duties and responsibilities to the best of my ability. Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION) Speaker 2: So your vision for the sorority. Speaker 1: The vision, as I said, was basically to make sure that we were on sound financial ground, looking at investing for the future, making sure that our monies equaled our program ideas and, and thoughts and that we came up with development projects that would fund what we wanted to achieve programmatically. To ens- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Do you, do you remember what some of those programs were in 1976 that--which ones did you think were particularly important? Just generally speaking, I know it's tough to remember. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. I was trying to think of Barbara Phillips' [Barbara Kinard Phillips] theme. It was something like fastest and--no. This one I'm a have to do over again. I've completely messed up. Speaker 2: Is there a certain, is there a certain type of project that you really got behind like the educational projects or some of the service abroad or what kinds of projects did you particularly support? Speaker 1: Well, actually projects that I particularly supported, I supported them all. I mean the programmatic, plus I had the support. You know as an officer I was treasurer, so therefore my basic role was not so much programmatically, but was to go around and educate the sorors on proper financial procedures and to maintain chapter financial operations as an officer at the time. So, although by sheer presence or being a member of the directive, of course, I'm involved in the program that the supreme basileus is putting forth, it is not di- a direct tie in that, you know, I take one of her projects and say I'm gung ho about this one or another one (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was just curious-- Speaker 1: It's the overall structure of the program. Speaker 2: --curious about the general thrust of the sorority at that time. Speaker 1: The general thrust of the sorority at that time was kind of getting us to collaborate and come together in an effort to improve our partnership and collaborative relationships, to become more of a business per se in terms of operations as opposed to just a girl's group, you know, or a sorority, just have fun, social--. It was more, we were growing financially. We were growing in stature. We were becoming more and more where it was necessary to promote our status as an influence. Part of one thing I was a part of under Barbara Phillips as treasurer was that's when the Educational Advancement Foundation was established, which is the nonprofit arm of Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.]. I was fortunate to be on the board at the time and therefore became an incorporator as, and the first treasurer before the first official board was elected for the establishment. That was the big creation, or Alpha Kappa Alpha thrust that took place during that administration was the establishment of our Educational Advancement Foundation. And one of the architects of that proposal and that draft was of course Barbara Phillips' sister who was in my region, Central Region, at the time, Connie Holland [Constance Kinard Holland], who was the architect of that. Speaker 2: And do you remember how that idea came about? Speaker 1: Yeah, it was through Barbara's vision and I guess collaborating with her sister, and she put the idea together. Story_ID: 609905 Speaker 1: How was it working with Barbara Phillips (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was fine. Speaker 1: --as supreme basileus [of Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.]? Speaker 2: It was interesting. Speaker 1: (Laughter) I'm sure you had your challenges. What were some of the challenges you faced? Speaker 2: The challenges that I had working with Barbara Kinard Phillips is she used to have a thing about keeping us up all night. She didn't care what time it was to meet. We would have the board meeting, go to dinner, everybody relaxing, she'd call us back at ten, eleven o'clock at night without a second thought, and then we'd end up sitting there and discussing some issue until one and two o'clock in the morning and then back up again the next day to take care of business. But, she was the kind of person that wanted to make sure that nothing was left undone. Story_ID: 609906 Speaker 1: What role did undergraduate membership play in the sorority [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] at that time? Were there, was there a particular focus from a national perspective on the undergraduates, or were there particular hurdles to overcome? Speaker 2: No, none that were particular to that administration [of Supreme Basileus Barbara Kinard Phillips]. I mean there's been a series of issues that we have had to address in terms of undergraduates. I mean, but the sorority has always been very inclusive and--to involve undergraduates in the process. The hazing issue or the process of pledging of course has always been an issue that had to be looked at and dealt with and so various things through the membership committee were developed to attempt to address those issues. But programmatically the undergraduates have always remained in the forefront, you know, through the undergraduate offices as well as on their own chapters and on the campuses. Story_ID: 609907 Speaker 1: Now you talked a little bit about Barbara Phillips' [Barbara Kinard Phillips] leadership style. What was your leadership style? Speaker 2: That's a good question. I, I think my leadership style is lead by example. In my career as well as in the sorority, I have never asked anyone to do anything that I was not willing to do myself. I also believed that you should know everybody's job, not as well as they do, but at least in terms of knowing the challenges that they may face in trying to complete a task. If you don't know what it takes to get that task done, then of course you don't know what challenges might be in the way or have a, not have as good an understanding as to why a certain person can't achieve a certain thing. So, what terminology they put to that particular leadership style I don't know, but-- Speaker 1: Who are some of the other women you were working with? You talked about knowing everybody's job and leading by example. Who are some of the other executive officers? Speaker 2: You mean on the board at the time-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --when I was tamiouchos? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: We had Faye Bryant [HistoryMaker Faye Beverly Bryant] who was first supreme [supreme basileus] at the time who came in. I had, I worked with Dr. Freddie Groomes [Freddie Groomes McLendon] who is now the supreme parliamentarian of Alpha Kappa Alpha [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.]. At the time, she was the international program chair. All the various regional directors throughout the regions. I believe central regional director at the time on the board time was Peggy LeCompte [Peggy Lewis LeCompte]-- Speaker 1: How are these-- Speaker 2: --who also ended up, I shouldn't say ended up, who also rose to be national president of Top Ladies of Distinction [Top Ladies of Distinction, Inc.]. And Johnella Martin was another, and--I'm trying to think--oh, Pat Russell-McCloud [HistoryMaker Patricia Russell-McCloud] who is now also in a leadership position with this administration, was supreme parliamentarian at the time, and Dr. Rosalind Griffin, Barnes Griffin [Rosalind Barnes Griffin] who is currently serving as a resource to the international program committee that I chair now currently, was the supreme grammateus, or secretary. Speaker 1: How were these women to work with? Speaker 2: Oh wonderful. We got along fine. Story_ID: 609908 Speaker 1: Was there anything that really spurred you to action in your capacity as national treasurer? Speaker 2: No, I just really aspired to a higher leadership position. I mean I just felt like I could serve the sorority at that capacity as well. Speaker 1: What was the greatest lesson you learned on the job? Speaker 2: The greatest lesson that I learned on the job I would say would be I learned the politics of Alpha Kappa Alpha [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.], and one day I will write my book. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Can you give us a general sense of what that means, the politics of Alpha Kappa Alpha? Speaker 2: The book that I intend to write at some point is called 'The Politics of Sisterhood' [ph.]. So, if that gives you a sense of what politics within Alpha Kappa Alpha might be like, then that's what it is. Speaker 1: So, that's interesting because you as a young girl were always striving for the sisterhood-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and you found it with Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and you took on a leadership position, but you learned that it can be, there's some challenges along the way. Speaker 2: It's, it's as political as any other situation that politics come into. And, and I'm not saying that's good or it's bad, I'm saying that it is disappointing when the politic aspect supersedes the sisterhood aspect. Individuals I know have been crushed or hurt because of the political angle of someone trying to achieve something. So, in that sense it, you know it may be bad. But, then in another sense I don't know how you run an organization or you have an organization when you have a competition for particular officers or to aspire to a particular position, how you not have that. There was a leadership institute started under [HistoryMaker] Norma White, training institute, and our current centennial supreme basileus, Soror Barbara [Barbara Kinard Phillips] is continuing that leadership development among the sisterhood and so it, it's to show that we develop leadership and that leadership should be proper--leaders should be properly prepared as they aspire to move up the ladder and there's certain intrinsic things that go with leadership and hopefully we can communicate that message and that it will become clear as to those who have prepared themselves and qualified themselves to move into leadership positions within the sorority. Story_ID: 609909 Speaker 1: You held the position of supreme tamiouchos for four years-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --'til 1980 [sic. 1978 - 1982]. Speaker 2: It's a two year term and re- with a reelection option. Speaker 1: What--tell me about the reelection? Speaker 2: It's basically if you've done a good job your first two years it's basically not a problem to get reelected the next second term, so that was kind of easy. Speaker 1: Did you meet--how often did you meet as an executive board? Speaker 2: Oh, the director meets four times a year. Speaker 1: And so where, where would you meet? Speaker 2: We meet all over the country. Speaker 1: Do you remember any of, any specific meetings or events maybe a boule that comes to mind that really demonstrates the kind of work you were doing? What stands out? Speaker 2: They all do. They all do. I mean the conventions are--the boule, these are the times when all the decisions, bylaw changes, resolutions, presentation of program takes place, decisions are made by--or affirmed, by actions-- Speaker 1: So take me (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) taken by the directorate. It's a meeting. Speaker 1: So take me to some of the specific boules. So you were in Houston [Texas] when you were originally elected. Speaker 2: Yes (laughter). Speaker 1: Do you remember subsequent boule conventions? Speaker 2: I, I, I mean, I would have to look at a book. No, I, I honestly cannot say the order I would get the sequence all out of whack. Speaker 1: Do you feel you accomplished your goals? Speaker 2: Oh yes, oh yes. Speaker 1: In what respect? Speaker 2: As an officer, I, I believe I, I accomplished my goals in that I spoke the truth. I mean I've said what needed to be said. It may not have been the most popular thing to say at the time, but I think that I stood firm on, you know, if it didn't turn out the way you might have thought it would have turned out so be it, this is the way it was. You know, as they said the thing speaks for itself, right (laughter). Speaker 1: Did things become more businesslike as you had stated? Speaker 2: Oh, I don't think it had anything to do with me. I, I just think that the sorority [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] was moving towards that anyway. The corporate office is the operation aspect of the sorority in terms of--which is headed by an executive director. Currently, that executive director is Dr. Betty James [Betty Nowlin James]. Soror [HistoryMaker] Barbara McKinzie, of course, our centennial supreme basileus, is the first supreme basileus to have served as an executive director, so she knows both the operations and the programmatic side of, of the sorority which is a good (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And the headquarters are based in Chicago [Illinois]? Speaker 2: Chi- in Chicago. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: 56th [Street] and Stony Island [Avenue]. Speaker 1: --in 1980 after your term is up as supreme tamiouchos, do you become more active with the headquarters or were you always active with the headquarters (unclear)? Speaker 2: No, it's not an, it's not an activity with the headquarters. Speaker 1: Right, but aren't some people, aren't some members of the local chapters more involved with what's happening at the headquarters? Speaker 2: No, no. That's the national headquarters, the corporate office. It's like just because it's in Chicago the local chapters don't have any more interaction with that than--unless their staff or--than any other chapter, because they're operating and carrying out the operations for the entire sorority. So-- Speaker 1: So did you have any-- Speaker 2: My advantage was being in Chicago was it was easy access, proximity to go get the records I needed and to be able to interact from being here in Chicago on a more frequent basis. If I needed information, of course it's easier to get it if you go there than opposed to living in Denver, Colorado. Story_ID: 609910 Speaker 1: In the 1980s, were you interacting with [HistoryMaker] Demetrius Carney who was an attorney? Speaker 2: In the eight- or when I was with--under Barbara K. Phillips [Barbara Kinard Phillips]? Speaker 1: Just, did you work with him? I know he was working with the headquarters, the national headquarters [of Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.]. Speaker 2: Yeah, well I, yes I was on the board when we were getting ready to start to build our corporate office that we just spoke of. Demetrius Carney, (pronunciation) Carney was the sorority's attorney at the time, and so he was involved in the acquisition of the land and where we're currently located and ultimately in securing the contractors that built the headquarters. Speaker 1: Okay, was that a big deal the building of the headquarters? Speaker 2: Oh sure, sure, that was history making. We were the first female organization to have a corporate office of that stature and that size and that magnitude built debt free. Story_ID: 609911 Speaker 1: So we talked about the 1980s, now we're moving full force into the 1980s that you--as a sorority [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] did some work with the Harold Washington campaign. What were you doing professionally at this time? Speaker 2: In the '80s [1980s] professionally I believe I was with City Colleges of Chicago at that time, probably Olive-Harvey College [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Did you also work as executive director at Jobs for Youth/Chicago [Jobs for Youth/Chicago, Inc., Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: Oh, yes I did. Speaker 1: What was that experience, and starting in 1980? Speaker 2: Okay, it was interesting. It was a career change because that's right when I had left I guess Chicago Public Schools, and I took on the job with Jobs for Youth and it was different. I mean it was, it was, actually Jobs for Youth was of course as you know, or may not know, it was you know finding jobs, preparing young people for jobs in the Chicago [Illinois] area, so I was back in kind of the career planning and helping young people to succeed situation and so I applied for that from a newspaper ad on a whim 'cause I was sitting at home after I had left the public schools and said, oh, let me see if I get this, and then ended up having the interview and getting hired and then moved up to deputy director. Speaker 1: And so you were definitely a leader? Speaker 2: Yeah. I guess you could say that. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Do any experiences sort of stand out in your mind from that job? Speaker 2: No, not really. Story_ID: 609912 Speaker 1: Were you working with--well Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] had Operation PUSH [Rainbow PUSH Coalition, Chicago, Illinois], and? Speaker 2: No, you know I was never really an active member of Operation PUSH. I used to attend some of the meetings, but not, not as a real active member. I supported a lot of the black expo fair [Black Business Exposition] and different things that were held, but not really totally involved in that per se. Speaker 1: Did you know Fred Yumen [ph.]-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --at all? Okay. And what did you do next? Speaker 2: Well, I went from that to, became a consultant again with a--or grant coordinator for the Illinois Community College Board, and that was in Springfield [Illinois]. And they flew me in for the interview, and I interviewed for that position and obtained it. And my responsibilities were to monitor all of the grants for the northern part of Illinois, so I didn't really have an office per se. It was kind of like the early age of working from home, but the eventually they did give me a small little room out of Olive-Harvey College [Chicago, Illinois] where I could store records and do anything, but I was primarily on the road traveling to the various community colleges in northern Illinois and back and forth to Springfield. Speaker 1: Were you working with state leaders? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Do you remember who specifically? Speaker 2: In Springfield. No, I don't remember who specifically. I do remember one thing Governor Thompson [James R. Thompson] was in at the time; I do remember that. And I do remember, you know, Thompson's boys they used to say, which was I guess basically his cabinet and the people around him. I do remember seeing first up and in your face kind of my first realization of the old boys' club when I hit Springfield 'cause I mean to tell you that was predominately white males everywhere you turned, all the leadership positions primarily, and so you know African Americans were sprinkled here and there. Women were sprinkled here and there. And then you know but it was primarily the old boys' club and so that was kind of-- Speaker 1: How did you negotiate-- Speaker 2: --that was kind of interesting, you know. Speaker 1: How did you negotiate that? Speaker 2: Fairly well I would say and I think one of the biggest things that was, which made it easier was the fact that I didn't have to be there that much. As a matter of fact when I decided to leave was when they were asking for me to spend more time in Springfield, which would be like two, three weeks at a time and that would be away from you know my home and my family and so that was not gonna work, so that was one of the decisions that I made. Story_ID: 609913 Speaker 1: So you mentioned your, your family. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: What was going on with your family? You told us about your husband, Paul King [HistoryMaker Paul J. King]. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Do you have kids? Speaker 2: Yes, I have two adult sons. Speaker 1: So when were they born? Speaker 2: The first was born, that's Paul Joseph King, III [Paul King, III], he was born in 1962, September of 1962. And my youngest, Tim King [Timothy King] was born, his name is really Timothy Jay, J-A-Y, King, and if he ever sees this he's probably gonna kill me, but that's okay. But anyway, Timothy was born June 1967. Speaker 1: And so was it tough balancing all of these parts of your life? Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Absolutely, but in their really formative years was really when I, why I really went into teaching and education because I knew that my hours would be basically the same as theirs. So, when they got out of school I was home and you know when they went we were going at the same time. So, all of that was coordinated so that they wouldn't have that much time there by themselves. Story_ID: 609914 Speaker 1: Were you active in other organizations? We know AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.], were you involved with Jack and Jill [Jack and Jill of America, Inc.] or? Speaker 2: Yes, I was involved in Jack and Jill when they [Honesty King's sons, Paul King, III and Timothy King] were kids. I belonged to several community organizations in the area. Speaker 1: Like what? Speaker 2: I was part of Parkway Community House, which, which is a part of Hull House associa- Jane Addams Hull House Association [Chicago, Illinois]. I, you know, was always involved with Urban League activities [Chicago Urban League, Chicago, Illinois], some political activities, definitely community meetings and community block clubs in terms of where we were living and involved in there. Speaker 1: Was there the sense of a black elite in Chicago [Illinois] at the time, if you belonged to certain organizations? Speaker 2: You know I think there's always been a sense of it and that certain people have always looked at individuals who belonged to those organizations as being a part of that black eliteness, but as I said just as I've never thought anyone was better than me, I've never thought that I was better than anyone else, so my involvement was strictly for whatever benefits there were that I could see to serve other people and not ever did I look at it as being something that would put me above the crowd. Story_ID: 609915 Speaker 1: When did you become central regional director for Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.]? Speaker 2: I believe it was 1982 through '86 [sic. 1986 - 1990] I believe I served. Speaker 1: Okay, and do you remember that process, running for the office? Speaker 2: Same process, you know, except--and at the time that I ran you had to have approval by the national body. Your election had to be more or less validated by the national body, which meant they had the opportunity to vote there. Now, once your region elects you, it's just confirmed by the national body. There's not another election. So, it was very interesting in that you have to kind of run nationally, even though you're running for your own region they have to know--. But, they do a first and second choice and usually it's the first choice that the boule confirms. Speaker 1: What inspired you to run for this office? Speaker 2: Well, interesting, I had served as supreme tamiouchos first, and I really wanted to help eradicate the hazing. I really thought that we were kind of really getting out of hand as far as that was concerned. And I thought that I could have the most influence and impact or helping to do that as a regional director. Story_ID: 609916 Speaker 1: What was happening on college campuses? What was the problem with hazing at that time? Speaker 2: Hazing itself. I don't know how to define it, I mean you know hazing has cer- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What kinds of instances were happening? Speaker 2: Oh, there was physical, verbal, and you know abuse of individuals, just craziness. Individuals being forced to do things in order to prove you know their worthiness to come into the sorority that had nothing else, absolutely nothing to do with what type of member you're gonna be once you become a member of Alpha Kappa Alpha [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.]. Speaker 1: When did hazing start-- Speaker 2: I wish I knew. Speaker 1: --becoming a problem? Speaker 2: Oh, it's been a problem since day one. As a matter of fact, it's, it's not a problem now, it's a disaster in that--what impact it may have on the life of sororities and fraternities on colleges--campuses nationwide. I mean there's dialogue going on now about eliminating Greek organizations off of college campuses because of the liability and because of the hazing and the relevance. I mean many individuals are saying what is the relevance of this? What values are you doing when you continue to do this to individuals just to secure membership? So you know back then and now, you know, it, it's to change the mindset, and one of the things we will probably do, and we are attempting to do, through the international program platform for the Undergraduate Signature Program [Economic Educational Advancement Through Technology] is to give them a signature program that they can go and make an impact on their campuses as well as their communities and bring the three together as well as other student organizations and groups to say, this is what we're about. This is what Alpha Kappa Alpha's about, and to have that positive image out there of service and sisterhood and collaboration that says we're not about this barbaric method of coming into our sorority, you know, this no longer exists, that we are about making positive impact through service. Speaker 1: And I know in the mi- probably the late '80s [1980s] I know there was a moratorium placed on pledging activities while-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --the organizations started rethinking the process. Speaker 2: Yes, and that was out of a joint agreement between all the fraternities and sororities to do something, to take a stand on hazing. The administration, or Soror Janet Ballard [Janet Jones Ballard] at the time, and basically we did the first notification that said if you are a pledge of Alpha Kappa Alpha, and you are hazed and you do not come forward and tell us that this is being done to you, then we have no obligation to initiate you. Speaker 1: So Janet Ballard was supreme basileus 1986 to '90 [1990]. Was that the same time you were central regional (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She was, if I have the years correct, she was the--I served on her board as central regional director. Yes. Speaker 1: Okay so '86 [1986] to '90 [1990] and that's around the time I pledged. Speaker 2: Oh really. Speaker 1: And it was under Janet Ballard-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and I remember all of the reorganization around the issue of hazing-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and the focus on hazing. Speaker 2: Right. Story_ID: 609917 Speaker 1: So when you took on that position, when you were elected central regional director, what was a part of your plan? Speaker 2: Well, the part of the plan was to, to just--awareness through education to try to make sure that the graduate advisors were properly trained and the graduate advisors were really overseeing the activities, I don't mean controlling or developing, but overseeing the activities of the undergraduate chapters to ensure that they were following the rules and regulations of the sorority [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] and that to, of course, you know report any improprieties that they might have seen. So, it was kind of a leadership development and at the same time showing where these types of things were no longer acceptable. Speaker 1: I remember there were a series of brown bag lunches and symposia around the country to get leaders on college campuses on board-- Speaker 2: Right to issues. Speaker 1: --with the national platform. Speaker 2: Right. So, several of these took place. Some took place in Central Region. There was an issue that was discussed at regional conferences and brought to the forefront of you know what do you want to see in an initiation process? What should it be, and how do you see this moving forward as we move forward? So, apparently it was a start. Well here we are twenty years later at least or longer, thirty? Speaker 1: No, I'm not that old (laughter). Speaker 2: No twenty--not that old (laughter). Twenty years longer, and we're still struggling, you know, with this issue, issue. Speaker 1: As central regional director, what were the states in your region? What was in their? Speaker 2: Okay. We have Kentucky, Indiana, Wisconsin, Minnesota, Illinois, East St. Louis-- Speaker 1: Michigan. Speaker 2: --Illinois. Speaker 1: Was Michigan in the region? Speaker 2: St. Louis, St. Louis--well East St. Louis, Illinois, would be part of Illinois. Speaker 1: Okay and Missouri. Speaker 2: But St. Louis, Missouri and Cape Girardeau only of Missouri. Speaker 1: And was Michigan a part of the region? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: It was not (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Michigan is part of Great Lakes [Great Lakes Region]. Speaker 1: Okay. And so you had some big schools as well. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Story_ID: 609918 Speaker 1: Were there problems on any specific campuses? I know in this region [Central Region] you have University of Illinois, Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois], University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], University of Wisconsin, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera. Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, yeah, I think one of the biggest problems at my time, at that time was my nemesis which is Gamma Chapter, which was at University of Illinois [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign], Champaign-Urbana [Illinois]. Although, I mean I had equal things going on at others, but that was the biggest fight to try to break that tradition that has been established there. Speaker 1: Was--what was the tradition that you found? Speaker 2: You know what it took to come into the sorority. I don't wanna say specifically because (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right. Big secret? Speaker 2: No, I can't prove any of it (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. What did you, how did you help lead the sorors at the University of Illinois? Speaker 2: Well, it was nothing. I mean I visit- visited with them and you know there was an inquiry about their being involved and you know unfortunately we had talks, we had discussions, but they, you know, held true to the oath, the secret oath of don't tell on each other or no one, or what do they call it--the oath of silence. Unfortunately, they ended up having to be suspended, so I had to do that, and I think it was for three years. So, I was out of office by the time their suspension was relieved. Speaker 1: I know that happened on Spelman's campus [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] as well in the South Central [South Central Region]. Speaker 2: Several campuses and several campuses have been suspended several times and it's you know--unfortunately, but historically just as the hazing has been, it has always been certain places and certain things. Speaker 1: Do you feel that you along with Supreme Basileus Janet Ballard [Janet Jones Ballard] and the other regional directors made some ground? Speaker 2: Yeah, I think it was, at least it was a time of letting individuals know that this is not our practice on a public basis. I think it was time where there was some unity shown among all of the Panhellenic, Greek organization leadership and I think that in itself raised the issue that this is a problem, this is something that we do not agree with, and maybe the proposal or as it turned out or history will have to say that might not have been as successful as we may have liked, but it was a start. Speaker 1: It seems to me that the process of pledging or initiation did change in those years. Speaker 2: Oh, the process did change. Speaker 1: It did change 'cause I remember initiating a line at Spelman in the late '80s [1980s], and it was a very different process. We made sure because we knew the regional directors and the bas- supreme basileus were watching us-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and we, we wanted to be true to-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --the integrity of the organization [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.], but there wasn't hazing. People were brought in who had the GPA-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --who had the leadership skills, there wasn't that pettiness. Speaker 2: Right, and so it did make a difference for some. Others found other ways to do it. I mean the membership process was changed. We're now in an evaluation process of revisiting the membership process again to see what kind of process is going to best work and really as--they did a leadership school in New Orleans [Louisiana] the undergraduates did the funeral you know buried hazing and did the line march, line dance march in terms of the handkerchief and whatever in New Orleans style at the leadership conference. So, the undergraduates are slowly grasping the concept and understanding. We still have a few renegades, for a lack of a best, better word, but-- Speaker 1: There was a problem in California a few years ago. Speaker 2: Well, they, we still haven't completely unraveled that one. That was not a sanctioned chapter. That was not a sanctioned process. Speaker 1: What school was it? Do you remember? Speaker 2: There was no school that we ever established. It was just something that occurred as part of a process. But, there was no official process taking place, so it was just a terrible unfortunate incident. Story_ID: 609919 Speaker 1: And you completed your term as central regional director in 1990-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and did you, what did you do after that? Speaker 2: Oh, I served in various capacities with the sorority [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.]. I served on a few national committees, and basically reactivated, I shouldn't say reactivated, reengaged myself with my local chapter, Theta Omega [Theta Omega Chapter], and of course we've just built our $2.5 million community service center [AKArama Foundation, Inc. Community Service Center] at 62nd [Street] and Ingleside [Avenue] in Chicago [Illinois] and so I served as treasurer of that foundation, responsible for getting that job complete. And so I was really engrossed in that process and you know local activities, as well as I did serve on some national committees. Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit about that project, the 2, what was it, $2.5 million building? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: What was that about, tell me more? Speaker 2: Well, it's a local chapter process and we several years back made a decision that we wanted to try to build a community--well actually at the time we were thinking of just building a place where we could meet because we had grown so large, and we were paying to meet in various places and we were thinking of some place where we could be able to come together. We contacted various individuals. We were given the land, reasonable price. Speaker 1: Do you remember who gave you the land? Speaker 2: Yeah, the alderman at the time. I guess it was Lorraine Dixon at the ti- or Troutman [Arenda Troutman] was one as well. As I said, the names get confused, like I said, I don't wanna be bad, I wanna mention everybody. But, and then of course we were able to get through our wonderful president of the senate [Illinois Senate], Emil Jones [HistoryMaker Emil Jones, Jr.], a five hundred doll- a five hundred thousand dollar grant to get us off the ground towards the construction. So, we said, well this has got to be more than just a meeting place. We've got to do something that's gonna serve the community, so we decided to turn it into community service center, which we did (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So what, what happens there? Speaker 2: We have various activities that engage--we'll, we'll carry our program, the chapter's prog- carries out the international program through our chapter. Other organizations utilize it for their programs and various activities. We've just--only been open a year now. This process took about nine years to get this done and built. Speaker 1: So, a long process. Speaker 2: It's a long process, that we didn't know it was gonna be that long (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter). Story_ID: 609920 Speaker 1: Did you work with some of the other (cough) leaders of the organization, former presidents? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Basilei? Soror Mary Shy Scott [HistoryMaker Mary Shy Scott] or Dr. Evans [HistoryMaker Eva Evans], [HistoryMaker] Norma White, [HistoryMaker] Barbara McKinzie you mentioned a couple already. Speaker 2: Right. Let's see of those living supreme basilei currently I have worked or have been fortunate enough and privileged enough to have worked with them all in one capacity or another. Some of them on a national level and am--basically I can say that I'm proud to say that I am friends basically with all of them. I mean they recognize me on a name basis and I recognize them, which is not an easy task with the numbers that we have in the sorority [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.], but our relationship has been such. Of course, I served Faye Bryant [HistoryMaker Faye Beverly Bryant] as a member of her program committee and I chaired her economic development subcommittee under her program committee. I worked with Soror Eva Evans on her economic business roundtable committee. Soror Julia Purnell [HistoryMaker Julia Purnell], I was very active with her Job Corps initiative [Cleveland Job Corps] and also she was like, became a very--friend of mine and supported me very much when I sought office for supreme tamiouchos. Speaker 1: Was-- Speaker 2: She was very supportive, even though she is not from this area. She just, you know, encouraged me. Speaker 1: Was she a kind of mentor? Speaker 2: Yeah I would say, I would say. I worked with Mary Shy Scott. We were on the same board together, so that relationship was very intimate. Speaker 1: What do you remember about her? I mean it's-- Speaker 2: Oh, Mary Shy Scott is probably one of the nicest individuals as I've ever made, met--made (laughter)--ever met. She is very personable and very caring soror. Who did I leave out? Oh, Mattelia, yeah Mattelia was like in my early years when she served as supreme basileus. She was kind of one of the ones that I said, wow, you know, as I was coming-- Speaker 1: That's Mattelia. Speaker 2: --yeah, Mattelia Grays [HistoryMaker Mattelia B. Grays]-- Speaker 1: Mattelia Grays. Speaker 2: --as I was coming in the sorority. She kind of set a standard that I wanted to achieve for myself in terms of how she operated and how she presented herself. She came, I was president of Theta Omega [Theta Omega Chapter], the local chapter, were we celebrated our golden anniversary, our forty years of being established, and Soror Mattelia came to that as supreme basileus and spoke at the banquet. So, I'll always be beholden to her for that. Story_ID: 609921 Speaker 1: Were you active in AKArama [AKArama Foundation, Inc.]? Speaker 2: Oh yes, that's our fundraising arm. Speaker 1: Tell me about the, the experience, the event for people who haven't been and what was your role? Speaker 2: Well, AKArama is--I've been, I've chaired AKArama, I've sub-chaired some committees on AKArama. Speaker 1: What was your favorite AKArama experience? Speaker 2: I think my favorite AKArama experience was, well I have quite a tie. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay. I enjoyed very much, we sponsored the Broadway production of 'The Wiz' and had a cast party afterwards where they came in character, all of the actors, and that was fantastic. I enjoyed, we premiered 'A Piece of the Action' with Sidney Poitier as a movie premiere and Sidney Poitier of course I got to meet up close and personal. Speaker 1: What was he like? Speaker 2: Oh he's elegant. You know quite a gentleman, yes. And so that was a good experience. I mean a memorable experience, because there have been a lot of memorable AKAramas 'cause AKArama is a good event. Speaker 1: It is a fundraiser? Speaker 2: It's the only fundraiser that Theta Omega Chapter has, major fundraiser that it has. Speaker 1: And okay. Speaker 2: And it's held annually and it has been held annually, annually as long as I can remember. Story_ID: 609922 Speaker 1: Now all this time when you're moving back and forth from national position with the organization [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] to regional position to local positions, you're also developing your professional achievements, your resume. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: What are some of the highlights? We're moving into the, in the 1990s. What did you do? I know you worked at Malcolm X [Malcolm X College, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Yeah, well that was--Malcolm X I was merely just doing a part-time grant specialist. I guess my really involvement in depth came with the City Colleges [City Colleges of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] when I went to Olive-Harvey [Olive-Harvey College, Chicago, Illinois] where I served as dean of careers and dean of instruction. And then I transferred from there to Kennedy-King to be with Dr. Wellington Wilson who became president then of Kennedy-King College [Chicago, Illinois], and I had known Wellington and his wife Kaye [Kaye Wilson] for some time and through a--had opportunity to have worked with him on other things when we were both like deans at various colleges before his career moved on. And he was also very good friends of a very good friend of mine. So, I knew him, I knew what he was about, I knew what he was trying to achieve. So, he asked me if I, when he assumed the presidency if I would be interested in, you know, helping him build his administration, and I said, yes, I would. So, I went there as dean of instruction and from there as I said to vice president. And it was very interesting, and I would like to put this in. My highlight was being awarded or being chosen as one of the ten student advocates across the country by North Carolina University [sic. University of South Carolina, Columbia, South Carolina] and it's called first year advocate, student advocate [Outstanding First Year Student Advocates Award]. And so that was an achievement, and I was brought to, actually we were brought to Orlando, Florida, and my whole family went to achieve this, or to receive this award. Speaker 1: So, that was a proud moment? Speaker 2: Yeah, that was a proud moment. Speaker 1: What were you doing-- Speaker 2: Especially 'cause it was student advocate (laughter). Speaker 1: Right, well what were you doing on campus in terms of student advocacy? Speaker 2: Just supporting the students in terms of what they wanted to do. We started a series of trying to help them be able to better succeed in college. We set up a orientation process, couple of week orientation before they started college in terms of expectations, how to study better, how to manage time. We did workshops. How do you manage family and career--you know job and school if you have such and time, as I said, time management, how to study, what courses do you take in terms of to better lead to your career, what are the various options, what are you looking for. So, we did this whole new orientation for new students' process. It was quite successful. Story_ID: 609923 Speaker 1: Are there students you remember, students you helped? Speaker 2: Oh yes. There, there, I, I couldn't call--there are quite a few of them, but-- Speaker 1: Give me one example. Speaker 2: Students who were having problems with financial aid, being able to help them be able to stay in school and see what could be done to defer their tuition or the cost or find alternatives to be able to pay their tuitions for them is one. Speaker 1: Did you mentor any specific students or the students with whom you stayed in touch with over the years? Speaker 2: I mentored a lot of students and a lot of staff because I had lot of younger staff working for me and I tried to bring in and around me, especially staff, student assistants that worked in the office part time as part of their work study in terms of showing them how to do and setting standards for how to get jobs done and showing them, you know, various ropes. So, through that aspect, yes, I always tried to do that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I have several, and I'm not gonna mention those names, but I do have several students with whom I'm still in touch with and I could pick up the phone, it rings and pick it up at any point and it may be them asking for a favor or can I help them or et cetera. Speaker 1: What does that do for you? Speaker 2: Oh, it makes me feel good. It feels like, you know, I've had a purpose and that was it and that fulfilled it. You know I helped somebody. Speaker 1: Who instilled that in you, this desire to help others? Speaker 2: I think that I've always been the kind of caretaker personality (laughter), even from a small child, but I, I think that really orientation into the sorority [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] and coming into the sorority and really learning the history gave me that real feeling of what it meant to lend someone else a hand and to serve other people, and I think that kind of just rolled over to career and you know and I'm sure my sons [Paul King, III and Timothy King], I was getting ready to say children, my sons you know it's been instilled in them as well because both of them are in positions where they want to help or they are benefitting others or individuals that they serve. So, I think that that's a great thing. Story_ID: 609924 Speaker 1: So you authored a book in 1997 focused on the sorority. Tell me about that, what was it called? Speaker 2: Okay. It was called 'Pledged to Remember: The History of Central Region of Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.' ['Pledged to Remember: The History of Central Region,' Loann Julia Honesty King], which is the region I served as central regional director. Now the first edition, there has been two now, but the first edition came about because I had the honor of knowing and being around Loraine Richardson Green, and she used to talk so much about what it was like when she was a member, what it was like when she was supreme, and we would just have conversation after conversation about the sorority. And I said, you know this stuff is too important to miss. Now of course our national history had been documented quite well by Dr. Marjorie Parker [Marjorie Holloman Parker], but it was like the little things --because she was in Chicago [Illinois] and a part of what we considered Central Region. It was the little things about that I felt maybe these are gonna, you know gonna get missed. So, she said, "You know you should right a history book." So, I went to the regional director at the time and I said, "Hey, you know I'd be willing to chair committee to try to put together a history of Central Region and see what comes you know on--of it if you think it's okay with you." Well, the regional director at the time did say, "Sure, fine go right ahead." So it started and it was a labor of love and a project that took approximately four years to really complete because as I got into it there was more and more that I wanted to say to make sure it got documented and chapters participated by submitting their own individual chapter histories to be a part of the book. They had, of course had to be edited so there was some consistency in how they were told. But primarily I wanted to talk about what was going on during the times of the establishment of these chapters and when we first came about and how the evolution of the region took place and what was going on and, and in what kind of atmosphere or environment did these trailblazing, pioneer women go out and establish these chapters and what were they doing on the landscape of the region seen to shape it. Story_ID: 609925 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What did you discover in your research [for 'Pledged to Remember: The History of Central Region,' Loann Julia Honesty King]? What--tell me a little bit about some of these pioneer women? Speaker 2: Early on, organizers before they were called regional directors they were called organizers of the region. This is right after we were incorporated in 1913 and following that incorporation, you know, Beta Chapter, which is, Beta Chapter which is in Chicago [Illinois] was the second chapter of Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] founded, or established. So, there was a lot of history there. Loraine Green [Loraine Richardson Green] was a student at University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] and that's how she got elected to be the second president of the sorority because the con- little convention or boule was held here in Chicago. Well, there was a cry that went out after that chartering to go out and organize all around the country. So these women were chosen and went out and where they were working and where they were located, the various founders began to organize other women. Now, you know they're traveling by second class citizenship, back of the bus, you know, special cars on trains. Most of their traveling had to be through personal cars if they had them, or someone had them that they knew to get from these different states and various college campuses and to talk to these individuals. I mean we went through you know segregation, Jim Crow, all the discrimination. They were on front lines. You know they were going around trying to organize these women in conditions that we would probably not even want to have to go outside of our neighborhood, but they went ahead and they did this. It was amazing. I mean they would--they saw it all and yet they remained steadfast into perpetuation of this organization. So, that was important to me and to show just how much we owe, or we--to our heritage and our legacy and, and how much we should pay tribute to what these women did who went before us, and you know we are only where we are today because of what they did. It reminds me of like we just had the Alpha celebration, you know our fiftieth, I mean hundredth anniversary celebration of Alpha Chapter, which was the first chapter on Howard University [Washington, D.C.]--our centennial--. I mean it was just amazing that we were able to come together in those numbers to play, to pay tribute to those who started, sixteen women started something that has now become a financial active membership of close to sixty thousand now with over two hundred thousand actual members. So, I felt like you know we need to know this and we need to know this for our region because being the second chapter in this region [Central Region] many of the graduate chapters were the first in the region that we need to let people know what the contributions of the regions, the region was. So, that was the project and that's what I took on and that was the first edition (simultaneous). Story_ID: 609926 Speaker 1: How did it feel to complete? Speaker 2: Oh it was wonderful. It was wonderful. It was like (makes sound). You know I, I think, you know the little message in the front, the dedication to my family kind of says something. For my niece and nephew I say, "Yes, Lauren [Lauren Honesty] and B.J. [ph.] it's finally finished." (Laughter) Because that was the (unclear), "Is she done yet?" (Laughter) You know, "Is she done yet" because it was taking, it was all consuming in terms of time. Speaker 1: Was this, is this a book ['Pledged to Remember: The History of Central Region,' Loann Julia Honesty King] that is read by folks all over the region [Central Region]? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: AKAs [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.]? Speaker 2: Yeah and you know other folks read it too, you know and it's, you know it's copyrighted so it soon will be in libraries and whatever. Gonna make some donations to some libraries. But, that was the first edition. That was a big task. A few years went back, went by, of course history goes on, so the current secretary, grammateus, Supreme Grammateus Dorothy Wilson Buckhanan [sic. Dorothy Buckhanan Wilson], which is Dorothy Wilson now, while she was regional director asked would I do a second edition to bring it through her term, and I said yes I would, thinking it was going to be a simple task because all I would have to do would be update you know maybe eight years. Well, it was not a simple task (laughter). The book ended up being twice as thick as the original book, but it has quite a bit of additional information, so I'm proud of it as well. Story_ID: 609927 Speaker 1: And at this time when you're, you know you're writing the book ['Pledged to Remember: The History of Central Region,' Loann Julia Honesty King] and your, your career is still underway, you mentioned Kennedy-King College [Chicago, Illinois]. How long did you work at Kennedy-King? When did you retire (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was at Kennedy-King for about five years. The bulk of my city college career [City Colleges of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] was spent at Olive-Harvey [Olive-Harvey College, Chicago, Illinois] where I was there for about nine years. Speaker 1: When did you retire? Speaker 2: I retired approximately five years ago. So this is 2008, so about 2003, 2002, 2003. Speaker 1: Okay so 2003. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And was, was that a big moment for you after you know so many years of contributing to the Chicago school system? Speaker 2: No, not really. I was ready. I had mentally gotten myself ready. Actually Dr. Wilson [Wellington Wilson] had become somewhat his health was where the doctors were advising him that, that he should retire. I mean he's fine now physically, but at the time it was, you know, I think you need to stop. And so he was getting ready to retire, and I had kind of made up my mind that you know I came there as part of his administration, as part of his team, and I guess I had just reach the point in my life that I didn't want to go through a change in administration and a new culture, you know being developed administrative culture and fitting into that and moving forth. And so and I'm fortunate enough I was in a position where I could retire. Thank goodness, you know, for Paul King [HistoryMaker Paul J. King] (laughter). But, you know-- Speaker 1: Your husband. Speaker 2: Yes, my husband. So-- Speaker 1: Was he working or did he retire? Speaker 2: No, he, you know he had his own construction--no you don't know. He had his own construction firm, UBM, Inc. [Chicago, Illinois], construction. As a matter of fact, he is one of your HistoryMakers in terms of bringing affirmative action into the construction industry in Chicago [Illinois]. So, I didn't feel it was, you know, a major problem with me retiring and so I said well you know it's time to leave this alone. Speaker 1: Were you able to dedicate even more time then to service to Alpha Kappa Alpha [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.]? Speaker 2: Dedicate more is an understatement (laughter). Actually everybody jokes and says, "You work harder now than you did when you were getting paid." You know it's amazing with the amount of time that is consumed as an international program chair as well as other things in which I'm involved that it's like, when did you work? You know it's like, when did you have time to have a full-time job as well? Story_ID: 609928 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) When did you become international program committee chair of Alpha Kappa Alpha [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.]? Speaker 2: I was appointed in July in 2006. Actually we start right after the boule where the new administration comes in. Speaker 1: Okay, and so you're getting ready right now for the centennial celebration? Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: So tell me about I guess your vision, what is part of your plan as chair of the international program committee? Speaker 2: My vision is to make our supreme, centennial supreme basileus' vision work. So Barbara [HistoryMaker Barbara McKinzie] and I worked a long time while she was as first supreme fine tuning and putting together her vision for Alpha Kappa Alpha because it is the supreme basileus vision that is instilled. We both have a lot of same ideas and thoughts about direction, so it was an easy task. Speaker 1: What are some of her ideas? What is the vision? Speaker 2: Okay. The basic vision of this Extraordinary Service Program, which has the acronym of ESP, is five platforms--developed into five platforms that are connected and codependent upon each other, although they each stand alone. Economics, sisterhood and partnership were the three keys of what this vision would entail. The platforms are: platform one, the nontraditional entrepreneur which is primarily African American women, business owners, and entrepreneurs. Platform two, the economic keys to success. Platform three, economics in the black family with emphasis on the black male. Platform four, the Undergraduate Signature Program: Economic Educational Advancement Through Technology, which is a program that we have designed as an Undergraduate Signature Program to get them more involved with other campus groups, their college, the community, and bring their expertise to be on the college campuses. And the last one, although not the least, is health and ec- health resource management and economics. And then we're taking an holistic approach to health primarily through emotional empowerment that takes in both the emotional, spiritual, and physical health of the well- of the person in terms of being able to better serve other people. Now, say, having said that mouthful, the whole idea is that each aspect of the program has an internal portion as well as an external portion. Because it is Soror Barbara's vision and belief as it is mine that if you can empower yourself first, you can better serve the community in which you have pledged yourself to serve. So, this is how it was working, although it's going on simultaneously, this is the idea. Economic empowerment we believe is the new civil rights and the key to advancing our people further along the road to full equality. So, we're trying to show how we can embrace our own and our communities and the families to address the societal issues from an economic standpoint, from an educational standpoint and from a physical standpoint, a health consciousness standpoint that has been keeping us from realizing our full potential. I mentioned something about the power of one and the power of one coming together in a collective resolve. It is that collective resolve that we believe the creation of all of our sorors coming together that can make this lasting impact on our community well into the future. So, that's it in a nutshell. Speaker 1: That's a, a mouthful. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 609929 Speaker 1: As we approach the big convention, the centennial celebration, what are you proudest of when you think about Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.? Speaker 2: Of her accomplishments and her achievements and I, I'm proudest of this. I really believe that we have a wonderful communication committee, Melody McDowell who is local, Chicago [Illinois], chairman of that committee I think that they're doing an excellent job on getting the word out. I think that this hundredth anniversary is giving us the opportunity to let the world know who we are. I believe after this hundredth anniversary given the various projects, given the work that will take place under program and other activities through this administration, that it will become known to everyone exactly what Alpha Kappa Alpha and who Alpha Kappa Alpha is. Speaker 1: Why is that so important? Speaker 2: It's important because I think that everyone should be aware of the work that is being done by this group of women as well as other group of women, but it's important because there's a message there that it sends to our younger black women that says there's a group out there of college trained women who are achieving success every day of their life. You have an alternative. You have a choice. It may not be Alpha Kappa Alpha, but there are these groups. They have endured for a hundred years. So, you having a choice, you're not locked into where you are because they come from all backgrounds and all upbringings. Story_ID: 609930 Speaker 1: What is an Alpha Kappa Alpha woman? Speaker 2: An Alpha Kappa Alpha woman is a woman of dignity, culture, achievement and the willingness to serve others. Speaker 1: What is your greatest accomplishment with Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.? Speaker 2: My greatest accomplishment with Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority I think is, well, I think writing my book ['Pledged to Remember: The History of Central Region,' Loann Julia Honesty King] was my primary greatest accomplishment. But, I will say this: I am so pleased to have, to be in this position at this time and did not realize that, that--I mean I knew were going into the cenial- centennial year. I knew that all of this was gonna be taking place, but I didn't realize that I would be a part or be able to be a part of kind of formulating that impact that will be made. So, this is very important to me being the international chairman of Alpha Kappa Alpha--program chair of Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority during the centennial year. Speaker 1: How do you see yourself as a leader within Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority and also beyond Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority? Speaker 2: A leader by example. As I said earlier, a leader that says we can do it all you need to do is come together and believe that you can do it, and we can achieve it. Story_ID: 609931 Speaker 1: What would you like your legacy to be? Speaker 2: I'd like my legacy to be one that has shown individuals that you don't have to be necessarily top person to make an impact and that with cooperative work, working with others, understanding others, listening to others and sharing with others, you can make a difference in someone else's life and giving of your time and service. So, when they think of Loann Julia Honesty King [HistoryMaker Loann Honesty King] this is what I would like them to remember: someone who unselfishly served. Speaker 1: Well Soror Loann Honesty King, you have lived an amazing life as a woman of Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] and as an educator and as a citizen I'd like to thank you for this interview. Speaker 2: Thank you for having me. Story_ID: 609932 Speaker 1: I became a part of an initiative with Chicago Community Trust [Chicago, Illinois], and it was called the African American Legacy initiative, and I was asked to join the board of that gr- advisory board of that group. The group was established to encourage philanthropy among African American individuals and it still exists today. I was one of the founding board members of that initiative. I do believe that my--I was asked to become a member of the initial board aside from other qualifications is because my husband [HistoryMaker Paul J. King] and I established for our anniversary that donations be made to establish the Paul and Loann King philanthropic fund [Loann and Paul King Philanthropic Fund] with Chicago Community Trust, which was the first donor advised fund established by an African American family with the trust. Speaker 2: And where does the money go? Speaker 1: We give various donations to various charity organizations and benefit organizations. Speaker 2: And how does that make you feel? Speaker 1: Oh great, makes me feel great. We just gotta get more money in there (laughter). Speaker 2: At this point-- Speaker 1: To build, yeah. Speaker 2: At this point in your life when you think about the future, do you have any hopes and dreams? Speaker 1: No, just, just to have as part of a legacy to say that you know we have established this fund and hopefully our children can--children, my sons [Paul King, III and Timothy King] can carry it on or establish their own and will move forward. Story_ID: 609933 Speaker 1: --So funny. Speaker 2: (Laughter) My name is Julieanna Richardson and I'm the interviewer and with, we're taping at the ABC studios [WLS-TV, Chicago, Illinois] with the ABC crew under the direction of Crick Bowen, B-O-W-E-N, Crick, C-R-I-C-K. Who's my cameraman? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Terry Stegner. Speaker 2: Terry Stegner is my, is our cameraman. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): And Joel Banana is the last name. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Hannah Banana. I'm just kidding. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Joel-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Joel Smargie [ph.]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Don't even bother sp- no one can spell it. He can't even spell it (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Joel--Joel is the production assistant and the teleprompter operator Rachel Chase [ph.]. They will go down in history. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: And so I want to have you start out by stating your name and spelling it for us-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --including-- Speaker 2: Do I say hello? Speaker 1: No, no hello. Speaker 2: I'm just kidding. Speaker 1: Including your date of birth. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): And time (unclear). Speaker 1: You know, all of the supreme basilei took it out of their bios. You know that? I told you that was going to happen. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Do you want the year too? Everybody get ready for this one okay. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Everybody put your hands over your ears. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay, my name is Loann Julia Honesty King [HistoryMaker Loann Honesty King]. Speaker 1: Spell your name. Speaker 2: L-O-A-N-N, that's a small A, one word, Julia, J-U-L-I-A, Honesty, H-O-N-E-S-T-Y, and King, K-I-N-G. It is not hyphenated. Speaker 1: And your date of birth? Speaker 2: I was born in Chicago, Illinois, on December the 10th, 1940. Speaker 1: And your, today's date? Speaker 2: Good question, May 28th, 2008. Speaker 1: Okay and your occupation? Speaker 2: Retired college administrator. Story_ID: 609934 Speaker 1: I want to start out by asking you about your parents, and I would like to know your father's name and what you know about his background? Speaker 2: My father's name is Edward Franklin Honesty [Edward Honesty, Sr.]. He was born in Chicago [Illinois]. I was second generation Chicago born. He was an entrepreneur, self employed. He owned a golf school and a pool hall on the South Side of Chicago. Speaker 1: Now ta- did he talk about his growing up in Chicago? Speaker 2: Not really. He, I got most of my information from his, he had no siblings, but his cousins and people who grew up with him, but not really. Speaker 1: Okay. And what information did you get about his growing up? Speaker 2: Well, basically what it was like growing up in Chicago at the time and how they used to hang out together, the guys, and how he met my mother [Elizabeth Chipchase Honesty]. Speaker 1: How, who did, what did they say about growing up in Chicago at the time? Speaker 2: Basically just talked about in general, you know, I mean there were certain things, rules, or regulations that you knew were acceptable. I mean you were in a closed, segregated community. We basically didn't go beyond those boundaries. His was pretty much the same, although we had the privilege of, and he did too, of having grandparent- I had grandparents and his parent, his mother [Julia Honesty Hellens] that did travel and take him various places, so he had that experience of getting outside the city, but pretty much the social life and entertainment was pretty much confined to the South Side of Chicago. Story_ID: 609935 Speaker 1: How far back do you know on, on your father's side of the family? Speaker 2: Only his mother. Speaker 1: So, can you, what, what, can you give her name and what you know about her? Speaker 2: Her name was Julia Honesty [Julia Honesty Hellens]. Speaker 1: So you're named after your grandmother? Speaker 2: Middle name yes. Speaker 1: That's okay. Speaker 2: And she was born in Brownsville, Pennsylvania, and she is of, rumor has it, supposedly mixed descent, Indian [Native American]; I think it was Blackfoot was the tribe and African American. She came to Chicago [Illinois] at a young age, I believe mid- maybe early teens or preteens, late preteens, but she basically was the matriarch of the family and she adopted her s- younger, one of her younger sisters died early and she kind of took over the raise of those, and as I said my father [Edward Honesty, Sr.] didn't have any siblings, but it seemed as if those were his brothers and sisters because they were raised that way. Speaker 1: Now did, was she a talkative person, your grandmother? Did you spend a lot of time with her? Speaker 2: Yeah, I spent a lot of time with her, but it wasn't so much talkative conversation. It was just about hearing stories, as I said she used to love to get in a car and drive and she was a great--they were sportsmen. I didn't know my real grandfather, but my step-grandfather that I knew and grew up with Frank Hellens was his name, they, he and my grandmother were good sportsmen. They used to love to go fishing and hunting, and as a matter of fact as a small child, they taught me how to shoot a gun in terms of target shooting, skeets, taking out--skeet shooting and I could hunt, but they wouldn't take me because I was a girl. Story_ID: 609936 Speaker 1: Now can you describe your father [Edward Honesty, Sr.] a little bit to me. What kind of person was, was he like? Speaker 2: Very ambitious, self driven, very responsible and would do anything to protect and take care of his family. I believe he loved my mother [Elizabeth Chipchase Honesty] very much, even though he did have a reputation of being a player. Speaker 1: And, and let's talk about you say that you know you heard how your, your parents met. How did they meet? Speaker 2: I assume it was, she was in high school I know that and he was too because my mother was quite young when I was born. And of course I guess looking at birth certificates and marriage certificates now at a later age when I was able to acquire those, I could see there was a short time between the time when they got married and I was born. But, they stayed together for forty some years. So, they met in high school that's all I know, high school childhood sweethearts I guess. Story_ID: 609937 Speaker 1: So how old was your mother when you, when you were born? Speaker 2: When I was born, she was fifteen going on sixteen. Speaker 1: Okay. Now give her name and what you know about her growing up. Speaker 2: Okay. Her name was Elizabeth Chipchase [Elizabeth Chipchase Honesty], and actually that was her stepfather's name. Her birth name was Deberry, but she only, she knew her stepfather [Arthur Chipchase] at a young age too, so she took his name because she liked him. And so she was always known as Elizabeth Chipchase, and they used to call her Chip, that was her nickname. But, I always remember my mother as being very, always working. She had a job, but very attentive. We were very close. I mean we used to play jacks, jump double dutch, and by her being a young mother I guess we were very close as I grew up, so we were more like sisters and best friends than we were mothers and daught- mother and daughter. Speaker 1: Did she, would she talk to you also about growing up? Did she share any stories or anything like that? Speaker 2: No, you know not really. I, you know, my experiences as I recall now at this age basically had to do with my growing up and just hearing what was, you know what went on. I didn't hear too much about stories. I know I used to hear about she didn't like the South. There were stories that she told about when she was younger. Interesting one, her grandfather, her mother's--her moth- my mother's--grandmother's name on my mother's side was Callie Spencer [Callie Bond Spencer (ph.)]. Her father [John Bond (ph.)]--which was Callie Bond was her maiden name--her father was Caucasian. Her mother was black, African Nigerian. Supposedly they were married. There were twelve children out of that bond, the union. My mother recalls being in Tennessee. They were in Tennessee right outside of, of Mem- Memphis [Tennessee], some place called Neely. My mother tells me about stories when she was growing up as a small child being in that environment, and it was a very nurturing environment. He was very protective of all of his children, and no one could do anything with them. As a result, they grew up pretty spoiled and they got away with a lot. But, the ironic part about it she does recall the fact that there were Night Riders that would come to his house. She would say that he would get on his horse, which was a white horse that she remembers, and he would ride off with them. I'm not saying if they were Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK] or what, but she's not positive, but everything that she remembers or recalls as a little girl looking out the window kind of leads to that. But no one bothered them or no one bothered that household and as a result many of the male, her uncles, her--my grandmother's brothers got into a lot of trouble because as they grew up and got to be teenagers they felt that they were untouchable and no one could bother them and in some cases a couple of them had to come to Chicago [Illinois] as a result of that. But, he left them all land when he passed, all of his children and so there's a Bond name that runs throughout Tennessee, which is his, which was his name. Speaker 1: So you're saying Mr. Bond was white. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, yet he was cohabitating, or he married. Speaker 2: He was married. Speaker 1: He, married, but he (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's, the story has always been that they actually married. Speaker 1: But he may have also been involved in Klan activity is what-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Now do you--so this is a story that she, she actually (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That my mother-- Speaker 1: --observed as a, as a, as a child? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 609938 Speaker 1: Does she remember coming to Chicago [Illinois]? Speaker 2: Yeah, she was very small like four, five. She came early. The only thing that I could remember and I may, if that relationship has anything to do with it, or some of her experiences of that, she would never send me down south to visit because she said that I was too uppity. (Laughter) And she would not send me down there because she was afraid that I would not take second or step back or do anything to anybody anywhere. And she was afraid of my mouth, that I'd say something and get in trouble, so she would never send me down south for the summer or to visit. So, I really never got to see that part of the family in their own environment. I met all of them, of course, when they all moved to Chicago, majority of them moved to Chicago. As I said there were ten of them. Speaker 1: Okay, and so do you know who came first of the ten, do you know? Speaker 2: I believe my grandmother [Callie Bond Spencer (ph.)] did. Speaker 1: So, the grandmother and then your, your mother-- Speaker 2: My mother's mother-- Speaker 1: Mother okay, okay. Speaker 2: --and brought my mother [Elizabeth Chipchase Honesty]. Speaker 1: And then maybe the boy, the boys came-- Speaker 2: They came later. Speaker 1: Okay I see. Now-- Speaker 2: Like teenage, getting to that age. Story_ID: 609939 Speaker 1: Let's talk about your earliest memory of growing up. Speaker 2: My earliest memory of growing up was where I was actually, lived when I was born, which is at 56th [Street] and Indiana [Avenue], and that's basically my earliest memory of growing up. I can still see that apartment today. I remember the good times. I remember the Christmas meals with all of the relatives coming to my grandmother's house. As I said, my grandmother was like the center point or the matriarch of the whole family, that's my father's mother [Julia Honesty Hellens]. I called her Nana. Speaker 1: Nana? Speaker 2: Nana. Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She basically--we lived with her. It was her, my step-grandfather [Frank Hellens], my mother [Elizabeth Chipchase Honesty], father [Edward Honesty, Sr.], myself and an aunt. That was the normal base of the family. On many occasions, it was other family members who for various reasons had to have some place to stay, so I remember being full of--house being full of people because of circumstances or whatever. Speaker 1: Now, now your (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But she was-- Speaker 1: I'm sorry-- Speaker 2: Go ahead. Speaker 1: --your aunt's name, what was her name? Speaker 2: My mother's sister? My mother's sister's name was Katheryn [Katheryn Deberry Duke]. Speaker 1: Did she have a nickname too? No? Speaker 2: Kat. Speaker 1: Kat. Speaker 2: Aunt Kat, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Now when you, you said you remembered the house. Can you describe the house to me, your memory of it? Speaker 2: The apartment, yeah. It was on the third floor, two apartments per floor. Wood, brick/wood building, had to climb the steps all the way to the third floor. We lived, I guess if you're facing north, we would live to the east. We were in the east apartment. It was come in the door there was a little, little foyer like. Off to the right was like the living room, go down a long hall and then at the back was the dining room, at the very back, and there were the kitchen, two bedrooms, and I guess a half a bathroom and one bathroom, but it was a typical apartment, I guess for that era in Chicago [Illinois] on the South Side. Speaker 1: And it wasn't a kitchenette though (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, not, it was not. Speaker 1: It wasn't. It was larger, it was larger. Speaker 2: It was larger. Speaker 1: Okay it was larger. Speaker 2: It was larger yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 609940 Speaker 1: I wanna go back to your earliest memory. You said you remember the house [in Chicago, Illinois], but do you remember any incident that sort of strikes you? Speaker 2: Well, I do remember--yeah, one incident. I used to love to, we used to listen to the radio and I remember sitting and listening to "The Shadow knows" ['The Shadow'] and these kind of shows on the radio. I also remember being very disappointed because my parents [Elizabeth Chipchase Honesty and Edward Honesty, Sr.] took me to a taping of one of the radio shows, and it was actually 'Buster Brown' ['Smilin' Ed's Buster Brown Gang'] and, "My dog, Tige who lived in a shoe," and so when I saw it I was very disappointed that these were actors standing up there just talking 'cause I had all this visualization of this person, you know, with this actual dog, and so that was kind of a letdown from radio, but it was very creative listening to the radio and letting your imagination--. One tragic thing that I remember living was that was the first time I actually saw a real fire, and it was right down the block across the street and it was a massive fire. And we could look out the window from the--it was like a bay window that was in the apartment off of the living room and like a little sitting area with a bay area and we could see it and I could remember the fire and the screams and it, it was very devastating and see the flames coming out the windows of the apartment down the street. That was not a very pleasant memory, but I still can see that. I also do remember, and I can't remember the year, but I do remember they had the, and I forgot what they called them--now that you asked the question all these things are coming back--they used to come around and have you turn your lights out because of the air raids or, or whatever was going on. And I do remember the guy coming and saying, "Turn your lights off," you know. And what it was it was the light--we didn't have the lights on, but it was a light from the radio 'cause we were listening to the radio and I guess he could see that, and I thought that was awfully strange how could he see this little bitty light and have to turn it off. So, I remember going through that and I remember hearing the sirens. I guess they used to, for as a warning, this was drills, these were drills, of course; nothing ever happened. My father was in the [U.S. military] service, and actually he was away part of while I was a little girl. Speaker 1: Now what, what age are we talking about? Speaker 2: I'm talking about four or five. I was born in '40 [1940], so-- Speaker 1: So like 1944, '45 [1945] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, uh-huh. I would assume it would be around that time. Story_ID: 609941 Speaker 1: I wanna take you back since we're at the apartment [in Chicago, Illinois] and tell me what sights, smells, and sounds remind you of growing up? Speaker 2: Well it was always the smell of food because there was always cooking going on. The sights that I remember-- Speaker 1: What kind of food though, what do you--when you thi- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, it was everything from traditional American to soul, what they classify as soul food. There was also a lot of--I had the experience of, which I didn't grow too fond of, but I also had the experience of live game because as I said my [paternal] grandparents both hunted. So, we had rabbit and they also hu- hunted deer. So, we had venison and that was my first experience with that. I do remember going to a packing plant where after they, with my grandfather [Honesty King's step-grandfather, Frank Hellens], and--after they skinned and then he'd cut the meat and prepare it and pack it and store it in these freezers. And I'm not sure where it went, but I do remember these big freezers going in there and cutting and wrapping this meat and having him pack it, watch him pack it, and my grandmother [Julia Honesty Hellens] used to go on occasion too. I watched and seen, which I never liked, rabbits being prepared for cooking. Though rabbit I did like 'cause it taste like chicken. Most of it I didn't like. They had pheasant. They had quail and most of the wild life that was around in terms of access to--Michigan is primarily where they went to do their hunting, and then when they went for deer they went further up. Speaker 1: Do you know where in Michigan? Speaker 2: Oh, I'm not sure. We had relatives that lived in South Bend [Indiana], but it used to be up further than that I do remember, but I, I, I couldn't tell you exactly. Speaker 1: Now what, what sounds do you remember? Speaker 2: Oh, I remember the ice trucks and the watermelon wagons coming through the neighborhood hollering: "Get your watermelon!" I remember those sounds. I remember ice guy sitting on the back of the truck. I remember chasing the ice trucks 'cause the ice used to drop off and believe it or not in those days I guess we weren't afraid of all the germs and the diseases that are around now because ice would fall off the truck and it'd be summer we'd take the ice and wash it off with the running water and you know suck on the ice and makes us cups of ice, and or add Kool-Aid to or something to it and make a sundae. But, I guess nowadays you can't do that. Speaker 1: Maybe even then you couldn't, but maybe the body helped (laughter). Speaker 2: Right, right maybe the body had its natural immune system (laughter). Story_ID: 609942 Speaker 1: You were also saying that you remember holidays, you know, at the-- Speaker 2: Oh, yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) house and so I was just wondering if you could describe maybe one? Speaker 2: Yeah. Christmas was always a big deal. It always been in my family, continues to be. It's not just, not a thing as not having gifts. No matter whether the money was there or how, some kind of way they always managed to get what was on your--Santa Claus always managed to come. I think one thing was really funny that I do remember from my childhood was that I had an uncle who we used to, well he's not really an uncle, but the ones, one of the siblings that my [paternal] grandmother [Julia Honesty Hellens] raised, so I called him uncle, used to always joke and you know he used to be a great--telling jokes and saying things and I remember on year he ran in the house and said that someone had shot Santa Claus. And so they guessed there wouldn't be any Christmas that year, so 'cause he didn't have the money to get his kids the toys that they wanted, so that was the way he joked out of it, but he still managed to get them a little something. But, used to be a great tree, decorating the tree was a big experience. We did have a tradition to do that on Christmas Eve, decorate the tree, and I kept that a long time into my adult years with my children [Paul King, III and Timothy King] until it just got almost impossible to decorate the tree on Christmas Eve and prepare for Christmas; it was just too hard. But--I would say that just occurred in the last six years--but great tree. The one thing I do remember was angel hair, 'cause my grandmother used to love to put angel hair on the tree, but she used to always tell, "Stay away from it, stay out of it." So, I do remember being cut by the angel hair, little side cuts and getting that stuff on you, it itches and et cetera, et cetera. Of course we let that go after a while. But, yeah it was a big tradition. Birthdays were always a big thing too. My aunt, my grandmother's sister, Teenie [ph.], we used to call her, her name was Ruthenia [ph.] who lived there on 56th Street [Chicago, Illinois] too used to take crepe paper, she used to do the most fantastic things with crepe paper for birthday parties that I'd ever seen. She actually built a carousel over the main dining room table out of crepe paper for several birthdays of mine. She used to fold this crepe paper and then pull it and it'd come out in these blocks and chains and she'd swirl it around and bring it down from the chandelier in the middle over the dining room table down, to the edge of the table, and create this whole tent carousel kind of atmosphere. You had fabulous birthdays on small budgets. Story_ID: 609943 Speaker 1: Did you have a brother or sister when you-- Speaker 2: I have one brother who was born when I was fourteen. Speaker 1: So you were really like an only child (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Only child. Speaker 1: Um-hm. And your brother's name? Speaker 2: Edward Franklin Honesty, Jr. [Edward Honesty, Jr.]. Speaker 1: Okay. And so let's--so, so during this early year very, it sounds like a very warm family environment, lots of people going, you know, sort of around. Describe the block you know on--that you lived on [in Chicago, Illinois] and you know other neighbors. Speaker 2: It was a typical block and it was, it was a community because everybody knew everybody on the block. There was a certain group right within the building. You had some neighbors that you didn't necessarily relate to, but other neighbors who took their responsibility to watch out for everybody. I remember we had one neighbor who was kind of heavyset who used to always tattle on me to my mother [Elizabeth Chipchase Honesty]. And one time, actually when my mother got pregnant with my brother, this is a little later on, got pregnant with my brother she was running around, she started gossiping and she ran around and told everybody that my mother was pretending that she was pregnant, but it was actually me that was pregnant and that--you know because you know whatever; she was just busybody. But, I was of age that I could have been, but that was not true. My mother was actually pregnant. So, I do remember my mother saying she was going to go down there and talk to her, and I told my mother, "You better take somebody 'cause she's kind of big, Mama." I didn't want them to have a confrontation. But, my best friends at the time lived in the building right down, couple of doors down, they were three sisters, and everybody was just like in that community, we--that's where our friends were, that's who we kind of ran around with and kind of as they say hung with right there, went to the same schools, Carter Elementary School [William W. Carter Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois], which is still there, which I was very proud of because it was the only school that had a swimming pool, so I learned how to swim at a young age. Story_ID: 609944 Speaker 1: Well actually I learned how to swim by my father [Edward Honesty, Sr.] 'cause he threw me out the boat on a fishing trip and told me to learn how to swim, that's how I really learned how to swim. But, they had the pool, so that perfected, 'cause we did synchronized swimming and stuff, so that was quite an experience that most people who went to public elementary schools didn't have. Speaker 2: So you, you're saying at Carter Elementary School [William W. Carter Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] they actually taught-- Speaker 1: At-- Speaker 2: --synchronized swimming? Speaker 1: Yep and they had a swimming pool and I remember--all this is coming back now that you're asking--but I remember the swim, I was in the swim club and it was called the dolphins. Speaker 2: That--so were you in like fifth or sixth grade when you were doing, in the swim class? Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Now that, 'cause that was the time, what was the famous synchronized swimmer, oh god, Est- ? Speaker 1: Esther Williams. Speaker 2: Esther Williams, right, you would see her. I loved watching her on TV. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Now let's, so at Carter you were, were you five when you start going to elementary school do you think? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Okay do you-- Speaker 1: Actually they gave me special permission I think because my birthday was December 10th and I think that was past the time, they changed the rules now, but I think you couldn't come in, I couldn't come in at four 'cause I wasn't gonna make it to five, so actually when I came in I was gonna be six, so somewhere--it was some- something had to do with that age of that December birthday. Speaker 2: Okay, so when you, so you started school you think at five or you started at six? Speaker 1: I started at five. Speaker 2: Okay. Now, now tell me were there any, do you remember things about schooling yourself during that time period, I mean any teachers that particularly you remember or liked or didn't like? I see you getting a smile on your face. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Yeah, I remember a lot about that experience. One--the first, my first thing was they had, I was apparently, I think what happened was they got me in at four 'cause I wasn't gonna be five 'til December, but I think they took me anyway, but then they caught up with me because they had what they called a 1-C, and so I was going to come out of there too soon, so they made me spend a semester in this 1-C. But, then after I protested--as a child, I was still protesting--but after I protested to my mother [Elizabeth Chipchase Honesty] and so she went up and advocated for me and then they gave me a double, what they called in terms of grades because of the academic level. I used to get all, they used to give S's, which were called superior then, the grading system, and I had all S's and Es on one, on all the academic subjects and in conduct I have all U's and Ds. All the way through school I couldn't keep my mouth shut. Well, I later found out through my own becoming an educator that it was because they couldn't keep my attention, 'cause I was through with everything everybody was doing, so I was busy, so I was talking and-- Story_ID: 609945 Speaker 1: Okay. So you were, you were talking about your, you know your teachers, right? Speaker 2: Teachers, in--oh when I was in elementary school [William W. Carter Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois], yes. You know I remember some of them from elementary school. I do remember-- Speaker 1: You were also talking about, you know, how you were getting S and E (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yes, right, right. Speaker 1: And S, S was superior and E were excellent? Speaker 2: S was superior, E was excellent. The grading system was S, E, G, F, D, and U--I think something crazy like that. Speaker 1: So D and U you were getting in, in conduct. Speaker 2: In conduct and check marks for--on the conduct side, and that's because I couldn't keep my mouth shut, and I did talk back and various things that, that I deserved it. But, anyway it kind of went through. Every now and then I'd be okay and then it would, another semester would come and I would do it--and whatever. I do remember a couple of incidents that had to do with that and that's I remember the teacher disciplining me maybe about fifth grade and turned her back and I stuck my tongue out at her. Well, of course, she caught me. But, she made the mistake of making me keep my tongue stuck out. So, of course, I went home and told. They wanted to see my parents anyway, but of course I told my mother [Elizabeth Chipchase Honesty] and father [Edward Honesty, Sr.] that she had brutalized me and that my mouth was hurting so bad and my tongue was hurting because I had to hold my tongue out for at least an hour. I think it probably was about ten minutes, but anyway. But that's all the evidence that I needed, so that turned out okay in my favor when they went up to school because she got disciplined for making me keep my tongue out of my mouth, so they forgot about the fact that I stuck my tongue out. So, I thought that was pretty clever on my part. But (laughter)-- Speaker 1: So, you were spoiled? Speaker 2: Yes, rotten. I'll admit it (laughter). I'll admit it okay so I know I was. Story_ID: 609946 Speaker 1: Let me ask you--will you describe yourself as a, as a young, a young child? Were you, were you a person that was--it sounds like you were very outgoing, but was there, were you an internal at all? What do you think about, you know, in, in quiet moments? I'm just trying to get a sense of who you were. Speaker 2: I, I was always try- yes, I was very outgoing and I loved, I guess because of the fact that I didn't have sisters or brothers in the growing years that it was always important to me to have friends and having people. I was always kind of regimented, I guess, in terms of I liked things to go a certain way and to follow a course, although I love science fiction movies, so I can't quite put together what the, how to two fit: being predictable and then being unpredictable at one time, so it's kind of a mixed thing. Yes, I did have times where I kind of wished things were better because of turmoil maybe between mother [Elizabeth Chipchase Honesty] and father [Edward Honesty, Sr.], or things were going on, but it was like, it was always at a point that it was accepted. My [paternal] grandmother [Julia Honesty Hellens] used--had a philosophy and I think I adopted that very early on, and I can't remember at what point I heard it, and she would always say that you know, "I used to be unhappy because I didn't have any shoes until I saw a man who didn't have any feet." And she used to always say that and always say, "The grass looks greener on the other side." Those are two things she always said, and some kind of way I guess I internalized that to realize that no matter how bad things got, there were probably other people who were or other situations that were far worse than what you were and to learn to appreciate what you have and to always help others. I was always, you know, wanting to help other people type of attitude too. One of the reasons it got me in trouble at school, now that I think about it, was the fact that I was, get through with my work and I was always trying to help somebody else with theirs and so that was looked upon as either cheating or not to be done. You know I was supposed to sit there quietly. So, those were the kind of things that, that happened. So, it was always caring. I always cared for what other people thought. I never liked bullies. I used to always not like the person, and would intercede much to my dismay sometime, but you know the person they were picking on. I never liked them picking on or the bullying or picking out one student because of this, that, and the other. I never did like that. Speaker 1: So now when you, you said that you like science fiction. What were, was that reading it or seeing it on TV? Speaker 2: Both. Speaker 1: Both. Speaker 2: Not TV, TV wasn't too much then. Speaker 1: So, so radio? Speaker 2: TV was limited, but it was, yeah. I mean I used to, "The Shadow knows" ['The Shadow'] that was a mystery I guess kind of thing, but I used to like mystery and I used--science fiction I liked you know the movies, the old movies, nothing like what they have today, but I enjoy those today too. And yeah read stories. I used to read stories. Story_ID: 609947 Speaker 1: You know I also found it interesting and I wanna ask you the time period. You said that your father [Edward Honesty, Sr.] owned a golf s- club, was it, did you say a golf club, a golf--? Speaker 2: School. Speaker 1: School. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Was he a golfer himself? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He was one of the original member of what, the first I believe black golf clubs, a group of men in Chicago [Illinois] called the Linksmen [ph.]. Speaker 1: And do you remember ever going to the golf school or were you taught-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --there as well? Speaker 2: No, I took golf in college to pledge the sorority [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And this was, this was, this be- came about I believe right around the same time, so it was like through my high school [Englewood High School, Chicago, Illinois], end of high school years to that, when he was, this business was going. Speaker 1: That he did that. So at the time that we're talking about which is more elementary, you know, or maybe going into junior high what-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I'm not sure. I can't remember if the actual--I know the barbershop was--he, he used to own the barbershop. And one of his barbers was Sutton [ph.] was his last name, but I can't remem- I'm trying to remember. It must have been because it was after my brother [Edward Honesty, Jr.] was born, so I had to be towards that ten year--'cause I remember him being in there in the pool room, especially sitting in the middle of the table throwing the balls all over. Speaker 1: So you're saying your father, now what was the sequence of his businesses? He owned-- Speaker 2: The businesses, the first one was the barbershop. Speaker 1: And that, were, were you under fourteen at the time he owned the barbershop? Speaker 2: Yes, I think that came towards my--yeah it was like maybe seventh, eighth grade in-- Speaker 1: Okay. So, that's like the mid-1950s. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Right, that we're, we're in that period-- Speaker 2: Yeah, we're in that period, right, right (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) okay mid-1950s. Now if you, if we look, so do you remember being at the bar- barbershop? Was it a typical black barbershop? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: A lot of you know people-- Speaker 2: Well, it was only like a I think two chair--it was small. It wasn't large. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you remember the men sitting around talking and joking? Or ta- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, they did the same thing, hung out, the typical black barbershop, yes. You know sharing the news and talking. But as I said it wasn't a large one, so it wasn't a lot of that, but there was enough. Five or six people were in there chatting all the time, but no I wasn't really involved. I wasn't there. You know I, I was always the protected female role, I guess, so. Story_ID: 609948 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And so where did you go to element- junior high school? You--Carter [William W. Carter Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) High school, it was only high school. Speaker 1: Oh, so, Carter went up to eighth grade. Speaker 2: Eighth grade. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: Carter went to eighth grade. After eighth grade you went into high school. It was all called one thing, and I was, I went to Englewood High School, which was the castle. Speaker 1: Now why was it called the castle? Speaker 2: Because of the magnificent building. It had towers. The old Englewood High School in Chicago [Illinois] before they turn it down--tore it down, and it was called the castle. That's what they nicknamed it 'cause it was a big mass structure with a drawbridge opening that went, not a drawbridge, a bridge kind of opening that you could go under into a courtyard and it had towers. It was a beautiful building. Story_ID: 609949 Speaker 1: I just wanna understand your, your brother's birth. So when he [Edward Honesty, Jr.] was born you were starting at Englewood [Englewood High School, Chicago, Illinois], is that right? Or what (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) When he was born, I was-- Speaker 1: In your first year? Speaker 2: --starting, I would guess I was starting. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: I'm trying to think. No, I had to be first or second year. Speaker 1: First, okay. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, let me calculate. He was fourteen years younger than my--so he had to be born '54 [1954], '55 [1955], right? Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: Which would have made me fifteen, so-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --I was in high school. Speaker 1: Okay you were in high school. I want you to sort of go back to when you found out your mother [Elizabeth Chipchase Honesty] was pregnant. What was that--because here you are living basically as only child, so what, do you remember, you know, your, your surprise or how you found out or? Speaker 2: No, you know I don't, I don't remember it being any of an issue. I mean, I, I just thought it was fine. I mean 'cause I was looking for a companion. I mean it was great to--I, I didn't have any, maybe because I had reached, you know, teenage years that it wasn't any real, I didn't see any rivalry, I just thought this was, this was wonderful, I was gonna have a brother or a sister. I probably thought about as it was gonna be a toy or somebody to play with, you know, or something. You know I, I really thought--I looked forward to taking care of him. Speaker 1: Do you remember the day-- Speaker 2: Or her. Speaker 1: --he came home from, from the hospital? Speaker 2: You know I can't remember the actual day that he came home from the hospital, but I can picture him small in the crib. I remember the cha- we used--we had a dog (background noise). Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: We, we had a dog and his name was Ruff [ph.], it was a boxer, and I do remember when he got up to some age he used to, he put baby powder all over the whole--we still at 56th Street, over the dining room 'cause the dining room had been converted to the top of the table was where his pad and where you did the changing and laid him out, bathed him and all that kind of stuff. That I can remember. And I remember the powder all over everywhere and he said the dog spilled it. No, the dog's name was Chip [ph.], yeah, that was, that first dog was Chip. And, but I don't remember, no, when he came home. For some reason, I can't remember that, but I do remember him being a small baby and playing. Story_ID: 609950 Speaker 1: What are you like at this point? So you're in, you're in high school [Englewood High School, Chicago, Illinois], you, what, what--you're becoming aware of the world around you. I don't know, you know we haven't spoken about church. I don't know if you were part of a churchgoing family and what chur- you know what-- Speaker 2: Yes, family did go to church. I was in church. I was in several church--Good Shepherd [Church of the Good Shepherd Congregational United Church of Christ, Chicago, Illinois] was my initial church on Indiana [sic. Prairie Avenue], which is still there. Speaker 1: Who was the minister at the time? Speaker 2: I, that I could not tell you, no. Speaker 1: Okay, that's okay. Speaker 2: That I could not tell you, but I was in the little Brownies and getting ready to go Girl Scouts [Girl Scouts of the United States of America], but I never went Girl Scout--I was only a Brownie. I did several plays, church plays. I went to Sunday school, the whole bit and grew up with the church. I used to have a church experience also as I got older with my (background noise) mother's mother [Callie Bond Spencer (ph.)] who was-- Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION) Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: So, you know I was wondering just about what you were aware of? You know this is coming of age time, you know you become aware of the opposite sex, you know you're, you were saying when we, when it got interrupted you were talking about church, you know, and you were saying you went to--I wanna go back to that. You said you went to Good Shepherd. Is that--did you go to other churches beyond Good Shepherd? Speaker 2: Yeah, I used to visit with them. My grandmother was Baptist, and I used to go to a couple of churches like visit every now and then with one of her churches. I think one time I got what they called the, the Holy Ghost at her Baptist church. I think that was experienced like eleven or twelve years old, and act- I mean actually my knees with doing that shaking and knocking together. You know I still--what it was it was a young choir. I think they must have been sisters and a brother or something and they were singing this very song, and they were singing this song and the minister was up there about coming forth to be baptized in the Baptist church, et cetera, et cetera, and all of a sudden this knee shaking and trembling started and I don't still to this day don't know why, so I tell everybody I guess that's when I got the Holy Ghost. But, of course, I got up and went down and joined the church, but I never went back. That's the ironic part about it. But, that was her religion. But, I did get moved in that particular session, so. Speaker 1: Now Good Shepherd was A.M.E. [sic.] right or was it--? Speaker 2: It was A.M.E. Good Shepherd was A.M.E. This was Baptist. Speaker 1: Right, so there's a big, at that point there was a big difference between (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Big difference in assembly. Speaker 1: People made a huge difference, you know-- Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: --either your Baptist-- Speaker 2: That's right there was a big difference right, right. Speaker 1: --or brimstone Baptist, okay. Speaker 2: But, my mother [Elizabeth Chipchase Honesty] and father [Edward Honesty, Sr.], neither were really--this was because of my grandmother and my aunt [Katheryn Deberry Duke] who lived with us in terms of the involvement in the church. My mother nor my father were major churchgoers, every Sunday you had to go, you know that type of thing and so it was not, I didn't feel a necess- you know a necessity to. After I got a certain age, a teenager, I'd go, but it wasn't a regular basis. I wouldn't consider myself as a regular churchgoer. Story_ID: 609951 Speaker 1: What are you becoming aware of though, I mean and that's why I'm saying as a young person you know what are you, you know aware of in the world outside you, you know what are you hearing-- Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: --you know discussed around the din- the, the dining room table? Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Oh, becoming basically really aware of--heightened awareness of what was going on in terms of what really segregation, prejudice, pressures of women; certain things you could do or could not do. I was becoming aware of that. Of course, I was becoming aware of my own sexuality. I was becoming aware of boys and all of the normal things that, that teenage girls at puberty that you start becoming aware of. Yeah, that was all happening. The, I was aware of political things that were going on, and-- Speaker 1: Like what, give me some examples? Speaker 2: Let's see high school [Englewood High School, Chicago, Illinois] I was kind of, well just in terms of you know I was always like I need to hurry up and vote. I wanna be eighteen, I believe it was, so that I could vote at the time because I thought that was really when you got grown. And just the climate, just hearing them talk about you know what was going on and things. I mean I felt-- Speaker 1: Do you remember any specific thing, incident? Speaker 2: No, I'm trying to recall that. I can't recall now. I can't recall. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you remember any discussions around the table or things that people said were unjust or you know, I mean 'cause you were, anything like that? Or you know you said I became aware of racism or you, 'cause you were living in a black enclave, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, right. Speaker 1: Really-- Speaker 2: Well, I remember my mother [Elizabeth Chipchase Honesty] did work for a black person and then-- Speaker 1: Black person or white person? Speaker 2: Black person. She did work for a black person, Joe Brice [ph.], used to have a chicken shack on 55th Street as well as then he opened up a tavern and he was the first person to open--he bought a currency exchange from a Jewish guy that had it originally. But, I do remember my mother working for him and she worked very well for him and as a matter of fact she end up, she ended up being the owner later on in life of the currency exchange, first African American woman who owned a currency exchange on South Side of Chicago [Illinois]. Well, I just remember situations of her--I remember one time she was working as a child, now this is, I'm skipping back and forth. She worked in what was called, I think it was Becker Cleaners [ph.], it was a cleaners, and she was a cashier, and I do remember my going to meet her at work, 'cause we were going to the show afterwards. And I do remember playing with the cash register and ringing the keys not knowing it meant anything, and she caught me and got very upset. I remember her--seeing how upset she was because she was saying her money wasn't going to even out or correct out, and she said that you know he, which was her boss, who was not black, would probably fire her or she'd have to make it up and I, I remember her being very upset 'cause--comments, and, you know, "'Cause he doesn't let us do anything and he's not gonna give me a break," and this kind of thing, so that I remember. I remember being aware because, as I said I used to go fishing trips and stuff with my [paternal] grandparents [Julia Honesty Hellens and Frank Hellens], I remember that I did-- Story_ID: 609952 Speaker 1: What other things do you remember at all that may have happened in your teenage years that you know may have happened in the community, any incident it may be you know in your family, in the community that, you know-- Speaker 2: I remember Emmett Till, not in my family, but that was a big issue in terms of when that happened. And I remember my mother [Elizabeth Chipchase Honesty] saying, "That's why I never sent you down south." And I kind of relate to that and the tragedy of that as a teenager growing up. That was an impact of, you know, things weren't as good. I remember, of course, also we used to be--in terms of traveling, now I'm in high school now, in terms of going to high school to various football games and basketball games. Now I was not of the demur, intellectual, snooty crowd okay. Those young ladies were at Parker High School [Paul Robeson High School, Chicago, Illinois] (laughter). I was at Englewood [Englewood High School, Chicago, Illinois], so I was considered in on the rougher edge of young ladies at that particular time--or teenagers. And I remember going to the games and seeing, you know they used to, especially when we were playing the white schools in the football. You know they'd be on one side of the field, we'd be on the other side of the field. So, there was a lot of racial conflict. I mean I remember slurs being thrown and held. They had to take us out of certain gates so that there wouldn't be any mixes. I do remember one time that you know we thought we were really tough and rough and whatever and they had bussed us to this particular community. It must have been maybe due west, maybe even, I'm trying to think exactly where it was, but it was like far west like around the 55th [Street] s- fifty--in that area I'm thinking the school was located. But anyway--I may have that wrong, but I remember the community and I remember that they took us out this side gate to get on these buses, and I remember as we were loading the buses they had all of these folks standing, this was the black leather jacket I guess motorcycle era part of it, and I remember them standing around at the various storefronts or where you could actually see them. And I remember some of the young ladies were picking their fingernails with switchblade knives standing there. They were like--intimidating for us, you know, and you know we got on the bus, we were glad to get out of there. But I mean you know they were calling racial slurs and things to the buses and throwing stuff at the buses. So, that's what I remember in terms of interaction with others. Story_ID: 609953 Speaker 1: That experience really was--well let me ask you what were your parents [Elizabeth Chipchase Honesty and Edward Honesty, Sr.] saying about things like that? What were they saying, you know as you became aware? Speaker 2: Oh, they all thought it was injustice, I mean you know it was always that you know, they always, I mean they never approved of any injustice or, I mean but there was still a standard that was set. I, I, I'm gonna flip back again, I'm thinking again. I remember I was, when I was a little girl they used to have in the department stores downtown they used to have the various rides and different things right in the store at Christmastime. They used to have these holiday Christmas, I'm trying to think what they would be called, like little Santa towns and they would do whole floors as I remember, it may have been a small part I don't remember, but they used to have little trains you could ride on, other little--kind of little kind of carnival kind of rides for kids that used to be there. And I remember my mother saying to me going down there one time in terms of, "Now I want you to act like a white girl when you go down." And I think I said earlier I was always kind of flippant and smart mouth. But, anyway so we got down there and we were there and there sure enough this little white child threw a tantrum and fell out in the middle of the floor and start kicking and screaming and throwing this tantrum and I pulled my mother, I'll never forget, I pulled her coat and I said, "Is that how you want me to act, Mommy?" (Laughter) Knowing full well it wasn't and that's not what she meant, but anyway she joked about that forever. She said, "I'll never make that mistake again." But, that was kind of a standard because that's the proper way I guess it was that we were supposed to act. But, then you know as you saw the other--you know I remember incidences of not being able to try on white gloves, going to buy gloves and them giving you black gloves. I remember an incident where my mother, my grandmother [Callie Bond Spencer (ph.)] and I went to Chicago Theatre [Chicago, Illinois], this is teenage years, and to see a movie or something and my grandmother, my mother's mother, asked the person to, if they would, it was like two empty seats and then there were a person and then there were like empty seats on the other side of them, and she asked this person if she would move over a couple of seats so that we could sit together. And her reply was, "Where I come from they don't even allow you niggers to sit with us, let alone asking us to move over a seat." Well, the next thing I remember was chasing my mother who was chasing her mother who was chasing the woman through the Chicago Theatre (laughter). And I remember running through the Chicago Theatre, and I guess maybe the ushers were behind us. I don't remember, but all I remember this group running after this remark was made. So, it was like I was always taught that, you know, you were as good as anybody else. You had a right, certain rights, but you had to understand what society imposed, not accept it, but understand and you were your own person. So, it was kind of--that's--was my experience. Story_ID: 609954 Speaker 1: When you graduated, okay, okay, when you graduated from high school [Englewood High School, Chicago, Illinois] what were you--well let me, so you're saying you weren't the most studious, but this was-- Speaker 2: No, I was studious, I was always studious, I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You were--even in high school? Speaker 2: --just, I was just not the, let's see I kept up my grades and got good grades you know I guess, whatever, but I was not your student who was just always in the books, you know. Speaker 1: Right. You know-- Speaker 2: I was running around on the outside. I might have cut class. I might have ditched a day and that kind of thing. Speaker 1: Now when you are graduating, what are you thinking you're gonna do? Speaker 2: Definitely go to college. Speaker 1: Did you, did you have an idea of where? Speaker 2: Yeah, I wanted to go to Michigan State [Michigan State University of Agriculture and Applied Science; Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan]. Speaker 1: Now why Michigan State? Speaker 2: Well, because I had family in Michigan and South Bend [Indiana]. We had cousins. I thought I could establish residence, and the tuition wouldn't be as great. That I would be able to go as a resident of Michigan, and it was a state school, and so therefore it wouldn't be that great of a hardship or tuition and I would get away to go to college. Speaker 1: Were people looking at the University of Illinois in that way at that ti- (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I had several of my peers who went to the University of Illinois, but they went here in Chicago [Illinois], which was Navy Pier then. Speaker 1: Okay, but not so much Champaign-Urbana [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois]. Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: You didn't hear people going there so much. Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My group didn't talk about that. As a matter of fact, I think of the majority I would say my little clique that I ran with there may have been on two or three of us that actually went to college. The rest of them went to work or went to the [U.S.] military or--the guys went to the military or went to work or went to some kind of business school or something of that-- Story_ID: 609955 Speaker 1: I have one other question on the schooling before we end. What, what--were you teachers white or black through, throughout elementary [William W. Carter Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] and high school [Englewood High School, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: Mixed. Speaker 1: Mixed okay, so in the mixed, with the white teachers did you experience any racism? Speaker 2: In elementary school, the biggest racist thing that I do remember was a Halloween, I guess I must have been seventh grade. O'Bryan [ph.] was here name, now that it comes to me, that was her name. I do remember for, my mother [Elizabeth Chipchase Honesty] had gone and gotten me this wonderful costume which I thought was costume, 'cause I was always her little baby doll or whatever, whatever and it was a shamrock and it had a green shamrock oilcloth, hat, this pretty white kind of organza dress with little shamrocks on it and whatever, whatever. And so she dressed me up in this and of course and that's what I wore and we had to wear our costumes to school on a particular day and I remember her telling me that I could not be a shamrock, and I said to her why could I not be a shamrock? She said, "You cannot be a shamrock, do not wear that costume back to school." So, when we went home to lunch, for lunch I didn't want to tell my mother what she had said, but I knew she had said, "Don't wear it back." So, what I did was my mother had a little thing where we were--all the friends dunking for apples, so I deliberately plunged my whole side down into the, to dunk for the apple so that the costume would get wet and I couldn't wear it back. And I did that and-- Story_ID: 609956 Speaker 1: You were talking about you, you put (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, yeah the costume with the, I was a little shamrock and so I deliberately went home and do dunking for apples in the big barrel with the apples. I deliberately wet the costume up to the point that I couldn't wear it back to school. My mother [Elizabeth Chipchase Honesty] just fussed at me 'cause I messed up my pretty costume, but they put me in a creation that they put together which ended up being a gypsy. So, I went back to school and of course she says, "That's much better." And I said, "Well you know the only reason I didn't wear it back was because I wet it up, not because you told me not to wear it back." I just did not want her to have the satisfaction of knowing that you know I figured out a way to do it because I knew if I had gone home and said that to my mother there would be an issue and she'd be up to school and it was Halloween, we were having fun, and I didn't want to go through all that hassle. But, I did later tell that story to the principal at the time who because of my why can't you keep your big mouth shut type of thing used to write on my report cards, did have me come and work in her office, which was a very good relationship and I learned a lot from her. Speaker 1: Was she a white principal? Speaker 2: Yes she was, and I did relay it to her later and of course I think she said something to the teacher-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --about it at the time. So, the majority of them in elementary school [William W. Carter Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] I get--now that I recall were probably white, but in, in high school they were mixed. Speaker 1: Okay, so transitioning especially Englewood [Englewood High School, Chicago, Illinois]-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --though Englewood and DuSable [DuSable High School, Chicago, Illinois] were the main two-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --schools that people went to. Speaker 2: Right, for South Side [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: For the South Side. But you mentioned Parker. What-- Speaker 2: Parker Elementary--I mean Parker High School [Paul Robeson High School, Chicago, Illinois], which was down the block from--it was, it was public as well, but it had another district and some kind of that district for some reason it got the reputation of having the so called upper middle or middle class blacks as opposed to Englewood, DuSable, et cetera. Story_ID: 609957 Speaker 1: Now you went--so you wanna go to Michigan State [Michigan State University of Agriculture and Applied Science; Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan] when you graduate [from Englewood High School, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: Yes I did. Speaker 1: Now did you ended up going to Michigan State (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: Mother [Elizabeth Chipchase Honesty] says, "No you want to--you're going to be a teacher, and if you want to be a teacher--," of course you know in those days our options were limited. We were either doctors, into medicines or teachers or something, or social workers or something of that nature coming out of school. You know your opt- you didn't have all these career options that are now there. Speaker 1: Now this is 1958 right? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Um-hm. And so, so she says, "Well you're gonna end up being a teacher." So, if you wanna be a teacher the best place to be a teacher--of course I was first generation on my side to go to college. I had one cousin on my mother's side, grandmother's [Callie Bond Spencer (ph.)], her grandmother--my grandmother's sibling had a son [Sidney Perry] who had gone off to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] and come back. He was, he was anywhere from six to seven, eight years older I think. He had gone off and gone to Howard, so I did have that; that was one thing I did know. But, I was actually the closest and first one to go to college other than him. And so he told her, at least she said he told her, "Well if she's gonna be a teacher the best place for her to go she might as well just stay here and go to Chicago Teachers College," which it was then, now it's Chicago State University [Chicago, Illinois], "because everybody who goes away anywhere else comes back and has to go to take classes at Chicago Teachers College anyway in order to pass the certification exam, teachers certification exam." Well, that's all the excuse she needed. She didn't want me to go away anyway. She needed me help her around the house, but that's okay. Story_ID: 609958 Speaker 1: So you lived at home-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and attended school [Chicago Teachers College; Chicago State University, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Yes I did. Speaker 1: For four years? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Um-hm. And then-- Speaker 2: Actually I got married before I finished. Speaker 1: Oh okay, so you met your husband, Paul [HistoryMaker Paul J. King]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Um-hm. I met my--him in 1959. Speaker 1: So, when you're in--like in your sophomore year, second year of college. Speaker 2: We were married in '61 [1961]. Speaker 1: Okay, so you were married before you graduated? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, so tell me how you met Paul. Speaker 2: I met (laughter) Paul through the sorority. Actually I was initiated in 1959 and there was, we were, the sorority-- Speaker 1: You should say which sorority. Speaker 2: Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc. He was Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity, Inc.]. The sorority was having--they used to have conventions, what we call our boules, conventions in the fall as well as, I mean in the winter, Christmastime, and it used to alternate every I think sixteen months and it would be in the summer, then it would go back to the fall, eighteen months. So, I was initiated in November of '59 [1959], and there was going to be a convention in Cincinnati, Ohio in December, that December. So, they said come on and go, you know, and this was my first experience, my first to go to boule. Well, it so happened there was a joint convention that year and A Phi A was having their convention in Cincinnati at the same time we were having ours. So Paul was already initiated, I mean he was already a year or two before me. They had organized the train ride that we would all go on the same train, the Alphas and AKAs going from Chicago [Illinois]. So, we--my dad [Edward Honesty, Sr.] took me down to Union Station [Chicago Union Station] where we had to board the train and that's the first time that I saw him and he saw me, the first time. And started conversation on the way down there, went out together while we were there, came back, and the rest is history as they say. Speaker 1: So, is that, that's common a lot of times; AKAs you know team up with the male Alpha, you know, right? Some, some (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah to a certain degree it is, but there's a lot of fraternal/sorority matches whether it's Alpha-AKA, Kappa [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity, Inc.]-AKA, Alpha-Delta [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority, Inc.], you know, but I mean through that fraternal environment especially those initiated undergraduate, graduate there seems to be a lot of matches. Story_ID: 609959 Speaker 1: Now was there a large chapter on Chi- Chicago Teachers College [Chicago State University, Chicago, Illinois]-- Speaker 2: No (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I mean were you initiated on the camp- ? Speaker 2: When I came through, it was Beta Chapter. It was considered a city chapter. It took from all of the colleges within the city area. We do now have a chapter at-- Speaker 1: So that was a second--Beta is two, right? Speaker 2: --at Chicago-- Speaker 1: I'm sorry. Speaker 2: Yes, second chapter to be founded in the sorority after Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], Alpha [Alpha Chapter]. Speaker 1: Do you, what, what year was it founded, the Beta Chapter? Speaker 2: Beta Chapter was 1913. Speaker 1: Okay, and who was the founder of the Beta Chapter? Speaker 2: Well, it's not so much a founder. Only founders existed were-- Speaker 1: The original founder. Speaker 2: --were original founders. They called them charter members. I, I'm not sure of the names of the actual chartering group of Beta. I do know some of them, but I couldn't recite them off-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --right now. Speaker 1: So, so what was, what appealed to you about, what made you pledge 'cause you hadn't had anyone in your family pledge before right? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Right, so what made you want to pledge? Speaker 2: Well, it's interesting. My very first--I graduated [from Englewood High School, Chicago, Illinois] in '58 [1958] and that summer I was gonna go to Chicago--and I made--determined I was going to Chicago Teachers College and I was going that fall and I received a call from a friend, a family friend's daughter, family friend's daughter who was in the sorority and I, I didn't know her at the time. And she just called and said, "Hi, this is you know who I am, and are you interested in, would you be interested in attending a--," I'm trying to think did she say rush party? Or some kind of event that Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] was having. Well I said, "Su-," you know, "sure." "Well I can get you an invitation if you'd like to go." And it was held at the old Defender building [Chicago Defender Building, Chicago, Illinois]; that part I remember. My father [Edward Honesty, Sr.] drove me there, and that was my first--I knew nothing about sororities, and that was my first encounter with members of fraternal world. And it was actually what they call now a step show, or at least they entertained. And all of the groups performed. Well, I was luckily impressed more by the women of Alpha Kappa Alpha. They seemed more like me; that was my feeling. So, then I went back to--then they asked me to put my name and address down and my father called and told me he was coming to pick me up at a particular time. It wasn't cell phone either. (Laughter) It was calling on public phone. And told him to come pick me up, and so he did and I had put my name down. Then I get this invitation to come to some kind of tea or something. I'm not sure, it's not all clear. And I met or saw Carey Maddox Preston [Carey B. Maddox Preston], and it was over at our first, what they used to call the national headquarters then on 52nd [Street] and Greenwood [Avenue]. And she talked to us about the sorority and becoming a member of the sorority and what it meant and what the sorority meant. Well, I was so blown away by her that I just said, oh, my goodness this is--I wanna be a part of this. Then the next person, we went to someplace else and then the next person that I happen to hear from was Loraine Richardson Green who had been the second national president of Alpha Kappa Alpha or the supreme b- second supreme basileus who was elected as an undergraduate, then she was at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], which was part of original group of Beta Chapter, not too far after its founding. So, that, they impressed me. So, then I met the women who were actually in the chapter. They sent me in- I went through the interview process. I ended up in what was called at the time the Ivy Leaf Club [Ivy Leaf Pledge Club], and I was in there for about a year and I got to meet different people. Different people were initiated at different times out of this group. It was like the interest group of the sorority when we had that structure and then of course they voted on who actually went into becoming pledges. Story_ID: 609960 Speaker 1: Now how many were pledged at any given time? Speaker 2: Oh, it varied. It was very--it could be anywhere--here in Chicago [Illinois] I mean it could be somewhere from twenty down to two or one depending on that particular time. My particular group that I came into the sorority [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] with was six of us. Speaker 1: Now what would they, how were you initiated. Can you describe the process? Did you have to do, did they put you through-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes I was hazed. I do not condone hazing. I think it is one of the most degrading things that anybody could do to another person, another human being. I have yet to understand why I did it or understand why they did it to me. The one thing that, that stays in, that I think about is I do believe that it was the time for me, the time in terms of where we were socially as women, what we were accepted to do, the options that you had as women were not as broad. In today's time, I do not believe if I was a young person in college in today's time with all the options I know that are out there to me now there's no way that I probably would even join the sorority had I known that that was part of coming into it. But, you know since my involvement in it I have met many members who are, some of them who are all good friends who never went through any kind of hazing and they're just as active and productive as anyone else in the sorority. So, it's not a necessary thing-- Speaker 1: What was the con- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) but I guess it was tradition. Speaker 1: What, that's what I was wondering. What was the concept behind hazing, do you know? Speaker 2: I think it was just tradition and culture. It was like you know, it's almost like the slave becomes the master or takes on the traits of the master. It's like, after something was done to you, now here's my opportunity to do it to somebody else, kind of payback. And I think it's just like the culture or subculture develops and they just continue to perpetuate it until you get a group or someone strong enough to say, unh-uh, this stops here, you know we don't need this, this is not gonna make you this, that, and the other. And progressively through the years that has taken place. A lot of things have tapered off. They don't do some of the same things anymore, and so you know some of it has ceased. Speaker 1: So it was viewed as rites as--rites of passage-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yes absolutely. Speaker 1: --you know if you could make it through, degrading treatment. Speaker 2: Absolutely, yes, absolutely. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: It was like you know what were you willing to sacrifice and what are you willing to do to prove, you know, that you're worthy to come in this, this organization. You know I think you evaluated me on the wrong concepts. Story_ID: 609961 Speaker 1: So, what did they have you do that was degrading? Speaker 2: Well, it was just terms of dress. You know we had, one thing they made us do, which was kind of funny though I have to admit that, but they made us, we had to wear twenty pearls; we have twenty pearls on our pins. So, we had to braid our hair in twenty braids and they all had to be the same length. Well, my hair was twice as long as it is now, and we had people who had very short cut hair in my group. So, then of course it meant that pinning mine up or folding it up so everybody would be the same length. Then we had to put a pink or a green ribbon on each of these. Well, that looks like a pickaninny to me, use the term pickaninny. That's basically what they had you looking like. This was before braiding was fashion. With these braids all over your head, and then they made us stand on the corner of 47th [Street] and--where was that? South- that department store, the black owned department store in Chicago [Illinois]. I think it was 47th and, I don't wanna say King Drive. It didn't seem like it was King Drive. Well, anyway somewhere in South-- Speaker 1: Park? South Park [South Parkway; Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive]? Speaker 2: Southtown [ph.], was that the? I'm trying to think of the department store name. Oh, well I've forgotten that. But anyway they had us stand out in front of it and sell pieces of toilet paper for a penny to the general public. You know as I said it was crazy, but it was also kind of degrading standing out there looking like a--. So whatever, but anyway that kind of stuff. The physical stuff was the worse. They did--my knees were damaged from crawling that, we had to get tetanus shots because the skin had come off of the knees and as a result of that they wouldn't let us wear--we had to wear tights so that--couldn't see our legs, 'cause they knew it was against the rules and regulations. But, the tights of course would stick to the, you know, open wounds and so every night it was just like you were creating this stuff 'cause you had to pull the tights off and it was pulling the scabs off and so it was kind of painful. That was the biggest thing that we endured physically in my mind. We had to eat some concoctions that were--like a whole raw onion and eggs and stuff like that. Well, you know, but, you know that's what it was then. I, I, we cut--when I became a member, all of that was cut out for Beta [Beta Chapter of Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.]. I don't know if they ever went back to it, but that part was traditionally cut out. There were a few things left, but that was part of--I didn't like that kind of stuff, you know. Story_ID: 609962 Speaker 1: Okay so you were saying, I wanted to talk to you about the education you were receiving at Chicago Teachers College [Chicago State University, Chicago, Illinois] and what, you know what that was like there with the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I, I think that the education that I received at Chicago Teachers College was just what I needed to be a teacher in Chicago [Illinois]. I had absolutely no problems passing the certification exam and for my discipline I went into business education and so I had to take both a major, a discipline as well as the general teacher's certification exam, which was local at the time. We did take the state as well, but, or national, whatever it was, but it was basically the local exam that you had to pass. So, it equipped me to be able to do that. My experience at the school I don't think was any different than any other college experience in terms of professors that you have. I think I was--did receive the benefit of having professors who were African American or black, but I had you know white professors as well. There was a mix. So, I think overall it was what it was for the particular time. Speaker 1: Now how many blacks? Was it all blacks at--it was--at Chicago Teachers? Speaker 2: No, absolutely not. Speaker 1: Okay. How many, how many blacks? Speaker 2: Oh, I, I, I think that we were probably in the minority at Chicago Teachers at the time, but what was, which--it seemed like more, people recall, is because Wilson Junior College [Woodrow Wilson Junior College], which is now Kennedy-King [Kennedy-King College, Chicago, Illinois], which is ironic 'cause I've come full circle when I tell you I retired from Kennedy-King as a vice president, but Wilson Junior College, which was predo- predominantly black was what was next to Chicago Teachers, actually shared the kind of same campus which made it seem like there were more minorities. But, no I'm not--I don't believe the minority population was that great at Teachers itself. Story_ID: 609963 Speaker 1: Now where was your first placement? Speaker 2: My first--student teaching or, or? Speaker 1: Well I wanna know where you did student teaching and then your first place- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I did student teaching at Wendell Phillips High School [Wendell Phillips Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: So how was that experience? Speaker 2: Very interesting. I had my first challenge. I think I was very small then believe it or not and so I think I weighed maybe 115 at the most with the same height that I am now. My first challenge was in the classroom when I asked a student to share a book with another student, and he refused and I said, "Oh, no you're gonna share the book," and I started walking toward the desk 'cause I was gonna actually move the book. And as I approached he stood--out, he got up out of his chair, which he was about six feet and big and he looked as if you know he was gonna do something as I approached or say something. Well, I had two sons [Paul King, III and Timothy King], so I don't know if it was basic instinct, common instinct, parent, whatever poured in at the time, but at that particular time I said, "I want you to think very seriously about what you're getting ready to do, or think you're going to do because if you put your hands on me I'm gonna pick up whatever I can and try my best to kill you," and he sat back down. So, that was my experience and from there I dealt with nothing but high school students and I had the gang members. I had gang members when I went over to Englewood [Parker High School; Paul Robeson High School, Chicago, Illinois]. My voice, I think, helped me too because it has always been heavy and deep, so, but I was always assertive and I was able to get through with them and communicate and so that was it. I had no problems after that. Of course, my knees were trembling, you know, as I was saying it, but I knew that I couldn't give up control 'cause if I gave it up then it would be all over for the rest of the time. So, that's what happened there. Speaker 1: That was you student teaching experience? Speaker 2: That was my student teaching experience. Speaker 1: Okay, now I wanna ask a question-- Speaker 2: So I had no fear when I got, 'cause I was gonna be in high school 'cause I was a business discipline and I was in, in high school education, so when I went to high school, my first assignment, I had no fear of students or anything. Story_ID: 609964 Speaker 1: So, what was your first, first hire then, where were you hired after your student teaching [at Wendell Phillips High School; Wendell Phillips Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: I actually went to Harlan [John Marshall Harlan High School; Harlan Community Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois], and I was literally, they didn't have a placement for me, so they kind of used me in the counseling department and I was really playing a highly paid secretary, I guess. And so I really didn't get too much classroom experience, but then when I got my permanent assignment, which was at Englewood High School--wait let me back up, no, it was not. My permanent assignment was at Parker High School [Paul Robeson High School, Chicago, Illinois], and that's where I got my first permanent assignment was Parker High School. And I had students, I think I started teaching in, as I recall I was like maybe twenty, hadn't quite turned twenty-one and so I had students who were eighteen, nineteen because they were, had been you know that late getting out or didn't get out or, so I see them today, you know, and I said--, "Oh, Ms. King [HistoryMaker Loann Honesty King]," you know, and I say, "My god, I taught you," you know. But, then of course maybe there was three to four years difference in some of our ages, so it was challenging. But, it was, I enjoyed it. Speaker 1: I wanna ask--I was told and I'm not sure of the time period of this, but I think it's around the same time that in Chicago Public Schools that it was hard for black teachers, they were on permanent temporary status or permanent temp, so they never could get, you know they weren't able to be hired--they were permanent substitutes, it was hard for them to get on. Is that, you didn't experience-- Speaker 2: That might have been earlier than me. That, that might have been earlier than me. I didn't experience that. Speaker 1: Okay, so you said you ended, so you're back at, oh, no you didn't--did you spend any time at Englewood or you just went to the Park-- Speaker 2: No, not teaching. Speaker 1: Okay, so Parker, so had the student body changed from the time that when you were in high school [Englewood High School, Chicago, Illinois] to the time you came back to teach? You know you were saying-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I was during the era of gangs. Speaker 1: You, okay. So can you talk about that? Speaker 2: Gangs had taken a big elevation in Chicago [Illinois], so that was, you know the--the particular gang that was in the area that I was in I think they called themselves the Supreme Gangsters or something. Yeah there were food fights in the lunchroom, I mean where they just totally disrupting, start fights and plates would just go flying all over everywhere and people, there were fights, you know, and there was gang activity. There was one incident where they were actually shooting down the hall. But then, you know, my experience went from that to, then it turned into a kind of--then we got into the civil rights era, so you know it was kind of a transition somewhat there. And then that became the, who were the teachers who were with the movement and who were the Uncle Toms and who were the Oreos and all of the words that we hear or experience in terms of the faculty. I was there in the high school during the times when the kids were taking over the schools. You know they would actually shut down the high schools and lock the teachers in the classroom and closets and fortunately no one ever got hurt at Parker where I was, but we did have a major confrontation between students and police, and then a group of us as faculty, concerned faculty kind of put ourselves between the students and the police line that was coming to quiet the so called riot. Speaker 1: So, give me the, the dem- give me the demographics of, of, was it Par- Parker? Speaker 2: Parker? Speaker 1: Parker at that time. So was it all black? Speaker 2: Oh yes. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: Well, yeah maybe one or two or three, yeah. Speaker 1: And the teachers were all black or large part black? Speaker 2: The teachers were not all black, but there was a significant number who were, yeah. Speaker 1: The principal? Speaker 2: The principal was black. Speaker 1: Okay, do you remember the principal's name at the time? Speaker 2: I'm trying to think, was the principal black when I first went there? I think when I first went the principal may have been white. Speaker 1: Okay and, and did you--with the standoff that occurred, was it because the students took over (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Uh-huh. Speaker 1: They took over the school. Speaker 2: Right. Story_ID: 609965 Speaker 1: This takeover--what happened? So the students actually took over the school? Speaker 2: Sure, they actually took over the school. Speaker 1: And why, was it because-- Speaker 2: Started putting teachers in certain rooms or making them go to rooms and escorting them down to rooms, et cetera. Speaker 1: Is this-- Speaker 2: It was a protest of you know the civil rights protest of the fact of not having an education that was Afro-centric education. Speaker 1: Okay. So you were, at that point were you still doing business education? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay now I had read that Zerrie Campbell [HistoryMaker Zerrie D. Campbell] was one of your mentors. Was she at Parker [Parker High School; Paul Robeson High School, Chicago, Illinois] at the time is that true? Speaker 2: I don't know where you read that. Speaker 1: Oh, it's in the notes here, oh. Speaker 2: Zerrie Campbell was when I went into community college system [City Colleges of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: I see. Okay, never mind then. Okay. So, when you, so how did that--so where were you, you were more one of the activist teachers right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: How did you figure that one out (laughter)? Speaker 1: So what, why, why were you more the act- was it just the, you had gotten involved, I just wanna-- Speaker 2: 'Cause I was involved in the Civil Rights Movement, definitely involved. You know I, I mean I loved Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture] and I believed in some of the things he was saying. Not all the way to necessarily a Black Panther [Black Panther Party], but student for nonviolent--SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] and my brother's sister was very much involved and so you know I believed in what we were fighting for and believed in you know-- Speaker 1: When you say your brother's sister, you mean brother's--? Speaker 2: My--I'm sorry, my husband's sister [Claudia King], my error, my husband's sister. And so we used to talk and communicate and you know through reading and going through the philosophy and I didn't see anything wrong with more African American history, you know, being brought into the schools and us learning more about our culture and our background and I agree that there was a certain cultural bias in education and especially in the textbooks. And so everything they were talking about was absolutely true. Well, if you know protest is the way you get change then so be it, nonviolent. Speaker 1: So you, were you going to Operation PUSH [Rainbow PUSH Coalition, Chicago, Illinois], I mean what were the things happening around the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not such-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Not such--not as such. I, I, you know I knew it, I supported things that they did. I was a member through membership but I never went you know every Sunday or whenever they had their meetings at the time as a part of that. Speaker 1: Okay, but there, what you're basically saying is that there was an activism occurring in the schools, in high schools? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: We often think of colleges. Speaker 2: No, there was an activism occurring in the high schools in Chicago [Illinois]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --the predominately African American high schools. Speaker 1: So what happened as a result of the, the takeover by the students? Speaker 2: Well, I mean they were disciplined. I mean there were plenty faculty that thought it was wrong. They were, some were disciplined, but basically nothing. They were just glad to get back to norm and you know the principals would talk and say you know well this is, you know, the way it is and we're gonna make these certain changes and things would just go back to normal. Speaker 1: So, what were the changes the students were asking for? Speaker 2: Just more inclusion of African American history being taught, more inclusion in the curriculum, to have their clubs. Actually, you know, it was like we're just doing this 'cause everybody else is doing it, kind of, you know. Everybody was asking for the same things, and this was just a way of showing we were unhappy you know. It was the time, I think you've seen some of it, history where you know the dashikis were being worn instead of traditional caps and gowns. And students were refusing to wear caps and gowns. I mean that was happening at high school as well as on the college campuses. Speaker 1: Yeah we, like I said, often you, you just hear really about college campuses (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, no it was happening in high schools too. Story_ID: 609966 Speaker 1: You taught, taught at Parker [Parker High School; Paul Robeson High School, Chicago, Illinois] how long? Fif- was it fifteen? Speaker 2: I think it was, well I didn't teach, I went from teacher to--I served as a, what they call the-- Speaker 1: Guid- guidance counselor (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) guidance counselor and then I was head of the guidance department and so several things there. Speaker 1: Okay now why did you decide that you were going more the administrative route, was that because of pay? Speaker 2: No, it was because I didn't feel that--. Okay. I had a real bias in terms of what I thought was, should be taught and what was happening in the, in the public schools [Chicago Public Schools]. I thought that it had basically turned into a babysitting service. They were more interested in you as a teacher getting there on time and making sure you were on time and giving you a checkmark if you did get on time and that your things were turned in here--that, not that there's anything wrong with that, but that's where the emphasis was. No one visited my classroom for three whole years to see what I was teaching in the classroom. To me they didn't care. As long as the students weren't doing anything or causing any problems and were quiet. You know you had a lesson plan that you were supposed to be following, but who knew. So, it came to me that, you know, I don't need to be doing this because you know I think I am teaching them something, I am making a difference, but I feel more comfortable not in this particular situation because they don't really care what I'm teaching, so maybe this way I can guide them, to tell me what they need to have, and show them the opportunities in terms of choices that were available for careers, 'cause I didn't want them to get saddled into that same these are the only things you can do. That was always my thing in terms of career options to broaden what, what students could do. One interesting story was I had a young man who had seen a movie, and I don't know what movie it was, and came back and asked me what was a forest ranger? He thought he wanted to be a forest ranger. I said, well, okay let's see what I can find out. So, we didn't have Internet and all that at the time; that wasn't the way it is now. I mean we may have had it, we didn't have personal access to do all that kind of research. So, I did some basic research the old fashioned way, found out about colleges that had those kind of training or places that had the kind of training, gave him, gave him the information. So, I think that's one of my satisfactions. About, after he graduated maybe two years after that time I got a postcard and I--hey I can't remember now where it was from, but it was from him and it was a picture included with him sitting on a horse as a forest ranger, you know and this was like, this is one more out of the so called ghetto to just quote a term, who made it, you know who's gonna be all right 'cause Lord knows I went to enough funerals of those who didn't go, who didn't make it. Story_ID: 609967 Speaker 1: Let's talk about the student population a little bit. What, what, what was it, was it a, 'cause you're really sort of painting a struggle to even save lives and save kids. So, how have the demographics of that area, how are they changing you know in the population, the student population? Speaker 2: You know I'm not so sure of what the change is to today. I think there's been some change, but it's the Englewood community. Parker [Parker High School; Paul Robeson High School, Chicago, Illinois] was a part of the Englewood community. I had gone to school at Englewood [Englewood High School, Chicago, Illinois], Parker was a part of--and I think it was all of the societal tra- changes that you have seen take place. It's kind of a devastated you know area. There was a move to try to, I think it was Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] that came out and said that they were gonna rebuild the area of Englewood, or maybe it was Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton], I don't know. Speaker 1: Big difference. Speaker 2: Yeah, I know it's a big difference, but I can't remember whom at the time. Speaker 1: (Laughter) We can't do that. We can't do that. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Roosevelt [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt]. Speaker 1: We can't--okay. Speaker 2: No, it wasn't that far back. Speaker 1: We can't do that. Speaker 2: What, what year was Kennedy? Give me the year. Speaker 1: Okay, Kennedy, but, no, Kennedy is in the '60s [1960s], which is where we were, you know, 'cause you're at the '60s [1960s] in Parker. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Now you were there for fifteen years. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay, but what I'm, what I'm trying to understand in that fifteen year period are you finding, when you got there were there still a lot of single family mother heads of households or did that increase as time went on; that's what I'm trying to-- Speaker 2: No, it was basically the same. It was probably increased. You know single--the demographics were primarily the same. I don't see too much difference in the demographics when I first went there as to now of the area. The only thing that may have been a major change there might have been more black owned ma pa type businesses in the area, the 63rd Street/Halsted [Street], which was a commercial, prime commercial area was still thriving. Speaker 1: In the '60s [1960s]. Speaker 2: In the '60s [1960s]. It is of course now totally gone, devastated, redone, and now it's an attempt to try to build it back up. The areas have been looked at as some presidents, I won't quote a name 'cause I can't remember what, but there were promises made to help rebuild the Englewood community and it's back there and I think that really one of my proudest things to say in terms of there are a lot of organizations trying to make a difference in the Englewood area, and my son's charter school, Urban Prep Academy [Urban Prep Charter Academy for Young Men - Englewood Campus, Chicago, Illinois] is located in Englewood High School, and he was at Lindblom [Robert Lindblom Math and Science Academy, Chicago, Illinois], so he's back in that area. So, when we were talking to the parent counselors or the LCDs as they call them, local school--LS--whatever. Speaker 1: Local School Council. Speaker 2: Local School Council, LSCs, when we were talking to the LSCs to petition, to get the approval for the charter school opening in that area, it was very, I was very proud to say that you know, 'cause one of the questions was, well what do you know about this, this is unfamiliar area. Well, I was on the advisory board of the planning team, or the development team for the school, and so I was very, I was able to say that no I'm alumni of Englewood High School, second generation, my father [Edward Honesty, Sr.] graduated from Englewood High School as well, and I'm also on your hall of fame, which they have for the graduates. I was inducted into the alumni hall of fame for Englewood. So, there's a sense of pride that he's back there still doing something for the young men in the Englewood area that I was doing many years ago, helping the community (simultaneous). Story_ID: 609968 Speaker 1: Let me ask you percentage wise, how many kids do you feel you saved? You know you talked about the one forest ranger (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, I don't know. Speaker 1: Would it be 10 percent? Would it be 20 percent? Would it be-- Speaker 2: It's, it's hard to say because I didn't keep, you know, track of a large number. I mean a lot, I touched a lot of students. I touched a lot of students. I don't know. I will say this that students that I had in high school see me on the street today, and I run into them every now and then, and they still remember me and can call me by name. I would love to say that I saved 50 percent. I really don't know. I have no way to base it on. I know I touched a few lives. I know I made a difference in a few lives. Speaker 1: 'Cause I know often like guidance counselors a lot of times they don't do the right thing. You hear story and story again of people-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --being misguided. Speaker 2: No I, I never did that because I remember my own experience with a guidance counselor and tell her you know what your capabilities are. I also remembered my own son being told where they could possibly go to college and where they could not go to college in terms of the possibilities of them doing you know and I always told them, you know, never let that stop you. As a result, they [Paul King, III and Timothy King] both ended up at Georgetown University [Washington, D.C.] being told that that was probably the far reaching-est option that they had in terms of within their possibilities. Story_ID: 609969 Speaker 1: So you stayed there [Parker High School; Paul Robeson High School, Chicago, Illinois] for fifteen years and you stayed in that role right of--? Speaker 2: I was in that role as a counselor for maybe six, six, seven--half of it. Speaker 1: And then what happened, then you went, you had a contract with the U.S. Department of Education [U.S. Department of Health, Education and Welfare; U.S. Department of Education] and then? Speaker 2: Yeah, I was on a program with the univers- of education [Triple T]. It was called the Training of Teacher Trainees [sic.]. That was an appointment-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --through the Department of Education, and I sat on a panel that talked about developing curriculum for training teachers at the various, through the Department of Education at the various universities and colleges. Speaker 1: Now this, was this out a need, recognition that maybe it was better to, that there should be some effort put into teacher training? Speaker 2: Yeah, I think it was put out--it came through Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois], Northwestern had the, put the panel and the discussion together and I think it had all to do with whether teachers were receiving the proper training in terms of how you actually teach. To know the academics and the background and the basics is one thing, but if you're not in an actual teacher training institution and you're just coming out of academia with a major in say history or whatever, how do you make that applicable in the actual classroom, so that was--that's what it was and basically to try to redirect the training of those who were interested in going to the field of teaching. Story_ID: 609970 Speaker 1: Now in 19- 1980 now you become the associate executive director of, of Jobs for Youth [Jobs for Youth/Chicago, Inc., Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Can you talk about that, how that came, and who the executive director was, you know how that, how that position came your way. Speaker 2: Actually what I had, when I decided that I no longer wanted to be with the public schools [Chicago Public Schools], I guess I had taken all that I could take and that was not fulfilling you know and, and I'm the kind of person that I think I li- I have to like my job or really have some kind of passion for what I do. The passion for teaching, helping was there, but in terms of the actual job situation it had just kind of deteriorated. And so I decided that--and I was fortunate enough to be able to do that, I decided that I would just try to find something else, so I resigned, which everybody was saying why are you resigning you've got fifteen years in, your pension, dah, dah, dah, dah, dah, well that's me. It was not meeting my expectations anymore and so therefore I resigned. So, it was like sitting around deciding on what, what are you going to do? So, I was looking through the paper and I saw this advertisement for a position with this organization called Jobs for Youth and what they did was help youth find jobs and get back on track with their lives, et cetera, so it sounded like just what I was interested in. (Cough) And I guess I had a partial to young men 'cause of having two sons [Paul King, III and Timothy King], okay. And so I went and applied and it was, it was like, I'm trying to think what the first position was. It was like an assistant something that I went and applied for, not thinking I was gonna get it and I went and I found it. And the director at the time was John Connelly--he's no longer there. But, so I went and the next thing I knew I had the job. So, I went and I started working for them and then they moved their premises. They grew and I just climbed, kind of went up the ladder, and then got to be the deputy executive director of the organization. Speaker 1: So, what, how many youths were you serving and how many locations did they have around Chicago [Illinois]? Speaker 2: They only had the one location. Speaker 1: And where was at located? Speaker 2: On, right off of Wabash [Avenue] and I wanna say something like Jackson [Boulevard]. Speaker 1: Okay, and what did you learn there because there you're doing more administrator--you know you're administrator as opposed to just direct service. Speaker 2: Yeah, but I had direct service contact with the young men. Speaker 1: Okay at the same time you did both. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because what we, what I put together was everybody was like a, they didn't just talk to one person, we had the job developers. We had the person to talk to them about how they dressed, the counselors, the job counselors, the preparation. We had general orientation, and so I kind of was overseeing those individuals, but at the same time I had direct contact 'cause I used to talk to all of the young men personally. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: To help them to see where they were going and help try to do their career plans. Story_ID: 609971 Speaker 1: You did this job [associate executive director, Jobs for Youth/Chicago, Inc., Chicago, Illinois] until 1983 right? Speaker 2: I would think. Dates are gone now. Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I think--okay, okay, I think it was 1983 and this 1983 is when Harold Washington was elected. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And you had been active on that? Right? In the-- Speaker 2: Yeah, the Harold Washington campaign yes. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Not directly, but you know. My husband [HistoryMaker Paul J. King] was quite involved, and our friends. Speaker 1: Now your husband had been, your husband had been getting, can you talk about that he was running, he was in construction, he had-- Speaker 2: Yeah, well he was running UBM, Inc. [Chicago, Illinois]. Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Can you talk about that a little bit? Speaker 2: No, I, I wasn't directly involved you know with his business. Speaker 1: Okay, but he was in the construction-- Speaker 2: But, he was in the construction business and had been into some of the--you know he was, he's known as putting the word firm in the word affirmative action, so he was in a lot of movements and a lot of the moving the construction industry forward for minorities and the hiring of more minorities and getting minorities into the various unions as plumbers, as electricians, and carpenters, et cetera. Speaker 1: So, I just wanted to say that because really there's a lot of activism going on, you know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yes. Speaker 1: --activism and community between the two of you. Speaker 2: Right, yes. Story_ID: 609972 Speaker 1: You joined the Illinois Community College Board at that time and then you go on to, you know later in the '80s [1980s] you go on and join, you start working with Malcolm X [Malcolm X College, Chicago, Illinois] and City Colleges [City Colleges of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Now around that time isn't [HistoryMaker] Reynaldo Glover, isn't he-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --he's-- Speaker 2: He is the head of the board for the community college, city college board. Speaker 1: And that was a big deal because it was the first time that a black person right, was, wasn't it the first? Speaker 2: Was he the first? Speaker 1: I think he was the first. Speaker 2: Okay, I, I, I'm not absolutely sure of that because he came before Nelvia [HistoryMaker Nelvia M. Brady] and-- Speaker 1: Yeah, he came before Nelvia. Speaker 2: Right then he must have been maybe the first. Speaker 1: So, what are you finding about, what are you doing in the city college system and that's-- Speaker 2: Well, actually I started, interesting I really, my start was through the Illinois Community College Board, and I got a call about a position. They needed someone to be over there--that was during JTPA, the J-T-P-A, whatever that act was. Speaker 1: Job Partnership Training Act [sic. Job Training Partnership Act of 1982]. Speaker 2: Right, Job Partnership Training Act, JTPA, during that time and they needed someone to monitor all of the grants that had been given to the northern part of Illinois, and so I had to go to Springfield [Illinois] to apply for that particular position, and so they gave me the position. They flew me to Springfield and so that's how I got connected with the Illinois Community College Board. Speaker 1: Now who was head of the board at the time, do you remember? Speaker 2: Oh, no I don't. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I do not know. I can't remember the name. Speaker 1: That's okay. Speaker 2: But anyway, so that's how I got involved with them and I had to work, periodically I used to have to go to Springfield to work in office, but primarily I was located on my own here in Chicago [Illinois]. Then eventually they set me up a little office out of Olive-Harvey [Olive-Harvey College, Chicago, Illinois], so I had like this one little room office in Olive-Harvey and I don't even know if they knew I was existing, but I was like in and out of halls and back and forth through that. The reason I ended up leaving them--it was fine I had to drive all over this northern for all these community colleges. I found out where all these community colleges were and had to drive and look at these grants and, and that was very interesting. The reason I-- Speaker 1: Now why was that interesting? Speaker 2: Just to see what these actual programs were doing and to be able to see that they were doing what they said they were doing because they were all to help minorities to get ahead and--for jobs, placement, to get employment, gainful employment, or to college careers if possible. So, it was to monitor. I was actually seeing, or as you've gotten this grant are you really serving the populations you're supposed to serve, are you doing what you're supposed to do? So, from that part it was very good. It was fulfilling to see those who were really doing what they were supposed to do and also to also be able to say you know you need to look at whether you're gonna fund these people next year 'cause they're really not doing what this money was to do. And that, probably would have stayed there had it not been for the fact that a job became that it demanded me to be in Springfield more when I had a family, so that was not gonna happen. So, and taking even an apartment in Spring- you know, no, that wasn't gonna happen, so I left. Story_ID: 609973 Speaker 1: Well, by my connection at Olive-Harvey [Olive-Harvey College, Chicago, Illinois] having been located there through ICCB [Illinois Community College Board] they said, "Well why don't you go and try to see about becoming a part of one of the community colleges?" So, my first assignment was over at Malcolm X [Malcolm X College, Chicago, Illinois], and it was still in the same capacity. I was their grant writer for, for Malcolm X and that was like part time on an hourly basis, consultant (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now that's about 1987 right? Speaker 1: I would think yeah, consultant kind of basis. Speaker 2: Yeah, okay. Speaker 1: So, anyway, so I went through that and-- Speaker 2: Was Zerrie Campbell [HistoryMaker Zerrie D. Campbell] there at the time? Speaker 1: She was there at the time, but she was like-- Speaker 2: She wasn't-- Speaker 1: --vice president. Speaker 2: She wasn't president okay, okay. Speaker 1: She was either vice president or something at that particular time, I'm not sure. So then it was supposed to be a full-time position that was supposed to be opening up there. There was a lot of turmoil within City Colleges [City Colleges of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] themselves in terms of presidencies moving in and out and whatever. Bottom line I ended up not getting a full-time position there, but got a full-time position as assistant director of student services at Olive-Harvey College. And so I stayed at Olive-Harvey College for a while, moved from that-- Speaker 2: Now who was the president at that time? Speaker 1: At the time that I went to Olive-Harvey was Homer Franklin. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And so I stayed there and I moved from that position to the director and then I moved to dean of career programs. And at that time, we changed-- Speaker 2: At Olive-Harvey? Speaker 1: Uh-huh. At Olive-Harvey. Speaker 2: And, and I have that as 1991. Speaker 1: Okay. And then we changed presidents, Homer left and we brought in Dr. Cox [Lawrence M. Cox] as president, and then through him I served as dean of careers and went from dean of careers to dean of instruction, which was an academic dean and stayed there in that position and worked under him until Wellington Wilson was appointed president of Kennedy-King [Kennedy-King College, Chicago, Illinois] who was a friend of mine and a very good friend of a very good friend of mine and said that, "I'm going into Kennedy-King I would like to take a team if possible." This person recommended, "Well why don't you see about Loann [HistoryMaker Loann Honesty King]?" So, he called and asked would I be willing to come to Kennedy-King and be a part of his new transition team, and I said yes I would. So, I, much to everybody's surprise, said, "I'm going to Kennedy-King," and everybody was like, "What, what, what, what?" So anyway I was supposed to go as vice president, but at the time he felt the climate wasn't right to bring me in as vice president at Kennedy-King, so I went in as dean of instruction and then was appointed vice president. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And that's the position I retired from. Story_ID: 609974 Speaker 1: Tell me the difference between Kennedy-King [Kennedy-King College, Chicago, Illinois] at the time and Olive-Harvey [Olive-Harvey College, Chicago, Illinois] and as dean of instruction how many s- you know what, how many people were you over and what was the size of the student bodies of those two? Speaker 2: They were pretty comparable at the time because enrollment was on a decline. Enrollment had been on decline. At Olive-Harvey when I got in the position I did a lot of stuff in recruitment and came up with recruitment plans there. So, then enrollment increased while I was there. So, some of those same skills they asked me could I bring and some of those ideas to Kennedy-King, which I did and it did help 'cause Kennedy-King's enrollment started increasing. But, generally they're about the same population. Speaker 1: Okay. And why-- Speaker 2: The difference, the main difference with Kennedy-King, Kennedy-King has a lot of career programs that are, that Olive-Harvey did not necessarily have. Speaker 1: Can you describe some of those programs? Speaker 2: Like dental hygiene, which was in association with the University of Illinois. They had theater broadcasting because of the studio, things of that nature. The auto tech part, which was much, which was greater than it was at Olive-Harvey. Speaker 1: Were there any programs that you wanted to bring in that you didn't bring in to, to, to Kennedy-King or Olive, Olive-Harvey that you thought was, you know great in the, you know the training, the career, career training program? Speaker 2: No, 'cause I worked, at Olive-Harvey I worked pretty good and pretty close with the person who was on the dean of adult ed [adult education] as well, as well as the dean of the economic development. Speaker 1: So who were they? Speaker 2: Oh, Shirley Chappell and Martha--I can't remember her last name-- Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: --Barnes [Martha Barnes]. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now the, the other question I have for you is the nature of the, of the, of city college system [City Colleges of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], what was the pipeline because there's this whole theory about community colleges, you know they're really to prepare people to move into, you know they're supposed to be a stop gap right? Speaker 2: No, it depends on what you go for. There's a, there's a college, there's a college track. It's supposed to be the first two years of college and you finish your major at, at whatever institution that you decide to enroll in; that's one aspect. But, there's also a career aspect to, with specialized training that is more career oriented and not necessarily to finish with a four year degree. So, there's an academic track of higher education and then of course there is a career track that could or could not mean additional training; that depends on you. Story_ID: 609975 Speaker 1: Why did you decide that it was time to retire? Speaker 2: From? Speaker 1: When you retired from-- Speaker 2: Well, Wellington [Wellington Wilson], the person that I had come to, came to Kennedy-King [Kennedy-King College, Chicago, Illinois] because of, had decided that because of health reason he was going to retire from the position. And I had reached a stage that I just didn't feel like I wanted to go through the adjustment of a new president, a new redirection or vision or whatever the new person may have, not knowing who it would be. So, I just felt that I had done--it was time to go home and rest. Speaker 1: Okay, okay so that was-- Speaker 2: And I was eligible to retire. Speaker 1: Okay, so that was the nine- was that in two-? Speaker 2: About five years ago. Speaker 1: So two- 2003. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Two thousand and three [2003]. Story_ID: 609976 Speaker 1: Do you have any other thoughts about your career and the work that you did, you know and the really, really in, in the cultivation of youth, you know, or young adults? Speaker 2: Oh I think it was al- always directive because that was what--I was always able to relate to the young folks. I was always a student advocate. As a matter of fact, I even won a first year student advocacy award [Outstanding First Year Student Advocates Award], only ten throughout the United States and because of the work that I had done and some of the testimonials some of students that I had helped. It is a nomination process and it's only ten people across the country are selected, and I was fortunate enough to be one. And it comes out of North Carolina University [sic. University of South Carolina, Columbia, South Carolina], center for first year experience, students first year experience [National Resource Center for the First Year Experience and Students in Transition]. So, that was rewarding in terms of knowing that something I was doing was working and that I would--because of my career and my history and what I was able to document and put--made me eligible. And programs that I had instituted felt that this recog- you know this organization felt that I could be recognized for the work that I had done for student advocacy. Story_ID: 609977 Speaker 1: Let's talk about the AKA because where--you know we've talked about your actually becoming part of the Beta Chapter. We haven't really talked about your, you know, your involvement you know 'cause there are lots of people who join, you know, a sorority and that's about it. You know they, they're, they're not as active in the leadership. So, I want to just talk about you know since we've covered your career, but I wanna go back and you know sort of cover your civic involvement, you know, with that. So, what, when you, so you got involved--how are you deciding that you're getting more involved with, with the sorority and what, you know can you sort of trace your path, you know, starting back in you know really 19--I think you pledged in-- Speaker 2: When I was initiated? Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But let's talk about that and you know what--you know I think you talked about even--was it Larzette Hale [HistoryMaker Larzette Hale-Wilson] I think or someone you heard speaking. You know and I think was--. Okay so I wanna talk you know just sort of have you trace that. Speaker 2: Well, that was what brought me to decide that I wanted to be a member of Alpha Kappa Alpha was I was impressed by Carey Maddox Preston [Carey B. Maddox Preston] who was a prominent figure in, in Chicago [Illinois] for--and in Alpha Kappa Alpha. She was executive director of Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.], and-- Speaker 1: So she was running the-- Speaker 2: She was running the corporate office-- Speaker 1: Office okay. Speaker 2: --which we call the national headquarters, not where it's located now. This was the one on 52nd [Street] and Greenwood [Avenue], just a little space in the apartment building, not our million, multimillion dollar structure now [in Chicago, Illinois]. But, that's who I saw and I, I thought her civic involvement, how she was and--I was just impressed. And then of course then I met and saw Loraine Richardson Green. Speaker 1: And she's very small too, small frame. Speaker 2: Very little. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Yes. And she, and that was an experience that I think that taught me what the sorority was all about and I was able to be fortunate enough to, after I became a member, to have time, extensive time with her traveling around the country and meeting at various events and so we had a lot of conversations. Is actually (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now is, is that Loraine Green, or? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Loraine Green. Carey Preston was there as a person that I used to just watch, kind of. She knew who I was, and she did give me some advice and try to mentor me, mentor me through some things as she could help. But, the relationship was not--it was close and personal. I called her, I considered her a friend and I'm sure she considered me to be someone that she liked and appreciated. But the difference, with Loraine it was a different kind of relationship because we traveled together, so we spent much more time together and we were able, she was able to share many things to me that individuals or let's say the average member would never get the exposure to or be able to take a part of. So, I guess I just joined and not having any sisters and meeting new women and friends and it was a passion of serving and giving service to the community as well as the--I guess social aspect of it and they were doing things that were of interest and I thought we were making an impact. And it was a community involvement, outlet, and the women that I got to meet I just got hooked, and I didn't let it go because I have been an active financial member since I was initiated in 1959, and next year I'll be what they term golden soror, which is fifty years of active membership in the organization. Speaker 1: Now, now are you saying Loraine--was she, was she an executive director following Carey or was she-- Speaker 2: No, Loraine Richardson Green was the second president, or supreme basileus of Alpha Kappa Alpha. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: She's responsible for a lot of the things that we still have now. Like the pen was designed during her administration. She produced the first Ivy Leaf magazine, which is our journal that we have now. Founders Day was started under her, observance that we do every year. So, she was at the building. I mean she was right there. She was elected you know like in maybe the fourth boule or meeting that the sorority had even had. We were very small then, so she was among the first of the, those setting the course of the direction for the sorority. Speaker 1: Okay. Let me--excuse my ignorance, but was she based here in Chicago [Illinois] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes she was. Speaker 1: And so that's how you got to-- Speaker 2: She was the wife of Judge Wendell Green. Speaker 1: Okay, so that's how you got to know her in that way-- Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: --because it was local 'cause-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --the people could be lo- Speaker 2: And she was in the graduate chapter [Theta Omega Chapter] once I got to the graduate chapter and used to come to many things as an undergraduate and speak and encourage us to the things and events that the undergraduate chapter was having, Beta (simultaneous). Story_ID: 609978 Speaker 1: I wanna ask another question about was, was the, when did the graduate chapter [Theta Omega Chapter] actually start and, you know and AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] and, and the sorority? Speaker 2: I think the year, you're really taxing my memory now, my history book. I think the year was 1928 or '23 [1923]. I'm--that I, I will not swear by. Speaker 1: So, so with Loraine Green [Loraine Richardson Green], you know because you're a part of the local chapter, but because she was you know based here, it's somewhat similar to Barbara [HistoryMaker Barbara McKinzie] now, you know as the basileus because when people--well Linda White [HistoryMaker Linda M. White] was based here. But what--have there been more basileus coming out of Chicago [Illinois] because of the base? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. How many have been from Chicago? Speaker 2: I think, I think the only one, and I'm not sure it was Maudelle Bousfield [Maudelle Brown Bousfield], but I'm not sure if she was Chicago. I think so. But, it hasn't been--Linda was--been a long time. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. And Barbara was not elected from Chicago. Speaker 1: I see, okay. Speaker 2: Barbara was living in Shreveport, Louisiana at the time when she--of her election and has recently moved back to Chicago. Speaker 1: I see. Okay, so, so when you, so you're getting very active and involved. Now how long do you work sort of under her tutelage? And what is your role? Speaker 2: Well, no I really wasn't working under her tutelage. It was more of a relationship. She was not involved except in the chapter. I mean, that, that whole process she was like the icon, like you know a president she was just like there, used to come to everything and everybody you know kind of gave reverence to her as who she was and her position that she held. She never took that as, you know, making her important. But, she was always the same person that she was. But, that's the kind of relationship that it was. No, my involvement in the chapter that just came strictly because of my passion for wanting to do something and to give service to the community. Speaker 1: So tell me what some of the projects you were involved in during, back then you know in terms of service to the community? Speaker 2: When I first came in-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --at the local level? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Oh, we did job fairs. We did career fairs. I think when I became president of the graduate chapter-- Speaker 1: And what year was that? Speaker 2: I don't know. That I don't know. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I don't know that. Anyway you know we're talking about years here. Speaker 1: No, I understand. Speaker 2: But-- Speaker 1: Was it in the '70s [1970s] you think? Speaker 2: Ah, let's see. I was, yeah it had to be. Speaker 1: In the '70s [1970s]. Speaker 2: Late '60 [sic. 1972]. Speaker 1: Early '70s [1970s] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Early '70s [1970s] maybe, okay. When I was--bas- you know we used to have, and we just set up a certain--we did a program that was set up that was like a vocational program where we first did a mentoring thing to recent juvenile releases from a court system where we tried to set up mentoring for them, and so there were a lot of community active programs that we were involved in. And fundraising was a big thing in terms of in order to support these programs. Story_ID: 609979 Speaker 1: You know the reason I ask the question is that a lot of times, Loann [HistoryMaker Loann Honesty King], people outside of the, you know, the fraternal communities don't understand you know how much the, the, you know how sororities and fraternities really help. Speaker 2: Yeah and I think (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You know the community, and that's all, that's why I'm asking because-- Speaker 2: Yeah and I understand that, and I think that the biggest, one of the biggest misun- are those, especially those individuals who belong to fraternities and sororities that end at college and what they don't understand about Alpha Kappa Alpha [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] and, and most of the predominantly, I'll say the ten Greek, African American Greek organizations is that their life really starts afterwards in terms of services to the community because these are networks and organizations that are giving community service around the globe at the alumni or graduate level, and that's where we really do our work and make our impact: through fundraising, donations. And we've supported the sorority--of course nationally just gave a million dollars to Howard University [Washington, D.C.], or pledged a million dollars to Howard University. I mean over the years we have given at least that much to NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], United Negro College Fund [UNCF], et cetera, and locally in the communities you know we're sponsoring programs. Theta Omega [Theta Omega Chapter], the chapter I belong to now, we built a community service center [AKArama Foundation, Inc. Community Service Center], which is located in the Woodlawn area [Chicago, Illinois]. It's a $2.5 million structure. We built that, Alpha Kappa Alpha built that, Theta Omega Chapter built that. And we're still paying and we pay it from our dues, monies that we raise, and the help. We did get some help from Emil Jones [HistoryMaker Emil Jones, Jr.] who we laughingly call Soror Jones because he was able to get us a five hundred thousand dollar grant that helped us on our way, and so we looking to the governor [Rod Blagojevich] who has promised us some more money, but I understand there's budget problems, to help us pay off this mortgage. But, that service center serves the community in which it's located. It's also running programs that are economic development programs, educating the community, the local schools on economics, the importance of economics, getting your finance together, home ownership, the whole crisis is going on now, a total economic package is part of our program. Speaker 1: So now where's that service center-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: 62nd [Street] and Ingleside [Avenue] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. Right, right, right. Okay. Speaker 1: 62nd--the service center is at 62nd and Ingleside. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 609980 Speaker 1: I want to just to finish off the AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.], can you talk about what value it has been to your life. Speaker 2: Oh, I, I think that my--. Okay, first of all I have served in several capacities at the local, national and regional level. I have had the privilege of serving the sorority as its national treasurer or supreme tamiouchos for two terms. I've had the privilege of serving the sorority as the central regional director, which is the director of, like governors to the president that runs a particular region and the region is Central Region. And that has been a very rewarding experience. I think the biggest thing in the sorority is the leadership development which takes place and the understanding of servant leadership to give back in order to do and to empower yourself through knowledge and understanding of events and history and putting a value of knowing that it's always better to give in terms of instead of receiving and you can help other people without helping yourself and growing in the process and developing the leadership that's needed to do that. This to me has been my biggest value that I personally have obtained. Story_ID: 609981 Speaker 1: And when you look back over your years and your association, you know with, with the AKAs [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.], can you talk about what--you talked about the leadership, but you also earlier had talked about you being an only child and you know and the, the whole sisterhood. Can you talk about that and the value to you-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and you know unto others. Speaker 2: The sisterhood is wonderful. As I said, being an only child my best friend, soror best friend today is, I met through the sorority. We were in each other's weddings. I actually sponsored her coming into the sorority, was her big sister, and I keep kidding all the time, but she's eight months older than I am (laughter), but we're best of friends, have been throughout all of our children, marriage and stuff. I have also acquired many other friends, individuals that I can call around the country any one you can see. There's something about being able to meet anyone anywhere and they will say I'm a soror or I'm a member and there's a kinship there that automatically develops. The sisterhood portion of it I think is absolutely great, and I think it has given the value to myself because it has given me some of my best friends. Speaker 1: Who, who's your best friend that you spoke of? Speaker 2: Her name is Judith Daylie Armstead. Story_ID: 609982 Speaker 1: Now somewhere along your life things clicked for you. Can you remember sort of when things clicked, and I say this because you talked about being in school and you know getting good grades, but just being mischievous and you know and just disruptive, you know. So some, I'm just wondering if you look at any sort of seminal point in your life that you think things clicked for you. Speaker 2: You know, I don't think so because I think that the value was there. I was always going to college. You know now whether I went in as valedictorian when I graduated from high school [Englewood High School, Chicago, Illinois], or whether I went in as however that was one thing, you know, but college was always a career--I was always going to have a career and that was always instilled in me. I had to go to college. I was going to go to college. I was gonna be a career. I was gonna be successful. At what point I don't know. There wasn't a click. There wasn't a turnaround. I wasn't a bad child. I never was in trouble, you know, so there wasn't a turning point in my life where somebody says, "Okay, bad child you're now gonna be a good child." That never happened. I was always at path. The mischief and all of that was just, I think, part of my personality or whatever, but there was never any doubt of wanting to be quote successful in my mind and to also be able to do it with something that I loved or something that I really enjoyed doing, so and had a passion for. So, that passion has always been there as far as I can remember. I would say that, you know, that sorority [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.], that giving, that philanthropic approach has continued in our lives. As you mentioned earlier, my husband [HistoryMaker Paul J. King] has been an activist. My sons [Paul King, III and Timothy King] have been activists. We always have just been an activist family. We've also been kind of an entrepreneurial type of family, even though my careers were not necessarily entrepreneurial, they have kind of taken that path, my mother [Elizabeth Chipchase Honesty], my father [Edward Honesty, Sr.], my husband, my son, there's not--it's education, but it is a charter academy, so it has somewhat of an entrepreneurial bent to it. These things have always, you know success, nothing less than that was going to be tolerated, so these have always been some of the moral values. The sorority led to the sisterhood and the contacts and the leadership development in terms of being able to apply these skills in the workplace, to apply the skills in other places, to understand the benefit of giving and being a part of a community and what it meant to do that. My husband and I also established the first donor advised fund by African Americans with the Chicago Community Trust [Chicago, Illinois]: the Loann and Paul King Philanthropic Fund; that was a first. Because we felt that we should have that type of an avenue in order to be able to give donations, et cetera, to the community and to assist where we can. So, those are the things that I think have just kind of all come together in the right place, I guess, to make me. Story_ID: 609983 Speaker 1: Your legacy, what do you want it to be? Speaker 2: My legacy to be? Is that she--let's see. What is my legacy--want it to be. To be remembered as someone who was always willing to help someone else...