 Story_ID: 71088 Speaker 1: Good morning, my name is Samuel Adams with the HistoryMakers. Today I will be interviewing you. Behind me is videographer Scott Sterns. Observing is our Executive Director, Ms. Julieanna Richardson and also observing is Pamela Bryant Samuels, Director of PR and Florida A&M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical] University. Could you give me your name and the spelling? Speaker 2: Good morning, my name is Henry Lewis III. It's spelled H-E-N-R-Y, L-E-W-I-S. I am interim president of Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University located in Tallahassee, Florida. Speaker 1: Your date of birth? Speaker 2: January 22, 1950. Speaker 1: And today's date? Speaker 2: April 22, 2002. Story_ID: 71089 Speaker 1: We begin each interview with a simple five short answered questions. It's a segue into our main part of our interview. What is your favorite food? Speaker 2: Fish, crabs to be exact in the fish family. Speaker 1: Your favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Spring Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation or destination spot? Speaker 2: Amelia Island, Florida. Speaker 1: And your favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: "To each that much is given, much is expected." Story_ID: 71090 Speaker 1: Okay, now sir I'd like to begin with your parents and your siblings. Could you give us the names of your mother and father and your brothers and sisters in order? Speaker 2: My father's name was Henry Lewis, Sr.; my mother's name is Evelyn Paramour (ph.) Lewis. There were six kids staring with me of course, followed by my sister Rosalyn Lewis Bryant, my brother Vernon Lewis, my sister Angela Lewis Johnson, my brother Darryl Lewis and another brother Kelvin Lewis. Speaker 1: Do you know anything about your mother's parents? Speaker 2: They were natives of Alabama; Dothan, Alabama to be exact. Both of them were domestics. My grandmother worked until she went blind from diabetes as a maid. My [grand]father was a factory worker--grandfather on that side. On my father's side my grandmother was a farmer, my grandfather was a farmer as well, he died at fifty-four years old and she raised thirteen kids. Speaker 1: Do you know any stories about your mother's parents? Speaker 2: I think the most significant one was during World War II when this country was at war; one of the things that you could not acquire during that time was lumber. Because of the fact that you couldn't acquire lumber and they wanted to move from Jefferson County [Florida] which is a neighboring County to here in Tallahassee they dismantled the house that they were living in and loaded it on a mule drawn wagon, carried it to Tallahassee [Florida] and re-erected it here in Tallahassee during 1945 to 1946. Speaker 1: Now what type of woman is your mother? Speaker 2: My mom was a strong individual, strong will that she finished the eighth grade coming from Dothan moving to Tallahassee. They did not at that time needed to access to education as well as she had. So she didn't get an opportunity to go to high school because she had to work. She, again there was twelve on their side, thirteen on my father's side so both of my families--my parents were strong large families. But because of that, she worked as a maid and a cook and put all six of us through college. Story_ID: 71091 Speaker 1: Your father, what type of man was he? Speaker 2: He grew up on a farm and as such had the backbone of a farmer. He loved to build and he was a self-taught carpenter and he was a carpenter for most of his early years until an accident caused him to fall off a house and break his back and they had to install a plate in his back and therefore he couldn't continue to be a carpenter. At that point in time he became a janitor here on the campus of Florida A&M [Florida Agriculture and Mechanical] University [Tallahassee, Florida] and he worked as a janitor for twenty seven years before he retired. It's interesting to note that he was a janitor in the same building that I trained to become a pharmacist, Jones Hall here in the campus of Florida A&M [Florida Agriculture and Mechanical] University [Tallahassee, Florida]. Speaker 1: What type of education did your father have? Speaker 2: He finished the seventh grade, I believe in the Jefferson County [Florida] school system again a neighboring county to Tallahassee. They grew up on a farm here as well so again they did not get an opportunity to attend high school because they had to work in the fields and that's how we made our living. Speaker 1: So how did your parents meet, do you know the story? Speaker 2: I'm told and I don't know how accurate this is but I'm told that they met one Sunday after church at a church picnic in which that was a big tradition in those days where you would--I think at that particular church, the pastor only came every other Sunday. So they made it a feast generally after church because people had to travel so far to church each Sunday that they usually fed you after church. It was at one of those church picnics that they met and they began to, as they called it then court. They call that dating now but that they courted for about two and a half years before they were married. Story_ID: 71092 Speaker 1: In the household you grew up in, a large household what were the dynamics of the household, the responsibilities and chores of each individual to make the household work? Speaker 2: Well if you talk to my siblings, they would say that I was a dictator but (laugh) I think we all had specific chores. I being the oldest, I cooked and I learned how to cook early on because I was the first born and my mom was out of the house most of the day cooking at other people's places as well. So I was taught to cook early on. My sisters generally did the washing and the cleaning; my brothers did the yard and other kind of cleaning as well. They would probably tell you that I--after I got a certain age I began to supervise and not do any of the work but certainly we all had responsibilities around the house. Speaker 1: What I would like to know is what is your earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: I think my earliest and probably the most fondest memory is when my father would take us to visit my grandmother, his mother every Sunday afternoon. She left Tallahassee [Florida], went back to the country and as such, that was about twenty miles from Tallahassee. Every Sunday we would pile into our little car and varying stages of that evolution and it came up to all six of us and my mother. So you had eight people in a car going twenty miles out of town and the car was not that large. At one point in time, we had a car that called a Morris Minor, that's an English car that's smaller than a Volkswagen but all eight of us managed to get into a Morris Minor and go twenty miles on Sunday afternoons to visit my grandmother. But I think that's the most vivid memory I have of visiting her, having fun on the farm, playing with the animals, riding the mules, we didn't have horses we had mules because that was what you plowed with. Having community picnics and community, actually, cow and hog slaughters. My grandmother had a fairly large farm and she raised animals in addition to her fruits and vegetables and when she would kill hogs; that was a community event. She may do about twenty at a time and the entire community came and participated in that event. And everybody took something back home with them as part of this full day's activity and everybody had a responsibility. The kids' job was to take the hair off the hog after they put it in this big drum in hot water and turned it after it was slaughtered. Speaker 1: So that's what you and your brothers and sisters did, you took the hair off the hog. Speaker 2: Yes, that was our job and that was fun to us at that point in time. I've since learned differently but certainly then we didn't know any better. So that was truly fun. Speaker 1: So it was a close knit family, your extended family with your grandmother? Speaker 2: Absolutely and not only was my--all of my cousins, we all lived in the same general area so we all participated in all these activities from the hog killings to the community picnics to the Sunday after church kind of a thing. So it was just a family affair, we grew up like that as a close knit family. Story_ID: 71093 Speaker 1: Talk about the Tallahassee [Florida] community in which you grew up in, your neighbors and those people in your neighborhood. Speaker 2: I grew up in an area that's called Bond Subdivision. Actually I grew up in a house directly across from Bond Elementary School where I went to elementary school at. Bond was a, I think, the center of Tallahassee [Florida] at that time being adjacent to Florida A&M [Florida Agriculture and Mechanical] University. A lot of the college professors lived in a place called College Terrace which is right adjacent to Bond subdivision and so you got a lot of interaction with the professors from Florida A&M [Florida Agriculture and Mechanical] University. A lot of the students lived in and around the Bond area so you got a chance to interact with them as well. In fact, at one point in time in our household that was a three bedroom, rather small house we would have all six of our kids plus two of our cousins who were attending Florida A&M [Florida Agriculture and Mechanical] University at that time. They spent three years--their first three years here before they actually got a place of their own and so they lived in our house and that was an interesting communal household at that particular point in time for those three years. But that was the nature of the family, we always took somebody in. My mom every Sunday after church if we had a visiting pastor would cook dinner and feed the pastor and some of the members of the church and we had to wait as children to eat and we--your piece of chicken was always gone by the time it got around to you. Speaker 1: So what did you take from that environment? How was your character influenced from-seeing that? Speaker 2: I think that what I gathered from that is irrespective of who you are, you have a role to contribute in bettering the community both the participation with the community events such as the hog slaughters or the cow slaughters or, indeed, the after-church events occurred. With my mom and my father they instilled in us the need for contributing back to your community and irrespective your lot in life, you had something to give back. Story_ID: 71094 Speaker 1: Now looking back on your childhood, what sights, sounds or smells remind you of that childhood in Tallahassee [Florida]? Speaker 2: I think more just the sound of kids. Bond [subdivision, Tallahassee, Florida] was a vibrant community. It--because we were right across the street from the school, the playground was there, the basketball courts were there, there was the football field was there so we were always on the Bond campus. Growing up it was either going to school or playing after school or in the summers on or more of the various things, whatever is in season at that particular time; we had a game going on. So you would always hear some kids and the laughter and the vibrance of the kids playing and being happy. That's the vivid memory I have of my neighborhood of Bond subdivision. Story_ID: 71095 Speaker 1: In your neighborhood, is there anyone there who you looked up to or you're being influenced by or you admire in particular in the neighborhood? Speaker 2: I think Mr. Joe, as we called him. Mr. Joe ran the neighborhood store and long before Wal-Mart came along, Mr. Joe carried everything in the neighborhood store. I would venture to say it was only about thousand square feet in size but anything that you needed, he had it there and if he didn't have it he would have it there by the next Tuesday whenever his trucks--supply trucks would come along. But I think he was the pillar of the community in terms of business. People would be able to buy from him; they could buy on credit from him. There was this honor system. To my knowledge he never kept a book but he always knew exactly what you owed him and he would never cheat you. That was the kind of integrity, I think, that he had and people respected that and it was just a support network within a community. Even if you were down and out for that particular point and time, you could go to Mr. Joe and get food, he sold clothes, he sold shoes, the uniforms for the men and ladies to work in, meats, everything was in there. While I won't share my nickname with you on this particular broadcast, I acquired it through acquisition of a certain piece of candy that I frequently bought every time I got money from his store. Speaker 1: Are there any stories about Mr. Joe? Was there any story about Mr. Joe that you can share that symbolized why you admired him? Speaker 2: Yeah, one vivid story that I remember was one afternoon we went after school to Mr. Joe's store and one of the kids backed into a mason jar, that's one of the other things he sold for canning purposes, the mason jar and he hit this rack about four mason jars fell and broke. Nobody would own up to who actually broke the jars and he decided that he wouldn't let any of us into the store until one of us told who actually broke the jar. We would not tell but Patrick who actually did it finally about a week and a half later went by and confessed to breaking the jar so that we could all have an opportunity to go back and patronize his store. Of course, we kind a encouraged him in a very vivid way to do that because we were at risk because of his actions and we did not want that to continue. We depended on our daily allotment of candies and other things from Mr. Joe's store. Story_ID: 71096 Speaker 1: Your elementary school, Bond Elementary, tell us about your experiences there and some of the teachers that might have had influence upon you. Speaker 2: Mrs. Anderson my first grade teacher saw something in me that I didn't know I had. She encouraged me to read. During that time we did not have the libraries that you have both in the school or downtown. We could not patronize the downtown library at that particular point in time in my life. But we did have a bookmobile that came around the community and it parked right on the school grounds every Thursday of each week. Mrs. Anderson encouraged me to read, she said I could leave the neighborhood; I could be anything I wanted to be. I could visit anywhere I wanted to visit through the books and I did that. So every Thursday as the bookmobile came around, I checked out three books and I would read all three of those books from Thursday to Thursday and I left Bond subdivision without ever leaving physically by visiting Africa and visiting Europe and visiting Paris and visiting Asia and going down under to Australia, all through these books in that regard. So I got my interests in reading through her encouragement through her motivation. Teachers then were as a lot of them still are, they motivated you, they encourage you, they challenge you and they stretch you beyond your expectations and she had that ability as well. Mrs. Williams who was--started out as the secretary in the school but later became the principal of Bond [Elementary] School was also a very strong influence on my life. She taught me discipline, she taught me to be able to manage my time, she taught responsibility and she taught integrity and those characteristics still stay with me today. I was happy to be part of a group that recommended that a local neighborhood community center be named after Smith-Williams Center in honor of her [Mrs. Lucile Williams] contributions that she made to the community as well. She is still alive in her late seventies right now but still active to this day in this community. If you see her right now, you would never think that she's probably seventy-nine years old. She is on several boards participating on virtually every one of the major community events we had both in the community as well as here on campus and just still a very active participant in leading the Bond community in particular to higher heights. Speaker 1: Do you ever wonder why they an active role in nurturing you and nurturing certain things about you or what they saw in you to nurture? Speaker 2: That always puzzles me. When you have hundreds of kids and why do they pick out singly one or two or three or whatever the number that they so chose to nurture as they did and perhaps they nurtured a lot more that I wasn't keenly aware of. I just know that the time and attention that they gave to me was instrumental and critical in my development because having parents who did not go to college, I was--normally would not be motivated to attend college but they saw that I could and they encouraged me to move on. And going on from Bond to our middle school, [R. Frank] Nims [Middle School] they followed me as I went to the sixth, seventh and eighth grade and on into high school. Finally when I got to high school, Lincoln High School was a vocational high school. FAMU [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University] High here at--on our campus was the quote unquote college bound program but by in large Lincoln [High School] was a trade school. It taught in addition to its basic subjects, carpentry, bricklaying skills, cosmetology and auto mechanics because a lot of the guy who were attending Lincoln [High School] went on to a trade and on into the workforce. I think through Mrs. [Lucile] Williams' urging I was admitted into a college bound curriculum experiment that Lincoln High [School] had beginning in my tenth grade year and for my tenth, eleventh and twelfth grade year there were seven of us who attended classes for three years, only seven in this college bound track. All seven of us came to Florida A&M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical] University as students in college at one time. But we were singled out and to this day I don't know why. I always think perhaps I did something on a test that sparked something. Nobody ever told me exactly why, I did find out that Mrs. [Lucille] Williams wrote a letter of recommendation that I be admitted to this college bound program--curriculum. I think that set the wheels in motion for me to ultimately come on to college and finish. Story_ID: 71097 Speaker 1: These people that see these things in you, I would like to ask you what type of child were you? Speaker 2: Bad (laugh). I don't know if I was truly a bad kid, I was a rambunctious kid, I was independent. I loved fishing and hunting and being outdoors and spending a lot of time in the country you have an opportunity to be outdoors and I loved that. I loved hiking; I would go five, seven miles away from home all the time and walk on back long before we had a bicycle. At one point in time I think I went through this thing of being violent. I had a group of guys that we didn't call them gangs at that time but we called them a group guys that looked up to me and we kind of made sure that nothing happened in our neighborhood. If anything happened in our neighborhood, we would make sure it was fixed and we did that for probably my fourth, fifth and sixth and part of my seventh grade year growing up. And we had a safe neighborhood because of us but people also knew that they would not mess with us because we would fight and that was part of growing up in Bond at that time. We would sometime challenge groups from as we call it across town and that was people who lived across Tennessee Street. That was the imaginary boundary between the north side and the south side [Tallahassee, Florida] and if you lived on the north side of Tennessee Street, you couldn't date a girl who lived on the south side of Tennessee Street and so on and so forth. So those were some of the kind of boundaries you would put up because we didn't have anything else to do in terms of playing and that kind of thing. Speaker 1: So where did that part of you that came from? Speaker 2: I think it was just an evolution of the time. It was--we saw a lot of violence in our community sometimes as well particularly the north side of town they had an area called French Town. French Town was where a lot of the black businesses were as well as a lot of the clubs and Tallahassee [Florida] drew a lot of people from the surrounding rural areas particularly on the weekend and people would sometime have a little bit too much to drink and get a little rambunctious or get violent and created some incidents and we saw that as kids and we probably continued to perpetuate that back in our own neighborhoods. I think I grew out of it if you can "go out of something" by looking at and seeing life is different and there is more to life than just right in neighborhood and right in our community. As I began getting small jobs, odd jobs, working with my father, I was able to see that there are opportunities to expand and not just be self-aggrandizing ourselves as part of our neighborhood watch group. Story_ID: 71098 Speaker 1: At that early age, did you see anything that stuck with you, any activity from any of these people who were in the first town or that area; did you see something that stuck with you any story or experience you'd like to share? Speaker 2: In all of the activities we saw both entrepreneurial activity and we also saw strong women who were trying to make sure that their families continue to move forward and irrespective of the violence or the other events that may have occurred in that area, you always saw rays of hope coming out of there and you looked up to those rays of hope because they were, I think, visions of what life should be about by all of the individuals who came out of those neighborhoods. I was pleased that a lot of good men and women came from that environment and went on to great things. Speaker 1: Now you're in [Lincoln] high school, what are your thoughts on--okay of thinking or your desires to go to college once you get to high school? Do you have those dreams since you are now sectioned off with this small group of special students? Speaker 2: I don't know if I or all seven of us really understood the significance of us being in this college prep curriculum. We thought they were just doing something bad to us so we couldn't cheat on the test because there was only seven so they could spread you out all around the room when you're taking an exam and that kind of thing. But I didn't get a sense that I wanted to go to college until I was well at the end of my senior year and I played football in high school and that took up a lot of my time, I ran track as well. So those two sports that took up most of my time for looking at what I wanted to do in that way, I was kind of totally immersed in football. I lettered two of the three years I played and we held the city hundred yard dash and two twenty yard dash records for three of those years I was in high school. I think what got me toward a college aspiration was my girlfriend in high school. I dated a young lady who worked in a drugstore in French Town, Economy Drugstore, and Economy is still there to this day, in fact. Mr. Howard Roberts was the pharmacist there and after football practice walking home because we didn't have buses to take you--after that bus has been to take you home during the regular time but if you did extracurricular activities, you had to get home on your own. I would stop by the drugstore and drugstores in those days had soda fountains. So I would get my girlfriend, Annie Ruth, to make Sundaes and banana splits and any other thing that she could get me free and I would stop by every afternoon. Finally Mr. Roberts came to me one day and said well if you're going to drink up all my sundaes and eat my banana splits, you might as well work here and earn it. So he gave me a job in the Economy Drugstore and it was working in that drugstore I got interested in pharmacy. Still did not realize that I wanted to go into pharmacy but he called the dean here at the school pharmacy and he said I've got a young man here that I think would make a good pharmacist. He sent me to see the dean and the rest is history. Speaker 1: We're going to change tapes right now. Story_ID: 71099 Speaker 1: So now you are working at Economy Drugstore with Mr. Howard Roberts. How is he influencing you while you are working there? What's intriguing about the pharmacy? Speaker 2: I think just watching his interaction with people and the respect that he had within the community itself. People knew that they could come--they call Doc Roberts for whatever they needed. He too like Mr. Joe extended credit and as such if you needed a prescription and did not have the money to pay, he has his own self insurance program that he provided to his clientele and he always knew that he would get paid. So that was a support system in our community just like the grocery and other dry goods that Mr. Joe sold. We had the same kind of support system with Mr. Roberts in the prescription business as well. But he also was just a leader in the community. He was instrumental in getting the pharmacy school started here back in the early '50s [1950s] and he just had a level of respect from both the black community as well as the white community that I admired and looked up to. Story_ID: 71100 Speaker 1: Now you mentioned that in your house being the oldest, you took somewhat of a leadership position and also you had your group of boys that used to protect the neighborhood, you were kind of a leader in starting that. Do you carry this leadership on when you were in high school in your extracurricular activities, football and other things you were doing? Speaker 2: Yes and I guess you didn't know that you were leading at that time or you were just doing it because they were told you would do it. I was the backfield--I played linebacker in high school so I was--I lead this linebacker core. During that time that was part of our student government--was active in our student government association for Lincoln High School. Just worked--just out front of a lot of different issues, we had another professor Mr. Crenshaw who had the first African American radio program here in the city of Tallahassee [Florida]. We call it 'Cousin's Cabaret'. He came on Sunday afternoons and he taught civics as part of his duties at Lincoln High School and he did his show on the weekends. But he also had a club that he taught students to be disc jockeys and get our DJs license. I got my DJs license, I worked with Mr. Crenshaw as well and broadcast a number of shows and sometimes you'd only get two words on the air but those were the two best words you ever spoke that week. Because you were actually on air and that was just a fun time and tremendous time for us to be part of Tallahassee as it was in the mid '60s [1960s]. Story_ID: 71101 Speaker 1: There is another area in the community I'd like to talk about, your church community. Tell me about the church you attended and the individuals there. Speaker 2: I grew up in the Pentecostal church. Both my parents were Pentecostal and my father was instrumental in building, physically building the University Church of God in Christ that's here in Tallahassee [Florida]. It was originally located on Osceola Street right down from campus. We had a number of students who attended Florida A&M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical] University that attended church there and just, I guess in the last five years have they built a new sanctuary just north of town here for University Church of God in Christ and made it a lot larger but we physically built the church, the basement first and they had all the church meetings in the basement for about five years before they raised enough money to put the second--the true sanctuary part on and it took them about five years to do that. So by nickeling and diming it and a dollar here and a dollar there they were able to build the church and pay for it completely at one time. Speaker 1: So what were the kind of things you were involved in building the church and how your family and the community related to the church itself? Speaker 2: Oh we hated it because Sunday was a total church day from morning to night. My mom was as I alluded very active in the church so we would go to Sunday school and the morning--the 11:00 [eleven o'clock] service and if there was an outside speaker, she would cook and they would come. They would go back to church that evening for what we called YPWW, Young People's Willing Workers. So Sunday was a true church day. I think that was a parental designed to keep you engaged so that you--an idle mind wouldn't become a devil's workshop, as my mom used to say. But that's certainly was an engaging time but it was a fun time because we learned to--where you couldn't go anywhere else so you might as well make the best of the situation because they weren't going to let you do anything else. While all the kids were out playing ball, you had to be in church. So we learned what the other kids who had to be there to have fun and games and we did that during the course of that Sunday. Story_ID: 71102 Speaker 1: What type of influences and how did it build your character? Speaker 2: Well the pastor of the University Church of God and Christ was Elder Owen Smith and Elder Smith as we called him was another one of those pillars in the community. He was very active in the bus boycott that was held here in early--the mid 1950's [1956-1957]. He was a part of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and very active with Rev. C.K. [Charles Kenzie] Steele who was a local confidante and certainly one of Martin King's junior soldiers during the whole civil rights movement. Elder Smith was that kind of individual and he, I think instilled in us the need for us to be very active in our community and not--to be change agents as well for the community and looking up at what he did and how he did it and trying to immolate some of those things were part of what we tried to be about at that church. Speaker 1: Now you're growing up in Tallahassee [Florida] during a time where the nation's changing. Talk about how race relations existed in Tallahassee at that time and things that were going on. Speaker 2: Well there were two Tallahassee's, there was a black Tallahassee and there was a white Tallahassee and that occurred up until the mid '60s [1960s]. I think Lincoln High School was integrated in 1965 and Harold Knowles who happened to be my--lived two doors down from me was the first black student to attend a white school in this city. But Tallahassee was sharply contrasted between the black Tallahassee and the white Tallahassee and there were very little if any mingling. Black people of Tallahassee had their quote unquote "place" in the city and we knew that place. There were white only sides as you probably saw some of them from the history of Tallahassee. City Hall was the most vivid memory or recollection I have of the "white only" signs. They had fountains on the inside for whites; the fountains for colored were on the outside. There were no restrooms that black people could use in City Hall. It was very--the signs that said for "white only" throughout the city. There were two major department stores in Tallahassee, McCrory's Five and Dime and JCPenny, both of them were segregated. The only way that you could go into them was generally you go and say I'm buying something for Mrs. Jones or Mrs. Smith who happened to be white and they sent you in to get it. That finally changed a little bit in the '60s [1960s] but you still could not eat at the lunch counter, McCrory's had a lunch counter and students from FAMU [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University] in, I guess, 1965-66 [1966] began these sit downs [sit-ins] and demonstrations there to change that. Growing up and being in high school at that time, we watched it from afar and were very instrumental in working with them. We participated in some of those events. I was one of the students who snuck away from Lincoln [High School] when they had their march downtown to sit in at McCrory's and they arrested over three hundred FAMU [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University] students and actually put us at the fair grounds for a makeshift jail. They had over three hundred students there. I was one of the students from high school and there were a number of high school students who slipped away and participated in those demonstrations and got arrested in that regard. But it was a different Tallahassee and we were wanting to see Tallahassee change. We saw on television and heard on the news and read in the newspapers the demonstrations and the Civil Rights Movement that were occurring across the country and wanted Tallahassee to be a part of that and it became a part of that, very instrumental in the--certainly the bus boycott. Story_ID: 71103 Speaker 1: Now talk about the bus boycott. Speaker 2: Well long before the Birmingham [Alabama] boycott that got national and probably international notoriety, we had one of our own here. Organized and probably categorized by Rev. C.K. [Charles Kenzie] Steele who was a Baptist minister who was very, very active in the Civil Rights Movement. He was a change agent, if you will; a leader of the change agent particularly with the ministers here in Tallahassee [Florida]. He led the boycott that brought to the ground the city of Tallahassee's bus system because they would not allow black people to sit at the front of the bus, we had to sit at the back of the bus and we thought that was not--was indignant, we thought it was racist and we thought it was discriminatory and the boycott, I think, helped to galvanize the black community together on a common cause and we caused the city to change its practice in 1958 [1956-1957]. It took a couple of years to do that but organizing that boycott and having people to drive people to work and using cabs and other kinds of private vehicles to get people to and from the grocery store or wherever they needed to go was the driving force which caused the city to change its policy on black access to the bus system. Story_ID: 71104 Speaker 1: When you were growing up in your childhood days, did you have interaction with Caucasians; did you have any interactions good or otherwise? Speaker 2: Very little as I said because we were segregated, Lincoln [High School] was in French Town and Leon High [School] which was the flagship if you will, white high school was downtown Tallahassee [Florida]. We didn't have a lot of interaction between the black kids and white kids in Tallahassee. Occasionally there was interaction but by in large it wasn't. McDonald's came to Tallahassee, it was located over on West Tennessee Street near Florida State University and up until probably 1964-65 [1965] McDonalds was a segregated establishment. We started working with and trying to integrate McDonalds as well and black students from Lincoln High School and well as black students from Florida A&M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical] University would go and try to purchase a hamburger and would be turned away because it was a white only establishment. We continued that vigil for three years. Sometimes it resulted in fights because some white students felt that we should not be there and they would come in there, car full of kids and sometimes jump out and jump on us and we would fight back. It was just a different time but we finally broke those barriers down and we finally got that hamburger and found it wasn't better than any other hamburger but it was just the thought that we wanted to have the right to buy a hamburger wherever we wanted to buy a hamburger at that particular point in time. Speaker 1: Another question in this area, do you have any specific experience or something that happened to you where you realized just the hatred and the vitriol the white community had for you? Anything you specifically or your family experienced that you recall? Speaker 2: One very, very vivid memory that still stays with me. I mentioned earlier that we used to go to my grandmother's house on Sunday afternoon and that was along Highway 27 which is now called Apalachee Parkway, a highway patrol--as we call it a state trooper stopped my dad for what he said was speeding but the car couldn't be speeding because it couldn't go fast (laugh), especially with all those kids in it, but it just didn't have enough power to go fast. But he made my father get out, he made him walk the middle line in the middle of the street as if he had been drinking, he had not been drinking but it was just to demonstrate that he had the power to do that. He wrote a ticket that was not supposed to be written because we couldn't speed in that car, that car couldn't go fast. But certainly that stays with me right now and how he had my father spread eagle and walk in this line. Speaker 1: How did that make you feel, what thoughts were going through your mind? Speaker 2: That this shouldn't be. I was big I would do something about this but we couldn't. Speaker 1: So you had a temper at a young age is what you're saying? Speaker 2: Yeah, I did some people say I still got it. Speaker 1: So did you ever talk to your father about that, have you ever spoken to him about that? Speaker 2: You know we did. We talked about how he was treated, not only there but in other cases as well and he would admonish me to be "cool" as we said. Just take it easy and not to let your temper get you in a situation where you can't control, always be able to control yourself and I learned to do that. Let me stop for a second here, bringing back some memories (wipes away a tear). So what have I suppressed, especially that Sunday. Okay. But he would say that things were going to be better. He always had this pie in the sky and by and by kind of a thing and I guess I wanted my heaven here on earth kind of philosophy but he would say if you just work hard and be true to yourself, you will be alright and that stays with me right now. Story_ID: 71105 Speaker 1: So you're beginning--about to attend FAMU [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University]. Was there any doubt in your mind that pharmacy was the area in which you were going to go? Speaker 2: I had no idea. No earthly clue until Mr. Roberts called the dean--the then dean Herb [Herbert W.] Jones to--for me to go over and meet with him. I had not really focused on or narrowed in on what I would like to do as an adult. Obviously, again somebody else saw something in me that I didn't see and I had all these guardian angels, I guess about me all of my life that saw different things in me that pushed me to another level and he did as well. When I got in to pharmacy, I always loved science because that was just part of my background. This college prep curriculum we were in was science based primarily. We took natural science, we took biology and chemistry and all that stuff that none of the other students took. So I had an affinity for the sciences all along and I did well in it. But I didn't know that this was my calling, if you will and when I got into--he encouraged me to come and when Mr. [Dean Herbert W.] Jones shared with me what the duties of a pharmacist were and what opportunities there were in pharmacy, I really got turned on to it and I came the following fall to Florida A&M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University] and my freshman year taking a lot of chemistry. I really gravitated to it. It was just my forte and ended up my second year--my sophomore year working in the chemistry lab under Dr. Abraham Allapalli who was the chemistry teacher there because again, he saw something in me that said hey I want to give you a job in the lab and I worked in his lab preparing the lab for the different lab sessions that he would teach. Speaker 1: So this is one of your first mentors when you get to FAMU [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University] that you had? Speaker 2: Yes, he was of East Indian descent and he chose to come to FAMU [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University] and work. Just a brilliant man, he worked here--just retired about two years ago after over thirty something years of working here at FAMU [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University]. He made chemistry fun. He had a way of teaching that just really turned chemistry on to people who wanted it, others hated it. But for me and a number of others, we just ate it up because he made it such fun. He was a stickler about being on time. His class was on the fifth floor of Jones Hall in the Science Building and we didn't have elevators at that time and it began at 8:00 [eight o'clock] in the morning. He would lock the door at 8:00, if you weren't in the classroom in your seat at 8:00, you didn't attend the class session that day and we had a seating arrangement so he knew who wasn't there and being of East Indian descent, he spoke with an accent and I can always remember him saying "Mr. Lewis, you were not on time today, don't do that again." In a very proper but accented kind of a voice and you always remember that. When I was named interim president back in January of this year, he was there and he hugged me and he recalled some of those times and that was a special event for me. Story_ID: 71106 Speaker 1: During this--well let me get to another thing, what year did you began FAMU [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University]? Speaker 2: I came as a freshman in 1967. Speaker 1: So you were on campus April 4, 1968 the day that Dr. [Martin Luther] King was shot? Speaker 2: Yes Speaker 1: What was that experience like and how was the campus? Speaker 2: That day was a--started out to be a very unremarkable day. We did the normal things you would do, we were on the quarter system so we were in school and attending classes and when the word came that Dr. [Martin Luther] King had been shot, the campus erupted; I mean literally erupted. We were primarily a residential campus in that most of the students who were from out of town stayed on campus because there was not a lot of housing within the community that you could live in; certainly you had to stay around the campus area or within one of the dormitories. People both in the girl's dorm as well as the boy's dorm, people were throwing things out of the windows, shouting, crying just a whole host of other feelings. I had an automobile at that time and I had to go across town because I hunted. I always kept my gun, a shotgun a 410 shotgun not a big twelve gauge, and it's a squirrel and rabbit kind of a gun in the trunk of my car. Because the campus erupted, they called out the National Guard on that day. The National Guard enveloped this campus and shut it down, literally on the four corners of our campus was National Guard troops carrying M16 rifles. I was not aware nor the guys who were with me aware that they had called the National Guard out and the campus had been literally closed off for both vehicular and pedestrian traffic. We had gone across town, we're coming back and we reached a point north of campus where we encountered the National Guard. They asked us to step out of the car and then they searched my car and they found my shotgun. They arrested all four of us who were in the car at that time and put us in the city jail. There we were met with at least twenty five or thirty other FAMU [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University] students who had been arrested for various other kinds of incidents. I don't know if we--we didn't get formerly arrested, we just got detained because there was never the finger printing and the--I think they just put us in to cool down the city for that night. I will never forget that was about 7:00 p.m. and I got up the nerve to make my one phone call about 11:00 p.m. to my dad and I called him and told him I was in jail. He didn't believe the reason why I was there, I said we weren't doing anything, we were just coming back from across town and they detained us, got my gun and put us in jail. So he let us stay there all night. About 6:30 or 7:00 that next morning, he was there to pick us up but he--I think he just let us sit there--he could have come at that point in time but I think he was just trying to send a message that this should be a learning experience for you and it was (laugh). I had not been in that environment before until I became the county commissioner. Speaker 1: So how did it take for the campus to calm down? Speaker 2: The National Guard was here for several days on a less intensive basis than certainly that first night and that second night. But there was a presence here for at least a week thereafter. The campus, I don't think, ever truly calmed down. I think it motivated and inspired the campus to be ever more vigilant about the civil rights movement than it was before and I think it catalyzed a whole new commitment to this civil rights movement by students at Florida A&M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University] that would not have happened had that assassination not occurred. Story_ID: 71107 Speaker 1: So continuing on during your college years, are there other mentors you met along your under graduate years that were really guiding you, showing you the way that might be what you become later on? Speaker 2: Yeah the dean of pharmacy, Herb [Herbert W.] Jones. He was a very meticulous man, dressed well, kind of a high society, as we call it. He started to working with the local white community, the Leon County Pharmaceutical Association, which was never done prior to that because there was just no intermingling between the black community and the white community. And certainly the black and white healthcare communities were very little intermingling, if any at that point in time. But he started something called The Green Tea and The Green Tea was a kind of a welcome to the campus for new pharmacy students that were conducted by the ladies--the white ladies of the Leon County Pharmaceutical Association. You had to dress, shirt and tie, suit and coming out of the hood, who knows--drinking green tea was not one of our fortes but he instilled upon us not only the need but the requirement that we come and participate in this event. They really had an affinity, they being the ladies auxiliary of the Leon County Pharmaceutical Association to him and respect for him and they started this scholarship program here that to this day still exists that sends at least one student per year to pharmacy school. I think it was because of his bridging the racial gap between the black pharmacy community and the white pharmacy community in Tallahassee that that occurred. Those bonds still exists between us right now and are even stronger because of that early bridging. That was in the--had to be '67 [1967] when I first started and '68 [1968] and it continued on until about '73 [1973] that we had that annual event, The Green Tea. Story_ID: 71108 Speaker 1: So now you're actually starting to interact with the Caucasian community. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Is this your first continual interaction on a friendly--(simultaneous)? Speaker 2: On a friendly and a kind of a wider spread basis because I didn't have a lot of money to go to school and we didn't have the kind of grants and other kinds of things that kids have these days. I did work as well in addition to--I didn't work in the pharmacy after I came to pharmacy school because I needed to make enough money to go to school. That was also during the time of the Vietnam War and that was also a hold new set of demonstrations running parallel with the civil rights movement. Olin Chemical Corporation came to the north Florida area and built a munitions plant in a little place called St. Marks, Florida which is about fifteen miles due south of Tallahassee. Their plant was designed to provide munitions, all kinds of ammunition for the armed forces and they got a large department of defense grant to make the various munitions for the defense department. Because of my science background, I was sent down to talk about getting a part time job there and, in fact, not only did I get a job there, I got a full time job there working in the quality control lab. The quality control lab was the lab that actually tested and analyzed the nitro glycerin for the gun powder that they made. Every different lot of gun powder depending on what they used whether it was cannon or rifle or tank had a different specification and it had a different amount of nitro glycerin content. My job as the quality control technician was to analyze that powder that came from the still and how they made it was they took old English cannon powder from England and re-impregnate it with nitro glycerin to create a new explosive. My job was to make sure that the powder met whatever the specification for that particular lot was and a lot was approximately fifty thousand pounds per lot. I worked--because they were on swing shift, that means that there were shifts from eight to four, four to twelve and twelve to eight; I worked the two swing shifts. I could always trade off my days because everybody wanted the day shift and I needed to go to school in the day so I worked either the four to twelve or mostly I worked the twelve to eight shift at night. I did that for twenty-seven months of my college education going to pharmacy school. I worked primarily from twelve midnight to eight o'clock in the morning. I drove back and I went to college during the day and I would grab a little shut eye and I studied at night or on the job primarily down there. But that taught me though--in those twenty-seven months I became quality control supervisor--(tape cuts off). Story_ID: 71109 Speaker 1: So now we're talking about there is another--there are some other things going on in the world besides the Civil Rights Movement at this time; the Vietnam War and your experience with that? Speaker 2: The Vietnam War was a kind of a trying time for all college students at that particular point in our lives because we had a draft going on and a lot of individuals who lost--saw what a lot of the other kids, particularly white kids were doing, becoming conscientious objectors thought about doing the same kind of a thing. We felt that it would not work for us and did not work for us. So we had to kind of grin and bear it but when the draft came certainly the lottery system for the draft during that particular point in time, I remember a group of us sitting around in our apartment talking about if we got called up what would happen. Never did we know that the draft system was going to make it an error in the way they mixed the birthdates up, that was to my personal advantage at that particular point in time. What they did was just take the months and dates of the calendar starting with January and put them in this big bin and turn it. Well when they put January in and February in and March in they did it on a month by month basis instead of moving from one part of the calendar to another, they did that. So ironically it ended up that when they actually started up the January part did not get stirred up that much. So it was on the bottom of the barrel. My draft number was number "356" out of "365" and that meant pretty much that unless something catastrophic happened, I would not get called into the draft and as such, I did not get called into the draft. I did participate in the ROTC [Reserve Officer's Training Corps] program, the reserved officer's training program here at Florida A&M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical] University because that was mandatory for the first two years. So we were prepared, I did not have to do the summer experience because that was only if you did the additional two years of advanced ROTC [Reserve Officer's Training Corps] that you would have to go to summer training. But I did do the two years and was glad that the draft happened like it did and I did my part by working at Olin Chemical Corporation making the ammunition for the guys who were on the front lines. A number of my high school and college classmates did get drafted. A number of them got killed in the war. A couple of them got killed immediately after coming back to Tallahassee [Florida]. Several that we know were actually psychological impacted by the Vietnam War and I have memories of all of that as well. Hezekiah Rush who was a very good friend of mine, grew up together went to Vietnam, did two tours of duty and on the front lines came back and within a week was killed in an automobile accident here in Tallahassee after doing two tours of duty over there. Larry Banks one of the seven in our college prep track got drafted and went to Vietnam, came back, I think Larry got shell shocked and I don't think has ever regained his command of all his faculties because of that. He came back--became my roommate, he tried to go back to college but he could not negotiate college again after that experience. He would wake up in the middle of the night hearing the sounds of war, the screams of people and the bullets flying everywhere and he to this day is still impacted by that war. And a couple of other roommates who were roommates before and did their two years and came back and stayed with us had some adverse events still surrounding the war. So it was a--it took its toll on us both physically and in terms of the number of Americans death that occurred but it took a psychological toll. That's a story that I don't think has been adequately told about the Vietnam War and certainly for African American soldiers. Story_ID: 71110 Speaker 1: That's interesting, talk about the fact that you were going into a field, pharmacy that was supposed to be able to assists these individuals by giving them some types of drugs to control those problems that existed. Can you speak to that? Speaker 2: Well I saw my role as a healthcare practitioner and becoming a pharmacist part of trying to deal with the sickness and the suffering that occurred from Vietnam War but I also was a little angry that we put our boys in harm's way and caused this to happen to my friends and my neighbors who were impacted by the Vietnam War and I never could reconcile in my own mind the justness and the need for this particular war. And I think hundreds and thousands of the kids across the country had similar feelings and that's why the Vietnam War never received the embrace or the support of the American public like the Korean War or World War II or World War I did. Because it was an obvious threat to the nation, those two wars when the Vietnam War there was never a connect between the American public and the need for us to send our boys thousands of miles around the world to fight in this God forsaken land as we called it at that particular time. So I had a bitterness and I didn't view myself as a health practitioner trying to help my buddy but I viewed myself more as an individual who thought we needed to something about this war itself. Story_ID: 71111 Speaker 1: So you were quite socially active at this time? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Were you protesting the [Vietnam] war? Speaker 2: I didn't actively participate in the protest of the [Vietnam] war; I actively participated in the changes that I thought needed to occur. In Tallahassee [Florida] that was my world at that time so I worked with trying to integrate the local establishments, the movie was another one, Florida Theater on north Monroe Street was the theater that was not--we were not allowed to attend. We had the Leon Theater, "the colored theater" over on Tennessee Street near French Town and the Leon Theater got probably fourteenth run movies after it's been somewhere else for a year, it did came to our theater and we participated in integrating the Florida Theater which was located at that time next door to JCPenny's. So we had two targets that we focused on in that particular--those demonstrations there as well. The shopping centers we were not granted free access to those and those were other targets that we had to force people to let us spend our money there. It was inconceivable but that was a sign of the time. So I focused most of my attention on local social change and not the national picture in that regard. Speaker 1: One more question about this area and then I have to get you out of under-grad[uate] to graduate school. Do you think this city, Tallahassee [Florida] would have had the social changes it went through without FAMU [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University] being here and speak to FAMU [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University]'s role if it did? Speaker 2: Absolutely not, I think because we had a university here and because we had students who came to Tallahassee [Florida] from all over the state primarily but certainly all over the country, we had a sensitivity to change. We had a drive and a motivation for change that cities without a university would not have. I think we had professors who--some of them were openly social change agents. Others were more covert with their role in creating change in that regard for the fear of the time. But I think Florida A&M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical] University was the fertile ground for germinating these new change agents that went on across the country to become major players in the Civil Rights Movement and major change agents in whatever city they ended up in because of the start that they got here at Florida A&M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical] University. Story_ID: 71112 Speaker 1: Now you're about to graduate from Florida Agricultural Mechanical University, what direction do you see yourself taking, what plans are you (unclear) to at this point? Speaker 2: Well again that was 1972 and while we were in the midst of what I think some significant change, it was slow in coming particularly in the health professions. Aside from black pharmacies, black pharmacists could not get a job in the South. As such, the majority of the graduates of Florida A&M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical] University and Xavier University [Louisiana] which had a pharmacy school as well at that time had to go North. Most of them went to Chicago [Illinois] where change was occurring in Chicago at that time as well. South Side of Chicago was formerly Jewish, was turning black. Walgreens a drug company which was one of the largest, Rexall was the largest but Walgreens was emerging as a large chain then was then buying up a lot of properties in South Side Chicago and as such, they were offering positions for black pharmacists to come to Chicago to work because they needed black pharmacists to go in these new black communities that were being created by the exodus of the Jewish community to other parts of Chicago. And as such, that created a strong job market for graduates of Florida A&M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical] University, Xavier [University, Louisiana] and Howard University [Washington, D.C.] as well. In fact, we have to this day a very large pharmacy alumni chapter in the city of Chicago because of the early migration of graduates in the '60s [1960s] and the '70s [1970s] to Chicago. I did not myself go to Chicago, I went south to Tampa, Florida with my BS [bachelor's degree of science] degree in pharmacy in hand and thinking I was God's gift to the healthcare community and wanted to go out and save the world through dispensing all these prescriptions, boy was I rudely awakened. I thought Tallahassee [Florida] was the most racist and segregated town that I had been in. I ran smack dab into Tampa, Florida which was if not as much, even more certainly segregated than Tallahassee was. I could not achieve a position in a drugstore in Tampa in 1972. I finally ended up getting a job as a motor vehicle inspector by day and a black pharmacist there who again became another guardian angel allowed me to work part time in his store to get my internship hours because at that time you had to get two thousand eighty hours of internship training before you are eligible to sit for the licensing examination in pharmacy. Doc Brown as we called him there allowed me to do that and he introduced me to a man by the name of Mr. White. Mr. White was a white pharmacist who owned his drugstore on Dale Mabry [Highway] Road in Tampa who happened to also be a member of the Florida Board of Pharmacy at that time. Mr. White was a liberal if you could call it that at that time and certainly different from most of the white people that I knew. Mr. Brown called him and said that this young man had needed to get some extra hours because I couldn't get all my hours with him and work because I needed to work as well at the motor vehicle station. So he allowed me to work at his store, free of charge but to get my internship hours. Little did I know that working under him, I was going to be able to establish a lifelong friendship with what I think the second white person I could call my true friend. And he showed me the ropes for becoming a pharmacist. He put me into opportunities that I never would have gotten. He took me to attend the meetings that the Hillsboro County Pharmacists Association which was the white pharmacy association for Tampa--Hillsboro County, Florida at that time and just broke down barriers that I never would have been able to break down before by myself through his assistance in that regard. I got my hours within a year's time that I needed to get them in and I sat for and passed the Florida Board of Pharmacy Licensing examination and I got a job working at Tampa General Hospital upon my licensure there. I worked there for about six months and then transferred over to St. Petersburg, Florida where I became the assistant director of the Bay Front Medical Center Hospital Pharmacy Department and I ultimately became director of that particular department before I came back to work here at Florida A&M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical] University. Story_ID: 71113 Speaker 1: You mentioned that Mr. White was the second, who was the first? Speaker 2: Mr. and Mrs. Bass, the Basses were a white family who spent part of their year here in Florida, they spent their winters here in Florida and they spent the summers in Boston [Massachusetts]. They too were liberal in that my father maintained their house while they were there. Their Florida house was what he kept up. They had about a twenty acre plot of land with a house on and he kept it up while they were spending the time in Boston. But I worked with him, doing those yards and all of that and all kind of handyman work around their house but she was a fan of the National Geographic Magazine and she knew that I liked to read and she would encourage me to read. She would give me books and she would give me every one of their old National Geographic Magazines. To this day I still have National Geographic Magazines from 1964 to probably 1980 something. My wife says I got to get rid of those doggone things because they take up too much space in the house but I have lugged them from here to Texas to Atlanta, Georgia to Washington, D.C. wherever I've lived, I've lugged these National Geographic Magazine because that was my way of leaving Tallahassee [Florida] through the print and learning about all of these great places that--a lot of cases now I've had the occasion to personally visit across the world. But they were, I think, instrumental in helping our family as a black family. They gave us clothes and food and not only an opportunity to work but they just gave us opportunities that we wouldn't have gotten any other time. Speaker 1: Now you mentioned a few time in regards to the escapism when you were a child reading, your teacher bringing you books and you would go to different places, Africa, Australia and once again with the Basses what was it about the Tallahassee [Florida] experience or just what was going on that made you want to go other places, what was that impotence there? Speaker 2: Well I think two things. One seeing the world through the television and the Basses gave us the first television we ever had and we had the first television in our neighborhood as well. It was an old black and white but it was a television. So--but seeing the world through the tube was just illuminating to me and to see all of these places that I have never visited. I could not conceive that I would visit ever because of our socioeconomic circumstance at that time. I knew that the only way I could physically leave Tallahassee [Florida] was through these books and through reading about all of these great places that were written about in these books and magazines. That was my escapism in that story I had left Tallahassee without physically leaving Tallahassee. Story_ID: 71114 Speaker 1: Now being the director of this clinic in St. Petersburg [Florida], this place where you said you came in contact with overt racism, what were your experiences like being there being a black director of Bay Front Medical Center? Speaker 2: Well I was--in fact I was the first black to hold an office other than the head of the laundry in the hospital there at all. That was in 1973, it was a different time for St. Petersburg [Florida]. St. Petersburg at that time and to an extent still is right now, was a haven for the "snow birds". A lot of people had their winter homes in St. Petersburg. It was known at that time was always sunshine. In fact the St. Petersburg Times, a newspaper would give a free newspaper for any day that the sun did not shine and I remember they had--it was many years before they had ever given out a free newspaper because of that motto that they had but St. Pete [St. Petersburg] was a different time as well. They were not that ready for integration and certainly having a black manager in a major hospital, the major hospital in St. Petersburg, Florida at that time. So it was different. I did not suffer or encounter a lot of blatant racism but I got a lot of snares, got a lot of things done to me underhandedly that shouldn't have been done because I was a black manager but we prevailed. I think the training I got here at Florida A&M allowed me to survive in that kind of an environment because it taught me to deal with all kinds of situations and I think all of my experiences leading up to that also taught me that you've got to deal in these environment however they come to you. Story_ID: 71115 Speaker 1: Now when you were in this position at the hospital you were receiving a firsthand look at the health services provided to African Americans, Caucasians and people of different cultures, what are you noticing? Speaker 2: I'm noticing a difference in the treatment of the two sets of patients. Although we were in the midst of active integration still at that time, black patients got treated differently than white patients and even to this day just last month the institute of medicine issued a study that's reconfirming in 2002 the same thing that was happening in 1972 and '73 [1973] that there were two standards of healthcare in this country. One for blacks and one for whites and I endeavor to try to make sure that all of the patients who came to Bay Front Medical Center [St. Petersburg, Florida] irrespective of their ability to pay got treated the same. That was also a time when we were just evolving both the Medicaid and the Medicare program and as such the hospitals and the establishments were being paid by the federal government for healthcare even if you are poor, you got Medicaid, if you are elderly you got Medicare. So there was a source of re-enumeration for the facility irrespective of the color of the patient. But notwithstanding that, there was still a difference in the quality of care. Speaker 1: Were there any specific incidents that you remember, you can specifically recall where that inequity showed out right? Speaker 2: Well there was a time when I suspected that a person, a lady who had diabetes and diabetes as you may or may not know creates a lot of vascular complications particularly of the extremities, the hands and the feet. With long standing and untreated and uncontrolled diabetes you can get develop gangrene. So part of your limbs, those extremities that become--develop gangrene have to be amputated. Well with this particular black woman I felt and I think a number of other people felt that she could have gotten--had a better quality of life had they only amputated her toes and still giving her the ability to have total mobility without a prosthetic device but they amputated above the knee which created another set of issues and dynamics for her that could have probably have been just as well treated with an amputation of her toes instead of her full leg amputation in that regard. I know that with great interests as I read that Institute of Medicine study that that is still occurring to this day. Speaker 1: What did you do while you were there, what efforts did you make to combat such behavior? Speaker 2: Well we formed a group of all of the black workers in the hospital to look at better working conditions for the employees there. I would say that there--outside of the laundry department there were no more than ten other African Americans working in the hospital at that time. There were several in the laundry department but those other ten primarily worked in the cafeteria. There was one LPN {licensed practical nurse) and one RN (registered nurse)and I was the one registered pharmacist in the hospital. So there were three "professionals" and the other ones were service workers. The registered nurse was somewhat afraid to begin meeting and having dialogue because of her fear, I think, of what might occur to her in the form of reprisals but I think we were able to get everybody to come together and petition the administration for some change. And I think they heard us and they hired some additional people and I think promoted a couple of other people over the next eighteen months the time that I was there and I thought that was a start of some change at the hospital. To this day, we [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University School of Pharmacy] have a very viable internship program between the Bay Front Medical Center and both the College of Pharmacy as well as our School of Nursing as well. Speaker 1: So it seems like all through college even in high school, college and in your practice that activism and your medical abilities are going hand in hand and you're working both at the same time. Speaker 2: Both at the same time, it has been. Story_ID: 71116 Speaker 1: Now what brings you back to Tallahassee [Florida]? Speaker 2: We--I had--that summer of 1974 just been elected president of the Pharmacy Alumni Association and the School of Pharmacy [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University] as we were called then had just got a new dean, Dr. Charles Walker who was named dean in June of 1974. We had our convention in the last weekend in June that same year and I got an opportunity to meet him and serving in my role as president I got a chance to interact with him both at that meeting and since that meeting. But he laid out his vision for the School of Pharmacy and what he wanted us to move to as a school. He talked about research, he talked about graduate programs, he talked about community outreach and all those resonated with me extremely well. Certainly as the alumni president but even more personally and he was not a pharmacist by training, he had a PhD in Pharmacology but he was not a practitioner pharmacist and that was one of the concerns that the Alumni Association had before he was named although I wasn't present at that time. The previous administration of our Alumni Association expressed that concern that he wasn't a pharmacist and that he may take us in a different direction of other than being a "pharmacy school". He and I hit it off extremely well. There was a synergy there that I had not experienced but he then became this next guardian angel along my evolutionary path. About two months later he called me up and asked me if I wanted to come and work with him and that was August [1974] and through his inspiration and his vision, I resigned my position at the Bay Front Medical Center, packed my little u-haul trailer up and came to Tallahassee [Florida] in August of 1974. Had no prior inclination that I wanted to work at the [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical] University nor did I want to teach at the University but again somebody saw something in me that says you need to be going on a different path and I'm here to guide you. He guided me to Tallahassee on the faculty of the School of Pharmacy. I was the first person he hired to his staff in August of 1974 and I came on board and worked in our internship program. I wanted to work in the internship program because as I had said earlier, I was not able to get an internship position after I graduated and I did not want a FAMU [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University] student to ever have to experience that again. Speaker 1: We have to change the tape. Story_ID: 71117 Speaker 1: This photo is from the National Institute of Health--National Institute of General Medical Sciences Advisory Council. I was appointed to this counsel by the secretary of health in human services, Dr. Louis Sullivan and this council made a recommendations on grants totally about nine hundred million dollars a year in the earlier pharmacology. Seated in the middle is Dr. Marvin Cassman who is the director of the National Institute of General Medical Sciences and the other gentleman I want to just point out is Dr. Franklin Prendegrass from the Mayo Clinic [Minnesota]. Dr. Prendegrass is a MD PhD who is one of the most premier African American research scientists in the country today. He also assists on the Eli Lilly Pharmaceutical Association Board of Directors. Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE: Can we get spellings for those names? Speaker 1: Cassman is C-A-S-S-M-A-N Prendergast is P-R-E-N-D-E-G-R-A-S-S. This picture is, I think, October 1986. This is a presentation from the-why don't you use a bigger one, that way I can--. Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE: Or is there a larger one? Speaker 1: There is a larger one that's got--that's it, you had your hand on it, isn't that the same, that group right there, yeah. This has got the county logo. This photo is a meeting of former country commissioners here in Tallahassee, Florida. I was the first African American elected to the Board of County Commissioners here in 1986 and I want to just point out that's me there and on the other right hand side the white guy there is actually Mr. Gary Yourdan was elected the same time as I was. He happens to be of Jewish descent and that year and we still kid about it, Tallahassee elected its first Black and it's first Jew to the Board of County Commissioners. Since that time three other African Americans have been elected, Rudy [Malory]. Rudy, I'm sorry--what was Rudy's last name. Oh God, I forget his name, it will come to me in just a second but Bill Proctor there as well as Anita Davis. What's Rudy's last name, had been elected since 1986. Speaker 2: OFF VOICE CAMERA: Spell it for us. Speaker 1: Bill Proctor--William Proctor, P-R-O-C-T-O-R, Gary, G-A-R-Y, Yourdan, Y-O-U-R-D-A-N, Anita, A-N-I-T-A, D-A-V-I-S and Rudy Maloy, R-U-D-Y, M-A-L-O-Y. Oh God, my wife must have put that one in there. That's my prom picture from high school and that's Annie Ruth who worked in the [Economy] drugstore (laugh). That's a prom picture from Lincoln High School here in Tallahassee, Florida. My date for that evening was Ms. Annie Ruth Holiday, A-N-N-I-E, R-U-T-H, H-O-L-I-D-A-Y. This photo was taken when I was dean at the College of Pharmacy and Health Sciences at Texas Southern University in Houston, Texas. The occasion was the unveiling of our new mobile health clinic van at the College of Pharmacy and Health Sciences there. We took a van into the neighborhood and provided healthcare coverage for disadvantaged communities in the greater Houston area and God I don't remember all these names of these people. To my-the young lady down there is Dr. Kathleen Louis, K-A-T-L-E-E-N, L-O-U-I-S. She was a professor in the College of Pharmacy and Health Sciences. The other three gentlemen were two members of the Harris County or Houston's health department. I don't remember their names and the gentleman on the far left is Commissioner Lee. Commissioner Lee he was--far left, my right, that gentleman. Yeah he was the County Commissioner there in Houston, Texas and he was instrumental in getting the funding for the mobile health van. Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE: Date sir? Speaker 1: That was 1993. This was recently, the occasion of the sharing (unclear) pharmaceutical companies doing a one hundred thousand dollar contribution to the College of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences here in Florida A&M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical] University. In that photo in the middle is Mr. John Nine, the gentleman who is giving the check and the African American gentleman who is receiving the check is Dr. James Ammons who is provost and vice president for Academic Affairs here at Florida A&M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical] University. Of course that's me on my far left. To Mr. Nine's far left is Mr. Eugene Tucker who is director of equal opportunity programs for Schering-Plough Pharmaceuticals located in New Jersey. That picture is in the year 2001. James Ammons, J-A-M-E-S, A-M-M-O-N-S, John Nine, J-O-H-N, N-I-N-E, E-U-G-E-N-E, T-U-C-K-E-R and I don't know the other two people in that photo besides myself. This is last year's well it was 2001. This is the occasion of Walgreen's Truck Company contributing a check of a one hundred thousand dollar for the new pharmacy building that's currently going up on our campus as we speak right now. To the--the gentleman who is presenting the check is William Harrell, W-I-L-L-I-A-M, H-A-R-R-E-L-L and the other two gentlemen are--I don't remember their names. I only remember the people giving me the money (laugh). Okay this is my wife Marisa, M-A-R-I-S-A Lewis, L-E-W-I-S. This is circa 1999 and the occasion is the National Association of Chain Drugstores annual meeting and ball in Palm Beach, Florida. Oh God no, she put that in there. Those were my militant days, look at those colors (laugh) and the afro. Circa 1972 just prior to graduation from Florida A&M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical] University School of Pharmacy and that's me. I've still got that coat and those polyester pants. This is at Texas Southern University [Houston] 1994. This was a presentation by two of my staff members on the right hand side of me with the reddish dress is Ms. Beverly Stewart, B-E-V-E-R-L-Y, S-T-E-W-A-R-T and to my left, Dr. Doris Jackson, D-O-R-I-S, J-A-C-K-S-O-N and that was an award from my accepting a position to come to Florida A&M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical] University from Texas Southern [University] in 1994. Okay this was 2001, this is Mr. Simon Barnes, S-I-M-O-N, B-A-R-N-E-S from Daytona Beach, Florida. Mr. Barnes is shown here at the Florida Pharmacy Association Convention where he is receiving his fifty year award for fifty years of practice of pharmacy; the second African American to receive the award here in the state of Florida. Story_ID: 71118 Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE: Who is the other gentleman? Speaker 2: That's myself. Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE: You look different. Speaker 2: I look different in that one. Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE: What year is this? Speaker 2: That was in 2001. Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE: Is he from Tallahassee [Florida] too? Speaker 2: He's from Daytona [Florida]. Okay wow, this is the College of Pharmacy in Pharmaceutical Sciences research advisory council for the college who advises us on research issues and research direction and it's because of their advice and their direction that the College of Pharmacy has been rated number six in the nation in terms of research funding from the National Institute of Health and these representatives are from all over the country, University of Miami [Florida], University of Virginia, University of Pennsylvania, Johns Hopkins University [Maryland], University of Florida as well as 3M Pharmaceutical Company. This is [Secretary of State] Hillary Clinton and this was in 1996 on her visit to Tallahassee to Florida A&M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical] University. Mrs. Clinton made a stop here in Tallahassee [Florida] to give a presentation in the same building here at Lee Hall Auditorium for the students and faculty at Florida A&M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical] University and I'm here pictured there with Mrs. Hillary Clinton, H-I-L-L-A-R-Y, C-L-I-N-T-O-N the then first lady. Okay this is Dr., what is his first name, this is Dr. Linberg who is the director of the National Library of Medicine. Dr. Linberg is presenting a plaque to me and that year is 1998 for my work with the toxicology outreach panel, Arthur, A-R-T-H-U-R, L-I-N-B-E-R-G. This is last year 2001; Tony Brown was the keynote speaker at our National Pharmacy Alumni Convention in Mexico. We went to Mexico--what part of Mexico, what's the one with a C in Mexico? Speaker 1: OFF CAMER VOICE: Cancun? Speaker 2: Cancun Mexico, Tony Brown with Tony Brown's Journal was the keynote speaker for our luncheon event at that particular meeting and that was June 2001 and that's T-O-N-Y, B-R-O-W-N. This was in 1990; this is the new dean's training seminar in which was sponsored by the Glaxo [GlaxoSmithKline] Pharmaceutical Company. It sponsored all of the individuals who had been named new deans of colleges of schools of pharmacy across the country. We came in for a week long training opportunity and this was the group that I came in as dean in 1990 from across the country. This is the Lewis clan--the Lewis family. At that time there were five kids. This was taken at the house of Mr. and Mrs. Marion Bass on a Sunday afternoon. I would say circa about 1959-1960. My mother Evelyn, my father Henry, I'm immediately in front of my father, my brother Vernon is directly in front of me. In front of my mother are my sister Rosalyn, my other sister Angela and my then baby brother Darryl. This is about the same time, same year in 1959-1960. That's me in the center, my sister Rosalyn to my right and my brother Vernon to my left. Oh God, that's me circa 1952 as a--just learning to walk good and obviously looking at a camera (laugh). Okay this is 1998 in the middle that's Dr. Cynthia Harris, C-Y-N-T-H-I-A, H-A-R-R-I-S. She is the director of the Institute of Public Health here at Florida A&M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical] University and to her left. He was instrumental in securing the funding to implement the Institute of Public Health as well as the Masters in Public Health Degree Program here at Florida A&M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University]. Finally this is circa 2000 in which I was in Ghana-Accra, Ghana visiting the Ghana National Museum in Accra Ghana, G-H-A-N-A. Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE: Accra? Speaker 2: Accra. This photo is a photo of a rock with a tree right behind. The tree was planted in my honor in commemoration of my role in establishing the first county public health branch clinic located on Old Bainbridge Road in Tallahassee, Florida. Since that time the county has opened up a second public health clinic located on Orange Avenue. We now operate a pharmacy department in that one as well. Speaker 1: Okay great. Okay, thank you sir. Story_ID: 71119 Speaker 1: Okay Dr. Lewis, last time we spoke we had spoken about you coming back to FAMU [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University]. Speak about that experience when you come back for the first time. Speaker 2: That was starting in 1974 when I first came to work here, Florida A&M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical] University. The College of Pharmacy then the School of Pharmacy had just hired a new dean, Dr. Charles Walker who was the neuro pharmacologist and he needed to have an individual with a pharmacy background since he was not a pharmacist by training to help him implement the new pharmacy curriculum that he was proposing and particularly experiential training component. He asked me to come back and do that particular job. I had not had any inclination to joining academia at all, as one of my life's aspirations and the thought intrigued me. I think it was more of his vision for the university and the college at that time that really inspired me to say that I want to make a contribution to my alma mater, I want to make a contribution to realizing the vision that he set for the school of pharmacy. I came back and started as the internship program director. I was bent on setting up an internship program statewide that would allow minority students not to have to go to Chicago [Illinois] or anywhere out of the state in order to receive the internship training and not be exposed to what--like I had to other kinds of career paths in order to just achieve your status of being a pharmacist here in the state of Florida. So we set about that business and it took us two years to put it all in place. We got the supervised externship program developed and that was my contribution to the evolvement of the new curriculum here in the School of Pharmacy. I left to go get my doctorate at his urging, again and did that and came back in 1978 and I assumed an assistant dean position. Assistant dean for Clinical Affairs at that time and that was involved with expanding our total pharmacy program from just Tallahassee [Florida] to again statewide. We opened up a branch campus in Miami [Florida] in which we still have. We opened that up in 1978 as part of the medical center in Miami, Florida and we have now, I think, have nine full time faculty who are stationed there full time to allow are students an opportunity to do their clinical clerkship. One year of training there in the Miami Medical Center and that's working extremely well. We have since added branch campuses in Tampa [Florida] as well as Jacksonville, Florida; all on a same model that we started out in 1978. But I think-we've seen at Dr. [Charles] Walker's tenure here as then dean of the School of Pharmacy enveloped, he set forth a new direction for the School of Pharmacy. He set forth a research mission that we had not had before. He set forth a graduate program development mission that we did not have before. As a result of his leadership and his vision, the School of Pharmacy started the first PhD program in the history of Florida A&M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical] University and we awarded that PhD degree in 1988 in this room that we're sitting in right now is the original diploma or a facsimile thereof of that first PhD awarded by Florida A&M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical] University in 1988. It was signed originally by the Governor [Robert Martinez]. Normally the Governor uses a facsimile signature because this was historic and mission changing direction for both the School of Pharmacy and as well as for Florida A&M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University]. The Governor chose to sign it himself and there was a formal signing ceremony at the Governor's office downtown at the capitol [Tallahassee, Florida]. In addition to the graduate program development, research was a new focus for us and we have set about a course of becoming more competitive in the research arena. We hired more research trained faculty who brought a new direction for the School of Pharmacy. The name of the school was changed from the School of Pharmacy to the College of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences and reflecting the new mission and indeed the new direction that the college is going in at that particular time. Our research blossomed extremely well. In the first five years we were able to track about three million dollars in research funding. For the last five years the School of Pharmacy now College of Pharmacy has led entire southeastern United States among all colleges of pharmacy and research funding from the National Institute of Health. And this year we are ranked number six nationwide in terms of research capability so among the eighty-four colleges of pharmacy in the country. Story_ID: 71120 Speaker 1: Now when someone reads your curriculum vitae they'd be extremely impressed, it's amazing. But what amazes me most is the route that career there's always the balance between your activism and your science endeavors and that particularly goes into there are three diseases that are now extremely plaguing our community. Two of which I'm about to speak about and ask you about. One which took the life or extremely affected your mother's mother, diabetes and sickle cell [anemia]; these have been two diseases that you attempted through the health industry to fight. Because they adversely affect our people, could you please speak about these two? Speaker 2: Well particularly in the case of diabetes because I have a family history of diabetes. My grandmother on my mother's side was a--or as they used to call it a juvenile onset; she had it from birth, a diabetic patient. My mother acquired it probably from her as well and on my father's side one of his sisters had diabetes as well. So in my family we've got the gene for diabetes. So that has always been a very near and dear area of research and clinical focus for me and as I set about trying to develop our research programs here, diabetes was always one of the main foci that we looked at here at Florida A&M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical] University. So as I said we could be on the cutting edge of providing new research and new treatment opportunities for diabetic patients because of that. In the later stages of my mother's life, she actually had a similar amputation as her grandmother. So that progression for me, I got it even more closer to home. In the case of sickle cell [anemia] my aunt has sickle cell anemia and we don't how that crept into the family history because we could not find that anywhere heretofore. But when the opportunity presented itself for the state of Florida to look at expanding its research focus through the state department of health, we convinced them that sickle cell anemia should be one of their directions that the state of Florida look into because we had so many African Americans and so many Caribbeans who are prone to sickle cell trait or certainly sickle cell anemia itself. And for the last sixteen years the state of Florida has funded a research program here in the School of Pharmacy [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University] dealing with the development of novel drugs for treatment of sickle cell anemia. We are currently right now in the final stages negotiating with a pharmaceutical firm for a new product that we've been able to develop in our laboratories from the root of a plant that's native in Ghana. Story_ID: 71121 Speaker 1: You spoke earlier when you were in St. Petersburg [Florida] with the inequities you've seen African American patients received to their Caucasian patients. Sickle cell anemia and diabetes both have been around for years adversely affecting the African American community. Do you think these diseases have gone--have not been given the same serious attention as other diseases because they adversely affect the non-mainstream society of America? Speaker 2: Certainly in the case of sickle cell anemia. It hasn't been given the kind of attention and certainly the research funding that other diseases particularly cancer and now aids and even Parkinson disease and, of course, when Mr. [President Ronals] Reagan developed his condition a lot of funds all of a sudden got funded into Alzheimer's disease and a lot of funding continues in that particular area right now. But certainly because sickle cell anemia impacts a very narrow part of our population particularly people of African descent. It hasn't received the kind of research support that it needs in order to develop an agent that will reverse the sickle process. You may not be aware but the sickling of blood cells was actually a native condition of survival for people of African descent when they were taken from Africa and brought to this country in order to survive in this particular country and deal with the malaria that we used to see. Our blood actually developed that shape because that shape wards off the malaria itself. So it was an evolutionary process that we are in but we need to elucidate that much more with research in that regard. Diabetes is probably the most devastating condition that impacts African Americans right now because so many African Americans are affected by it. As our nation gets more obese and that is one of the predisposing factors for diabetes and African Americans traditionally are more obese than the regular population. African Americans are more apt to have diabetes because of that. Not enough research is focused on the African American diabetic gene because there has been some early research showing that there's a difference in the gene between African Americans diabetic patients and the majority of the diabetic patients and we need to elucidate that particular current right now. And with this whole concept of gene mapping it, we have the technology to do it. Do we have the research focus or do we have the dollars to do that, that still remains to be seen and the federal government's commitment in that regard. But certainly, I think, as [HM] Dr. David Satcher our former Surgeon General brought to the forefront the whole issue of health disparities and the differences in the health status of the majority population and minority population. Diseases like diabetes, sickle cell and hypertension and others will get, I think, more public policy debate than they have in the past and hopefully funding will come from that. Story_ID: 71122 Speaker 1: Now the third disease which is really becoming a killer of our population in the African American community is AIDS. Your experience with it in regards to--have you seen a disease like that touching our community and what can we do to defend ourselves against it in the healthcare? Speaker 2: AIDS is actually now, I think truly devastating to the African American community at rates that are alarming to everyone and certainly to me. Through my work with the Minority Health Profession's Foundation [Atlanta, Georgia] we've gone about trying to educate the African American community about the impact and the condition of aids and how they can minimize the spread within the African American community. We've held town hall meetings across the country. In Chicago [Illinois], in Los Angeles [California], in Washington D.C. and Atlanta [Georgia], in St. Thomas University in Miami [Florida] and have one scheduled for September of 2002 in New Orleans [Louisiana] all trying to rally the communities to empower themselves to now continue the education program in this same regard. I think that we've got to continue to press the message to our kids that they are indeed still vulnerable to this disease and they're not invincible as a lot of kids think they are and because of the latency period which sometimes is up to seven years, people may contract the virus and if they don't get tested, they don't know they have the virus, it will lay dormant so to speak for that seven year period of time before they actual aids condition itself presents itself. Now there is a lot of theories about this whole thing about AIDS and where it came from and how it was developed and what not, in fact, manmade or not, the jury is still out in that regard. But I do think that we've got to be ever vigilant on trying to define some cure for it or in some way to inoculate the population from the AIDS virus. There have been some researchers particularly one African American physician I know of from Oklahoma [Dr. Gary Davis] who I think has a potential agent that could be effective in arresting the AIDS virus. He's met with some considerable bureaucratic hurdles in terms of getting it through the National Institute of Health and on to clinical trials. I do think that we've worked with him here through the Florida A&M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical] University in particular the College of Pharmacy in elucidating the mechanism of action of the drug and doing some of the preliminary testing for him to get clearances from the National Institute of Health. If that proves to be fruitful and we hope it will I think that his product which is a serum from the goat will have some very significant ramifications in actually arresting the aids virus and that's what we do not have on the market right now. Story_ID: 71123 Speaker 1: What do you think the role is specifically African American healthcare providers, doctors and so on in educating the African American community to seek out positive efforts in their own healthcare because the relationship between African Americans and the healthcare system for years has been almost antagonistic? How can African American healthcare providers make inroads to that? Speaker 2: Well first I think we've got to more African American healthcare professionals. Be they doctors or nurses, pharmacists, physical therapists and on and on down the line. If you look at every one of those groups, we are totally underrepresented in all of those disciplines in the healthcare profession. Once we start along that track, I think those who are in the profession or are coming into the profession have to be more vigilant about community empowerment and community education. I tell my pharmacy graduates all the time you're not going to be--you've never met a poor pharmacist nor have you met a poor physician or a poor nurse because these professions will allow you a good standard of living. How do you again give back to the community of your expertise and indeed your time such that the community becomes empowered itself in that same regard. I think we've got to continue to teach the African American community in particular to take responsibility for its own health. Teaching them about the health that they need--areas they need to be knowledgeable of and empowering them to be able to test when they can at the community level to do the preliminary analysis because as you alluded to there is still a schizophrenia about the interface between the minority community and the majority healthcare community. It goes back to the [UI.S. Public Health Service's] Tuskegee syphilis experiment [Tuskegee Institute, Alabama, 1932-1972] and on and on and on. Those "frenias" if you will still exist within the African American community and there is still a chasm between in particular poor patients and the healthcare community itself. So we've got to empower our community to take responsibility for its own healthcare. We've got to give them the information and then they need to make good decisions and we've got to do some things in terms of changing the habits of our African American community. Take for instance smoking, that's--if you can stop smoking, I would say a third of the adverse health impacts within the African American community would go away right there. But you've got to be able to empower those people to stop the smoking habit. It's an addiction; I think that's been shown now through the food and drug administration. So it's going to take more than just education, it's going to take breaking that addiction habit. Story_ID: 71124 Speaker 1: Now between 1984 and '89 [1989] you come back here and you come back here as dean of planning and development and you're still at the Pharmacy Department [School of Pharmacy, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University] but you're activism is really taking over now, explain that. Speaker 2: Well working through the local chapter of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] we thought that the county government here in Tallahassee, Florida needed to reexamine the way they elected its commissioners. I worked with the then president of the NAACP, Anita Davis to examine the voting rights and indeed voting system of Leon County [Florida] which was an at large system totally at that particular point in time to say whether or not African Americans and other minorities had an equal opportunity to get elected to our Board of County Commissioners. Our findings showed that they did not. We, in fact, filed a lawsuit through the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] to change the at large voting system to a single member district form of governance and we prevailed in that lawsuit through the District Court of Appeals. Once we had won the case, we looked around and said well you won the case, now who's going to run? And they said, "Well Henry you got us in this mess so you've got to run." So I in fact did seek that office of the first single member district office here in Tallahassee in Leon County and I won in 1986 becoming the first African American elected to the Board of County Commissioners. Speaker 1: What are some of your achievements that you're proud of that you brought forth when you did that? Speaker 2: I think first and foremost bringing to the county governors a representation of the African American community a voice to the table that they did not have. If you look at the whole county system of governance, we were disenfranchised. Most of the dirt roads in Leon County at that time were where African Americans lived. So we started on a program that we coined as SAFE and that acronym stood for "Surface Asphalt For Everyone" and that was a road paving project that we attempted to pave every unpaved county road in Leon County. And today all of those roads except about five or six that the people on those roads chose to keep as unpaved have been paved by county government and I think that was a significant move to improve access for minority people within the Leon County area. I think the health department system here was not what it should be. We started the branch system of health department coverage. So people who couldn't get out of French Town [Tallahassee, Florida] and other areas had a place close to home to go so we opened up a new county health unit over on Old Bainbridge Road in the French Town area and that now provides, I think, excellent coverage for people who can't--who don't have a physician home but certainly need coverage. There is a full time physician on staff there all the time in that regard. And we finally started the minority business enterprise program for Leon County and I think that allowed minority businessmen and women, in fact, to access county contracts and county services in a way that they never had and that program right now, I think is netting about five to six million dollars a year in county contracts going to minority disadvantaged businesses. Story_ID: 71125 Speaker 1: Now, when you first get on the county commission, how were you received since I'm sure there weren't too many other people who looked like you on the commission, how were you received? Speaker 2: Well I think because--as I alluded to earlier, this was the first time they had an African American and first time they had a person of Jewish descent. When we both came on simultaneously for whatever reason we formed a natural affinity for one another that's still exists to this day. Gary Yourdan was the person of Jewish descent who came on board at the same time I came on. We partnered and strategized together because we knew the commission when we came on board went from a five member commission to a seven member commission and that meant that in order for any vote to prevail you needed at least four of the seven votes in order prevail on any given issue. So we went into every Tuesday meeting. The Tuesday meetings then saying that we're looking for two more votes because that was our way of saying we can count on each other for at least the first two. Through that I think that affinity that we had for one another, we were able to move a number of agenda items that were positive and in favor of the minority communities here in Leon County [Florida]. I think that that taught me a good lesson in being able to give and take of the political arena. You're not going to be able to prevail unless you can get four votes or whatever the number of votes to carry the majority for that particular agenda item and giving up something on this in order to get what you need later on or the next day or the same day was part of that whole debate and dialogue that goes on right now in virtually every elected office. Story_ID: 71126 Speaker 1: Now from there we're going to your first deanship-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --at a school. Texas Southern University [Houston]. Now how was, how did they even call or come to you that Texas Southern University wants the man of Tallahassee [Florida]? Speaker 2: Well I think that the College of Pharmacy [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University] was growing and continued to grow and we're in good stead as I served both on the [Leon County, Florida] County Commission and working on the faculty here in the College of Pharmacy. I had these aspirations of moving on and staying in academia. I said earlier I had no prior inkling that I wanted to be in academia once I got there, I found out I said hey this is my thing, I kind of like this. So I think I'll make a career out of this and my mom said I couldn't work in a drugstore and I couldn't work in a hospital pharmacy so I had to teach (laughter). So teaching was indeed my forte and I think now that you search for things that really give you that thrill and that benefit and sometimes it's right under your nose and being in academia has been that forte for me and I actually love it. The call came from Texas Southern [University, Houston] because I was president at the same time of the International Pharmacy Association and I had the chance to interact with the African American pharmacists across the nation. I interacted with quite a bit of the alumni from Texas Southern University and, in fact, through the president of the alumni association that I got a call saying that we would like for you to consider the deanship. That was at the same time I was finishing up my first term of office as county commissioner and nobody at that particular point in time had announced opposition for my candidacy for reelection if I had so chose to do that. So I was another decision thinking point. Do I run for county commissioner again and stay in Tallahassee [Florida] or do I go ahead and pursue my aspiration of staying in the academy and I chose the latter. Staying in academia I think was a positive move, I think I got into politics only because I was the rabble rouser and they didn't have anybody else to run for office after you won like a dog chasing a car once you catch it what do you do. And that's how we kind of evolved into that political arena. But what I found though is being in academia has allowed me to be in the political arena as well as the academic arena simultaneously. Being a dean has allowed me to work with congress in crafting legislation, getting funding, getting new programs started and at the same time I'm able to serve the students by providing an opportunity for them to achieve their career aspirations in whatever their chosen field is. Speaker 1: How were you received at Texas Southern University [Houston] (unclear)? Speaker 2: Being a rattler and going into--their mascot is the fearless tiger, it was different at first but certainly within the first few months being able to move the school then. They had both pharmacy and six programs in the health sciences, I had little knowledge of physical therapy and occupational therapy and environmental health and those kinds of--health information management--and those kinds of programs that were part of the umbrella of the College of Pharmacy Health Sciences there but I was a quick study. I had good people around me to give me information about the whole process. In my first two years I had four accreditations come up and that's a horrendous task for any dean and certainly a dean with no background in some of those disciplines. But our faculty rose to the occasion and we prevailed. We set about changing the mission of that institution just like Dr. [Charles] Walker changed the mission here. We set forth a course of, a research focus and a graduate program focus and now they are one of the--certainly in the Southwest one of the leading research institutions in the southwest and they now have PhD programs in the pharmaceutical sciences as well and they did not have that prior to then. Speaker 1: We're going to change the tape. Story_ID: 71127 Speaker 1: Let me ask you now, what brings you back home-we'll just call it that, home [Tallahassee, Florida]? Speaker 2: The decision to leave Houston [Texas] and come back was both personal and academic. Both of my parents were getting up in age. My father had retired, my mom had been sick for a number of years prior to my coming back and I needed and wanted to be closer to them. They've both since died since I've been back to Tallahassee [Florida] but that was one reason that drove me back. The other one of course is this is my alma mater [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University] and wanted to get back to my alma mater and the opportunity to run the College of Pharmacy presented itself and I came back and we've had a happy marriage of programmatic development and growth since that time of coming back in 1994. We've doubled our enrollment; we've broken ground on a new thirty three million dollar building that should be ready in about fourteen months. We've open up branch campuses as I said earlier in Tampa [Florida] and Miami [Florida] as well as Jacksonville [Florida] most recently. We kind of made the map in terms of African American pharmacists and PhD production. We graduated over twenty percent of all the black pharmacists in the country right here at Florida A&M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University] College of Pharmacy with sixty percent of the black PhDs in the pharmaceutical sciences graduated from Florida A&M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical] University College of Pharmacy. So we're making a mark, we've sent three deans of College Pharmacy from here, from our faculty of staff to be deans of other colleges of pharmacy. Since I've been back-I'm proud to be able to train a next generation of academic leaders for our colleges of pharmacy across the country as well as training the next generation of practitioners and researchers as well. Story_ID: 71128 Speaker 1: But the work didn't stop there for you. After you make A&M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical] University one of the top pharmacy schools in America one of the top ten and one of the largest in the Southeast they tag you for another position. They need your help again and what is that? Speaker 2: Now it's serving as interim president of Florida A&M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University]. When Dr. Fred [Frederick S.] Humphries indicated his intent to step down after sixteen and a half years of service as president of the institution that came literally on the heels of our provost--a former provost Dr. James Ammons being named chancellor of North Carolina Central University in Durham, North Carolina. In fact the two announcements, one was on Friday, the second one with Dr. Ammons was on Monday--the following Monday. So that just shocked the campus in ways unknown that both of the top level administrators would be stepping down literally months apart from one another. At the same time we knew that we were growing into a new form of governance for the state university system of Florida from one of having a statewide board of regions that govern all ten universities to each of the ten universities having their individual boards of trustees. So all these changes were looming at a time when our two administrators were stepping down. I think as the board of trustees was named and they came on board they asked Dr. [Frederick S.] Humphries to stay on board for a few additional months to prepare for the transition. The chairman of the board of trustees came to me and asked me if I would serve in this capacity and I said yes. I think since I've come on board in January 1, 2002, I had a tremendous opportunity to see the university from a totally different perspective. Not just from the eyes of a dean of a college but now from the eyes of the president of twelve colleges and schools out there. My first three days on the job I had to cut five point five million dollars from my budget because of nine-one-one [September 11, 2001] and what happened with the attack at that particular time, Florida being a tourist based economy when we shut down the air system and people were afraid to travel that impacted the Florida economy very significantly and as such all the state agencies had to have major cut backs in their current fiscal year operational budgets and our part was five point million dollars in the middle of the fiscal year. Story_ID: 71129 Speaker 1: Three more questions and then I will let you go. The first one is there is a push to integrate African American--historically African American colleges and universities. What do you think the role today is that HBCUs [Historically Black Colleges and Universities] play in the black community and how vital is it? Speaker 2: I think HBCUs [Historically Black Colleges and Universities] play the same role that Brandeis [University] plays for the Jewish community as well as Notre Dame [University] plays for the catholic community. They are indeed a pillar for those respective communities. HBCUs [Historically Black Colleges and Universities] need to be and should continue to be the same kind of pillar for the African American community. There is a lot to say about being able to have a cultural maturation as part of your academic experience. We provide that through the historical black colleges and universities network. There's a lot to say about being able to inspire a young man or a young woman to go beyond his or her known abilities and capabilities. African American institutions have been able to do that historically in stretching the minds of young men like myself to think outside of that box and be more than we even dreamed, in some cases, we could be. So I think there will always be a role for those institutions or these kinds of institutions in our society. The challenge would be how do you buttress in the case of a public, as Florida A&M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical] University is a historical black college, with the public policy roles that are coming into play right now in saying that we should not have two separate systems of education. And if you look at the composition of institutions--public institutions like Florida A&M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical] University, you find that we are not segregated bastions of academia. We have the most integrated faculty of any state university system in Florida. Our population is about eighty percent African American and about fifteen percent white and about three or four percent Hispanic. So we are--when you look at it in terms of true integration, we are there but at the same time our focus and mission is on maintaining the African American community's cultural and indeed moral values in that regard. So I think they are--should always be a role for institutions like Florida A&M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University]. Story_ID: 71130 Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be? Speaker 2: Wow, well I tell people all the time your life is nothing but a dash and that's the time you were born dash the time you actually die and if you can fill that dash with being able to say that I helped somebody along this way, I was able to make a way for young men and young women to achieve their career aspirations, I instill in those same young men and women the need to give back to the community that so richly gave to them to be able to set an agenda for our community to continue to prosper and grow and to continue to be able to instill those cultural and indeed moral values that I was taught as a kid and my father was taught and my father's father was taught as we came along. I think that would be my legacy, giving back to this community both the city and indeed the university community. Speaker 1: What would you want to be remembered for? Speaker 2: That I inspired, I motivated, I challenged and I helped people reach their dreams. Speaker 1: Thank you very much Dr. Lewis, it's been a pleasure talking to you. Speaker 2: Thank you...