 Story_ID: 364135 Speaker 1: I'm Denise Gines from The HistoryMakers and I'm the interviewer. Scott Stearns is the videographer, and observing today will be Thomas Hester [ph.], Daniel Edwards, J.W. Lemon, Jr., Fred Thornton [ph.] and James Miller, and Mrs. Gladys Lemon [Gladys Prince Lemon]. Good morning, sir. Speaker 2: Good morning. Speaker 1: We're going to start off by what we call slating. If you will tell me your--okay, would you state your name and spell it for me please. Speaker 2: James Windel Lemon [HistoryMaker J. W. Lemon]. J-A-M-E-S, James, W-I-N-D-E-L, Windel, L-E-M-O-N. Speaker 1: Okay, and tell me your date of birth. Speaker 2: November the 9th, 1919. Speaker 1: And the location of your birth? Speaker 2: Locust Grove, Georgia. Speaker 1: And today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is the 11th of No- December. Speaker 1: Two thousand and six [2006]. And tell me the location of this interview. Speaker 2: The location of this area is one mile west of Locust Grove. Speaker 1: Okay. And tell me what was your occupation? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Tell me, what was your location--your occupation. Speaker 2: I, when I retired, I was working for the postal system, out of Atlanta [Georgia]. Speaker 1: And what was your position at the post office? Speaker 2: I worked as a clerk and a mail handler. Story_ID: 364136 Speaker 1: Okay, Mr. Lemon [HistoryMaker J. W. Lemon], we're gonna start with five People magazine-ish type questions, just to warm up a little bit, okay? Tell me what is your favorite color? Speaker 2: My favorite color is probably white. Speaker 1: And your favorite time of year? Speaker 2: (Unclear). Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year? Is it spring? Speaker 2: I don't drank beer. Speaker 1: (Laughter) No, your favorite time of year. Do you like the fall or winter or the spring or the summer? Speaker 2: I like all four of 'em, about equal. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is your favorite food? What do you like to eat? Speaker 2: Barbecue pork. Speaker 1: And when you go on vacation, what's your favorite place? Speaker 2: Detroit [Michigan]. Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase? Speaker 2: Favorite phrase is one that was coined by Benjamin E. Mays [Benjamin Mays]. I'll let no one separate me from the grace of God. Story_ID: 364137 Speaker 1: We're gonna start with information about your parents [Maggie Richie Lemon (ph.) and James Lemon] and your grandparents. Can you remember your grandparents? Speaker 2: Very well. Speaker 1: What about your great-grandparents? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay, so let's start with your grandpare- let's start with your grandmother. Tell me her name and tell me about her. Speaker 2: Her name was Kimmel Lemon [sic. Maggie Lemon]. Speaker 1: Okay. And share a story with us about your grandmother. Speaker 2: My grandmother was one of the--we didn't know what it was at that time, but she was one of the first persons that we ever known to have sugar diabetes. She died with it in 1924. Speaker 1: Okay. Where was she born? Speaker 2: She was born at Locust Grove, Georgia. And she, when they laid the Southern Railroad [Southern Railway] through here, she hoped laid the Southern Railroad. Speaker 1: Do you remember when she was born? Speaker 2: No, I, I got it here somewhere, but I don't remember. Speaker 1: Okay, so she worked to help lay the railroad? You said she helped to lay the railroad? Speaker 2: That's right. She hoped lay the railroad through Henry County [Georgia] here, the Southern Railroad. Speaker 1: And do you have any knowledge of any of your ancestors being slaves? Speaker 2: Well, my, I don't have any knowledge of it, but my grandfather, he was freed from slavery up at Alpharetta, Georgia. Speaker 1: And your grandfather, his name? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: What was your grandfather's name? Speaker 2: George Lemon. Speaker 1: Do you know when he was born or when he died? Speaker 2: I'll get all that information and get it to you. Story_ID: 364138 Speaker 1: Are there any stories you want to share about your [paternal] grandmother [Maggie Lemon] and grandfather [George Lemon]? Did you visit them? Speaker 2: Well, my grandfather, a lot of 'em call him a lazy man. Back in slavery was set free, they had a lot of Negroes that professionalized in gambling. And grandmamma and her family was one of those families that professionalized in gambling. He won enough money, I believe it was 1912, and I wouldn't be perfectly exactly, but I believe it was 1912 that my grandfather won enough money to build him a house and buy him a hundred acres of ground. Speaker 1: What location did he buy the land? Speaker 2: One mile south of Locust Grove [Georgia], between Locust Grove and Griffin [Georgia]. And to my unfortunate, they tore the house down about six months ago. Speaker 1: And who, who owns the land now? Speaker 2: The bank I think. We lost it. The Lemons lost it in 1927. Speaker 1: And what was the cause of that? Was it, tell me, do you have any--? Speaker 2: Well, they claim it was boll weevils, shortage of cotton crops and my uncle was an undertaker and he wanted to put my grandmother and my aunt and my grandfather all died in 1927. He wanted to put 'em away real nice and grandpa did have some money. He supposed to have put seventeen hundred dollars on each one of those graves, which would break anybody, three graves at that time. And that's what, that's what broke grandfather. My Uncle George [George Lemon] spending money on the funerals that he did not have. Speaker 1: Before they lost the land, did they raise cotton on the land, tell me-- Speaker 2: Raised cotton, corn and all of that. Speaker 1: So it was a very luc- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Regular farm land. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. And did you spend any time there at all? Speaker 2: From four years old up through twenty-five. I got shot in 1925, carrying my grandmother's hat, she died in '24 [1924] and I was carrying her hat out of a house to throw in a pile where they generally put junk and what not that they was gone through away to be burned, and I got shot in month of November. Speaker 1: And that was on that land? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And you say you were five? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Five years old? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Who shot you? Speaker 2: Don't know. Speaker 1: Was it an accident or-- Speaker 2: Accident. Speaker 1: It was an accident. How did you know it was an accident? Speaker 2: Because it was November and we figured my granddaddy and my daddy [James Lemon] had heard some people hunting. And they heard the shots and they heard me holla. They rushed back, back in the house. Speaker 1: What was the results of the shooting as far as your physical condition? Speaker 2: I lost my left eye. Speaker 1: And how, well, we'll talk about how that affected you when we start talking about your life. Story_ID: 364139 Speaker 1: So let's on to your, your mother. Tell me what is your mother's name and can you spell it for me please? Speaker 2: Her name was Maggie Richie [Maggie Richie Lemon (ph.)]. She was born in Jones County [Georgia]. She and my mother's, my grandmother and my grandfather separated. I don't know what year it was, but they separated and that have a story. It's true because grandma and grandpa both, I remember them telling it. But since she wanted to get an argument out of 'em. But he wouldn't argue. She went by the field where he was plying potatoes, and asked him for a autom- a TV or something, asked him, said, "I'm quitting you today." Speaker 1: This is your grandmother and your grandfather? Speaker 2: He didn't own it then. Speaker 1: No, I'm talking, the people that you're talking about is your grandmother and your grandfather? Speaker 2: Yeah. They're my grandmother and my grandfather. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: And he stopped the mule and asked her, say, "Lizzy [Lizzy Richie (ph.)], what you say." She said, "I'm quitting you today." Whoa, pointed to the sun, said, "You see that sun yonder? Say if it go down and you're not in the house and got supper done, don't come back." She went off. Speaker 1: We're gone stop for a minute. Speaker 2: Mother's name. Speaker 1: Okay, so we're talking about? Speaker 2: My grandmother on my mother's side. Speaker 1: Okay, her name was Lizzy? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And your grandfather's name was? Speaker 2: Champ. They call him Champ Richie [ph.]. Speaker 1: Okay, we're gonna go back and put that in there. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Unclear) started to roll just as he was saying, you know, we got Lizzy and Champ on tape. Speaker 1: Okay, great. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): And you're good to go. Speaker 1: Okay, so you were telling me the story about Lizzy and Champ in the field and he told her to be home and have his meal cooked. So what happened? Speaker 2: She went off and stayed two days. She come back one day twelve o'clock. He was laying up on the porch asleep when she walked, said she walked up to him and shook him, said, "Champ," said, "I'm back." And she say she felt better than she ever felt in her life. He turned off the porch and said, "Lizzy, I'm show is glad to see ya." Well he go off the porch, went right out to the barn, hitched up two mules to the wagon and told her, said, "You go in the house and pick out what you want, say 'cause I told you not to come back." She went in the house and picked out some of the furniture that she wanted and told him said, "I didn't come back to quit, I come back to stay 'cause I realize what condition I was in." Said, "But you go in there and pick 'em out," and she went in and, he went in the house and loaded up everything except the cook stove and one bed, put 'em on the wagon and carried them over to her brother's house, unloaded them in the yard and told 'em, grandpa told 'em, her brother, said, "Here it is, you can do whatever you wanna with 'em." So they stayed there 'til they moved 'em in the house just before sundown. Speaker 1: All right. Now Lizzy and Champ, do you have any knowledge about their parents? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay, that's fine. Speaker 2: Other than that my, Champ, Champ's daddy was a, a white man, and I forget the name of the street, but the bank is still there. He had a right smart of money deposited in the bank there in Macon [Georgia], the main street going through Macon. When the banks went broke, he went broke with 'em. Story_ID: 364140 Speaker 1: Did your mother [Maggie Richie Lemon (ph.)] share any stories about her growing up? Speaker 2: Nothing other than that she missed her daddy [Champ Richie (ph.)] and missed her mama [Lizzy Richie (ph.)], and but they both had planned on sending her to school in Macon [Georgia], to college in Macon, but she missed all of that by them being separated. Speaker 1: What, how much education did your mother have? Speaker 2: I believe she finished high school. Speaker 1: Okay. And do you know about her mother? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: No, okay. Is there anything else you want to share about your mother? What type of mother was she? Speaker 2: Hm? Speaker 1: What type of mother was she? Was she a caring mother? Was she a disciplinarian? Speaker 2: Very caring. Very much caring. Her older brother tells a story about her and other people tells it too, that stayed around here that she wanted something or other so bad, and wanted papa to own something. See when his daddy died and the uncle lost all the land, they lost all that hundred acres that they had. And she wanted a car, and papa never was able to buy her one. He worked all the time and my brother tells the tale about mama argued with daddy so much, papa so much about buying a car 'til one morning she got up, called my daddy Ed [James Lemon]. "Ed, you set around here all the time and last two days you haven't did a thang," said, "them oaks out there need to be plowed," and you don't plow oaks. So he kept that joke on mama up until she died. Speaker 1: Did your mother work outside of the home? Speaker 2: Hm? Speaker 1: Did your mother work outside of the home? Speaker 2: Well, my grandmother she got married again and my mother worked with the family that she married in. Speaker 1: And what type of business was that? Speaker 2: Farming. Speaker 1: Oh, in farming, okay. Story_ID: 364141 Speaker 1: So your mother [Maggie Richie Lemon (ph.)] and father [James Lemon] were sharecroppers? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Tell me about the life of a sharecropper. What type of life was it, where you grew up? Speaker 2: Well, it was a rough life because they grew up just at the time that the boll weevils, I know you heard talk of boll weevils. Boll weevils hit southern farmers and began to eat up all of the crops and whatnot. If you haven't heard about it, Reverend Miller [James Miller] can tell you about it, and then probably I could add a lot to it. But they lost everything they had. Speaker 1: Okay. So, the land that you grew up on with your mother and father, where was this property located? Speaker 2: One mile south of Locust Grove [Georgia]. Speaker 1: Okay. And I'm actually asking about your mother and father as sharecroppers, and you growing up, how was life as a sharecropper for your mother and father? Speaker 2: It was rough because 1935 my daddy had a hundred acres of cotton, had a hundred acres planted, all of it wasn't in cotton. Some of it was in corn, potatoes, and things of that nature. But he had a hundred acres planted. In '35 [1935] things had got so bad around here that the white people invited the Negroes to come to church and have meeting with them so that they could improve the farm condition here and around Locust Grove and all around through the community and whatnot. I do remember we going to the white church, the white Baptist church in Locust Grove. There the Negroes sung and prayed and things actually got better, improved a lot. Speaker 1: How did they improve, how did they, how did things improve? Speaker 2: You have always that prayer changes things. Speaker 1: Yes, sir. Speaker 2: I was a perfect example of that. I saw prayer change things. A lot of the conditions on the farm began to improve. Speaker 1: Tell me some of the poor conditions. What, what needed to be changed? Speaker 2: Everything. Speaker 1: Okay, give me some examples. Speaker 2: That year, 1935, 'cause I told you papa had a hundred, worked a hundred acre farm. He planted cotton, corn, peas, everything. Syrup cane [sugarcane]. He always tried to put up thirty-five or forty barrels of syrup ca- gallons of syrup cane every year for us to eat on. Always planted enough peas for us to eat on during the winter, and to feed the hogs. That year, 1935, cotton sold for two cents per pound and that was the number one crop the farmers depended upon to make a living. And when cotton went to two cents per pound, papa went to the cotton mills and start working. Other than that, he never would have made it. Speaker 1: So, tell, tell me how sharecroppers were paid. After the crop was done, tell me how they were paid. Speaker 2: Most sharecroppers were paid by the landowner that they stayed with. If you agreed to work for a Reverend Edwards [Daniel Edwards], work his farm and everything, he'd furnish all the fertilizer and everything for the farming, and you agreed to work his farm, and give him half of what was made on the farm. That was all that you got was one half of it. Story_ID: 364142 Speaker 1: Your father [James Lemon] went to work in the cotton mills to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: --to be able to survive and take care of your family, and that was in 1935? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Now tell me more things about your father. We were talking about your mother [Maggie Richie Lemon (ph.)], but tell me more about your father. Was he the disciplinarian in your family? Speaker 2: Disciplinarian, the very, very religious man. I think it's down to the church now, he went to Sunday school there for thirty-six years I think. Never missed a Sunday. He was superintendent of Sunday school, at Shoal Creek Baptist Church [Locust Grove, Georgia]. Speaker 1: And how much education did your father have? Speaker 2: Finished the sixth grade. Speaker 1: And tell me more about your dad, I mean, at growing up, what did you, what did you think about your dad? Speaker 2: I thought he was a wonderful man because very, very few people took time out to send their children off to school like he did, very, very few of them. In 1927, my oldest sister [Rossie Lemon] finished high school in McDonough [Georgia], and Northwest University [sic. Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois] was offering scholarships to children that would be willing to work their way through school at Northwestern. He[AB1] [sic. She] went to Northwestern after finishing high school in McDonough, and so the children at North- coming out of high school in Chicago [Illinois] in Evanston, Illinois, was so far advanced over her that she couldn't stay there. She had to leave there and come back south and finish high school. Well she finished high school before she went there, and went to college some after-- Speaker 1: You can finish your sentence. Speaker 2: --after she got back from Northwestern University. Story_ID: 364833 Speaker 1: We were talking about your sister, but I want to go back and talk about you as a child. How many siblings do you, did you have or do you have? Speaker 2: There were six of us in all. Speaker 1: Okay, can you--? Speaker 2: Three boys and three girls. Speaker 1: All right. Tell me then their names in order and tell me where you fit in. Speaker 2: My oldest sister was named Rossie [Rossie Lemon]. The next oldest was a girl. She was named Annice [Annice Lemon]. Speaker 1: Annice? Speaker 2: A-N-N-I-C-E. The next one was a boy. His name was William [William Lemon]. Then came myself. Then came my twin, I was a twin, twin sister Jewell [Jewell Lemon]. Speaker 1: Now tell me about life with your, your siblings. What did you all do on the farm? Speaker 2: Chopped cotton, picked cotton, hoed cotton, plowed cotton, everything that went along with farm work. Speaker 1: So y'all started working at a very young age? Speaker 2: Very young age. Speaker 1: How old were you when you started working in the field? Speaker 2: I start plowing when I was eight years old. Story_ID: 364834 Speaker 1: So now you did a lot of work, but tell me some of the fun things that you did as children. Did y'all play games? Did y'all make up games? Speaker 2: Yeah, we had games that we played, spinning tops. We didn't go to school at that time but six months out of the year. The other six months, we spent it working on the farm for the white man. Speaker 1: What other types of things did you do? Did you go swimming? Speaker 2: Fishing (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Fishing. Okay. Speaker 2: Picking muscadine, blackberries and things. I, when I was seven years old, I picked blackberries and sold 'em for twenty cent a gallon. And we had a branch over here just before you get on I-75 [Interstate 75] that had some long blackberries, 'bout a quarter of inch long or better. And we'd go down, I had a friend of mine named Riley Joe Taylor [ph.]. Riley Joe and I'd go there early in the morning when I get through milking the cow, and carry the cows down to the pasture, and while the cows are working their way down through the pasture, we'd be picking blackberries. And believe it or not, some mornings by nine o'clock, we'd have three or four gallons of blackberries that we'd be ready to bring to town and sell. Speaker 1: And who would you sell them to, just anyone or--? Speaker 2: Mostly white ladies and white men and we had one fellow from here that was, he worked for the government. That's all I knew. He worked for the government out of Washington [D.C.] and he'd come in once a month and he was the only one that would pay twenty cent a gallon for blackberries. The rest of 'em paid ten and fifteen cent a gallon. Speaker 1: So you sold them mostly to, to white people-- Story_ID: 364835 Speaker 1: What were you told, what did your parents [Maggie Richie Lemon (ph.) and James Lemon] teach you about white, white people and interacting with them? Speaker 2: Well, I grew up loving 'em, still loves 'em. Speaker 1: Okay, but did your parents teach you about--? Speaker 2: My parents never did teach me nothing about no hatred, bigotry or none of that. Speaker 1: I'm just talking about interacting with them. Speaker 2: Well, we played together when we was in school because at that day and time, we had just about as much as they had. Didn't nobody have nothing. And we interacted together. Speaker 1: Okay. During this time, we're talking about the early or late '20s [1920s], I guess, a lot of parents in that time taught their kids, you know, if a white person was walking down the street to, to move to the other side, not to look them in the eye, that type of thing. Was there anything like that that your parents told you, or not? Speaker 2: We were taught that, if we was coming down the street and they was coming down the street, to move to the other side of the street so that you wouldn't bump against them, or they wouldn't bump against you. Speaker 1: Okay, and the reason, did they give you a reason why that shouldn't happen (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. Speaker 1: Okay. So that was just something-- Speaker 2: Just told us to do that and we did it. Story_ID: 364836 Speaker 1: So now you're going to school six months out of the year, and how far did you go to school? Speaker 2: I finished high school. Speaker 1: Okay. And the elementary school that you went to, do you remember the name of it? Speaker 2: Shoal Creek Elementary School [Locust Grove Elementary School, Locust Grove, Georgia]. Speaker 1: And that went to what grade? Speaker 2: It went through the ninth grade. Speaker 1: And the high school? Speaker 2: Junior high they called it. Speaker 1: Okay, junior high school. What was the name of it? The same school? Speaker 2: The same school. Speaker 1: Okay. And the high school, you went to high school? Speaker 2: Henry County Training School, McDonough, Georgia. Speaker 1: So Locust Grove [Georgia] didn't have a high school at that time? Speaker 2: No, it had a junior high. Speaker 1: How far away is Henry County, McDonough high school from where you lived? Speaker 2: About seven miles. Speaker 1: How did you get to school? Speaker 2: A lot of times we walked. Speaker 1: And you said you went to school six months out of the year. What months out of the year was this? Speaker 2: June, it started in October, and went through the month of May. Speaker 1: Now tell me the conditions of the school. Speaker 2: Conditions of the school at that time was when we were--(cough) pardon me--in high school the whites got all of the books. We got the books after they finished with them. Speaker 1: How did that make you feel? Speaker 2: Hm? Speaker 1: How did that make you feel? Speaker 2: Well, we felt kind of good to be able to get a hold to books because a lot of schools was not able to get books, and we were able to get some books and most of them we'd pay twenty-five or thirty cents per book for, but they were raggedy. Sometime they had just a little bit over half of the pages in 'em, but we were glad to get 'em. Story_ID: 364837 Speaker 1: Tell me about the teachers at your school. Were they black or white? Speaker 2: Black. Speaker 1: All of them? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. In your elementary school [Shoal Creek Elementary School; Locust Grove Elementary School, Locust Grove, Georgia] and junior high school years, was there one teacher that you can remember that might have encouraged you or that you looked up to? Speaker 2: There was three or four of 'em. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you remember their names? Speaker 2: Ralph Long [ph.], he was the coach. James Herman Twitting [ph.] was the ag teacher in school. Speaker 1: What teacher? Speaker 2: Agriculture. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: See when you finished high school, you had the privilege to study ag. They called it ag. Agriculture, whereby you could study to be a farmer. That's the reason they named it agriculture. You could study to be a farmer. And every year from 1920, from 1917 I believe it was, we went to school and would go down to Fort Valley State College [Fort Valley State University, Fort Valley, Georgia] and study ag for two or three months. Speaker 1: You mean in 1927? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. For two or three months? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. So we were talking about the teachers. You said the coach and the agriculture teacher and who else? Those are the two that you can remember. Speaker 2: B.L. Donavus [ph.]. Nobody could ever go to school to un- forget her. She finished high school in Boston [Massachusetts], and not a school in Boston would hire her to teach. She had to come south to teach. Story_ID: 364838 Speaker 1: Now in school during the day at this time was there indoor plumbing or outdoor plumbing? Tell me about the physical school itself. Speaker 2: You'd do some work around the school but there wasn't no paying at all. Speaker 1: Was there indoor plumbing at the time? Speaker 2: Sometime you'd run upon a school where they built a new one. Speaker 1: I'm talking about the school that you went to, Shoals Creek [sic.]. Speaker 2: Shoal Creek [Shoal Creek Elementary School; Locust Grove Elementary School, Locust Grove, Georgia]? No. Speaker 1: Okay. Now tell me in walking to school this seven miles, the roads weren't paved so tell me about your, your journey to and from school. Speaker 2: They put buses on several years for the white, before they put 'em on for us. We'd have to walk to school and they'd ride by us and spit on us, make spit balls and throw 'em, throw 'em at us, and we had to put up with it. Speaker 1: Okay. So, were you privileged to ride the bus at all before you finished school? Speaker 2: No. No (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. So this was way after you finished? Story_ID: 364839 Speaker 1: Okay, so when you finished Henry County School [Henry County Training School, McDonough, Georgia] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Training School. Speaker 1: --Training School, what did you do then? Speaker 2: I went to Atlanta [Georgia] and started to work for my Uncle George Lemon. And from there I went to the NYA [National Youth Administration] school that was paying ten dollars per month to go to school and they would hold out, pay you ten and hold our ten to send you off to college. Speaker 1: How long did you go- what is NYA stand for? Speaker 2: National Youth Administration. Speaker 1: And how long did you attend that school? Speaker 2: Well it went into effect at the same time that, I can't think of the year, but-- Speaker 1: Well, let's go back. And what year did you graduate from high school? Speaker 2: Thirty-nine [1939]. Speaker 1: And you went to work for your Uncle George doing what in Atlanta? Speaker 2: Pressing. Speaker 1: Pressing? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So he owned a, a what, a shop? Speaker 2: Press. Speaker 1: And how long did you work for him before you went to school? Speaker 2: About four months. Speaker 1: Okay. So you attended NYA and, for how long did you attend? Speaker 2: Well, I attended NYA school. It was there that I met my wife [Gladys Prince Lemon]. Story_ID: 364840 Speaker 1: We're just jumping a little bit ahead. So let's, let's step back a little bit more and talk about family life with your brothers and sisters. Tell me about holidays at your house with your family. What were holidays like? Christmas and Easter and any holidays that your family celebrated? Speaker 2: Wasn't much celebration. Speaker 1: Wasn't much, okay. Speaker 2: I tell my grandsons now that for Christmas we generally got two apples, two oranges, two little round balls of candy, I forget the name of 'em, and two peppermint sticks of candy. And that was about all we got for Christmas. Speaker 1: Was the family, a happy family together? Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We was glad to see Christmas come and glad to see the seasonal year come whereby we could get new clothing, britches, shirts, overalls. Speaker 1: Okay. Was your mother [Maggie Richie Lemon (ph.)] a good cook? Speaker 2: Hm? Speaker 1: Was your mother a good cook? Speaker 2: Excellent. My daddy [James Lemon] was a better cook though. Speaker 1: Okay. So your family ate dinner together? Speaker 2: Yeah. And one thing I could say about my dad, when all of us was at home, every time we got ready to eat, he'd invite the whole family in and sat down to the table and have grace and all of us eat together. Story_ID: 364841 Speaker 1: What about Sundays? You said you father [James Lemon] was a very religious man. Did your family all attend church? Speaker 2: Yeah. Always. Speaker 1: And the church that you attended was? Speaker 2: Shoal Creek Baptist Church [Locust Grove, Georgia]. Speaker 1: And you mentioned that you dad was a minister, a deacon there? Speaker 2: He was a deacon for forty-some-odd years, superintendent of Sunday school for thirty-six years I believe it was. Speaker 1: And did your mother [Maggie Richie Lemon (ph.)] have a position in church? Speaker 2: No, she generally stayed around the house and cooked and supplied food and whatnot for us to eat. Speaker 1: Okay. Well tell me about Shoals Creek. Tell me about the church, has a very unique history, so tell me about the history of the church as you know it. Speaker 2: The history of the church as I know it, Shoal Creek was one of, one of the older schools in the community after slavery to build a school. They built a school there in 1912 I believe it was. I.S. Mike [ph.] was pastoring Shoal Creek Baptist Church and he carried twelve boys off to Morehouse College [Atlanta Baptist College; Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] to attend school. Now Morehouse was not a college at that time. It was simply a high school whereby they could go and enroll in high school. A lot of 'em enrolled in high school and a lot of 'em went from there to World War II--World War I [WWI], and stayed there until World War I ended. Story_ID: 364842 Speaker 1: Tell me about the, some of the other pastors. I understand that Daddy King [Reverend Martin Luther King, Sr.] was a pastor at Shoals Creek [Shoal Creek Baptist Church, Locust Grove, Georgia]. Speaker 2: Daddy King came there in 1920 [sic. 1930]. Speaker 1: Okay. And how long was he there, do you remember? Speaker 2: Three years, I believe, three or four years. Speaker 1: What was your interaction with the King family? Speaker 2: Hm? Speaker 1: What was your interaction with the King family? Speaker 2: Well, Junior, as they called him, Martin Luther, Jr. [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], when they first called, my daddy [James Lemon] was chairman of the board, they first called him, Old Man King, as we called him, to pastor the church, it was my job that if Junior start crying to take him and carry him outside of the church and he did (unclear) me, I could set him around my neck and bounce him up and down. He just loved that. And I did that, but see we wasn't having meeting at that time but once a month. Speaker 1: Was he pastoring somewhere else? Speaker 2: Hm? Speaker 1: Was Martin Luther King, Sr., was he pastoring somewhere else, because usually the pastors would be at one church one week and go to another church. Speaker 2: That's right. Switched him out from one church to another one. Speaker 1: Okay. So he was there for about three or four years. Did they live in Stockbridge [Georgia]? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. So really the only interaction you had with them was at the church, is that right? Speaker 2: Fine. Story_ID: 364843 Speaker 1: What else do you want to tell me about Shoals Creek Church [Shoal Creek Baptist Church, Locust Grove, Georgia]? What type of programs? As you were coming up, were you in different programs at the church? Speaker 2: We were, and by Shoal Creek being interactive with several other schools and whatnot, by them being one of the few schools, churches who was willing to send children off to school, they sent children off to Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] and had one gentleman, he turned out to be a preacher. He left and went to Morris Brown [Morris Brown College, Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 1: I hear you talk a lot about the men going off to college. What programs were there for women, or were women interested at that time to, to go to school, or encouraged to go to school? Speaker 2: Mack [ph.] encouraged a lot of 'em to go to school, ladies. We had one lady from here, she went from here to Detroit [Michigan] and started working as a beautician, and she was the first Negro in the City of Detroit that became to be a millionaire. Speaker 1: What was her name? Speaker 2: Give me a little time. Speaker 1: Okay, that's fine. Speaker 2: Hey Baby. Speaker 1: We'll get that. Speaker 2: Vivian Smith [ph.]. Speaker 1: Vivian Smith, okay. Story_ID: 364844 Speaker 1: Okay, so now let's go back to the NYA [National Youth Administration] and your school there [State Teachers and Agricultural College of Forsyth; Fort Valley State University, Fort Valley, Georgia], and what are you, were you, what are you learning there? Speaker 2: Well I had finished high school [Henry County Training School, McDonough, Georgia] when I went there. Speaker 1: Okay, so you were going there to learn what? Speaker 2: I went there to study to be a plumber and a carpenter. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Okay, so you were at NYA studying to be a plumber and a carpenter, and this is where you met your wife [Gladys Prince Lemon]. Tell me the story about how you met your wife. Speaker 1: Well, as part of my job, I checked out food for 'em to cook in the kitchen, and the bus pulled--she came in from Albany [Georgia], and the bus pulled in from Albany, Georgia, a fellow working in the kitchen with me, I told him, I say, "You see that lady on there?" He said, "Yeah." I said, "That's gone be my wife." And it turned out to be my wife. She got off the bus and was standing out there kind of at the front end of the bus, looking good and beautiful as usual, and that was in the month of October. Speaker 2: What year was this? Speaker 1: Forty [1940]. Speaker 2: Okay. So tell me how you met her? Speaker 1: Hm? Speaker 2: Tell me how, what did you say to her, how did you meet her? Speaker 1: Well every Friday night we, at the gym we had dances, and I considered myself a pretty fair dancer. In fact, I considered myself a good dancer. But she didn't dance. She played the bass violin in the school band, and I missed most of my dances with her because she was in the band playing and I'd be on the floor dancing, but during the school year, from that time up until we got married, I'd go to--the girls was supposed to get chairs for the boys to set in when they going to see 'em on Sunday night, Sunday evening, Sunday nights. I never did sit down in my chair hardly. Speaker 2: This was in 1940, but what city are we in? Speaker 1: Forsyth, Georgia. Speaker 2: Forsyth, Georgia, okay. And she came from Albany, Georgia? Speaker 1: In 1940. Speaker 2: For what reason? Why did she come to Forsyth? Speaker 1: Well they was transferring the girls on the NYA out of school at Forsy- at Albany, making more room for girls to go to college there. So that was the reason she was transferred. Speaker 2: And you got married when? Speaker 1: December the 20th. Speaker 2: Nineteen forty [1940]? So you met her in October and got married in December? Speaker 1: It don't take a lifetime to get married. Story_ID: 364845 Speaker 1: Okay, so it's 1940 and you just married your lovely bride [Gladys Prince Lemon], so tell me what, what happens next? Speaker 2: Naturally, I didn't have a job. Speaker 1: So you left NYA [National Youth Administration], didn't work there any longer or go to school [State Teachers and Agricultural College of Forsyth; Fort Valley State University, Fort Valley, Georgia], so you didn't have a job. Speaker 2: No. Came home, my wife asked me said, "What are, what are we gonna do?" I said, "Well, I got four uncles in Detroit [Michigan] that's working, so I'll try and get a job there with one of them, in the automobile plants. They was hiring then." But I did not get a job there, she came home one, came upon the bus one Saturday afternoon, well it got to Locust Grove [Georgia] coming from Forsyth [Georgia], it got here about eleven o'clock. When the bus got here, I wasn't expecting her. She got off the bus and a friend of mine brought her out to the house. "Man I didn't know you was married." I said, "Yeah, I got married. I didn't tell nobody 'cause I didn't want nobody to know it." Speaker 1: (Laughter) Why was that? Speaker 2: Hm? Speaker 1: Why you didn't want anybody to know? Speaker 2: I wanted to go to school. But she came out to the house and the curious thing about, marriage license at that time cost three dollars. I had two dollars. I borrowed two from her and we got married. And I haven't paid her back yet. I'm scared to pay her. Speaker 1: What do you think will happen (laughter) if you pay her? Speaker 2: She might quit me. That's what most women do now. Story_ID: 364846 Speaker 1: Okay, so now you're married and you're looking for a job. You decided not to go to Detroit [Michigan], so what do you do? Speaker 2: (Unclear) Conley Army Depot [Conley, Georgia] up here was just opening up. Speaker 1: Conley, as in Conley, Georgia? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And the depot is [U.S.] Army depot? Speaker 2: Army depot. I went there and went to work there. Speaker 1: What did you do? Speaker 2: Stock the warehouses and whatnot. Went to work in the chemical section stocking chemical section of the Army depot. Speaker 1: So how was working there? Was there a lot of other black workers, or? Speaker 2: Oh yes, Lord, they was hiring everybody that would come that way that the landlords would let 'em hire. If Reverend Edwards [Daniel Edwards] was working for you and they didn't want you to leave the farm, he'd go and tell him that the Army depot don't hire so and so, that's one of my sharecroppers. Don't hire 'em. And they wouldn't. But I was lucky enough to get by, having finished high school [Henry County Training School, McDonough, Georgia]. I was pretty good in school. I'll have to give myself credit for that. Speaker 1: So where were you and your wife [Gladys Prince Lemon] living at this time? Speaker 2: With my dad [James Lemon] and mother [Maggie Richie Lemon (ph.)]. Speaker 1: Okay, and your mother and father still sharecroppers at this time? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. So tell me about the conditions at the Army depot? Tell me about the foreman that was there, the supervisors. How did they treat the workers? Speaker 2: Kind of rough. Story_ID: 364847 Speaker 1: I started a credit union at the [U.S.] Army depot. Speaker 2: How did you start a credit union? Speaker 1: Hm? Speaker 2: How, tell me how, what was the process for you to start the credit union (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The process was that a lot of Negro farmers wanted to move but they didn't have nothing to move with. I started the process whereby they could borrow money through the credit union to have enough money to move off of Mr. Ludlow's [ph.] farm to Mr. Chudlow [ph.] farm. And when they got moved, then they start their own plantation. Speaker 2: So there was already a credit union there? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: Well tell me how, how did you start this? I mean where did the money come from to loan the workers? Speaker 1: There was a colonel there by the name of Colonel Stevenson [ph.]. And I didn't know why it was that Stevenson took a liking to me. We took a liking on one another, and he called for me to come over to the office one day and telling me about the conditions there. And I told him, yeah. We had truck drivers there that was driving trailer trucks, dump trucks and whatnot. They were being paid as a pick-up truck driver. We had others, these were mostly colored, others coming there were white. They were being hired as trailer drivers and they couldn't find first gear in a trailer, but they were being hired and worked there until they learned how to drive a trailer truck. I told him that. Had others there that was hired as brick masons. A quarry had a rock quarry over in Conyers [Georgia] and it just practically went down because so many Negroes was working there at the quarry building houses. Reverend Miller [James Miller] know about those, a lot of those houses they were building over there at Conley [Conley Army Depot, Conley, Georgia]. They were working there and during their work some of them were being paid as truck drivers, some being paid as laborers, but wasn't none of 'em getting the pay that they was supposed to have been getting. Speaker 2: Okay, so how did y'all remedy, remedy that situation? Speaker 1: Hm? Speaker 2: How did you remedy that situation? Speaker 1: By getting the Army depot through Colonel Stevenson to set up money that they could borrow money until they could move from the condition under which they were working to the present conditions that they were going to. Speaker 2: Okay, so did you form some type of workers' union or have a workers' right? Speaker 1: We had a credit union. Speaker 2: Okay. Just a credit union? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Story_ID: 364848 Speaker 1: The credit union helped them get money to move from one property to another, but as far as the conditions of them not getting paid what they needed to be paid on a equal scale, was this Mr. Stevens [sic. Colonel Stevenson (ph.)] still involved in, in getting them the equal pay (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was. He was. Speaker 1: Okay. Was there any type of federal workers' union started there? Speaker 2: Well, one of the lawyers here at McDonough [Georgia], said that he'd work for the federal government for a number of years and I was the first somebody that he ever saw go to the work, go to work for the federal government and then hire people as laborers to work for 'em. Speaker 1: And so did he help, the lawyer help in that situation? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Tell me what came out of that? Speaker 2: What came out of it? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: We had a lot of Negroes to build nice homes in Conley [Georgia], Stockbridge [Georgia], some in McDonough, because they could get a hold of some money in which to build 'em with. Speaker 1: So Stevenson was someone that helped you, but tell me who Mr. Knobbs [ph.] was? Do you know, do you remember Mr. Knobbs? Was he the second supervisor that came in and wanted the activity to stop? Speaker 2: He was a colonel. Speaker 1: I'm sorry? Speaker 2: He was a colonel. Stevenson was a colonel in the United States Army. Speaker 1: He was a colonel. Okay. Well who was Knobbs, Mr. Knobbs? Speaker 2: Who? Speaker 1: Mr. Knobbs. Was he a supervisor at the depot [Conley Army Depot, Conley, Georgia]? Speaker 2: Knobbs taken Stevenson's place when Stevenson left there. Stevenson left there and went to Richmond [Kentucky] to take over the depot [Blue Grass Army Depot, Richmond, Kentucky] at Richmond and he left. Knobbs came to me and told me, said, "You been had your way around here for a while." Said, "But I got Stevenson's place now and I'm gonna take over." Speaker 1: Was he a colonel as well? Speaker 2: He was a lieutenant colonel. So when Stevenson left, he automatically moved up the ladder to a colonel and it was from there, as the old folks say, I started catching hell. And talk about I caught it. Speaker 1: Tell me some of the things that make you say that? Speaker 2: Make me say that? Speaker 1: Yeah, what are some of the instances? Speaker 2: Some of the instances was that a lot of the people that I had gotten promotions for, he broke 'em down, and called himself putting 'em in their place. Speaker 1: How did the credit union fare after this? Speaker 2: Well he was the head of the credit union. Money quit coming in, and when you don't get money, you can't, as the old song say, you can't boogie honey. Speaker 1: So the conditions now reverted back to before Stevens? Speaker 2: Yeah. And some of 'em even went worse than that. Story_ID: 364849 Speaker 1: How long did you continue to work there, at the Army depot [Conley Army Depot, Conley, Georgia]? When did you leave? Speaker 2: When Stevenson [Colonel Stevenson (ph.)] called me in the office one day and told me say, not Stevenson, Nunn [ph.], Colonel Nunn. Speaker 1: Is it Nun, N-U-N? Speaker 2: I believe that's the way he spelled it, N-U-N-N, I believe. Speaker 1: Okay. He called you in the office and he said what? Speaker 2: Said, "You got three or four months to find you a job." Said, "I'm gonna fire you." I said, "What for?" Said, "You made it rough for me. Now I'm gonna make it rough for you." And I got fired. Speaker 1: Did you find another job before you left? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Where did you go to work? Speaker 2: I went to work for the mail department of the railroad. Speaker 1: And where was this? Speaker 2: Hm? Speaker 1: Where was this? Speaker 2: At the terminal station in Atlanta [Georgia]. Speaker 1: Was this part of the United States post office? Speaker 2: It was. Part of the United States post office. Speaker 1: And you worked there for how many years? Speaker 2: I worked for the railroad twenty-one years and I left the railroad and went to work for the direct for the post office, for twenty years. Speaker 1: Direct? Speaker 2: Um-hm. See we had a, when we're working, when I, the railroad was subbing out from under the post office. Speaker 1: Um-hm. So you worked there for twenty-one years for the railroad and then directly for the post office for how many years? Speaker 2: Twenty years. Speaker 1: Twenty? So you had a total of forty-one years with the post office? Speaker 2: Yeah, forty-two years I believe it is. Speaker 1: Okay, so now this is 19- we're going into 1945, is that correct, when you left the Army depot? Is that right? And what happened in 1945? Speaker 2: That's when I actually started working directly for the postal system. Story_ID: 364850 Speaker 1: The NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], well, let me ask you. Did you know anything about the march in 1941 that was scheduled by A. Philip Randolph and that was cancelled? Speaker 2: Yeah. I knew Randolph. Speaker 1: Okay. Tell me about that. Speaker 2: They scheduled that march in I believe you are the first somebody to ask me a question about it. But they scheduled that march and I was supposed to been in it. But I couldn't go because I couldn't get a release from work to go and participate in that march. Speaker 1: What was the feeling of people, or the climate of the community when the march was cancelled? Did they feel that they were--? Speaker 2: Well they felt like the average child feel when Christmas come and they don't get no toys. Speaker 1: So what were people talking about? Speaker 2: Hm? Speaker 1: What were they saying about A. Philip Randolph? Speaker 2: They were saying they knew he wasn't gonna do nothing. You had had a lot of bluffs put on by different people showing that the average Negro that was working for the government, see Philip Randolph was a union man. One hundred percent union. He organized the Pullman porters' union [Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters] and it was, when I was working for the railroad and I come in direct contact with A. Philip Randolph. I sat down and talked to A. Philip Randolph just like I'm talking to you. Speaker 1: What did you talk about? Speaker 2: The union, how to improve the union with railroads and whatnot, and what was essential and necessary to improve the conditions of the railroad. Story_ID: 364851 Speaker 1: So now in 1943, thirty-four people were killed in the riots in Detroit [Michigan] and six people killed in New York [New York], and is this the year that you start the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] here [Henry County, Georgia]? Speaker 2: Nineteen forty-three [1943]. Speaker 1: Okay, so what prompted you to found the NAACP at that time? Speaker 2: Well, my wife [Gladys Prince Lemon] went to school and she finished Washington High School [Booker T. Washington High School, Atlanta, Georgia]. She said not to get ahead but I got to jump ahead a little bit. She enrolled at Clark College [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] and finished three years there, Clark College. She went to work for the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] and it's there that ex-president of Washington High School got in touch with me through the NAACP and asked me, they were trying to get somebody to take over and sign up to be the head of the schools, but they couldn't find a Negro school in Georgia, whereby we had a single Negro that was willing to take over and opper- and sign up as credit against the Georgia system for not operating schools whereby Negroes could attend. And I did. I signed up, went to McDonough [Georgia] before the board of education and I had something happened to me never happened before and I hope it never will happen again. Speaker 1: Okay, what was that? Speaker 2: The superintendent of the board of education gave me an interview. I accepted. Went in and had the interview at the board of education and when I finished with the interview, I asked them, said, "Do any member of the board have anything they want to ask me?" "No, no, no, superintendent, no, no, no. You asked for this interview, we granted it and so that's it, we're not going any further." First time I ever been in a meeting with white people and they didn't have a single question to ask a Negro, and it was a hot issue at that time, a real hot issue. Story_ID: 364852 Speaker 1: And that was the conditions of the schools? Speaker 2: Hm? Speaker 1: That was the conditions of the schools? Correct (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: Who was the superintendent? What was his name? Speaker 2: Thomas Brown [ph.]. Speaker 1: Thomas Brown, okay. So what happened after that? Did anything get accomplished? Did anything come out of the meeting? Speaker 2: Well, out of the meeting, we eventually got teachers come out of the meeting and we eventually got better trained teachers. I must say here in Henry County [Georgia], we got some of the best-trained teachers there were in the state out of that meeting. Speaker 1: What about the pay for the teachers, for the African American teachers? Speaker 2: The African American teacher received a salary, ag, you hear me speak about the ag teacher, agricultural, they were supposed to been the highest paid teachers it was in the system. The reason for that because they got a supplement from the federal government for teaching agriculture. During that supplement, the average ag teacher salary was raised up to one hundred dollars. Before that supplement, you had a lot of teachers that were teaching school for sixty, sixty-five [dollars]. Didn't none of 'em hardly go over seventy dollars. Speaker 1: How much were white teachers being paid at that time? Speaker 2: Depend on who they knew. Speaker 1: An average? Was it a lot more than the black teachers? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, a lot more. If your dad was a judge, member of the Supreme Court of Georgia, you might be getting a hundred and fifty dollars a month and couldn't congregate [sic. conjugate] the verb to be. But if you was a black, you didn't do that. Story_ID: 364853 Speaker 1: Okay, so now you're the founder and you are the youngest chapter president of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]? Is that right? Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Okay, and, well the national offices in Springfield [Illinois], how much communication did you have with the Springfield office? Speaker 2: National NAACP? Speaker 1: Yes, sir. Speaker 2: A lot of it, a lot of it. Speaker 1: Okay. And who was the chapter president then? Do you remember? Speaker 2: No, I don't remember, but I remember Walter White. Speaker 1: Walter White? Who was Walter White? Speaker 2: Walter White was executive secretary for the NAACP when I taken over and set up. Speaker 1: So tell me how people in Locust Grove [Georgia] took to the notion of actually being a member of the NAACP? Speaker 2: Well, a lot of 'em made real good crops, good farmers, and it wasn't nothing to find a farmer that Sir Reverend Miller [James Miller] had worked the farm and raised, picked out, sold thirty-five or forty bales of cotton, but he didn't get paid for it. And a lot of 'em got interest, I sold their idea to a lot of 'em on that ground. You work these crops and you never got paid for 'em. One fellow, M.B. White [ph.], you remember him? Him and his wife made forty bales of cotton, he didn't get no pay for it. Speaker 1: He didn't get anything for it? Speaker 2: Made him move. Speaker 1: They made him move? The owner of the farm made him move? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Why did he make him move? Speaker 2: When he found out that I was gone file a case against him. Speaker 1: For them not getting paid for the cotton? Speaker 2: Yeah. Some of 'em, the federal government had what they call a program they pay you for not growing cotton. Story_ID: 364854 Speaker 1: Okay before we start to talk about the government program, I wanna go back and talk a little bit more about membership in the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. How much was the membership? Speaker 2: One dollar per year. Speaker 1: Okay. And as people, were people having a problem joining? Speaker 2: Several were until the teacher at McDonough [Georgia], Red Lewis [ph.] caught on. Somebody told him, said all the postal workers was white, that the postal workers was catching the mail that come through the postal system for NAACP members and making a lot of 'em move and doing other things against 'em, just antagonizing 'em because they were members of the NAACP. And he asked me was there any way we could stop it. Speaker 1: Who is he? Speaker 2: He was the teacher at the high school at McDonough. Speaker 1: What was his name? Speaker 2: His name wasn't Red Lewis, we called him Red Lewis. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Unclear). Speaker 2: That was his name? Speaker 1: Red Lewis. Speaker 2: Okay, so you were saying that, you were saying that-- Speaker 1: Somebody told him about the white postal workers fooling with the mail that was coming through the post office marked for NAACP members. And he in turn told me. And wanted to know if there was anything we could do about it. And I got on the telephone that night and called Walter White and was telling him about it and he said, "Give me 'til tomorrow morning." He went to work on it. And did something about it. We was able to get it stopped. The way we got it stopped was that the members, I told 'em not to send no more membership cards to any individuals. All membership cards and whatnot that you send out now from now on, send 'em directly to me, and I will handle 'em on this end. That's what was did. Story_ID: 364855 Speaker 1: So that helped to stop members from being harassed. What about you yourself? Have you had any incidents with the Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK]? Speaker 2: I had plenty. Speaker 1: Okay. Tell me about some of 'em. Speaker 2: Plenty of 'em. Being the head of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] was almost like slapping the mayor's wife downtown. Everywhere I went in Henry County [Georgia], everybody--all white people knew me. They talked about me. They talked about lynching me. I had one, one fellow come up and say, "One of these nights you ain't gonna get home. Going around here trying to make white folks out these niggers and you just ain't gone get home." I said, "Why?" So another white gentleman was standing behind me. He always had some, somebody that God would post that would stand up. I was coming out of the bus terminal getting my tickets and this gentleman was right behind me. Said, "What was that you said?" "Nothing, nothing, nothing." After this white fellow asked him. "Yes, you did," said, "I heard every damn word you said, sir." That boy and his folks been around here all they life, long as it's been Locust Grove [Georgia], and say, if I ever hear anything happen to him or any of his folks, I'm gonna come kill you. I never did hear no more from that incident. It dried up. Story_ID: 364856 Speaker 1: Anything else that has happened? Speaker 2: Hm? Speaker 1: Anything else that has happened to you involving the Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK]? Speaker 2: Well, they paraded me several nights from town. I'd get off the bus. I rode the bus for twenty-five years, and I'd get off the bus uptown there where the railroad come across, and walk out here home. I walked out here home and several nights, several carloads of Klan dressed in their regalias would follow me home. I'd get off, turn in here, come into the yard, they'd keep down the road with the lights on and everything. I didn't know it for a pretty good while, a long time. My wife [Gladys Prince Lemon] was telling me that my oldest son got the, well pumped shotgun, twelve gauge. So nearly every night, he'd get that pump shotgun and lay it across his bed, say if anybody do anything I'm gonna be involved in it. He finally went off to college and when he went off to college, before he went, he and my dad [James Lemon] and several others formed a coalition together but I didn't know anything about it, but they was protecting me. But I did find out about it after he came back from college. Speaker 1: I understand that you used to carry a gun? Speaker 2: Hm? Speaker 1: I understand that you used to carry a gun. Speaker 2: I did. I got a .32 Smith and Wesson. Speaker 1: A .32? Speaker 2: Yeah. A pistol. I carried that gun after they told me, he told me that he was gonna meet me, they's gonna meet me one night and kill me. And that post, the telephone post out there where you turn to come in the yard, I stopped there under that post one night and I said my prayers and when I got through praying I was just as wet as if you took a ten ounce glass of water and poured it up cross there. Come on in the house, told my daddy and Jimmy [J.W. Lemon, Jr.], I said, "Y'all can go to bed now, I said everything's over with." I had that feeling from God above that everything was over with and it was. Speaker 1: So you never--? Speaker 2: Nothing ever happened since. Speaker 1: Okay, that's great. Is there anything else, has anybody else in the community had any problem with the Klan that you can think of? Speaker 2: Well, some had trouble with 'em but I wouldn't want to call their name. Speaker 1: Okay. Were there any lynchings that you know about? Speaker 2: No. Story_ID: 364857 Speaker 1: Where are we? We're still in 19- is this about 1945 now? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. You had begun to tell me about the government program for some of the, the farmers where the government would pay the farmers not to plant crops. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And were some of the black farmers not getting this, these funds? Speaker 2: Most of the white farmers was taking the money that was subsidized for black farmers and spending it on themselves and keeping it. So one black farmer told me about it and said, "Look like you could do something or another to help us." And I said "I might can," I did. Speaker 1: So what did you do? Speaker 2: I went to the federal, went to, a lot of people give Talmadge hell, but he was one of the best friends I ever had. Speaker 1: Which Talmadge are we talking about? Speaker 2: Herman Talmadge. Speaker 1: Herman Talmadge. Speaker 2: He was governor and he was senator. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: I called him up, told him about it. He said, "Let's wait 'til tomorrow." He come in somewhere that night and things changed overnight. Speaker 1: Let me ask you this before we go any further. When you say black farmers, were these black farmers who owned their own land? Speaker 2: No, most of 'em were sharecroppers. Speaker 1: They're sharecroppers. So actually the sharecroppers were entitled to some of these funds? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They was entitled to half of it. Speaker 1: Half of it. Okay, I got you. Speaker 2: Supposed to have been divided half way. Speaker 1: Okay. And the white farmers would just, the owners of the property would just take all of the funds. Speaker 2: Take it. Speaker 1: Okay, so you had a meeting with Talmadge. Did you go to his office? Did you go to his home? Tell me about the meeting (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, he came here some way or another. Speaker 1: Okay. He was governor or senator at the time? Speaker 2: He was senator [sic. governor]. Speaker 1: Senator, okay. And he came here and talked to you about it and, and the situation was corrected. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. So the black farmers began to get their share of the funds? Speaker 2: Not only, they got their share of the fund before then because he sent letters in here to all of the sharecroppers telling them what to do and how to get their money. Speaker 1: Was there a process to it? How did they get their money? What did they need to do, do you remember? Speaker 2: Hm? Speaker 1: What did they need to do to be able to (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Apply for it. Speaker 1: Oh they had to apply themselves. Speaker 2: Apply to the federal government themselves for it. And most of 'em did and most of 'em got their money. But we had, before that happened, about three or four white farmers that was real good friends of the Negro farmer, his name, the Negro farmer was Doc Taylor. His name was James Taylor [ph.] but didn't nobody know him by his name until he died. They called him Doc. And when Doc, before Doc died, he had a good friend going up 42 Highway [Georgia State Route 42], that stayed in the house right across the railroad, when you cross the railroad, and Doc told that fella about what he was doing and that gentleman, he was white, he told some of the rest of the white farmers about what, what I had did. Some of 'em come to me and I told no I ain't, I ain't helped nobody, didn't help nobody. So we got it, got that kind of ironed down and settled. Story_ID: 364858 Speaker 1: What were some of the other issues that the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] dealt with? Speaker 2: Getting Negro farmers to buy land through the Federal Home Loans Administration [sic. Federal Housing Administration, U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And getting some Negroes to put in for land. We did help several purchase some of this land through the Farms Homes Administration [sic. Farmers Home Administration]. And (unclear) and a lot of the white had begun to find out then but Talmadge [Herman Talmadge] was behind me, pushing me 'til declared hands off. Speaker 1: Declared hands off of you? Speaker 2: Yep, off me and off the land too cause the name Talmadge was almost like calling God Almighty. They respected it and respected him. Story_ID: 364859 Speaker 1: Talking about Talmadge [Herman Talmadge], how did you feel about his father? Speaker 2: Who? Gene (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Her- Gene Talmadge [Eugene Talmadge]. Speaker 2: Gene was a good man to people in Telfair County [Georgia] that stayed with him. He paid the highest salary to anybody that stayed with him and worked for him, but he, his biggest fault that Negroes found with him was that he talked too much about Negro farmers. Not only Negro farmers, he said no man that wore suspenders and ties was worth their weight in gold. He didn't believe in paying 'em what he paid white. Story_ID: 364860 Speaker 1: So now Herman Talmadge, let me see, he was the governor from '48 [1948] to '55 [1955]. Did you have any interactions with any of the other governors after him? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Which ones were they? Speaker 2: Some of 'em said that I was res- played a big hand in helping to get Carter [James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] elected governor. Speaker 1: Did you have any interaction with Lester Maddox, Carl Sanders or Marvin Griffin? Speaker 2: No, Lester and I didn't cross fields, didn't cross paths as much. Speaker 1: And you want to tell us about your interaction with Jimmy Carter. Speaker 2: Who? Speaker 1: Jimmy Carter. Speaker 2: Well I raised a lot of money for him from Negroes, sent it to the headquarters, his headquarters to help pay expense. And then I went on several trips for him. Speaker 1: Okay, we're gonna talk about the trips in just a minute. Story_ID: 364861 Speaker 1: Did you have an opportunity to meet President Truman [President Harry S. Truman]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, tell me about that. Speaker 2: I had the opportunity to meet President Truman and I went to his office and Talmadge [Herman Talmadge] was probably responsible for that. I went to his office and sat down and talked with him 'cross the table, but before I talked with Truman, I talked with Talmadge and I got some pictures here that showed me, but they didn't identify themselves, didn't tell who they were. Talked with Talmadge. I carried a bunch of Masonic brothers, the national Masonic met in Baltimore, Maryland and we went from Baltimore, Maryland, over to Talmadge's office and that's when a lot of the Masonic brothers found out that I had a little bit of power with Talmadge. I tell people about what went on, aw, he just know the man that's all. He's like all the rest of them Negroes, but when, when they found out what went on and got it direct from Talmadge's mouth, things changed. Speaker 1: Okay, so what year was this that you met with Talmadge and then met with Truman? Speaker 2: I'd have to go back and look that up. Speaker 1: Okay. So at this time, this is when Talmadge was a senator. Is that right? Speaker 2: Um-hm [sic. governor]. Speaker 1: Okay. And what did you and President Truman talk about? Speaker 2: Well, I didn't have a, a direct conversation with Harry S. Truman, but, well it wasn't, it was direct too because the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] met in Cincinnati [Ohio] in 1945 and they wanted the NAACP to support Taft for president, Howard Taft [sic. Robert A. Taft]. But they didn't see fit to support him so the next year, '46 [1946], we met in Washington [D.C.] and he was going to almost demand our support and the gentleman you heard me call his name while ago, ex-principal of Washington High [Booker T. Washington High School, Atlanta, Georgia], he called me his adopted son, said, "I hear that y'all getting up a delegation to go to Washington to talk with the president." I said, "Yeah." He said, "I don't know who you got to represent Georgia, but whoever you got on there, cut some of 'em and put Lemon [HistoryMaker J. W. Lemon] on there to represent Georgia because he can do a better job than anybody else you got on there." So I went to Washington. We represented Georgia and we did get some grants that I think we would not have gotten if I had not been there. Story_ID: 364862 Speaker 1: Now, at this time in '45 [1945], this is when Japan surrenders and ends World War II [WWII]. What was the climate of the community here in Locust Grove [Georgia] here at that time? You know Truman [President Harry S. Truman] desegregated the [U.S.] Armed Forces at that time, and he had a number of people, African American, in his cabinet. So what was, what was the thought behind him having, just the climate in the area about Truman and the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] actually backing his candidacy? Speaker 2: Well we could see a change in it. It was making a change. It was, and the change was for the better. Negro soldiers was coming back home telling that they'd been, were being treated better in the armed forces and whatnot, and the colored papers, Pittsburgh Courier [New Pittsburgh Courier], Chicago Defender, and all of them were doing a better job of reporting what was happening to Negro soldiers. Story_ID: 364863 Speaker 1: Okay, so, the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] is continuing to work with people to, to acquire property. How did you acquire your property here that you live on? You've lived in this house for how long, on this property? Speaker 2: When did we move here Jimmy [J.W. Lemon, Jr.]? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Nineteen forty-four [1944]. Speaker 2: Forty-four [1944]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Sixty-two years. Speaker 2: How did you acquire this property? Speaker 1: I, my dad [James Lemon] was a sharecropper. We had borrowed some money through the Farms Home Administration [sic. Farmers Home Administration] to purchase some land. Speaker 2: Okay, so you were a part of that, how you were helping other people, you helped yourself also? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Go ahead, tell me about how it felt to be able to own your own property. Speaker 1: Hm? Speaker 2: Tell me how it felt for you to own your own property. How did it feel for you to own your own property? Speaker 1: Felt good. Felt real good. Speaker 2: Was it a long process? Speaker 1: Well, for a long time, I said it was because my name was [HistoryMaker] J. W. Lemon, I couldn't borrow a dime to buy no property, or to buy anything. They would tell me, say, "We'll let you have some money to get you a car," but I didn't want no car. I didn't need no car. And I didn't get no car. Speaker 2: You wanted property. You wanted to own your own property? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So you opted to wait until you can get the funds and the funds came through the federal government because you couldn't get it locally? Is that right? Speaker 1: (Nods head) Um-hm. Speaker 2: Okay, so let's move on to say 1948. Did the NAACP back Talmadge [Herman Talmadge] for reelection? Speaker 1: I did. Speaker 2: You did? Did the NAACP? I mean as a group? Speaker 1: Not many. Story_ID: 363882 Speaker 1: Okay, we were talking about the re-election of, of Truman [President Harry S. Truman] as president, and you said that you backed Truman, but a lot of the other blacks didn't, and I understand that the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] was disbanded [in Henry County, Georgia]. Could you tell me what happened to cause that? Speaker 2: A lot of the, see the white have meetings and up until (unclear) came in here and got involved in it. Speaker 1: Who was that? Speaker 2: Manual [ph.]. Reverend Miller [James Miller] can tell you that they barred us out of all their meetings. We wasn't, we were not allowed to attend their meetings and hence we could not gather information like we once could. Speaker 1: Okay. So the property owners put a lot of pressure on the sharecroppers not to be a part of the NAACP, is that right? Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: They would cause them to have to move off the property if they found out they were involved, so is this what caused the NAACP to disband? Is that right? Speaker 2: Well they, by not getting money to fight cases and whatnot, slowed the NAACP down, 'cause you can't fight cases, some say honey without some money. Story_ID: 363883 Speaker 1: Well you continued to do things and one of the things that you did was voter registration, is that right? Speaker 2: Hm? Speaker 1: Voter registration, you worked with voter registration? Speaker 2: Yeah, when they couldn't get anybody else to do it, Reverend Miller [James Miller], myself, Brick Franks [ph.] and several others, Willie Varner, we went to work, and we registered a world of people in Henry County [Georgia] for the board of education. In order to get them qualified to vote on issues that was coming up before the board of education. Speaker 1: So did you, okay, but voter registration to vote in national elections. Also, there were a lot of things that white people would do to keep blacks from registering. How did y'all get around that so that the people that you registered could actually go and vote? Did you teach them how to vote? Speaker 2: We, we taught 'em at our churches. We gave seminars on voting, taught people how to vote, told 'em what to vote for and why it was important for them to vote. Speaker 1: Okay, so now-- Speaker 2: The nearer I got to retirement, the less active I got. Story_ID: 363884 Speaker 1: Well tell me about your thoughts since you talked about the board of education, tell me your thoughts about the case of Brown versus the Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] and the desegregation of schools. Did you work to rally around that? Speaker 2: I worked to rally on it, but a lot of the work was behind the scenery. I didn't come out in public like I once had did before. And a lot of other Negroes couldn't come out in public. Speaker 1: And that was because, tell me why. Speaker 2: Hm? Speaker 1: And why was this? Why didn't you come out in front? Speaker 2: Because they was gonna use that against us in the national election. Speaker 1: Did you ever have the opportunity to meet Thurgood Marshall? Speaker 2: Several times. Speaker 1: Okay, can you tell me a story about any time that you met him? Speaker 2: I think the last time I met Thurgood, he had just been appointed federal judge. I didn't, I actually didn't know that Thurgood knew me. I got off the plane there in Washington [D.C.]. We walked across the river bridge and I believe Randall Partner [ph.] was with us, and went over and Thurgood met us. One of the first things he did was grab me and shook my hand. "Hey Lemon [HistoryMaker J. W. Lemon], how you doing," said, "you know we, we been talking about you during the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] meetings, but we knew that you was having troubles and we didn't want to involve you too much." I said, "Yeah, I was having some troubles, but trials all just about to be over with." Story_ID: 363885 Speaker 1: At this point, I'd like to talk about different things that have happened in the African American community. We're now at about 1955. Where were you when Emmett Till was murdered? Speaker 2: Hm? Speaker 1: Where were you when Emmett Till was murdered? Do you remember? Speaker 2: I was around Atlanta [Georgia], but the voice sentiment was voiced but not real loud. I was working at the post office and we didn't voice too much sentiment against Emmett Till because it was already getting national attention. Speaker 1: So people didn't talk about it very much where you were? Speaker 2: Some of 'em did, but very few. Speaker 1: Well what was your thoughts about it? Speaker 2: I thought that the boy had not been properly schooled on the conditions that he was going to meet out there in life when he started voicing his opinion against the opposition. Speaker 1: So, you believe that--because he was only fourteen--that his parents should have taught him better? Speaker 2: His parents should have taught him better and the people that he was out there representing should have had more influence upon his life and what to expect from the people, 'cause it was a mean world out there at that time, and I mean a mean world. Story_ID: 363886 Speaker 1: Okay so now if we can go to 1957, the Southern Negro Leadership Conference [Southern Negro Leadership Conference on Transportation and Nonviolent Integration; Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC)] is formed. Did you have any, interaction with that group? Speaker 2: No, very little. Speaker 1: None with, what about CORE [Congress of Racial Equality]? Speaker 2: I was involved with CORE to some extent, but I never have been involved with anything like I have the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. Speaker 1: I wanna just step back a little bit and talk about Talmadge [Herman Talmadge] once again because Talmadge was a senator and then he became governor [sic.] and he was a friend that, that helped you do some things. Tell me about, about the senior citizens home that he helped you get the money to help get built. This senior citizens home is in Atlanta [Georgia], is that right? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay, how were you involved with that? Speaker 2: I let him know that I supported him one hundred percent. I stood behind him a hundred percent, and my wife [Gladys Prince Lemon] was telling me about-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Hold on. Tell him to stop. We're gonna restart that. I didn't cut, but I'm just saying, he's looking down, I think he's getting tired. Speaker 2: Yeah, I know. Mr. Lemon [HistoryMaker J. W. Lemon]. Speaker 1: My wife was telling me about the check stub that she found in going through some of the things and I think it was a hundred and some fifty odd dollars that I sent Talmadge during these times, and say, I do remember him saying that he knew I was not able to do it, but I did it. Speaker 2: So you were able to go to him on behalf of the people who wanted to, to build the Wheat Street senior citizen high rise [Wheat Street Towers, Atlanta, Georgia]-- Speaker 1: Yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) and ask for the funds? Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 363887 Speaker 1: And how much did he give you, how much did he make sure that you got? Speaker 2: In 1962, members of Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia] met and they was discussing Morehouse. Borders [William Holmes Borders] was talking about what he had did for the people around Atlanta [Georgia], and now he couldn't get a dime. Speaker 1: And who is this you were talking about? Speaker 2: William Holmes Borders. Couldn't get none of 'em to help him with nothing. So, I asked him, said, "Have you discussed with Senator Talmadge [Herman Talmadge]?" "No, no, you don't need no, he ain't do it, he ain't gonna do nothing but talk." I said, "Would you mind if I called him and talk with him?" He said, "No." I went in and picked up the phone and, if God had ever been with anybody, he was with me then. I picked up the phone and dialed the number, and was able to get Talmadge on the phone. I told him what I wanted, I told him what conditions Borders was facing at Wheat Street [Wheat Street Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia] and now he wanted to build a high rise and couldn't get a dime. He says, "Is he there?" I told him, "Yeah." "Put him on the phone." I put him on the phone, Borders talked with him, come back out on the little front porch there on the home. "You know he sound just like he gonna help me." I said, "Did he tell you he would help you?" He said, "Yeah." "Well he gonna do it. If he told you that he would help you, he'll do it." That was on a Wednesday. I told Borders to get his delegation together and be down to his house at Saturday, twelve o'clock. Borders got his delegation together, come back and ask me, said, "You going with us?" I said, "No, I'm not going with you." I said, "I done got your foot in the door," say, "you ought to be able to walk from there on in. That's as far as I'm going with you." So that year, everybody wanted to know how did Talmadge get to be the man they speak of at Wheat Street? And the word leaked out. He got the money to build that high rise tower [Wheat Street Towers, Atlanta, Georgia] and they've already started on it. And Lemon [HistoryMaker J. W. Lemon] was the one that got it for him. We got it started. It's still there, still flourishing and doing good (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, still flourishing. Yes. Story_ID: 363888 Speaker 1: So Talmadge [Herman Talmadge] did so much for you and Henry County [Georgia] and Atlanta [Georgia] and Wheat Street Baptist Church [Atlanta, Georgia], how did you feel when he was accused of financial wrongdoing? Speaker 2: Well, I knew where it was coming from. See when you know the source from where the spring water coming from you can enjoy drinking the spring water better. I knew the source from which it was coming. It was coming from his wife [Betty Shingler Talmadge]. And why she wanted to do everything in the world she could back there then to destroy him, I never have been able to understand. Still don't understand. I was scared to death what he was going up for trial in Henry County. I was scared his wife was going to subpoena me. I was scared he was going to subpoena me. Speaker 1: That he was going to do what? Subpoena you? Oh, okay. Speaker 2: But I didn't get a one. I walked by the courthouse the day the trial was going on, but I didn't go in. Story_ID: 363889 Speaker 1: Okay. So now, let's go to 1963. President Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] gets killed. What are your thoughts, what are you doing at this time? Speaker 2: When Kennedy got killed, I believe I was in Detroit [Michigan], I believe I was. Speaker 1: What were your thoughts at the time? Speaker 2: Hm? Speaker 1: What were your thoughts about his assassination? Speaker 2: I knew, and I still know, that they killed a good man. He was a good man, any way you want to try him. And I do know, not believe, but I do know, that this country would have been a better country to live in if he had lived up 'til now. Speaker 1: So if we move on to 1968, now Martin Luther King, Jr. [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was somebody that you babysat. Speaker 2: Yeah, I used to carry him around in my arms, set him around my neck and ride him piggyback. Speaker 1: So tell me how you felt when he was assassinated? Speaker 2: It hurt. It's almost like losing a member of the family. It hurt badly. Speaker 1: Did you visit the family at all during that time? Speaker 2: Um-hm. But I didn't, didn't make too many visits, not like I should have, because I was very close to the family, and the family was very close to me, especially the old man [Reverend Martin Luther King, Sr.]. I never was too close to the wife. But Old Man King and Martin Jr. I was just as close as you could get. Story_ID: 363890 Speaker 1: Is there anything that, about your life, that we haven't talked about that you, that you want to talk about? Speaker 2: About three or four months before Talmadge [Herman Talmadge] died, he invited several of us over, but I don't think nobody went but Jessie [ph.] (unclear) and myself, to his house. Saying he had an important announcement he wanted to make. I got there, Talmadge wanted me to take over as postmaster of the post office of Locust Grove [Georgia]. I looked him in the face, I said, "Senator, you're my friend, but you're trying to get your best friend killed now." I said, "You know if I was to take hold of postmaster at Locust Grove, I couldn't last." "Why you think you couldn't?" I said, "Look at my color of my skin. They not gonna put up with a black man being postmaster." That's why I couldn't last, and I still feel that same way now. Story_ID: 363891 Speaker 1: When you look over your life, is there--do you have any regrets about anything? Speaker 2: No, I don't particularly. I think I could've did a better job with some of the friends that I met as I traveled, was traveling along life way. Probably could have used some of 'em to a greater advantage other than what I did, but I was not one that wanted to take the advantage of nobody. I didn't in taking advantage of somebody just to lift me up. I didn't believe in that. I did a good job, married the best woman [Gladys Prince Lemon] in the world. Story_ID: 363892 Speaker 1: How do you want to be remembered? Speaker 2: Hm? Speaker 1: How do you want to be remembered? Speaker 2: As an individual who tried to help somebody as we travel along this way. Ain't particular about no great big stones and none of that stuff, but I want the world to know that if I did anything wrong to hurt anybody, pray to God Almighty to forgive me for it, and help me to be better. Story_ID: 363893 Speaker 1: Do you have any advice for the future generations? Speaker 2: If I had some advice for future generations, I'd tell them--somebody out there Jimmy [J.W. Lemon, Jr.] I think. That's my wife [Gladys Prince Lemon]--I'd tell them the Bible says do unto others as you would have them to do unto you. And if you fail to do that, you're gonna reap what you sow. God's gonna see to it that you reap what you sow. Be as nice, be as kind, be as humble toward everybody as you can be, 'cause as you travel along the road of life, you gonna meet 'em, you going to greet 'em and you gonna see your mistake, and wonder, why did you do what you did. And I tell all of 'em, hate nobody, let no man make you stoop so low as to hate anybody. Love everybody. There might be some time that you falls out with what some people say, what some people do, but never, never stoop so low as to hate anybody. Story_ID: 363894 Speaker 1: Well, if there's nothing else that you would like to tell us about your life, I'd like to, is there anything else that you'd like to say about your life? Speaker 2: Hm. Speaker 1: Is there anything else you'd like to say about your life? Speaker 2: Best lady there is in the world. Speaker 1: Your wife [Gladys Prince Lemon]? Speaker 2: Yeah. That's including you, and I don't know you. But she's, she is a good lady. Speaker 1: Okay, Mr. Lemon [HistoryMaker J. W. Lemon]-- Speaker 2: And I'd tell any man, if you got a good wife, treat her right, love her, respect her, honor her and God will see to it that you are rewarded all the same. Speaker 1: Mr. Lemon I want to thank you for your interview. I want you to thank you for taking the time to do this interview so that the future generations can know about your life and that you are truly an unsung hero now that the world will have the information and history about this area, Locust Grove [Georgia], and about your life. Thank you so very much. Speaker 2: Thank you for doing it. Thank you for the opportunity to present itself and God bless you...