 Story_ID: 666396 Speaker 1: So, I will begin by slating. My name is [HistoryMaker] Harriette Cole, I am the interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Today is November 8, 2016, and we are at Skadden, Arps [Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher and Flom LLP] at 4 Times Square in New York City [New York, New York]. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Observing is Sheila Gray. I would like for you, please, to say and spell your name; and tell us your birth date and what you do. Speaker 2: My name is [HistoryMaker] Byron Lars--B-Y-R-O-N, Byron; Lars, L-A-R-S. I was born January 19, 1965 (makes sounds). Speaker 1: (Laughter) And what do you do? Speaker 2: I am a fashion designer. Story_ID: 666397 Speaker 1: So, we'll start with some People magazine type questions. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: What is your favorite color? Speaker 2: I don't really have a favorite color. I don't think any designer does because every color is your friend. Speaker 1: Food? Speaker 2: That's like color (laughter). I love all food. But, I do tend to like healthy things, but I like bad things, too. So, yeah, all food. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Season? Speaker 2: I think my favorite season is fall. Speaker 1: Vacation destination? Speaker 2: Vacation destination. I love the Caribbean, but I really love Mexico because I could eat Mexican food five days a week and twice on Sundays. Speaker 1: (Laughter) And do you have a favorite saying or phrase? Speaker 2: My dad [Earnest Lars] used to always say even a broke clock (laughter) is right twice a day, you know, and that comes to mean to me, don't just--don't discount anyone just because they're not an expert or because, like, 90 percent of what they've ever said is useless (laughter). Somebody always has something to contribute if you listen, thoughtfully. Story_ID: 666398 Speaker 1: So, I'd like for you to tell me about your family. We can start with your mother, tell me her name, when and where she was born; tell me about her. Speaker 2: My mother's name is Gloria Bonds [Gloria Gardner Bonds] and she was born in Louisiana, but basically grew up in California. Speaker 1: Do you know what part of Louisiana? Speaker 2: Somewhere around and about Shreveport [Louisiana]. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you know when her family moved (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She was there as an infant, so-- Speaker 1: Ah. Speaker 2: --you know, she really doesn't have memories of that at all. Speaker 1: And, and what--what's your mother's occupation? Speaker 2: My mother was a safety specialist for the [U.S.] Navy. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: Yeah, like, what does that mean (laughter)? I mean--(laughter). Speaker 1: Did you know what it meant? Speaker 2: She described like things that she would do just to make sure that like office spaces were up to code and all kinds of like [U.S.] military facilities were--you know. Speaker 1: Did she work on a military base? Speaker 2: She did work on a military base, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Which one? Speaker 2: It was an--actually a hospital, military hospital: Oak Knoll [Naval Hospital Oakland] in Oakland [California]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 666399 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And in her family--how far back can you trace her family? Speaker 2: Really just to my great-grandparents. Everything beyond that is very vague (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And were they in Louisiana? Speaker 2: Actually, they were in California also. Speaker 1: Really? So the whole family moved from Louisiana? Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah. It started with my great-grandparents--my, my grandmother's parents. Speaker 1: Do you know what, what was their work? Speaker 2: I don't. Speaker 1: Did you know them? Speaker 2: You know, I never knew them, no, no. I don't know what they did. I, I believe my great-grandmother was a housewife. I do know that whatever they did, they were able to buy a home in California, a really nice house (audio disturbance), and so you'd think that I would have that story, but I don't. Speaker 1: And what about your grandparents (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's a shame. My grandfather was the computer scientist, one of those early generations of when there was a UNIVAC [universal automatic computer], when the computer (unclear) was hot in a room-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --and they had to have air conditioning (laughter). Speaker 1: What was his name? Speaker 2: His name was Colonel Gardner. Speaker 1: Colonel Gardner. And would Colonel--was he in the [U.S.] Army? Speaker 2: No, he was not (laughter). Speaker 1: Like his name was Colonel. Speaker 2: His name is Colonel, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's his name and when they moved to California, my grandma helped work as a maid in San Francisco [California] to put him through school, and he went to UC Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California]. And, yeah, he was very accomplished but very, very soft spoken man, very unassuming. You'd never know he was the guy that he was. Because he was kind of like one of those absentminded professor (laughter) types. But, he was a schoolteacher in Louisiana and that's how he came to meet my grandmother. Speaker 1: Who-- Speaker 2: He was her high school teacher. Speaker 1: Ooh (laughter). Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah (laughter). Speaker 1: And what's your grandmother's name? Speaker 2: She was fifteen, though, and he was nineteen [years old], so it's not quite as scandalous-- Speaker 1: Okay (laughter). Speaker 2: --as it would sound, but it's still pretty scandalous. It's, like, really? That's my daughter. What are you doing? Anyway, he-- Speaker 1: What was her name? Speaker 2: And her name was Tina Gardner [Tina Lee Robinson Gardner]. Speaker 1: Okay. And-- Speaker 2: They called her Tiny. Speaker 1: And was she? Speaker 2: She was tiny, petite, really cute, and clearly my grandpa was smitten with her (laughter) and, yeah, that's how our family started (laughter). Speaker 1: And was--did she work? Speaker 2: She, she worked only until he pretty much got set up. After that, she was pretty much at home. I guess she paid her dues now (laughter) and-- Speaker 1: How many children did they have? Speaker 2: Only two, yeah, my mom [Gloria Gardner Bonds] and, and uncle [Douglas Gardner] who was killed early in life. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: As a child? Speaker 2: No, no. He was like thirty-one [years old]. Story_ID: 666400 Speaker 1: Did you know him (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And that's like--I did know him. Speaker 1: What was his name? Speaker 2: His name was Douglas Gardner; and his occupation: pimp. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay. Speaker 2: How do you-- Speaker 1: That was it? Speaker 2: --how did you get from there, professor to pimp, I don't know. But, I do know this. He was one of those kids that needed a day with a strong hand and my grandpa [Lars' maternal grandfather, Colonel Gardner] was just not that guy. He's mild mannered. I--my grandpa has never spoken a cross word to me, he never raised a hand to me. He was always loving and kind and patient and I think my uncle needed another type of dad with some--I'll just say it, whoop ass. He needed it. And, you know, my grandpa just didn't know how to give it. That's not who he was. So, yeah. Speaker 1: How did your grandparents react to their son becoming a pimp? Speaker 2: Oh-- Speaker 1: Did they know? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. And my grandma [Tina Lee Robinson Gardner] was very vocal about it. She denounced everything (laughter) about my uncle when he--she loved her son but, you know, she really--that killed her; and she would talk to me and my brother [Vincent Lars] like--'cause, you know, he'd blow into town in his European suits and his fancy car. He lived in Hawaii, and that's where he conducted business. And, you know, we were, of course, like enamored with him when he came to town and she was like--she did the whole build up a week before he came. What he's doing is not okay. He's, he's not a nice person (laughter). I love him but, you know-- Speaker 1: So, you wouldn't-- Speaker 2: --this is not-- Speaker 1: --you wouldn't get the wrong impression. Speaker 2: Yeah. But, you know, her words kind of like faded to nothingness once he blew into town because he was kind of fabulous (laughter). He really was and--you know, and he was very handsome, very charismatic, obviously. And he--I know that like all my friends' moms in town who knew him from high school, when they found out like that he was my uncle, it would be like stars in their eyes would start coming out (laughter) I'm like, okay (audio disturbance), well, I guess Uncle Doug had that, you know, early on (laughter). Speaker 1: And so, he had a great sense of style. Did, did that-- Speaker 2: He did. Speaker 1: --influence you? Speaker 2: You know, I saw him so infrequently that I would have to say no, but what it did do at a very early age was open my mind up to another way of doing things. Because I remember like he blew into town once in clogs and I just thought that was very odd, a man in clogs; and, (laughter) you know, before he went out, he'd dab on a little makeup to take off that shine just like you did to me before this interview. And that would be like, boys don't wear makeup. But then, he had all these girls (laughter), so I'm like, well, it must--it's working for you (laughter). I--so-- Speaker 1: So, you got some insight into other ways of--? Speaker 2: Yeah, like--I mean that like everybody didn't dress or look or do what was going on in our small town, (laughter) you know, and--not that I ever aspired to look (laughter) like that or do that certainly, but it was interesting I have to say. Speaker 1: And what was your town? Speaker 2: Richmond, California. Speaker 1: Right. And so (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, in San Francisco Bay Area [California]. Speaker 1: Right. Story_ID: 666401 Speaker 1: Tell me about your father. What's his name? Speaker 2: My father's name is Earnest Lars. My middle name is Earnest after him. And, he was a concrete finisher for the City of Oakland [California]. Speaker 1: What does that mean, concrete finisher? Speaker 2: He's the guy that like basically like led the crew to like pour all the concrete in like sidewalks in the city and he's the guy that came and made it nice. And he was very (laughter) good at his job. He had a very artistic soul. I think that's where I got what helps me in my job. I think it's from him. Speaker 1: And you say artistic soul. How did he demonstrate that? Speaker 2: It manifested itself in all sorts of ways. I mean, like, just--he could fix anything and--with flair and he had like this, this climbing plant and then he just like splayed like cording across the ceiling and it just like grew in this pattern over the ceiling. I'm like--it's just so neat, just so many different ways he basically exhibited creativity. And he always kept a very well stocked garage for us to explore our creativity. I never realized that it was for us, of course, until way later in life. We always had plenty of wheels for our go carts. I thought all garages had wheels. We always had plenty of tools and plenty of lumber and plenty of everything to build whatever our hearts desired (laughter). Speaker 1: And did he teach you how to build? Speaker 2: He was always there on the ready to help, yeah. We made a puppet theater together. Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: I was like eleven [years old]. And I had this big plan. I was gonna give puppet shows through the neighborhood, but like--but I was eleven, just on the verge of like, puppets? I'm too old for puppets. And we finished--I mean, he worked tirelessly. We made this beautiful theater and then I'm thinking like, now I'm over puppets but I better give one damn show, I know that much (laughter). And then I was like making these puppets with my cousin who lived down the street, and I was really losing steam for it. And I guess he could like sense that and my dad, you know, in his typical fashion, he was like, "Listen, man, like, if you don't ever give a puppet show, that's all right with me. I just enjoyed making this theater with you." (Crying) Sorry. Speaker 1: It's okay. Speaker 2: It's been a long time since that happened. He was a good guy. Speaker 1: Did you ever do a show? Speaker 2: I never did. Once he gave me the out, I was like, well, that's it (laughter). I'm done (laughter). Speaker 1: Well, you went onto other things. Speaker 2: So, yeah, I was like very thankful that he supplied that for me. Speaker 1: He, he saw it. Speaker 2: Yeah, he was like, hm, I think he's over this. Story_ID: 666402 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Where was your father born? Speaker 2: He was born in Louisiana also-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --around Shreveport [Louisiana], but my parents [Gloria Gardner Bonds and Earnest Lars] didn't meet there at all. They met in California. He relocated to California and moved in with his aunt and uncle and got on his feet. He joined the service; he was in the Marines [U.S. Marine Corps] for a little bit, and he always warned me and my brother [Vincent Lars] to never go into the service (laughter). Apparently, he hated it, yet he did identify as having been a Marine. Speaker 1: And when, when was he born? Speaker 2: Oh, gosh. When was he born? (Pause) Nineteen thirty-seven [1937]? Somewhere thereabouts, yeah, 1937, I believe. Speaker 1: And his family, how far can you trace them back? Speaker 2: Honestly, just to my grandparents. My dad was very non-communicative about his family. Now he--obviously, he experienced some pain there and like there were just some things that we were not privy to and because of location, it was just a nonissue most of the time until much later in life when family reunions started to happen over there and then he got this notion that me and my brother should go and I'm like, why would we? I didn't say this to him. I'm like, look, if you really want us to go, we'll take that bullet for you, but I don't know these people. You never made them a part of my life, so I don't really have an interest except for one nephew and his sister who he loved dearly, and I knew them. I mean, I'll go see them, but I don't want to meet all-- Speaker 1: How many siblings did he have? Speaker 2: Two--yeah, a brother and a sister. And his brother, I never met because he died of natural causes before I had a chance to. Speaker 1: But the sister lived in California? Speaker 2: No, the sister lived in Lou- still lives in Louisiana (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, okay. Great. Speaker 2: She's still alive, yeah, with my--his favorite nephew, her son. Story_ID: 666403 Speaker 1: You grew up in the San Francisco area [San Francisco Bay Area, California]. What town? Speaker 2: Richmond [California]. Speaker 1: In Richmond, right (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) El Cerrito [California]. Speaker 1: And so, when you look back on your childhood, what's your earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: My earliest childhood memory is probably--I was probably like two [years old], two and change, and I remember my dad [Earnest Lars] coming home from work and kissing my mom [Gloria Gardner Bonds] when he got home from work. I remember waiting for him to come into the door. They would kiss and he'd go on. My earliest full memory is probably that third birthday when my mom was making the cake for me and I understood that the cake was for me and for--you know, this day that was for me. I remember like the whole thing. I remember we had Shake 'n Bake, which was new, and it was horrible, and we were all excited because it was on TV. I remember this like and--we're like, yes, Shake 'n Bake, and it was just wretched. I mean, we couldn't even eat it. Speaker 1: I remember Shake 'n Bake (laughter). Speaker 2: It was horrible. It was the worst thing ever, "And I helped!" That was what the little girl said on the commercial (laughter)-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --when, as her mom presented it to the family. Speaker 1: Well, because you grew-- Speaker 2: It's like well, I--we have you to blame. Speaker 1: --you grew up at a time when TV dinners and all the--all-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --same as me, when all of those conveniences came into play. Speaker 2: And they were exciting for a child. Speaker 1: But they weren't so tasty. Speaker 2: I found them tasty if they were packaged nice enough. If the compartments and the portions and the size of the cuts--'cause that's how children operate. Some things I realized they were a little nasty, like we talk about those holiday cookies with the royal icing that was so sweet it was bitter. Speaker 1: Yep. Speaker 2: But it was so beautiful that you just kept biting and kind of wincing (laughter) until you got through it as if it was a job. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, so. Story_ID: 666404 Speaker 1: When you think of the home where you grew up, the neighborhood, what are the sights, sounds, and smells that you remember as a child? Speaker 2: Hm. Well, there were two homes--well, three actually because once my parents divorced--my parents divorced shortly after that third birthday and then we moved in with my grandparents, my mom's parents [Tina Lee Robinson Gardner and Colonel Gardner] for a short time; and then my mom [Gloria Gardner Bonds] moved us into our own house. So, I was basically between three homes all the time: my dad's [Earnest Lars], my grandparents' and, you know, my mom's. And so, my grandmother's house always smelled like something delicious cooking (laughter). And-- Speaker 1: What was her specialty? Speaker 2: Oh, god. It was all savory things. I mean, like, soul food like, do you know what potlicker is? Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: Okay. Maybe some people don't know what potlicker is. That's the juice at the bottom of any cooked green. And she taught us about potlicker and how to work the potlicker by dipping your cornbread in there and neck bones and pork chops and all sorts of stuff that'll probably like send you to an early grave (laughter), but it was delicious. And she was a really masterful cook. She made great chili. She made like--yeah, she was a really good cook. But she apparently never thought so. Every time she made something, she would--, "Well, that--this is too salty or that, that doesn't have enough salt or that--," and I know she was sincere. She wasn't fishing for a compliment. But now--I guess, you know, I know when I cook, I'm never really satisfied with the result because you just lived it, I guess, too much. And I'm like, you're wrong, it's fabulous (laughter). Speaker 1: Keep cooking. Speaker 2: Have a seat. Exactly (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) What about the sights? What do you remember seeing? Speaker 2: Gosh, I remember--wow, it's all her house. It's weird that that's-- Speaker 1: And was her house-- Speaker 2: --where it's all happening. Speaker 1: --in the same town [Richmond, California]? Speaker 2: Her house was in the same town. I guess it's where I spent the lion's share of my time because, you know, she would--I'd have to go there after school because I couldn't go home alone and, and my mom would pick me up from there after work and then we'd go home. So I guess most of my childhood happened really in my grandma's house. So, a lot of the sights are her house, like the, the rose garden or the rose bush outside the front and like my first sight of a hummingbird, which is like--I'm like, what was that? And then, you know, it was off before anybody--it was like some sort of--like I just saw some crazy insect (laughter) and that--but, I thought that was some kind of bee. It took me years to figure out what it was. But, yeah, that's what the sights are. She had a little white house with a little picket fence and there was a fish pond in the back and-- Speaker 1: What kind of fish? Speaker 2: Goldfish. And, then there weren't fish for like many years, you know. I don't know what happened to them. I was never really invested in the fish oddly even as a child. Speaker 1: Did you have pets? Speaker 2: I did have pets. I had a German Shepherd. His name was Mack [ph.]. Speaker 1: And whose house--where did the German Shepherd stay? Speaker 2: German Shepherd stayed at my mom's house and my dad actually got him for my brother [Vincent Lars] without asking my mom, as a puppy. Yeah, that didn't go over so well (simultaneous). Story_ID: 666405 Speaker 1: But, of course, you know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) How--your brother is what age? Is he older? Speaker 1: My, my brother is five years older than me. Speaker 2: Older, okay. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: And what's his name? Speaker 1: His name is Vincent [Vincent Lars] and he's a musician. Speaker 2: And so he started at a young age in music, right? Speaker 1: He did and my [maternal] grandfather [Colonel Gardner] also was a musician on top of all that other stuff. He played the trumpet and he, he taught--among other things, he taught music, but that was not his specialty. His specialty was mathematics in school and-- Speaker 2: And what instrument-- Speaker 1: --later on (mumbles). Speaker 2: --does Vincent play? Speaker 1: Saxophone. Yeah, he had a saxophone, my grandfather, in his closet in some trunk. And you know how it is. You're, you're in every nook and cranny of your grandparents' home. He was in that trunk and he saw that saxophone and he asked my grandpa about it and he was like, "Hey, you wanna try playing it?" And that's how it all started for him. Speaker 2: At about what age? Speaker 1: I think he was like five, so it was before I even knew him (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, very young, yeah. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: That's young for such an instrument, right? Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 666406 Speaker 1: Likewise, I guess, indirectly, my interest in fashion started in that same house in the other room where my [maternal] grandma [Tina Lee Robinson Gardner] had like all these clothes from another life--from a, a her that I never knew; like, you know, these gowns and stuff. And I remember she had this salmon gazar, silk gazar evening dress, bustier with boning and fluting--fluting is like when they cut fabric on the diagonal and then reapplique it to a bodice or part of the garment so that it looks like little soft folds, but it's not really folds, it's separate strips. And, man, I just had to know what was keeping that dress up. I just had to know. So, I like cut (laughter) into like each one of those strips and like--I'm like, oh, there's plastic in here--boning, didn't know what the term was for it then. But, like, then I put some pieces together, every time I saw a '50s [1950s] movie and a bustier, I'm like, yeah, I know how that's staying up. There's plastic in there (laughter). Speaker 2: So-- Speaker 1: No interest in fashion (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) you took the dress-- Speaker 1: --though, at that time. Speaker 2: Did--you took the dress apart? Speaker 1: No, no. Speaker 2: Just that little part. Speaker 1: Just enough to see the plastic in there so no one would know. I was never found out (laughter). I never was. Speaker 2: What age were you? Speaker 1: Geez, I might've been six or seven? I know it was very early--long before I had any interest in fashion. I just wanted to know how stuff worked. Speaker 2: Well, and you said-- Speaker 1: You know. Speaker 2: --your father [Earnest Lars]-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --encouraged you to make things, right? Speaker 1: Yes. Yeah. Yeah, he did. Speaker 2: So, at a young age, what were the kinds of things that you were making? Speaker 1: Wow. All kinds of things. I mean, there was a clay mound near--in this field that was near my grandma's house. We'd dig things out there and make pots and, you know, ash trays and, and things. And, of course, there were go carts and, and the puppet theater that would never see a show. And, you know, I was always drawing likenesses of people that--you know, in the family and friends and-- Speaker 2: And were you good? Speaker 1: --papier mache. Speaker 2: Were you good drawing as a kid? Speaker 1: I was, actually, and I can no longer do that. I can no longer capture someone's likeness. Because then--I guess when you're a child, you just don't think about it so much and so you just do it. And now, I think way too much and I just don't (laughter). Speaker 2: Well, and you draw other things. Speaker 1: I do draw other things, but I don't know that I could, given all my efforts, capture the essence of someone's face. I really did get their character and like I don't know how I managed. But--and I could even make cartoon versions of them and, yeah, I don't-- Speaker 2: And this is when you were young? Speaker 1: Yeah, I was like younger than ten. Story_ID: 666407 Speaker 1: Where did you go to school as a kid? Speaker 2: I went to Grant Elementary School in Richmond, California--really small, tiny little school, you know. Speaker 1: And was it integrated? Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah, you know-- Speaker 1: So what was Richmond like? Speaker 2: --I--my whole life was always integrated. So, I remember when my grandparents' friends would comment about me--you know, "Oh, those little white girls were just saying, like, 'Bye, Byron [HistoryMaker Byron Lars],' when he left school." I'm like, what the hell is that supposed to mean? What is that, some kind of crack? I remember getting really annoyed about like the commentary on like my diversity of friends. I, I was like, what's the big deal, first of all? Well, now, sure, you grow and you know what the big deal was. You know, that just wasn't my reality-- Speaker 1: So, Richmond-- Speaker 2: --from a child. Speaker 1: --what was Richmond like demographically? Speaker 2: Richmond was definitely segregated. Like, my [maternal] grandparents [Tina Lee Robinson Gardner and Colonel Gardner] lived in a black neighborhood. My dad [Earnest Lars] lived in a primarily black neighborhood but was somewhat integrated. Like, our neighbors were Filipino and, you know, there was a white family across the street from us. But, it was primarily black. And my mom [Gloria Gardner Bonds] lived in the same neighborhood as my grandma 'cause she was--so. But, school, I just always went to school and had all types of friends because that's just the way it was. Speaker 1: And it was--it was an integrated school? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And were all the schools (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I never knew that there were--was such a thing as a non-integrated school at the time. Yeah, all schools in the area were that way--that I knew of, anyway. I mean, I suppose there must've been some that weren't, but. Story_ID: 666408 Speaker 1: Do you remember--apart from your family bringing it to your attention, do you remember growing up having any sense of racial conflict? Speaker 2: Yeah. My [maternal] grandparents [Tina Lee Robinson Gardner and Colonel Gardner] would share. Speaker 1: Okay. It was from their stories. Speaker 2: Yeah. And my dad [Earnest Lars] would let me know, you know, what to expect, that like, listen, you know, you're gonna have to work, you know, three times as hard for not as much and all this things, but like--but that's great because whatever you gain in knowledge, nobody can take from you, you know. And just a lot of the inequities and unfairness or whatever but like they never like talked about it with bitterness: "Just so you know, so you're prepared for it." Some of the stories my grandparents told me, I was like, I don't know how you could not be (laughter) racist when you've lived through some of this stuff. You know what I mean? Because I remember like this story about like, you know, a, a relative of ours who in the South was the friend of a white man and his wife, and they would invite him in the front door because they were friends; and then the town just did not take kindly to this. They're like, you know, he needs to come in the back like all other niggers. And this white man was like, excuse me, this is my home and my friend. He'll come in whatever door I say he can come in. That--'cause that's how it is. Well-- Speaker 1: This is in Louisiana? Speaker 2: Um-hm. He was taken by a gang of white marauders and like beaten within an inch of his life and he-- Speaker 1: The white man? Speaker 2: The black man. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, and he made it--he somehow survived and he like made it to help through somebody and they found him again and tied him to a railroad track and he was decapitated. Speaker 1: Oh my god. Speaker 2: Yeah. I was like, what? Just for walking in the front door? You know (laughter), and--yeah. So, needless to say, they moved to California because they were like, yeah, we're done with all this kind of stuff. Speaker 1: Well, and that they told you--well, you remember, obviously. But, a lot of--a lot of-- Speaker 2: They weren't really talking to me when they were--they were recounting this story. The first time I heard this story, they weren't really talking to me. I was like, say what? (Makes face) (Laughter) You know, one of those. And I was just like--I just couldn't believe that people would do that to people you know (laughter). And it was like--that was before 'Roots' and before like a lot of, you know, the realities of our-- Speaker 1: The awareness, um-hm. Speaker 2: --history. That yeah, I'd been made aware of. So, yeah. Story_ID: 666409 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But you personally, did you experience racism growing up? Speaker 2: Not--no, at least not that I was aware of. The first time that I pretty much suspected it was when I and another classmate, black classmate, Tim Kuzmicki [ph.], were ushered into honors English because, you know, we had--we were in honors classes in high school [El Cerrito High School, El Cerrito, California]. You had the same classes with all the same people 'cause that's how it worked or whatever. But I remember when it was determined that we were honors students and we were like taken out of like this English class that was gonna be a cakewalk. I was like, nice (laughter). And they were like, no, no, you two don't belong here, and they took us to honors English. And I remember Mrs. Protter [Ruth Rotman Protter] who was a white lady from Boston [Massachusetts] was just like, "No, no, they don't belong here." And we were the only two black people. Speaker 1: In the honors class? Speaker 2: Yes. And she was just so adamant that we--she kept looking at the documentation and I was just like, really? 'Cause at first, I didn't really want that extra challenge, but then I'm like, oh, watch me do so well in here just to spite you (laughter) because I was so put off that she was so (laughter)-- Speaker 1: So, she wasn't gonna-- Speaker 2: --incredulous. Speaker 1: --get away with it. You did take the class. Speaker 2: Yeah, I did. And, you know what--and she didn't treat us unfairly once we were in there. But, there was definitely some funkiness in the beginning that I was just like--I knew what that was, you know. That was probably my first time being aware of it. Maybe other things had happened, but I was so not in that headspace that I just would not have even recognized it, but that one, I was like--both Tim and myself, we were like, um-hm (laughter). Speaker 1: And you both stayed in the class? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. And were tortured with Jane Austen. I'm like, if we read one more Jane Austen novel--. No Richard Wright. Speaker 1: Oh, no. Speaker 2: No. In honors English--I--like, if I stuck out in my old class, in that class they took us out of, I might've had some black authors, but no, not in honors. Story_ID: 666410 Speaker 1: So, where did you go to high school? Speaker 2: I went to high school at El Cerrito, El Cerrito High School [El Cerrito, California], yeah. Speaker 1: And was that a public high school? Speaker 2: Um-hm. It was. Speaker 1: And was it there that you began designing? Speaker 2: It is there that I began designing. Actually, a neighborhood friend, the young lady that lived next door to my [maternal] grandparents [Tina Lee Robinson Gardner and Colonel Gardner], we were very good friends from childhood, and she started sewing. And she made herself all kinds of neat clothes and stuff that nobody had. Our high school was very into fashion, just historically. I don't know why, but lots of people liked clothes and they dressed up 'cause it was a time when people dressed up (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They dressed up to go to school? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: What years were you in high school? Speaker 2: I was in high school--I graduated in '83 [1983]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So--but be- long before that like throughout the '70s [1970s], I--it--that just high school, people dressed up. And actually before I started high school, there was a really cool guy there that made clothes. He was the first school designer. He made it okay for boys to sew. And after--I, I just wanted my friend to make me some pants. I had no interest in learning how to sew. I just wanted some baggy pants. I wanted her to make them and she was like, "No. I'm not making you anything. Forget about it. I'll show you the ins and outs of the machine and you can make them yourself," but that's about it. Speaker 1: This was a contemporary friend who knew how to sew? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Yeah. And so around-- Speaker 1: And she taught you. Speaker 2: --tenth grade--yeah, she taught me, tenth grade. But, of course, you know, there were no like interesting patterns available for men. It was like something that--I guess in the Midwest, somebody would make their husband or something. I, I don't know how it worked, but it was like, I don't want any of this. Speaker 1: I don't even remember men's patterns. I remember Butterick and Singer and all that but they were women's (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, you just wouldn't have even--you wouldn't have even gone to that section that was like three pages of disinteresting or uninteresting things. I was disinterested; let me put it that way. Speaker 1: And so, you--so, you--she taught you how to sew, then you made your own pattern (unclear)? Speaker 2: I made the pattern from newspaper, yeah. You know, I'd seen that--I'd seen her make enough stuff to know what like a crotch of a pant looked like and what--and just from making stuff like my whole life, I guess I was able to kind of like fake it, take measurements and stuff and just kind of work it out. Ironically, the first pair of pants came out like really great. All the kids wanted some. I was like, hey, this is neat. Speaker 1: What kind of material did you use? Speaker 2: I think they were corduroy, like wide wale corduroy. Yeah, I'm pretty sure they were blue. Speaker 1: And so the kids were-- Speaker 2: But I'm not 100 percent sure. Speaker 1: --interested. Speaker 2: Because I just--after that I kept like making them, so it was just like-- Speaker 1: And did--and so, you started selling right away? Speaker 2: No. I made a couple things like for my brother [Vincent Lars], for my dad [Earnest Lars], you know, but I was like, I don't want you having my pants (laughter). That's why I started making them. Story_ID: 666411 Speaker 1: Around that same year, the juniors were like about to go to like their junior prom and I was like, hm, why don't I make prom dresses 'cause I can make a lot more money off of those than pants and then girls spend more money on clothes than guys. So, I was like, you know I'll (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, it was really like a business decision-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --to go to women's wear. Speaker 1: Yeah. I'm like, I'll sketch you something up and, and nobody will have it (laughter). You kn- meanwhile, really, I don't know how to make a dress, never made a dress. Speaker 2: How old were you? Speaker 1: I was in tenth grade, so how old are you in tenth grade? Speaker 2: About fifteen? Fourteen? Speaker 1: Fifteen, sixteen? Speaker 2: Something like that. Speaker 1: Fifteen, somewhere thereabouts. Yeah, fifteen, sixteen. And yeah, so I made--ironically, the girl next door, her best friend, her best girlfriend's dress 'cause she--we know she wasn't making it. She didn't make my pants, she wasn't making Sheila's [ph.] dress (laughter). So--yeah, so I made it, I sketched it, she approved the sketch, got to the newspaper, made the dress, and it came out really nice. She still has it to this day. She kept it (laughter). And, you know, all the kids liked it and they talked about how pretty her dress was, nobody had it. So, the next year, I had like tons of business. Speaker 2: So you got orders from the high school [El Cerrito High School, El Cerrito, California] to make dresses. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Now, did you have help doing this? Speaker 1: No. No. I, I-- Speaker 2: So, you essentially were doing couture. You, you-- Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: (Laughter) High school couture. Speaker 1: Let's just say elevated dressmaking (laughter). Speaker 2: But, it's--was it--did you replicate a pattern or did you make something different for each person (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No. I designed--every--each thing was different. I designed it, made the patterns, all that stuff; went to--there, we had this amazing fabric store in San Francisco [California] where I guess they got ends, ends from designers from here and took it there. But like, you know, you could get mohair and like--and silk velvet and just like really luxe things that like--Neiman Marcus was across the street and then I. Magnin [I. Magnin and Company] is out of business now and all that stuff and, you know, you could get like real fabrics, you know, to make like nice things. Speaker 2: And were they regular price or was this-- Speaker 1: No. It was really expensive. Speaker 2: This was like--it was really expensive. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: The--it was a--if it's across from Neiman Marcus, it's high end. Speaker 1: Yeah, it was--it was very pricey, but I was like, I'm not making cheap stuff (laughter). Speaker 2: From the beginning? Speaker 1: Yeah. How dare I, right? It's like, really? Hm. Speaker 2: And so to design these pieces, you know, cut it out from newspaper and pick these expensive fabrics, were you ever afraid that you were gonna make a mistake? Speaker 1: Never. Speaker 2: And did you ever make a mistake? Speaker 1: Sometimes (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I mean where--whereas they couldn't wear the dress? Speaker 1: Oh, no, never. I mean, like, I made mistakes where I had to go buy more expensive fabric on me, but you learn fast that way. Story_ID: 666412 Speaker 1: Across the way from Neiman Marcus from this--was I. Magnin [I. Magnin and Company] and there was--in their couture salon, there was this black sales lady, Binky [ph.], who would take me in and she's like, "Listen, we got some new Valentino in. I want you to see this shoulder pad, come see this new Saint Laurent [Yves Saint Laurent]. I like want you to see how they finished this hem." And it was like amazing. She was like--she was--'cause first, she was like, what's your deal? Why are you here? Why is a boy here in the salon, couture salon? Speaker 2: So you would go-- Speaker 1: I told her I wanted to be a designer and she was like, "Oh, really?" And then she just started showing me all the things that they had. Like, she didn't just like, you know, really? Well, I'm trying to make sales. Get lost. Beat it. She was very, very nurturing. And, you know, they close and before I even started--I, I wished I could've found her at some point. She was older then, so I'm--would find it very difficult to believe that she's still with us. But I never was able to thank her, you know what I mean, and find her because it was like, she really--she was such a special part of my development, an integral part of it, you know, like to really start developing taste. I mean, like what--this is what something like nice looks like. You know, even like the idea of brown for evening. I just--it was unheard of for me in high school [El Cerrito High School, El Cerrito, California]. I'm like brown, nobody wears brown at night (laughter). You know, I'm like, oh, brown with gold and coppers and--(laughter). I'm like, oh (laughter), you know? She was really, you know, she really mentored me (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And she showed you the clothes inside out so you could see-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --how they were made. Speaker 1: Yeah. Because, honestly, that's what--I was probably more interested in that than fashion. I was interested in making stuff, even to this day. I--I like fashion (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, this is a construction that you do. Speaker 1: --but I love, you know, building clothes. But, I like fashion, but I love that. I love--I love making clothes. I love figuring out the problems. I love that part of it. Story_ID: 666413 Speaker 1: So back to Binky [ph.] showing you the real couture clothes that are coming in, then she shows you the Saint Laurent [Yves Saint Laurent] shoulder pad, you go home and try it? Speaker 2: No, it was a Valentino shoulder pad. Speaker 1: Oh, excuse me, Valentino; get it right. Speaker 2: 'Cause Saint Laurent shoulder pads were not as re- evolved as Valentino shoulder pads. She showed me how 'cause then it was all about shoulder pads. Remember like a shoulder pad being on your sweater, then the shoulder pad being on your coat; and the next thing you know, it was just a mess, a bulky mess. Mr. Valentino's shoulder pads stacked on one another. The inner side layering shoulder pads were this big and this close to the body (gesture). The outerwear shoulder pads--like he built them so that they all like sat on one another and stayed there; and I was like, hm, his shoulder pads never looked a mess. You can go back. Everybody else is looking like cartoons, (gesture) never Mr. Valentino's (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well this is a good point because in the '80s [1980s], you know, which is Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan]; which is, you know, a conservative wave--many women are in business and they're wearing menswear, they're--a lot of women are wearing shoulder pads. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I mean, almost every work suit had a shoulder pad in it. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And you're right. They--sometimes they extended out like propellers. Speaker 2: And it just got out of hand, you know, as things do. But, like, there was always a refinement. And just like in engineering, the other designers just weren't thinking about--that Binky showed me: you need to be thinking about this stuff. What happens when you put that shoulder pad on top of another shoulder pad? Apparently Mr. Valentino was the only one thinking about it, to my knowledge. I mean, I don't know what the world of fashion was doing, I was just in San--in my little town, you know, with whatever I. Magnin [I. Magnin and Company] bought (laughter). And then, of course, I go across the street to Neiman's [Neiman Marcus] and see like, okay, how things compare. But, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But I. Magnin had higher end clothing at that time? Speaker 2: No, no, no. They were-- Speaker 1: No? Was it about the same? Speaker 2: They were on par, but like Binky was more welcoming. Speaker 1: Got it. Speaker 2: I'd go to Neiman, they'd be like, "Really? What are you doing here?" I'm like, "Just looking" (laughter). Story_ID: 666414 Speaker 1: In high school when you're making these dresses, you're designing and making these dresses for students with the high end fabric. What are you charging? Speaker 2: A hundred and fifty dollars. I don't know. That was what they paid me plus fabric and stuff, so I was like $150? Oh my god, so much money (laughter). But, it was to me and I was like really happy to get it. Speaker 1: And it probably was to them. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Because how much is the fabric costing? Speaker 2: 'Cause the fabric is like-- Speaker 1: It might be the same, right? Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So your--your-- Speaker 2: And sometimes more by the time you get like trim and all that stuff going, like--yeah. Speaker 1: So, was it hard for these young ladies to convince their parents to have you design these clothes? Speaker 2: You know what? It was never an issue. They just--I never thought--even thought it would be an issue, you know what I mean? I was like, well, if you want something nice, you got to pay for it (laughter). Speaker 1: And, so you, you are doing this at El Cerrito High School [El Cerrito, California], are you figuring out that this might be what you'd like to do for your work? Speaker 2: Yeah. Then when--not Sheila's [ph.] dress, but after that, the next year when I dressed a lot of different girls and then like they were all out going to prom, and I was like thinking about like something that I made facilitating a good time for somebody--you know, she's looking great, she's feeling great, she's probably dancing now; just all the imagination about what was happening in these things that I made and like--and what it was, you know, doing for people as creating a memory in their lives--that was super powerful, you know. And it's still today what drives me. I love--really love making those clothes. It's like, oh, yeah, she's gonna kill in this or like, you know, when you make that dress, it's just like, this is gonna have the husband knowing, remembering why he made that move, you know what I mean? That kind of stuff. It's still very important to me. Speaker 1: And because you had earned money, you real- and, and you're going into I. Magnin [I. Magnin and Company] and Neiman's [Neiman Marcus], you know that it's possible for this to be a, a career. Speaker 2: Yeah. And like you said, it was the Reagan era [President Ronald Wilson Reagan]. It was all about opulence and like--it was very in our faces that like, this is real. This is a real vocation. This is--you can do this. And Willi Smith was--in high school [Jules E. Mastbaum Area Vocational Technical School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], and Willi Smith was like--had arrived and was like thriving. Speaker 1: And he transformed the fashion industry, bringing sportswear-- Speaker 2: Yep. And I remember my cousins who went to that same school started wearing his stuff 'cause they--like people just--that school, you know, I remember like, wow, what is that? And then they told me that it's Willi Smith. And then I'm like, he's black. And I was just like, wow. That's awesome. I didn't even think that it was like, wow, a black guy is doing this? It's like, so what? Yeah. Any, any person that's like--does this and is good, you know, not knowing anything. I didn't know how remarkable it was and, yeah, how many obstacles and all that stuff there were and, you know, and all that (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So-- Story_ID: 666415 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Where did you go to college from-- Speaker 2: From high school [El Cerrito High School, El Cerrito, California], I went for two years to this small fashion college that is no longer in existence, Brooks [Brooks College]; and then I transferred from there into FIT [Fashion Institute of Technology, New York, New York]. Speaker 1: So, Brooks is in California. So, at first you were still (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, it was in Long Beach [California]. Speaker 1: But, you--did--you had to move there 'cause that's not near, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah, I had to move there. Yeah. Speaker 1: And why did you just stay there for two years? Speaker 2: It was a two year program. Speaker 1: Oh, it's a two year program. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Got it. Okay. Speaker 2: And that was it. And then I guess I had to like work up to New York [New York]. You know, like, I wanted to do fashion, but ironically, I never really wanted to live in New York. I remember like, you know, I was around when 'Sesame Street' had first come on the scene and I was like, they live in apartments and they're on a stoop. It's all so depressing. I'm like, I don't want to live there. And I really--'Sesame Street' really shaped my, my views of the East Coast and how things work here, and I was like, I don't want any part of it (laughter). Speaker 1: And you grew up in a house? Speaker 2: Yeah. I mean, everybody has a house. Like, in--not anymore. But, you know, that was just how-- Speaker 1: But when you were growing up, you grew up in a neighborhood with houses. Speaker 2: Yeah, and a yard and space (laughter) and stuff. And I was like-- Speaker 1: So, so, was the move to New York strictly because that's where fashion is so you knew you needed to come? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And FIT was then and remains the premier fashion school? Speaker 2: It was. And then like hearing that like, you know, Norma Kamali and Calvin Klein and, you know, all the people that came from there. I was like, okay, this is where I need to, to be. I mean and-- Story_ID: 666416 Speaker 1: Now, at this point--so, you're aware of those designers, why? Because of seeing them in the stores or you're learning in school? Speaker 2: Oh, then, I made it my business to know who everybody was. I mean, like once I decided I was getting into it, it's just like I'm--I need to know who the players are and what they do and-- Speaker 1: Well and while you were still in high school [El Cerrito High School, El Cerrito, California], Calvin Klein did this big (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Was major. Speaker 1: --jeans campaign with Brooke Shields, which changed everything. Speaker 2: Everybody in school owned Calvin Kleins--everybody. That's what was happening. Speaker 1: We used to get them dry cleaned (laughter). Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And they were hard. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Do you remem- ? They were such a terrible shape. Speaker 2: They were (laughter). Flattened-- Speaker 1: Square, square--flat. Speaker 2: --flattened your butt. Speaker 1: Right. Right (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter) But you had them. Speaker 1: But--and they were really expensive? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But you had them. Speaker 2: But you had them. Everybody had them. Speaker 1: And that, that college students were buying fashion was different. Speaker 2: Well, this was even in high school. I mean, I was in high school-- Speaker 1: Oh, right. You were-- Speaker 2: --and that was happening. Speaker 1: You were-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --you were in high school and they were buying it. Speaker 2: Yeah, and they were--oh, yeah. Speaker 1: And they were expensive. Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah, they were. Speaker 1: So, the, the effect of the, the fashion designers who were on the national scene being purchased by high school students was-- Speaker 2: Definitely was evidence that this was real-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --and could be real for-- Speaker 1: And how did your parents [Gloria Gardner Bonds and Earnest Lars] react to you wanting to get into fashion? Speaker 2: You know, my dad, in typical fashion, was like very supportive. He was like, "Hey, man, whatever you want to do, you know, as long as you not hurting anybody," (laughter). I can't help doing his voice (laughter). He was the first one to say, "You need to make some clothes for some big women." And he was right. Anyhoots, I'm jumping ahead, I know. But-- Speaker 1: But that's interesting. He planted that seed from-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --an early age. Well because--now, so, typically, what was the--what was the muse body for you? Speaker 2: It was probably--it was definitely thicker than a New York [New York] sensibility 'cause when I first went to fashion school, I really got reprimanded for making like, you know--I mean, I'm, I'm black. I mean, our people are thick. These are--like a lot of my images were like of, you know, no--not, not heavy women, but like thick women. It was always desirable, you know, a nice butt and, you know, fullness, womanhood. Speaker 1: And the--and you had been making clothes for real people, so-- Speaker 2: Yeah. So, that's what the sketches looked like and that was just not what it was. It took forever for my eye to adjust. Speaker 1: Was that at Brooks [Brooks College, Long Beach, California] also or at, when you got to FIT [Fashion Institute of Technology, New York, New York]? Speaker 2: When I got to FIT, I was still making them too big in (air quotes) you know, fashion terms. Story_ID: 666417 Speaker 1: So, what years are you at FIT [Fashion Institute of Technology, New York, New York]? Speaker 2: My last year there was '87 [1987]-- Speaker 1: Right (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) and I was like there--I was only there for one year because--and then I left to take a job. So, it was like--you know, I was in FIT and I, I was learning some but like, you know, I had already gone to school [Brooks College, Long Beach, California] for two years and like been making patterns from newspapers for a long time and, you know, I was learning more, but then like not enough for me to warrant just hanging out there or whatever. And then, you know, I would enter at the time like, you know, there'd be like design competitions, I'm like, hey, let me enter this. It's like--would be a monetary prize and some travel or whatever. And then I started winning those things and then I was like, well, this is great, but it started feeling like I was like hanging out in school to like be the professional contestant more than to learn anything. Speaker 1: So, where did you learn construction? Is this something you taught yourself? Speaker 2: No. I mean, like my [maternal] grandma's [Tina Lee Robinson Gardner] dress, Binky [ph.] showing me all that couture [at I. Magnin and Company], you know, trial and error, like making prom dresses [for students at El Cerrito High School, El Cerrito, California]; you know what I mean? And then you go to fashion school and then all those pieces come together. Like, you know, every pattern class I took was like, oh, I get it. So, that's why the seams were twirling around. You know, it just all was so much more powerful because I'd already experienced so much of it when I started really learning the true way of going about building clothes. So, you know, yeah, it just came to a point where it's just like, okay, so I'm gonna like do it. Speaker 1: 'Cause you felt like you had learned as much as you needed to. Speaker 2: That sounds so arrogant. It wasn't that. I just felt like I wasn't learn- I felt like I learned more in a practical setting than I was in school and theory, you know. I'm like I wanna really learn what happens as people really make this real. Because part of me--I mean, I made those prom dresses and stuff, but then I was starting to have second doubt--doubts in school. I'm like, how does anybody make money at this? I've been working on this jacket for a week (laughter). How on earth are you ever supposed to make this work in a practical sense? That was really concerning me more than anything as I'm in school sewing, sewing. I'm like, how does this turn into anything real monetarily when it takes so much? Speaker 1: Were you taking the business of fashion classes as well? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Just design. Speaker 2: Just design. Speaker 1: And did FIT have those kind of classes? Speaker 2: Then, it was very segmented, like there was the merchandising program and there was the design program and ne'er the two shall meet. I think things have changed somewhat now. I think they're a little more fluid in their--I mean, there's still like definitely set programs, but I think there's like--there's an opening to kind of like, you know, explore other areas that affect your direct area. Speaker 1: 'Cause that's essentially the question you were asking. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: All right. Okay. I can make this jacket, but--(laughter). Speaker 2: But it took a week and how does--how do I make money on that if it took a week? How do you make this work? Speaker 1: And a week seemed like a long time to you. Speaker 2: A long time. If you're gonna--one jacket? I mean, like, it's not gonna feed me, so how does this work (laughter)? Speaker 1: But as you are--well, were you noticing what other classmates were making and was it taking them the same amount of time? Speaker 2: Probably similar amounts of time. I wasn't slow but I wasn't very fast either 'cause I always was a perfectionist in terms of like, you know, I wanted the result to be professional looking. I do not want anybody asking me, "Did you make that?" Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: That was an insult to me: "Did you make that?" Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Why? Does it look like I made it? What's wrong with it (laughter)? Story_ID: 666418 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And your style, are--what style are you developing while you--before you leave school? Speaker 2: It's all very, very rigid and architectural, probably overly so in many cases. (Laughter) You know, it was the '80s [1980s] so, you know. Speaker 1: And you were interested in architecture, weren't you? Speaker 2: I was. I actually wanted to be an architect before I learned fashion. I left that whole part out. Speaker 1: Did you take any architecture classes? Speaker 2: You know, in high school [El Cerrito High School, El Cerrito, California], I took drafting courses and all that. Yeah, that factored into the construction, too, sure. Speaker 1: Be- I'm asking about construction-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --because something-- Speaker 2: Forgot about that. Speaker 1: --that takes you a week--I mean, just based upon your work, it is so detailed in the construction. Not every designer--actually, not many designers are like that right now or even not necessarily then. So, I'm wondering, in school, your week's worth of making a jacket might be different from somebody else's week. Speaker 2: Maybe. Speaker 1: But you weren't paying attention to that. Speaker 2: You know what? I was like, I'm on my path. I'm like, I don't know what you're--you guys are doing, but this is what I need to do, or feel like I need to do. Speaker 1: FIT [Fashion Institute of Technology, New York, New York] is, is the school that cranks out a lot of incredible talent. Who, who else was there with you? Speaker 2: You know, the same year I was there, Victor Alfaro was there, and John Bartlett. Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: And, yeah, we used to all like be in each other's labs, working through the night on stuff. And that was pretty remarkable that we were all around--the same time and we all knew each other. I thought--I'm like, hm, okay. Well, there's something to that, I guess, clearly. Speaker 1: Well, and, and each of you certainly has made a name for yourself in the business. Speaker 2: And in our own specific ways and stuff. Speaker 1: In very different ways. Right (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. So, yeah. And--but you don't really think about that when you're in school. You're just like, look, I just want a job. Story_ID: 666419 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, you got a job. What was--and, and a number of jobs. So, what types of jobs were you having when you left FIT [Fashion Institute of Technology, New York, New York]? Speaker 2: I never got a job at a designer house--well, I freelanced at a designer house like when I was about to start my own business. Every time I won a competition and got to go to Europe, I'd be looking for a job. Speaker 1: In Europe? Speaker 2: Um-hm, 'cause that's what my plan was, like I'll work in Paris [France] for a couple years or work in Italy for a couple ye- couple years then I'll come back or whatever. I just never got a job. And I never had the guts to just move there and just--with no job and see how it works. It's just like, I'd be making grapes indefinitely (laughter). Speaker 1: But, but, at the same time that you're-- Speaker 2: I can't get back. Speaker 1: --you're about--you're going there, Patrick Kelly is now huge. I mean, he's, he's the rising star. Speaker 2: He's done it, yes. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And he's around at the time that I'm getting those trips, yeah. Speaker 1: Did you interact with him? Speaker 2: No. And everybody I knew in Paris knew him but like I never met him, you know what I mean? It just never happened then. You know what? I never thought to look for a job with Patrick 'cause I'm like I don't wanna be the black guy looking at the black guy for a job. It's just like, you know what? I just--(shakes head). Speaker 1: But, was it inspiring to you to know that he was (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Very. Speaker 1: 'Cause he was in Paris--wasn't he? His (unclear) is there. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Oh, very, yes. I mean, come on. The Chambre Syndicale [Ecole de la Chambre Syndicale de la Couture Parisienne, Paris, France] accepting him? Oh--which is like the governing authority of French fashion officially accepting this African American who moved over there into like their realm. I mean, that was just--I'm presen- I'm getting goosebumps just talking about it. Speaker 1: Sure. Speaker 2: It was just like-- Speaker 1: Well because the context is American fashion had not been taken seriously by Europeans. The, the--what the, the 'Battle of Versailles' ['Grand Divertissement a Versailles']-- Speaker 2: Exactly, yeah. Speaker 1: --in '73 [1973]--so that's a bit early-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --it's twelve years earlier I guess than, than Patrick. But, still, that's still new. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: That was the first time that American designers were taken seriously (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And by now, it's kind of dissipated. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: It's like all--it's been downhill since 'Versailles,' you know. And now, let's face it: America is on the copycat train. You know, Europe shows and then the New York [New York] shows come and it looks awfully European, you know what I mean, like--and so they've kind of lost, you know, whatever we gained and that, that monument is showing at this point in history (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But so back-- Story_ID: 666420 Speaker 1: When you're going to Paris [France], there still is interest in American designers, isn't there? Speaker 2: Not really (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Not so much? Speaker 2: Not so much, no. In fact, you know, I mean, my book, which I just thought was my book, when I looked for a job here was always commented that it was so European; and, you know, I would make--just sketching the clothes that like spoke to me instead of sketching for the house, sketching for the house--because I just thought, well, if you're a house looking for a--you know, more, then if I'm just sketching for you, well then you already have that and what else, I thought, you know. Speaker 1: So, when you say this, you--what were you doing? You're ske- when you're sketching for the house? Speaker 2: You know, I wasn't really sketching specifically for the house, but I was just trying to come up with like good sound ideas that can be interpreted for the house. You know, I mean, I thought that that would be the, the lens through which and the interviewer would be reviewing the book, but that's just not how it works. It's not--it's not that. It's not--it's not as evolved a process as you would imagine (laughter)--or that I imagined at the time. And, in fact, basically what usually happened was they took your book back and Xeroxed it and, you know; and, in fact, I'm going on the record for saying this but like one of my school projects, Gaultier [Jean Paul Gaultier] who I respect and adore and who was a master, but one of my jackets ended up in (laughter) in the collection. You know, the thing that got me to Paris, I was like, aw, man--I never even interviewed there. I was like, hm, well, maybe I should've. And then another trip, I got to go to Italy and on this trip and it--where my book got Xeroxed. And then I came back home jobless and I was working at another competition because apparently I was the professional con- contestant (laughter). I'm like cutting a jacket out as this kid comes in with a Women's Wear [Women's Wear Daily] and this thing that I'm cutting is on the cover of Women's Wear where my book was Xeroxed (laughter). It's a coat version of the jacket that I'm cutting out (laughter). And I was like-- Speaker 1: And whose--who made that one? Speaker 2: It was Versace. Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: And--'cause that's what happens. Speaker 1: Yeah, sure. Speaker 2: I mean, it's what happens. You know what I mean? And then when--I, I remember like all those years later when I saw like, you know, other things that were very similar in different European collections, I'm like, ah, some kid was looking for a job and probably got--I hope he got a job at one of these places or some place (laughter). But, you know, when you see something that's so off the beaten track in two houses the same season, after that happened to me twice, I was like, you know what? This is what happens. And, whatever. I was like crushed at the time, but then, you know, the big stories. Like, if there's not more where that came from, well, you need to hit the road anyway. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Right?..