 Story_ID: 487359 Speaker 1: I'm Denise Gines, the interviewer with The HistoryMakers. Scott Stearns is the videographer, and Lurly [ph.] is observing. Would you please state your name and spell it for me, please? Speaker 2: My name is [HistoryMaker] Kenny Leon, K-E-N-N-Y, L-E-O-N. Speaker 1: Do you have a middle initial, a middle name? Speaker 2: Yes, but I'm not talking about it (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay (laughter). Speaker 2: My name is Kenneth Leroy Leon at birth. Speaker 1: Alright, and what is your date of birth? Speaker 2: Two, ten, fifty-six [February 10, 1956]. Speaker 1: And your place of birth? Speaker 2: Tallahassee, Florida. Speaker 1: And what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I am a stage director and a film director. Speaker 1: The location of this interview? Speaker 2: I am the artistic director of True Colors Theatre Company [Atlanta, Georgia] and we're in the offices of True Colors Theatre Company. Speaker 1: And today's date? Speaker 2: September 10, 19--2007 [sic. September 9, 2007]. Story_ID: 487360 Speaker 1: Now, I'm going to ask you what I call People magazine-ish type questions to begin with. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: I guess my favorite color is a, is a toss-up between red and blue. Speaker 1: And what do you like to eat? What's your favorite food? Speaker 2: Chicken. Speaker 1: When you go on vacation, what is your favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: I don't have a favorite vacation destination--I like to travel a lot, so I guess the most exciting place I've been is South Africa. Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: No. Any day above ground is great. Speaker 1: And, speaking of phrases or sayings, do you have a favorite phrase? Speaker 2: I think one that comes to mind is something I always tell the actors, you know, all you have is your time and your talent. Those are the two greatest gifts that you have, so use them wisely. Speaker 1: Very good. Story_ID: 487361 Speaker 1: Let's talk about your mother and her family. Tell me your mother's name and tell me where she was born. Speaker 2: My mother's name is Annie Ruth--now her name is Annie Ruth Holtzclaw [Annie Wilson Holtzclaw]. She was born Annie Ruth Wilson, and her mother was Mamie Wilson [ph.]. Speaker 1: And, can you spell her last name now? Speaker 2: H-O-L-T-Z-C-L-A-W. Speaker 1: And where was she born, your mother? Speaker 2: Tallahassee, Florida. Speaker 1: Did she share any stories about her growing up? Speaker 2: No (laughter). Did my mother share any stories about me growing up? Speaker 1: No, about her growing up. Speaker 2: About her growing up. No, I mean I knew she grew up in Tallahassee, Florida. She grew up as a, you know, out in the country of Tallahassee, Florida, and so I mean, there are plenty of things that go along with that, you know. Speaker 1: But she didn't share anything specifically about her growing up? She never told you about her--you know, did she go to school? What grade did she go to, did she finish school? Speaker 2: No, no stories like that. Speaker 1: Do you know (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I know my mother--she didn't finish high school until I was away at college [Clark College; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia]. But I didn't know she hadn't finished high school, but I knew she was working two jobs and she was doing something at night, and I found out she was going to school to finish her high school--to get her high school diploma. So, she did that much later, and then she also ended up going to dietary school and became a dietician and all of that, but she didn't really share that with me early on. Later on, I found out that she got all that, you know, later, and I was very proud of her, you know, becoming a dietician and taking care of four children. Speaker 1: What was your personal relationship like with your mother? You say you had three other siblings, right? Speaker 2: I think it would be better if I just told you the whole thing, because then you're going to ask me questions that are going to like--they're going to seem like they're half answered, you know what I'm saying. No, you don't know what I mean. Like if you said--since we're having this conversation--if you said, "So tell me about your early years," and then I can start telling you about that--because when you ask me about my mother, I have to like start in the beginning and talk about my grandmother (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, I'm going to ask you about your grandmother. But I just-- Speaker 2: Okay. It's hard to answer them because I can only answer them--you're looking at me like I'm crazy (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) No, no. Speaker 2: I can only answer them-- Speaker 1: Okay tell me-- Speaker 2: --I'll answer exactly what you-- Speaker 1: Tell me about your mother and your grandmother, okay. If you want to start with your grandmother and work your way forward, is that what you're saying? Tell me about your (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm just trying to answer the question. This might take about five hours (laughter). But, what was the question you asked me originally? Speaker 1: About your mother and your relationship (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) About my mother. Yeah, you said when you have stories about my mother, her growing up. Story_ID: 487362 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) She grew up on a farm? Speaker 2: Yeah, she grew up--my mother [Annie Wilson Holtzclaw]--that's very good--my mother was the seventh of thirteen children, and there were seven girls and six boys. And so, you know, they grew up on a farm. I don't know a whole lot about it. I just know that when I was born, my mother was fifteen years old. And early in life, she decided to leave Tallahassee, Florida and come down to St. Petersburg, Florida to make a way for our family. She was no longer going to be with my father. My father was, you know, he was nineteen years old, a sharecropper in Tallahassee, Florida as well. So, my mother being a single parent, went to St. Petersburg, Florida and left me with my grandmother. At that time my grandmother had like one kid that was still at home. So, I became like the fourteenth child, so my early years I spent with my grandmother, you know, sitting on the porch out in the country waiting for cars to come by, chopping wood, heating water for a bath, going to the outhouse. You know, we were like really, really poor but it was all fun and great out in the country, you know out in the woods picking berries, picking plums, walking three miles to my cousin's house who lived not far away and my grandmother on my father's side also lived in Tallahassee, Florida, too. She was Alice Leon and Zack Leon were their names. My father's name is Leroy Leon. So, I stayed with my grandmother until I was like, I don't remember, maybe nine or so. In the meantime, my mother went to St. Petersburg, Florida and met Johnnie Holtzclaw and married him, and then so we had a self-made family. Then one summer I went to visit my mother, and they said, "Well you can either stay with your mother, or you can come back and live with your grandmother." And I was like, well, I want to live with grandmother, because that's cool and, of course, they had already arranged for me to come and live with my mother and stepfather, which I sort of hated, but I ended up moving to St. Petersburg, Florida, and you know, growing up there we grew up sort of poor. I was in a program called Upward Bound. Speaker 1: Okay, we're just jumping ahead just a little bit. Let me go back and ask you about your grandmother. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: What was her name? Speaker 2: Mamie Wilson [ph.]. Speaker 1: And where she lived, you said--was she a sharecropper or did she own the land where you were growing up? Speaker 2: Yeah, she owned the land. Speaker 1: She owned the land. Do you know how they acquired the land? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: And what about your grandfather, your mother's father (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't know. I don't know. See, so we really didn't skip it, I just don't know. Speaker 1: Okay. That's fine. And now, your father--you said his name was Leroy? Speaker 2: Leroy. Speaker 1: Leroy Leon. And his mother's and father's name? Speaker 2: Alice and Jack. Speaker 1: Jack. Do you know the year that your mother was born? Just so that if-- Speaker 2: She was fifteen years older than I was. Speaker 1: All right, and your father? Speaker 2: He was nineteen. Speaker 1: And he was also born in Tallahassee? Speaker 2: Yes. No, he was born in Jacksonville [Florida], I think he was born in Jacksonville. Speaker 1: And Alice and Jack, your grandparents on your father's side. They too, they were sharecroppers? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Do you know the name of the owners of the property where they were sharecroppers? Speaker 2: No. Story_ID: 487363 Speaker 1: You started school in Tallahassee [Florida]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Tell me the name of the elementary school that you went to. Speaker 2: Rainey Elementary School [Leon County, Florida], R-A-N-E-Y [sic.]. Speaker 1: And what was that experience like? Speaker 2: I don't remember. I just remember we were in the country and we were in one big room. Speaker 1: How many grades were in that room? Speaker 2: Six. Speaker 1: Six grades? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Now, tell me about your brothers and sisters, or your siblings. I don't know whether you have brothers and sisters (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm the oldest. Growing up, I was the oldest of four, then later on my mother [Annie Wilson Holtzclaw] had another kid, so I'm the oldest of five. I have a sister who is two years younger than I am. Her name is Jackie Leon [Jackie Leon Henderson]. I have a brother whose name is Tony Leon [Antonio Leon]. I have another brother--my mother and my stepfather [Johnnie Holtzclaw] had a son named Donovan Holtzclaw, and I have another brother named Julian Holtzclaw. Is that all? Yeah. Speaker 1: In elementary school, were there any extracurricular activities that you were part of while in Tallahassee? We're still in Florida. Speaker 2: Not that I remember, no. When I moved to St. Petersburg [Florida], in elementary school there you know--in elementary school, just like any kid, you know, you play kickball, softball, basketball, all of that. I played volleyball on the volleyball team in junior high school, and played basketball as well. Speaker 1: So, your brothers and sisters--they stayed with your [maternal] grandmother [Mamie Wilson (ph.)] as well, or did they go with your mother, and were you the only one that was left in Tallahassee? Speaker 2: My mother left and went to St. Petersburg, she was with my sister, and she was pregnant with my brother, and they went to St. Petersburg. I was the only one that stayed. Story_ID: 487364 Speaker 1: So tell me what it was like when you moved to St. Petersburg [Florida]. Speaker 2: Well, I didn't like it very much, you know, because I missed my [maternal] grandmother [Mamie Wilson (ph.)]. And you know, you love your mother [Annie Wilson Holtzclaw], but you're in a situation where you have another male figure in the house as your stepfather [Johnnie Holtzclaw]. I didn't adjust to that for a while. Speaker 1: Did you not have a relationship with your father [Leroy Leon]? Speaker 2: Not a father relationship. I wouldn't call it a father relationship--I knew him, but he was not a part of our upbringing, a part of my upbringing in my life, but he was my father. Speaker 1: How old were you when your mother and father separated? Speaker 2: I don't know. Speaker 1: You don't remember? So what elementary school did you go to in St. Petersburg? Speaker 2: Campbell Park Elementary School [St. Petersburg, Florida]. Speaker 1: How much different was that school? Speaker 2: It was different because it was a lot more people, a lot more kids. You know, in the country we were way out and we all had to catch the same bus, and it takes you a while, you know, forty-five minutes to get home on the bus and a lot of people on the bus, you know, a third of them were probably in your family, but in the city it was just a lot more. But I loved school, I loved people. Academically, I was really successful, and I was outgoing, and I loved sports and I loved academics, so you know I was a--. Speaker 1: So, you were a good student? Speaker 2: I would say so. Speaker 1: And what sports did you play? Speaker 2: (Unclear). Volleyball, basketball, softball. Speaker 1: Were there any organized sports that you played outside of school? Speaker 2: Outside of school? I played baseball and I played volleyball for the school. Speaker 1: What about music and art? Speaker 2: Yep, I was in the orchestra. I played a violin for like five years, and I played a trumpet later on in life, but I really appreciated the sound of a violin, so. Speaker 1: Were there any teachers that you remember that might have been an influence on you? Speaker 2: Oh, plenty. I had Mr. Smith [ph.], who was my fifth grade teacher, Ms. Cohen [ph.] who was my fourth grade teacher, and I had Ms. Howard [ph.] who was like my eighth grade geography teacher, and she was great because everybody used to think she was an overly disciplinarian, but she really was a person who really pushed the students a lot to really succeed and to try and be your best and to teach you that no one's going to give you anything in life. So, she was really great. But, I had a lot of great teachers throughout high school [Northeast High School, St. Petersburg, Florida] and college [Clark College; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] as well. Story_ID: 487365 Speaker 1: Tell me about the neighborhood in which you lived. If you can think of a sound, a sight or a smell that would take you back to that time, what would you say? Speaker 2: Well, early on, my neighborhood was in the country of Tallahassee, Florida and that was great. That was country life, small farm life. But later on in St. Petersburg [Florida] it was more of a--we were in a poor neighborhood, but we didn't know that it was poor, so, you know, we had a car--and then when I was sixteen, I had a car, so I always thought that we were okay. We always had something to eat, and it was always fun, and it was a close relationship between all of the young people in the neighborhood, you know, and there were always people who were responsible for us. So you couldn't get out of line because the woman next door would be on you and everybody usually went to the same church and the same school, so it was really a communal, family feeling in the neighborhood when I was young. After ninth grade, we had integration, and then I went to a school, Northeast High School [St. Petersburg, Florida], and that's when things probably changed a little because you were bussed out of your neighborhood to fifteen miles away, you know, and with people who didn't watch over you in the middle of the day. And the school was very rich, so you had like swimming pools and driver education range and we were on something called modular scheduling, which was like twenty minute mods--so you had to go to school for like--you would have a class for like two mods and then have two mods off, free time. And you know, coming from my background, we didn't know what to do with free time. What am I going to do now? Walk around? You couldn't go home because you're so far away from home, so you know high school was divided between growing up poor and having the feel of family around you, to going to a better school but not having that feel of family. Speaker 1: Tell me about the people in the neighborhood, because I asked you about a sound that reminds you of that time, or a smell or a sight that would remind you. Just think about a square block from where you live, and tell me who lived there, maybe the occupations of your friends' parents, and who were the merchants in the area? Speaker 2: We didn't have merchants. My stepfather [Johnnie Holtzclaw] was a laborer for the City of St. Petersburg. My mother [Annie Wilson Holtzclaw] was a dietician at the time, you know, and I think my friend's, Spanky's [ph.] dad was a post office worker. Most of the people were laborers. His mother was a teacher, so we had one or two people who worked at the post office and was a teacher. That was a big thing. Everybody else was just basic workers. They were either going to be a maid or a laborer or a cafeteria worker, what have you. But, we didn't really know that much about what folks' families did, you know (laughter). Like we just went to school and came home and played basketball every day, so the sound that I would probably--the sound that comes to mind is the sound of a basketball on concrete, because we played basketball every day, from like fifth grade to twelfth grade, you know, as far as I can remember. And growing up in Florida, you know, it was like hot every day, but that's what we did. Story_ID: 487366 Speaker 1: What were holidays like at your house? Speaker 2: Thanksgiving was great. Everybody ate and watched sports, and, you know, my mother [Annie Wilson Holtzclaw] having a large family, sometimes all of her family who were in the South would all get together, you know. So, it was a lot of food and a lot of sports watching in our household. Christmas was great, because we always believed in it. Also, we were a very religious family, so we went to church all the time, you know--Tuesday, Thursday, Friday, Sunday. So, it was a lot of Easter egg hunts and splitting time with church and the idea of going to sleep, waking up getting toys as well, so we kind of combined the real meaning of Christmas with the sort of secular definition of Christmas. It was all fun. Speaker 1: Were there any special traditions that you think of now? Was there anything special during any holiday that might have been a little different (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The only thing I can think of is the best about it was going to sleep the night before Christmas and smelling Mom cooking potato pie overnight and trying to go to sleep, because you know my mother said the quicker you go to sleep, the quicker you can wake up, you know. But we would be like anticipating Christmas, and that was always great, even if you just got a fire truck, you know, that was fine. That was a big thing, until you got to the age where you didn't get anything. And so, for us, that was like about fourteen or so. The older kids didn't get anything. You got something, it would be like socks and shirts, practical stuff. You didn't get any stuff--you didn't get any toys, or, you know, cool stuff. Story_ID: 487367 Speaker 1: You said there weren't any merchants, but where did you shop [in St. Petersburg, Florida]? Where did, you know, where did your family go? Was there a butcher or bakery, grocery store (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, we had a regular store. We had a corner store. The Jewish guy owned the store. We knew him, and we'd go down there, and you shop in that little corner store most of the time. Even though the food was higher, you trusted the people that were working there, so it was like kind of a cool thing, you know, to go to the people in that neighborhood. It was a Jewish guy, a white guy that owned that store. Speaker 1: What did growing up in a segregated community mean for you? Speaker 2: It was great. It was great, because it was like family. It was like having an extended family. It was like I said, you know, everybody in the neighborhood could discipline you, and usually everybody went to the same church and they cared about you. And when integration happened, I don't think that there was that care and concern, you know. Even on sports teams like--on our sports teams, like we were very competitive, and it was a tradition of always winning because a lot of the black athletes went to the same school, and they fed right into the same high school. But, when integration happened, you split all these black athletes up, and then so there was not a tradition of that high school winning anymore, because it was all spread out. But, I remember like Mr. Bonner [ph.], who was one of the coaches, and Mr. Davis [ph.] and Mr. Jenkins [ph.]. These guys were like, if you missed a free throw in practice, you would get like smacked, you know, on the butt with one of those little boards until everybody made all ten of their free throws, and that was just really, but we didn't think anything of it. We was like, we were supposed to achieve like that, but when they integrated and you start smacking students that weren't African Americans, then it was like it was a big problem, so you had to cut all that out, you know. I'm not saying all that was good or bad, I'm just saying that was the difference, you know. Even the teachers could discipline you in a different way, because you felt they cared about you, and they would tell your mother. "I'm going to see your mother in church and I'm going to tell her you're screwing up in school." But when you got to know teachers that you don't really know a history of, then that was not part of the scenario. Story_ID: 487368 Speaker 1: You talk about church, and that your family was very religious. What church did your family attend? Speaker 2: Macedonia Freewill Baptist Church [St. Petersburg, Florida]. My [maternal] grandmother [Mamie Wilson (ph.)] attended Tessalena Baptist Church. [ph.] She was from the old school and they used to baptize out in the river and stuff. But, at our church, Macedonia, they had that water up under the pulpit. They used to open it up, and baptize you there. So, we grew up in a small church. The church had one hundred, one hundred fifty members maybe, but that's where we grew up, as a part of that whole congregation. A lot of those people had an impact on my life, like Mr. Philliu who was also a teacher. Lewis Philliu [ph.] was a teacher, but he was also the head of the choir for the young folks, you know, so he would teach you about acting and about singing, and about getting you involved in stuff. And, then you had Ms. Warren [ph.], who died last year, who was our Sunday school teacher. But those people represent more than just your Sunday school teacher, sort of your acting instructor, they were like a part of your family. Story_ID: 487369 Speaker 1: And we--I got a lot from growing up in Macedonia Church [Macedonia Freewill Baptist Church, St. Petersburg, Florida], because we used to do little plays for Easter and for Christmas, and that was the first experience I had with doing any kind of plays until I went to a program called Upward Bound, which was a program that benefitted poor families, you know, but who had college potential. Angela Bassett was a part of that same program, because we grew up in the same town, St. Petersburg [Florida]. So, we would act in the Upward Bound program. That was the only place where I really did plays or anything, because in the school system, especially when they integrated to Northeast High School [St. Petersburg, Florida], which is the school I went to, they didn't have--the black students could only be maids and butlers, and they didn't have the imagination to say, "Oh, no, it's acting, you can do this role." So, it was like, you didn't want to be a part of that, and I was really heavily involved in politics of high school. So, I became student council president at the school that we integrated. I had white friends, I had black friends, but I didn't spend any time in the drama program because I was trying to boycott that and I was trying to get them to do the right thing. But, I did spend a lot of time with the Upward Bound program and in church, acting--never knowing that there were careers in acting. Speaker 2: So, there was no one that would actually tell you, you can actually do this for a living? Speaker 1: No. Oh, no. That wasn't the thing. I think we were probably being encouraged--but, I had some teachers, black and white, who encouraged you, you know, that you can be a teacher or you can be a--well, I wasn't good enough to be an athlete, but, you can be a teacher--but nothing about acting or performing or anything like that. Speaker 2: So, you went to high school in 1970. You were fourteen years old? Speaker 1: Nineteen-seventy four [1974], I graduated from high school. Speaker 2: So, you were fourteen when you started high school? Speaker 1: No, I was--I don't know. How old are you in tenth grade? Yeah. Speaker 2: Northeast High School is the name of it (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I remember that was the time when they had streaking, and people used to take off their clothes and run through the campus, in high school. You don't remember that, do you? But I still see that vividly in my head and sitting in the library and seeing these naked sixteen year old people run through the campus. Like "What is that?" But, it was like a little fad for a while. Story_ID: 487370 Speaker 1: Tell me a little more about the Upward Bound program. It was in the summertime? Speaker 2: The Upward Bound was, it was a great program. There were a lot of programs I think that this country benefitted from, but they don't really acknowledge that, like the CEDA program [Community and Economic Development Association]. The CEDA program, was like when I was in college [Clark College; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia], people like Samuel L. Jackson and Bill Nunn and all those folks, they were part of the CEDA program because they gave summer jobs in acting or theatre administration, to learn about it, you know. And, this was happening in New York [New York] as well. But, Upward Bound was all over, and I was in the program in St. Petersburg [Florida]. And almost every city had them, and what you did, every Saturday during the school year, you had to go to school on a college campus, and you take advance classes. And, then during the summer you would stay on college campuses for the whole summer for three months and you would take classes and you would also compete athletically against other Upward Bound programs in the country. So, you know, you accelerated your academic and your athletic progress, but you also competed. So, we would play Tampa [Florida] and Miami [Florida] and, you know, it was a whole, whole big thing. And then they would help you apply to colleges and their goal was to have 100 percent of us in college, and most of the time, we ended up in college. So, that's why I always believe in things like affirmative action, because I think of people like Angela Bassett. Without Upward Bound, she wouldn't be where she is. Without Upward Bound, I wouldn't be where I am, and all we needed was a little boost, a little up. I remember one time I looked on my parents--my mother's [Annie Wilson Holtzclaw] and my stepfather's [Johnnie Holtzclaw] IRS [Internal Revenue Service] application and their total income was $10,400, and that stuck in my mind. Back then, it was like oh that's a lot--but when I got older, it was like how could they raise four children--and I never thought I was poor--for $10,000, that's like, that's crazy. But it reminds me what [maternal] grandmother [Mamie Wilson (ph.)] had said, "If you have a kid, you'll always take care of it, because you just will." Story_ID: 487371 Speaker 1: You knew that you would go to college. Which college campus did you go to during the summer while you were--(simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well I knew that after going to an all-black junior high school and then the richest high school [Northeast High School, St. Petersburg, Florida] in the State of Florida for high schools, and becoming really involved with the program there and getting to know a lot of people, a variety of people, and--Craig Pippin was a white guy who was the star on the basketball team, and we became good friends, and his sister Sharon Pippin [ph.]. So, I really appreciated people and respected people regardless of their race, you know, so that was a good thing. So, when it got time for college, I said I needed to really get more involved in my specific culture, so I wanted to go to a predominantly black college [HBCU]. That was just really important to me, and I couldn't go to Tallahassee [Florida], because that's where my [maternal] grandmother [Mamie Wilson (ph.)] and all my uncles and aunts were, so I said I can't go to Tallahassee, that would be like being home. So, the next state up was Georgia. And, I said okay I'll go to Georgia, and the guy--what's his name--Syvell Brown [ph.], who was our counselor--he said, "Yeah, man there are a lot of schools in Atlanta [Georgia]. You know, they got the Atlanta University Center [Atlanta University Center Consortium, Atlanta, Georgia] with the six colleges, and it's just a great place, and Atlanta will change your whole outlook about life." So, I visited Atlanta and saw Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia] and Clark College [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] and Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia] with all those women and, you know, they had the theological center [Interdenominational Theological Center, Atlanta, Georgia] and they had Morris Brown [Morris Brown College, Atlanta, Georgia], and it was just, it just blew my mind. So, I decided to apply to Clark College because I wanted to be in a co-ed situation, I didn't want to be in an all men's college, and it's all right there in the same university center. So, I applied to Clark College, came to Clark College, and it was the best thing I'd ever done in my life. And at that time was when I met people like Samuel L. Jackson and Latanya Richardson who he later married, Bill Nunn--Spike Lee and I were in the same class--Monty Ross, who was one of the producers for 40 Acres and a Mule [40 Acres and a Mule Filmworks, Brooklyn, New York], and at the time, I also was friends with Angela Bassett. So, we had--if you think about all those people back then--none of us knew that we were going to be, you know, working or successful, but it was just sort of a little mini Harlem Renaissance back then. And at that time, I met a guy, Maynard Jackson, who became mayor of Atlanta, and I was on college campus as a freshman and this guy was saying, "Yeah, yeah, you can do anything and, you know, black is a good thing." And I just saw so much charisma and power and honesty in Maynard Jackson, and what I saw, what people could do in the City of Atlanta. They could do anything. You know, you had black judges, you had--of course, you had black people driving the bus, you had black city councilmen, you had Andy Young [HistoryMaker Andrew Young], and I met all these people. Over time, I met all these people--the King family, you know, Coretta [Coretta Scott King] was a great lady. Her daughter Yolanda [Yolanda King] and I were good friends. [HistoryMaker] John Lewis, you know, was a great friend of mine. You meet all these folks here in Atlanta. So, Atlanta sort of changed my sort of impression of the world. So, I thought with what I had gathered in junior high school and then what I'd gathered with the friends I'd made in high school, and then to come to college and come to Atlanta, I would have had a full view of the world, so I went to Clark College, I was excited about that. Story_ID: 487372 Speaker 1: And at that time, I was a political science major and sort of a drama minor, you know what I mean, all of my electives were in theater, but I was preparing to go to law school, because that's when my mom [Annie Wilson Holtzclaw] said, "You're a first generation college student--you're going to be a minister or you're going to be a lawyer, or you're going to do something that they know." And then I went to law school for, you know, for like that long. And when I left, I went to law school in L.A. [Los Angeles, California]--Southwestern University School of Law [Southwestern Law School], and I left there and came back to Florida for a minute. I said, I can't live in Florida, so I came back to Atlanta [Georgia], and when I came back to Atlanta, I had an audition for the Academy of Music and Theater [sic. Academy Theatre], and this guy, Frank Wittow who died last year--he was a great friend of mine, he had this company that would do plays in prisons and in the school system, and I got a job doing that, working improvisationally through theatre to create plays, and then also doing it in legitimate plays, like, you know, 'Richard III' [William Shakespeare] and 'Hamlet' [William Shakespeare]. At the end of that year, he said, "Okay, so you want to come back and work for me for two hundred dollars a week, or do you want to go back to law school?" So, I was like, "Ah, I think I like this." And, at that time, I was also starting to do television commercials, because I looked a certain way at a certain time, and my mother, who was a dietician in Florida--I think she was concerned about, "Is he going to make a living," or whatever, and she was watching television with one of her patients and she said, "That's my son, that's my son." She said, "Oh, he does commercials, oh he can make a million dollars." I was like, really? So, at that point, she said "Okay, I understand, you know, okay, I understand." Speaker 2: What was your first commercial? Speaker 1: It was an Aaron [Aaron's, Inc.] rent furniture television commercial, and there was a thing about a man was working so hard that he was not spending any time with his mother. And at the end of the commercial, she would take this, her purse and hit the man in the stomach, and I was the man. And, so it was like a really cute, funny commercial. Story_ID: 487373 Speaker 1: Now, you said you were a political major just going back (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Political science. Speaker 1: I'm sorry, political science major. And, what made you choose that major? Speaker 2: Because it had no math (laughter). I was good in math, but I hated math. And it was like, political science has no math, I'll do that, that'll be my major, and you get to talk about, you know, world issues and-- Speaker 1: You said in high school that you were very outspoken. Speaker 2: Absolutely (laughter). Speaker 1: And, what was going on during the civil rights era or times in St. Petersburg [Florida]? Were your parents [Annie Wilson Holtzclaw and Leon's stepfather, Johnnie Holtzclaw] active at all in any of the (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, no. My parents were real hardworking people, and chose to like stay out of trouble and remind us don't get in trouble. But, they also knew what they raised in me, because I was just always about changing the world and doing something, and I had a big mouth. But, I always believed in the law, you know what I mean, and if you believed in the law and lived by the law and really worked hard, you know, the world is yours. I don't feel that way now, but I thought there was a time when in America when you raise a young person--we always had hope, and I don't think I see a lot of hope with everybody. But growing up, it was it was like yeah, all you have to do is work hard and do this, and you'll be out there, and you'll make a lot of money and you'll--so but, we had a lot of race riots in St. Petersburg, Florida and we had a lot of race riots in the school, you know like even at Northeast High School [St. Petersburg, Florida], there were race riots at times, so even that's very hard because you had friends that were white friends, and then you got riots, you know. It was like black kids throwing all the motorcycles that all the white kids owned into the pool. We didn't have motorcycles, you know what I mean. So, those were hard times because then there were people, like myself, who went like, "Look, we don't need to do this. We need to come together and be together. We need to fight issues like why can't black students be involved in the theater program." But that was just the time we were going through, so, a lot of race riots, a lot of marches in the city, and you know, I was part of other type things, but-- Speaker 1: Did you see anything improve because of the marches in your city? Speaker 2: (Laughter) To tell the truth, I don't really remember, you know. They had to change, because there were times when like, say, 16th Street Junior High School [John Hopkins Middle School, St. Petersburg, Florida], we didn't have certain books and stuff, and didn't have the equipment that the white students had, so some of that started changing, but I was in school and I saw that the textbooks we had were like four or five years old, just bad books, and not only that, we were getting inferior education. So, the good thing about integration was that we had the same books and the same--it was the beginning of the computers--and the same things that they had. But, before that, we had less, you know what I mean. It's like in Atlanta [Georgia], I'm part of a program called 100 Black Men [100 Black Men of Atlanta, Inc.]. And we had this girl who was just--passed every test and I mean, just was smart in school, passed every class. But when it came time for the standardized test, she didn't pass them, and this was the smartest girl in the school. It wasn't her fault, you know, but she didn't have the things, you know. So, I think I'm a product of that era, you know. Story_ID: 487374 Speaker 1: Tell me once again the law school that you attended. Speaker 2: Southwestern University School of Law [Southwestern Law School, Los Angeles, California]. Speaker 1: And one year, and you were ready to come back to the East Coast (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, not even one year. Speaker 1: Oh, it wasn't quite a year? Speaker 2: Unh-uh. But something happened. It was an emergency that happened at home. I had some friends that were in a car accident, and I was already going through a housing issue in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], and I said just let me go home and check on this. So, I left to check on that, and then while I was gone, they said, "Well you have to stay out the whole year. You can't come back until the following year." So, I was like, okay. So, then I went to Atlanta [Georgia] because I didn't want to live in Florida. Okay, I went to Atlanta and I was going to work a year and then go back to law school, but in that year, I changed my mind. Story_ID: 487375 Speaker 1: So, now you're working--you decided to take the two hundred dollars a week? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And tell me about that experience. Tell me what happens next. Speaker 2: Then I became a member of the Academy Theatre, which is--I went around the state doing plays for young people in elementary school, in high school, and I was also working the prisons doing workshops and then I worked with the homeless people doing something called 'People on the Brick' [ph.] with me and Barbara Lebow, who is a playwright. We actually went out and recruited homeless people and taught them acting skills and then we built a play about their lives. It was a beautiful thing in terms of opening my eyes about what it means to be homeless and how difficult that is, and how varied that is for every person that's out there. At that time, I really wanted to do something about the situation in the country. So, we were offered to do the same program in other cities, like D.C. [Washington, D.C.] and New York [New York], but I found out that the government really didn't want that, because once you spend time with the homeless population you realize that there are really serious problems out there. You realize that many of them are mentally ill. You realize that, and you have to deal with that. So, if you're not willing to deal with that, you're not willing to deal with the problem. We had a lot of security issues. If you're not willing to deal with security, if you're not willing to deal with putting families back together, if you're not willing to meet them halfway, then you're not really trying to solve the problem, you're just trying to put a bandage on it. You're just trying to say, okay they're homeless, so let's give them some beds. Well, that's not the problem. So, I decided not to really expand that program at that time, because I was really disillusioned about what people in this country really wanted to do about the homeless situation. So, I still find it true that people want to, they want to be known for doing something about it, but they really don't want to do something about it. But, that was a great time for me to combine what I knew about acting and putting that with some of my social concerns, hence the political science background. Then, I went to Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] and started out for a master's [degree] in political science. Speaker 1: Now what-- Speaker 2: And, this program was a program run by Mack Davis [ph.], and the idea was to study economics, business, psychology--everything with the idea of what does that mean being black in America studying these things. So, I finished that program, but I didn't finish my dissertation, so at the end of, I guess a year or two later, President Thomas Cole [HistoryMaker Thomas W. Cole] awarded me an honorary doctorate, so I'm proud of that. Speaker 1: So now, what year were you in--you worked with the program with homeless and acting from 1978 through-- Speaker 2: Seventy-eight [1978], I graduated. I went to law school [Southwestern University School of Law; Southwestern Law School, Los Angeles, California] in about '78 [1978], came back in '80 [1980], at the end of '79 [1979] or '80 [1980]. I went to graduate school in like, I guess it was like '82 [1982], a couple years of that. Story_ID: 487376 Speaker 1: While you're working in the master's [degree] program, where are you, are you still working, you're still working (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm in Atlanta [Georgia], and I'm still doing theater, still doing local theater in Atlanta. Speaker 1: And, tell me some of what you were doing in the local theaters. Speaker 2: Back then I was acting in all of the theater companies around town. Speaker 1: What were some of the productions that you worked on? Speaker 2: There was a company called Jomandi Productions, and I did plays for them, like 'Zooman and the Sign' [Charles Fuller], 'That Serious He-Man Ball' [Alonzo D. Lamont] with a company called Theatrical Outfit at the time. I played in--I starred in 'Split Second' ['Split second: A Play in Two Acts,' Dennis McIntyre]. Then at the Academy Theatre, we did like a range of things from 'Richard III' [William Shakespeare] to 'The Queen and The Rebel' [sic. 'The Queen and the Rebels,' Ugo Betti]. At that time, I also started directing. I directed my first show, which was 'The Wishing Place' by Beverly Trader [Beverly Trader Austin] and I thought it was great, you know. I don't know if everybody else thought it was great, but I thought it was great (laughter). And at that time, a lot of people came out to see that play. It was really abstract, you know, but it was dealing a lot with love, and I love that kind of play because it was like, it was kind of--it was not like a kitchen sink drama, it was like it was people dealing with real issues, but it was also like you had an opportunity to bring in the other elements of life, so, the spiritual elements and the poetic elements. So this play was really poetic and spiritual and moved in a lot of different ways. It moved very differently than a regular August Wilson play, or a Lorraine Hansberry play, but it was very miraculous. And at that time, Frank Wittow, who was the founder of the company, really liked me a lot--I spent nine years with this company. So, I was working nine years for that company. In the meantime, I was going back to try and get a master's and I was also working around town doing commercials and working for other theater companies. And, then Frank says, "Well, I don't think you really have the skills to direct, but I like you acting. I just want you to act in all these plays." So, I said, "It's time to go, Frank." And, so that's when I decided it was time for me to leave. But at the same time, this woman Timothy Near, whose sister is Holly Near, the folk singer, she came to town and she saw this 'Split Second' play I acted in, she saw the homeless thing I did, she saw another play I acted in, and she said, "You should apply to this program for the National Endowment for the Arts." It's called the NEA directors fellow program. So, I left the Academy Theatre at that time, applied to that program, and the National Endowment picked me, like one of six people, for this program. And this program would allow you to study with a large theater company and, you know, spend time deciding what you want to do in the field. It was very competitive, you know, it was over six hundred or seven hundred people applied, and they picked six. And what they said to me--well I applied to be a part of the Alliance Theatre, which was the big theater in Atlanta. And I was like, that theater is not diversified, and it's just like people with fur coats on, and they are one race and we need to have that theater for everybody. And so some of the people at the Alliance at that time said, "That's great, you should be a part of this." So, Timothy Near, who had just been named associate artistic director at that theater company, along with Bob Farley [Robert J. Farley], who was named artistic director--Bob Farley could not be here for like another six months, so she was like running the theater until he got here, and she saw my work, and she said, "Let's apply for this program, and then you'll be the resident director, and then you can come in and diversify the theater and be a part of the theater." And so, we applied for that, but then the panel said, "We like Kenny [HistoryMaker Kenny Leon] but we don't want him to be a part of the Alliance Theatre. We want him to leave Atlanta, that's what he needs." I said, "Well I filled out an application to diversify this theater." They said, "We want you, but you have to leave Atlanta." And so at that time, I had--I'm now divorced, but at that time, I was married, and my wife [Carole Mitchell-Leon] said, we said, she said, "Well, you gotta--you should go." Story_ID: 487377 Speaker 1: So, I went away, and I went to Center Stage [Baltimore Center Stage] in Baltimore [Maryland]. And so I did six months there working with Stan Wojewodski [Stan Wojewodski, Jr.] who later ran the Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] theater program, but he was at Center Stage in Baltimore. Great, so, I would assist direct, serve as assistant director on several projects, including 'Hamlet' [William Shakespeare] and at that time they had a play that had come out, called 'The Colored Museum' by George Wolfe [HistoryMaker George C. Wolfe]. Nobody knew him then, he had just wrote this play. So, I was working on 'The Colored Museum,' but not with George. This was another production with Lee Richardson [Lee Kenneth Richardson] directing, and George was just the writer. So, I met all these folks and I was there and then I remember taking the board of directors from that theater, and I said, "Why don't we go to New York [New York], and I'll head up--I'm the directing fellow. We'll go to New York, and I'll give a speech about being black in America, and we'll go see this play by this new playwright. This new playwright is August Wilson, and he wrote this play called 'Fences.'" So, I took this group there, and I went there and met August Wilson, and you know, August said, "Yeah, man, it's great, you know, with somebody like you in the world." And I thought he was great. So, I did six months fellowship at the Center Stage. In that whole region, I would go to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], New York, D.C. [Washington, D.C.] and, "I'm an NEA [National Endowment for the Arts] fellow. What can I learn from you?" I did that for six months-- Story_ID: 487378 Speaker 1: And then, in the second part of that six months, Timothy Near, who was the person at the Alliance Theatre, she said, "Look, I'm not taking the job at the Alliance. I've been offered the head job at San Jose Repertory Theatre in California. Can't you ask the panel if you can come out and spend some time with me for six months?" So, I was like, "Wow." So, I asked the panel, and they said, "Yeah, sure." So, I went to spend six months with Timothy and I acted in a play for her, 'Sizwe Banzi is Dead' [Athol Fugard], and then I did a workshop of a play called 'Cyparis' written by Barbara Lebow, and then also I came back to Atlanta [Georgia] to direct a play called 'T-Bone N Weasel' [Jon Klein] in that small space. So, I did all that. At the end of that year of fellowship, I got maybe two or three offers from around the country, and one of those offers was to come back to Atlanta and to be the associate artistic director at the Alliance Theatre, which was Timothy's old job. So, it was like, wait a minute. I was trying to get through the doors of this theater company and be a resident director, now I've spent a year away, and now they're offering me the associate artistic director's job. So, I came in, I did that, and had a good time working with Bob Farley [Robert J. Farley], the artistic director. And then two years later, they decided they did not want to go into the direction with the artistic director, they wanted a new artistic director. So, they had a national search and then they asked me, "Will you throw your hat into the ring?" I was like, "Yeah, but I know about 50 percent of how to run a large theater company, but I can fake the rest of it for a while." And to make a long story short, I got that job, so two years later, I became artistic director of the theater company that I was trying to just-- Speaker 2: The Alliance Theatre? Speaker 1: Yeah, to get in and just to diversify. So, I became the artistic director of that theater company. Speaker 2: And what year are we talking about that you were the NEA [National Endowment for the Arts] fellow? Speaker 1: Nineteen eighty-nine [1989]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Wait a minute, no, I'm sorry, 1987 I was a fellow. Nineteen eighty-eight [1988], I was named associate artistic director of the theater company. In 1990, I became artistic director, and I left in 2001. Speaker 2: All right, you mentioned that you were married. Who did you marry, and what year did you marry? Speaker 1: Oh, I don't know that. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Nah, I was married to an actress, a local actress by the name of Carol Mitchell [Carol Mitchell-Leon], and I was married eleven years. Speaker 2: Any children of the union? Speaker 1: No. Story_ID: 487379 Speaker 1: You talk about meeting August Wilson. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Tell me more about him and your relationship with him. Speaker 2: Wow. Well, when I was named associate artistic director of the theater, the first play-- first they wanted me to do some other play by some other writer, but then August had just written a play called 'Joe Turner's Come and Gone' [August Wilson]. It wasn't even published yet, and I said, "Wow, I want to do this new play." And August said, "Man, you can do my plays anytime, even when they're still running on Broadway." So, that was the beginning of our relationship. So, the first play I did at the Alliance [Alliance Theatre] as associate was 'Joe Turner's Come and Gone.' And then, every year after that, I did a play by August Wilson if it was ready. And when I started True Colors Theatre Company--I'm jumping ahead, but when I started that company, later on, the first play we did was 'Fences' by August Wilson. And, the first Broadway play that I directed was 'A Raisin in the Sun' [Lorraine Hansberry]. The second play that I directed was 'Gem of the Ocean' by August Wilson, so he's always been a big part of my life, even when he didn't even know it, because he encouraged a lot of people. I would say that without August Wilson, the whole history of American theater would be completely different, because when August came along, you have to understand that there was--the only thing that was happening was--in New York [New York] 'The Cosby Show' was happening, and there wasn't as many jobs as there are in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] now for African Americans. So, you got a lot of folks, from Delroy Lindo, Laurence Fishburne, Angela Bassett, Samuel L. Jackson, Denzel Washington--all these folks were doing plays by August Wilson. So, he made it possible for many of us to work, and for directors. One thing he demanded was that, even though he allowed white directors to direct his plays, he always said, "I want black directors to direct my plays." And he had director approval, so because of that, then people like myself and Marion McClinton, and Seret Scott and Timothy Vaughn [sic. Timothy Douglas] and Claude Purdy--all of us were given an opportunity to direct on the regional theatre level because no one else was giving us an opportunity to direct any kind of plays. So, August wrote ten great plays. He wrote more plays for Broadway than any playwright that we can think of. So, practically he just gave directors, designers, and actors jobs. And, almost any actor you can think of, you know, Roc Dutton [Charles S. Dutton]--that whole, Roc Dutton got a television show called 'Roc' because of his work on 'The Piano Lesson' [August Wilson], you know. All that cast--they took that whole cast out to Hollywood and they did that show, you know. One of the first roles that Sam Jackson did was Boy Willie in 'The Piano Lesson' before Charles Dutton did it. So, we have much to thank him for, and also because the regional theater--the only play they would do by an African American writer was August Wilson. So, every regional theater in this country was doing August's work. So, that means you have actors working all over the region. Story_ID: 487380 Speaker 1: But he means a lot to me in that sense. He means a lot to me in terms of giving me personal guidance, even when he didn't know that, you know. It's how he lived his life as a professional artist in the country, how he demanded respect, how to him it was always about the work, and we can't be fooled into thinking it's about the money. You know, he could have had millions, you know what I mean. He probably did have a couple million, and he could have had a lot more if he had just been chasing the money, but he carried the burden of producing plays that meant something to American history, and he put it on his back to say, I'm going to tell the history of a people through these ten plays, you know. He could have stopped after the fifth one, and said I'm tired, but he didn't, and he finished those ten, and he died. But, I don't think I know any person more loyal. I don't know anyone that works as hard, and certainly there are very few people as talented as he is, you know. And it's not just his content, but the way he did it. You know, if you watch the poetry in his plays, if you watch his character development, if you watch the structure of his plays, you know, he has a whole new technique all his own, the Wilsonian technique, there are Wilsonian actors, who--not every black actor can do an August Wilson play. You have to have the diaphragm and the muscle technique, the muscle development to be able to deliver the language. You have to deliver many words in long sentences, you know. You must understand that the character's emotion is right on the word, not between the word, so there are a lot of things that August has--and, he sort of--when I saw his play, when I saw 'Fences' [August Wilson], I thought before that, it was all about, wow, theater is great, but when I saw his plays, then I heard my mother [Annie Wilson Holtzclaw] and my [maternal] grandmother's [Mamie Wilson (ph.)] rituals--their myths, their rhythms, their tempos. I saw my family's life on stage, not my specific family, but I heard it, I heard it in my bones, just like wow, and we're on a raised platform in front of the whole community. That makes it important. Everybody in the community, everybody in America is watching what's important to my life, and when I did 'The Piano Lesson' [August Wilson] in Atlanta [Georgia], I had--I remember this little black kid, maybe ten years old, sitting in the back of the theater, and he was like, "Go Boy Willie, go Boy Willie go," because he saw himself on stage, you know, and that's a great thing and that made me want to do it more, when people can see themselves on stage in front of the community. That says, that says that they are worthy, they are worthy to be honored--my mother was somebody, my grandmother was somebody. Story_ID: 487381 Speaker 1: Let's go back and talk about the Alliance Theatre, and talk about some of your accomplishments at the Alliance Theatre. Speaker 2: See, it's kind of hard to talk about your accomplishments, because--it just is, because you don't know what they are. I know some of the things that we were after, which were to--we wanted to diversify the board, diversify the staff, diversify the programming, and I think we did that. I think some of that was hard, just because when you try to gear to one group of people, sometimes you may think you're taking something away from another group, and that was certainly never the intention, you know. So, what I feel good about with the Alliance days--like, we created a lot of new work, you know--we helped produce 'Aida' [Linda Woolverton, Robert Falls, and David Henry Hwang] that went on to Broadway, with Elton John. We did 'Last Night of Ballyhoo' ['The Last Night of Ballyhoo'] with Alfred Uhry. We produced five world premiere of [HistoryMaker] Pearl Cleage's plays, you know, and helped folks know who Pearl was, and 'Flyin' West' [Pearl Cleage] was one of the greatest new plays ever. We got black audience members sitting next to white audience members, and I think we went from maybe having 1 percent subscription to at least 20 percent of the subscription base being African American, which was great. So, those were good things. But, it also helped me understand how much we have to do in this country. I remember getting a letter in the mail when was I named artistic director, and they said, the letter said, "We want someone of our own kind to run our theater, not some uppity, pushy coon." I remember the exact phrasing of that, and I'm like wow. Then I remember one time someone said they was going to kill me, and I was like wow. I'm getting these letters, and people are going to kill me, and I'm just doing some plays. And as I opened my eyes, I was like wow, I must know what it was for Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] or, you know, some great person. But then I was like, this is just some coward or something. So, I always kept in front of me the vision of what I was trying to do, so I could never be on that level of like how well the shows sold, or how high the subscription base was. It was always like, what are you trying to do? And, at one time the subscription base went from nineteen thousand down to thirteen thousand, and that was the time for the board to really say, "Hey, this is getting scary because you're messing with my money now." But, my hat has always been off to that board of directors--people like Jennings Hertz [Jennings M. Hertz, Jr.] and Laura Hardman. These people said, "No, this is the direction we want to be, we want to have national exposure, we want folks to know who we are, and we want to do something important," so they stuck with me. And then we turned that around and I think, you know, we got up to about sixteen thousand or seventeen thousand subscribers. But I think the quality of what we did there, the importance of theater, how to respect other cultures and other races, the importance of new work--I think all that makes me proud. You know, it's like when folks around the country talk about the Alliance Theatre, they can't talk about the Alliance Theatre without talking about what happened in the late '80s [1980s] and in the '90s [1990s] because that's when people found out about the Alliance, you know, and certainly it provided me an opportunity to cut my teeth, and people know me because of that and I'm real proud of the values that we stood on during those times. Story_ID: 487382 Speaker 1: When you say--I know that you diversified the staff, but the plays and everything that was going at the Alliance Theatre before you came, did you include local playwrights and different types of--I mean, what did you do to incorporate everybody, to actually diversify the plays that were gonna be performed? Speaker 2: For one thing, I mean, right away we just started adding black people to the board of directors, and then we added when we started hiring for positions on the staff. We looked at hiring blacks on the staff too, and then looking at them in a nontraditional way. You can't just look at the person who has the longest resume. You can't just look at the person who went to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. You gotta look at it like, what do I really need in the office and can this person do it. So, we stretched, you know, how we looked at people and we gave people more of an opportunity to come in there. So, once you change who's around the table making the decisions, then you can really do something about racism and you can really do something diverse. If you--I don't care how liberal ten white people, or how liberal ten black people are, if they're sitting around the table, they're only going to come up with what comes to their mind. So, you have to have--the table has to be different. You know, if you've got a sixty year old at the table, you've got to have a thirty year old at the table, because then a thirty year old is going to say something that you can't even think about and that you've forgotten about. So, diversity has always been important. So, I'm most interested in that table looking different. And, so you know, we did a lot of things that were easy to do, and some things that were hard to do. I remember the staff having to deal with racism seminars, and some of them was really hard, you know, to hear the truth. And you got to understand that America's deepest problem is that of intolerance and that of racism. So, if America's problem is that deep, you know, how can one theater company solve that problem? We can only do what we can. So, for me, like if I say I'm not a racist or a sexist, and I know I've got to produce eleven plays and I say these are the eleven plays I want to do, and three of those plays happen to be by African American writers, but those people who've been affiliated with the theater for twenty years, they're like, "Wait a minute, you're doing three plays by black people. You're turning this into a black theater." I'm like, "No, I'm not." But, you have to understand. They think that you're taking something away, because three looks bigger than one, you know. And then you have black audience members who are new, and they're like, "Well, they don't want us to come to that theater, they just want to use us for that big gospel show, and that big road show coming in, but they don't want us to come to everything." And I said, "No, I want you to come to Ibsen [Henrik Ibsen], I want you to come to Shakespeare [William Shakespeare], I want you to come to 'Much Ado About Nothing' [William Shakespeare], I want you to come to 'Ghosts' [Henrik Ibsen], I want you to come to all of our plays." And for the black folks to buy on to, we're going to see the August Wilson and the [HistoryMaker] Pearl Cleage, and also these other writers. That was ownership. They knew somebody gave them ownership of the building, of the theater, not just coming to one play. So, that's kind of hard, you know, for some people, because it's different. So, it was challenging, but it was rewarding at the end of the day, because I have met some people--white and Jewish people that I never would have met were it not for the theater, you know. But, I know that our problems are deeper--racism is a deep thing, you know. Sometimes if you're a white audience member and you're looking at something on stage and then they use the N word, and you're like, "Wow, what are they saying, what are they saying about me? I didn't have nothing to do with that. My grandparents didn't do that." And they would say, "Kenny [HistoryMaker Kenny Leon] is trying to push that in our face." No, I'm not. That's not why I did it. I did the play because I thought it was a great play. So, we have a lot of other issues that we have to work out as people when we live in America. Oh, I don't know--was that your question? What was your question? I forgot your question. But it was a (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) That's fine. You gave us a very good answer. Speaker 2: It was a great time. It was a great time, and some of it was challenging, but it was rewarding. Story_ID: 487383 Speaker 1: Do you have friends who are also in the theater that are producing plays like--do you know [HistoryMaker] Charles Randolph-Wright? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: The difference in your styles, I guess it would be, right, or--(simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) As a director? Speaker 1: As a director. Speaker 2: As a director, I have a very specific style that's--I know directors like, I know several brilliant directors who thrive in chaos. Speaker 1: Who, who--tell me who they are. Speaker 2: I mean, you know, just directors that thrive in chaos. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay. Speaker 2: But then, there are other directors, like myself, I thrive in harmony. So, there are like--even Joan Lewis who taught me theater at Clark College [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia]. She would come in and like she would scare these girls and get into their personal lives, and just, you know, scream at them, and it would force them to give up something great. That's not me, you know what I mean. I think that George Wolfe [HistoryMaker George C. Wolfe] is a brilliant director, but I think when George is--when he has artists around him, I think that's an intimidating factor about him, you know. If you don't get the stuff right, then you're going to be gone. That's not me, but I love to see that in George. George Wolfe is a brilliant, brilliant director. For me, I have to thrive in harmony. I need everyone to understand why we're doing a play. I end every rehearsal in a prayer, because we all--we hold hands, and we say a prayer. I might scream at them during the day, but I don't live in disharmony for extended periods of time. So, if I'm not getting what I want from an actor, I will be very direct and specific to them. If I'm disappointed in them, I will tell them that I'm very disappointed. But at the end of the day, even if I scream at you, I'm going to still hug you, and say okay, we got a job to do, and this is why we're doing it--we're doing this play. And most of the time we were doing it because of the spirits of the people that lived before it, so I don't see a play as something to play with. I see it as like, wow, you know, people lived these lives, and we're trying to say something to communicate to people in a way that may impact their lives to be better--for them to be better human beings, for them to understand a part of life that they maybe don't understand. So, I always say that the first part of the word entertainment is enter. There is a door for all of us to enter through to learn something more about each other, to walk in someone else's shoes. That's what it's about for me. So if I do 'Radio Golf' [August Wilson] or 'Gem of the Ocean' [August Wilson] or 'Raisin in the Sun' ['A Raisin in the Sun,' Lorraine Hansberry], I'm very careful about the shows we pick. We just did 'Ceremonies in Dark Old Men' [Lonne Elder III]. You know, you do those plays so that we, the living, may learn something about ourselves and our connectedness to each other. If we're not going to learn that through theater, then I don't think we should do the play. You know, we can spend our time--we could--we can be entertained some other way. But when you have live performers in front of you confronting life, and it's three-dimensional, it's a connection to you, an energy to you, that helps you understand more about yourself and more about the people that live in the world with you. Story_ID: 487384 Speaker 1: You leave the Alliance Theatre in '90 [1990], is that right? Speaker 2: No, I left it, I left the Alliance Theatre in 2001. Speaker 1: Two thousand one [2001]. Speaker 2: I became artistic director in 1990. I was the associate director in 1988, artistic director in 1990, and I left in 2001. And, I was leaving to do more, you know, just to spend more time with my artistic development, to become a better director, to spend more time trying to get a Broadway show, trying to do more--just more time directing, and when I was running the theater you spend a lot of time with administrative work. And when you're in a situation of a regional theater, you always need--it's usually a partnership that runs the theater--a managing director and an artistic director. And usually the managing director is responsible for raising the money, and the artistic director is responsible for programming the theater and having the vision and the passion. But, the artistic director also shares part of the fiscal responsibility, because that's what people want to give to--the heart and the passion. So, you know, 10 percent or 20 percent of your job has to be spent to help raise the money, but most of the time it's run with that partnership. And I found that we were getting to the place that I was spending so much time on the administrative side, I didn't have enough time left for me to develop as a director. So, so, well I left. Story_ID: 487385 Speaker 1: I had no idea I was going to start another theater company, but then Riley Temple [HistoryMaker Riley K. Temple], who is the head of the Arena Stage board in D.C. [Washington, D.C.], and Chris Manos [Christopher B. Manos], who is the head of Theater of the Stars in Atlanta [Georgia], they both independently tried to talk me into starting a national black theater company. And I was like, why would I want to do that, I want to--you know. And, at the same time I got my first opportunity to direct 'A Raisin in the Sun' [Lorraine Hansberry] on Broadway with P. Diddy [Sean Combs; P. Diddy] and [HistoryMaker] Phylicia Rashad, so I wanted to do more of that, but you know, the weight of these two men saying, we need a national black theater company--so, I went into the room and said okay, if I had to do a theater company, what would it look like, you know? What would a national black theater look like? And to me, it would look like a theater that was all-inclusive of all people, because I wanted everyone--I didn't want to do a black theater for black people. I wanted to honor black theater, but in the midst of the broader community. So, I was like wow, if I can figure out a way to do that, it would be great. So, what I decided to do was to--at the center of the work, to do African American classics, which those plays--those are the plays that no one's doing. You know, if you're in the Alliance Theatre or the Arena Stage, or the Goodman Theatre [Chicago, Illinois], you're not doing plays by James Baldwin and Les Lee [Leslie Lee], and Zora Neale Hurston. You're not doing that, so I was like, wow, as soon as a black writer dies, that's it, you know. Their work don't get--that's it. So, and if you read James Baldwin or Langston Hughes, you're like, that was some great work. Or if you read Lorraine Hansberry's other work other than 'Raisin in the Sun,' that was some great work. And you got all these new generations of people that will never know these people, and these people were great Americans. So I was like wow, if True Colors [True Colors Theatre Company] can be the company that embrace that work--because if you're these other large regional theaters--you're only going to do the hottest thing that just left New York [New York] or just getting ready to go to New York, because it's about making your money, but you only got one space for diversity, you're only going to do one black play and one Hispanic play, so they couldn't do it. So, I was like, if we did that, that would be something no one else is doing. But, to be different, I don't want to just do all black plays, but then, let's flip that model because the model for most American theater is to do all Anglo-American work at the center. Right? And then they just diversify one or two spots on the edges for other people. So, it's like, I don't know, let's put the classics in the center, and then we'll do three or four plays by everybody else, because I'm not racist, I'm not sexist. And that's when I said that's what I would do if I was running the theater. So, Chris Manos said, "Here's fifty thousand dollars, start it." So, I was like, "Well, you know I'm not going to be able to spend all my time there because I've got to develop myself as a director." He said, "You don't need to, you just need to get it going. You need to be the inspiration, you need to be the vision for it." So, I went around the country and I asked these great people like Zelda Fichandler and all these people, and Zelda ran--you know, she started the regional theater movement--she started the Arena Stage about fifty years ago. So, I talked to all these people--Ben Cameron, and these people said, "Look--," Woodie King [HistoryMaker Woodie King, Jr.], who's a great pioneer of the black theater movement. So I talked to black folks, white folks--I talked to the great [HistoryMaker] Lloyd Richards just before he died, I talked to August Wilson, and they said, "Look, the reason these black--," and at the same time you got to remember black theaters in the last fifteen years were dying, so you had these large theaters that were trying to diversify, and they were getting a lot of funding to do that, but they were only putting in one play, one play. And then you had the black theaters that wasn't getting--they weren't getting enough money, and they were dying. So, now you have a problem in America. You don't have culturally specific theaters and you don't have the large theaters doing enough of the work--that can't do enough of the work. So, it's like wow. So we started this company to do that. Speaker 2: And the name of the company? True Colors? Speaker 1: True Colors Theatre, which means, you know, I promised myself to always be in pursuit of truth and clarity, and that's truth and clarity about life, about who we are. So, every play is an effort to shed some light on the truth as we know it. And sometimes that can be in a comedy, sometimes that can be in a musical, sometimes that can be in a drama. Story_ID: 487386 Speaker 1: I want to go back just a little bit. You talked about 'A Raisin in the Sun' [Lorraine Hansberry] on Broadway. Talk to me a little more about that experience, of actually going to Broadway with that play, and the cast. Speaker 2: 'A Raisin in the Sun' on Broadway was a great thing in my life, just because if you ask anyone about an African American classic, the only play they would name is 'A Raisin in the Sun.' But they're many other titles, but that's what we know. So, you go back and you look at that and it's like Lorraine [Lorraine Hansberry] made it possible for us to do the work, you know, the first drama on Broadway and she was--when I look at myself and I say wow, I got a chance to do Lorraine Hansberry on Broadway almost fifty years after it was first done, and then I get an opportunity with my second shot to do the next to the last play by August Wilson, and then I get an opportunity to direct the last play by August Wilson, and to spend time with him the last three or four months of his life, as he finished that play, professionally, I've been blessed, you know. But, to go to New York [New York]--David Binder was the producer of 'Raisin in the Sun' and I remember going in, and they said, "Well, we need a marquee man to play Walter Lee [Walter Lee Younger]." At that time, I went to all of the top black directors who were at the right age, and you know, for some reason people would find a reason not to want to do the play. Some people felt the play was dated, it was old. Some people didn't have the time in their schedule, and the producers on Broadway, all they want to know is like, "Look, we need somebody in this play to sell the play." And I called [HistoryMaker] Phylicia Rashad, because we had done four plays at that time. When I was at the Alliance [Alliance Theatre], we did 'Blues for an Alabama Sky' [Pearl Cleage], we did 'Medea' [Euripides] together, we did 'Everybody's Ruby' [Thulani Davis] off Broadway, and I said, "Phylicia, I want you to play Lena [Lena Younger] in 'Raisin in the Sun'," and she said, "I'm not that old," and I said, "I don't want her to be that old. I want her to be like fifty-five, and sexy. I don't want her to be seventy-five or eighty, or eighty-five, and when she leaves that house, it's about life, and her husband died when he was young. It says so in the script that before he was forty he was working himself to death. So the script tells us that Lena is around fifty years old." And I said, it's only because, it's like George Wolfe [HistoryMaker George C. Wolfe] said in his play, 'The Colored Museum,' that particular play has become a cliche of itself, so when people do 'Raisin in the Sun' now, they always cast Mama as heavy-set and old, and they always cast Walter as dark and angry. They always cast Beneatha [Beneatha Younger] as idealistic and you know, not really real. And I was like, but look at the play. Our job as artists living now is to interpret the work of the past, to keep it fresh. That's what white artists do with 'Death of a Salesman' [Arthur Miller], and 'Long Day's Journey into Night' [Eugene O'Neill], and 'Rich III' ['Richard III,' William Shakespeare]. They re-interpret it for now. We don't do that for our work. So, if you go back and you look at 'Raisin in the Sun,' it's like wait a minute, no, Lena is sexy and full of life and Walter Lee is misunderstood. He is smart. He is in that limo every day seeing an America that he can't be a part of, and he knows he's the same age as those guys, and they're no smarter than he is. So, I set out to cast the play like that. So, I cast it, and she said, "Wow, I want to be a part of that then." And then I called Sanaa Lathan, because Beneatha represents a woman who is, she's like twenty-one, twenty-two, twenty-three years old, okay. The script stays that, basically. Through the text you can assume that. But when I read it, I say this is one of the smartest women I've ever read about. I mean, she's dating three or four guys from different walks of life. She's dating a rich guy, she's dating this other guy over here, she's dating this African guy who's very smart, she's taking horseback riding in this period. She's taking piano lessons, she's taking guitar lessons, she's taking foreign languages. Her mindset is ahead of her time. So, I said, Beneatha is Lorraine Hansberry. Lorraine was ahead of her time. You know, so it's like, I need a twenty year old, a twenty-two year old who has the mind of a thirty-five year old. So, I said I'm not going to cast this with a twenty year old, I'm going to cast this with a thirty year old who looks twenty. And I'd seen Sanaa in a few movies, and I called her up and I said, "Look, this is what I want you to--I want you to do this play." And she was like, "Okay." So, Sanaa Lathan came to do it because I explained it like that. Story_ID: 487387 Speaker 1: And then Audra McDonald, who I saw her first in 'Carousel' [Richard Rodgers and Oscar Hammerstein II]--I was running the Alliance Theatre then and I saw her in 'Carousel,' and I was like--I saw her make me--she transcended race in this play, you know. She was playing the lead in this Broadway musical, and I was like--I just thought she was the character that she said she was. I didn't think she was anything else but that character. And I said, "Audra, do 'A Raisin in the Sun' [Lorraine Hansberry]." And Audra said, "Well, you know this character [Ruth Younger] is sort of like the victim in the play. She's just there to serve Walter [Walter Lee Younger] and there to serve Mama [Lena Younger] and--." I said, "No, it's her play. It's like, without her, Walter can't be who he is. She knows how to love him, and how to let him be a man. Without Ruth, then Mama can't be--she's there to keep the family together. She's the only one in the play that has a dream of having a house with a backyard to raise her son and to raise her family. She has the dream of family, and she's the glue to that family." And when I put it that way, she got it. And then we still hadn't--needed this man. And at the time, I met--I can't think of her name--Susan [Susan Batson]--I'll think of it in a minute, what's her name, Susan--anyway, she's a great acting teacher. She was the teacher for Nicole Kidman and Tom Cruise, and Susan was just--she was just this loud, crazy, good acting teacher, black woman. She said--she called up and she said, "I hear you're looking for someone who should be kind of street smart and who is earthy and who understands inner city life." She said, "What about Puffy [Sean Combs; P. Diddy]?" And I was like, "Puffy?" I know he did 'Monster's Ball' and a couple other things, but you know, going on stage is a whole different thing, you know. Susan said, "I think he can do it." So, they put me on the phone with him, and he's like, "Look, I can do it." And I said, "Are you willing to audition?" He said, "Yeah." I said, "Okay." And, he came in and he auditioned, and he had all the raw instincts for the character. He understood inner city life. He understood what it means to be rich, because he's one of the richest people on the planet. But, his sincerity about wanting to do it--and I sat there and I shared stories with him and I said, "You know, Puff, I was raised by my [maternal] grandmother [Mamie Wilson (ph.)] and my mother [Annie Wilson Holtzclaw], man. It was some strong women in my life". And he said "My dad [Melvin Earl Combs] was killed when I was three, you know, and I'm really tight with my grandmother." And so, we started talking about grandmothers and life, and he would tell me, you know, he just said, "I want to do this play so I can bring some positive to the hip hop culture, that will bring something positive to that culture." And I said, "The reason I want to do it is because I want to bring some young people to Broadway that never come to Broadway." And because of us wanting the same thing about that, we decided to go forward with it. And I said, "You know, you need to like kind of downsize your businesses, because this is harder than the marathon that you ran. This is the hardest thing ever, eight shows a week. You got to re-train your muscles, you got to, you know, you got to support and deliver every night." And he said, "Okay, man, I'll do it." And that was a great experience. And people always want to say--well I got a lot of flak from people, like, "Well, why you couldn't get a real actor?" I said, "He is a real actor. We all come to this differently. He was acting in movies, he never did stage before. I learned how to act watching people sitting on the bus. I used to go sit in the courtroom and watch people in the courtroom and see how people lie, and say, oh, that's what it looks like to lie." You know, so we learn it different ways, and he's the guy that built a replica of the set of 'Raisin in the Sun' and put it in his Park Avenue [New York, New York] home. So, when I visited him on Sunday, he had the set in his house. So, we would rehearse eight hours, and then I would stay two hours and work with him, and then he would go and work with Susan, his acting coach, and he would come back and pick me up, and then we would go to a restaurant and close the restaurant talking about acting and theater and all that. And then he would go home, and then like study some more with the set in his house, you know what I mean. So, this cat, I found, would do anything that it takes to succeed. And that's a lesson I learned from him. That's why he's a successful businessman, because he's like, what do I need to do make a million dollars, what do I need to have this clothing line. What do I need--and he is willing to pay the price. So, I would imagine that he probably slept three hours a night during the whole four or five weeks of rehearsal. So, that was a great experience, and it was even a greater experience for Craig Zadan and Neil Meron to ask us to do the movie. You know, David Binder produced the play, and these guys in the story line produced the movie, and it's going to be a three hour movie event on television coming on the night after the Oscars [Academy Awards], and it's the best thing I've ever had anything to do with. Story_ID: 487388 Speaker 1: 'Fences' [August Wilson] went to Broadway, but you didn't direct that. Speaker 2: I'm going to direct the revival-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --this year. No I was too young then. That was in '86 [1986], '87 [1987]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's when I was doing my [National Endowment for the Arts] fellowship. That's when I see--I was just meeting him--[HistoryMaker] Lloyd Richards--he had three directors. Lloyd Richards directed the first four plays, and then Marion McClinton directed the middle couple, and then I finished. Speaker 1: Okay. We're talking about August Wilson's plays. Story_ID: 487389 Speaker 1: But back to 'Raisin in the Sun' ['A Raisin in the Sun,' Lorraine Hansberry], you played in 'A Raisin in the Sun,' with Esther Rolle. Tell me about that. Speaker 2: Yeah, well, you know, I remember when the producers for 'Raisin' for Broadway called me about directing the play, and they wanted to know if I knew anything about the play, and I was like, yeah, probably the most I know about any play, because I acted in 'A Raisin in the Sun' with the great Esther Rolle, and that was a great experience. And then later that year, I directed 'A Raisin in the Sun' with Esther Rolle and another actor, because I felt like I couldn't--when I acted in it, Woodie King [HistoryMaker Woodie King, Jr.] directed me in it. When I'm acting, I need a director. And so then I later directed Esther Rolle in the play and maybe three years before that, I directed a production in Milwaukee [Wisconsin]. So, I directed a production in Milwaukee Rep [Milwaukee Repertory Theater] and I acted in a production in Atlanta [Georgia], then I directed another production in Boston [Massachusetts]. So, I figured I had learned enough about the play, I learned what not to do with the play, like, I think in the first production I had a, Asagai [Joseph Asagai] a guy to wear a lot of African garb. I felt like, over time, I felt, I learned that that was wrong, you know. Asagai, the African character in the play is now an American, and he's more American than he is African, but he still wants to go back to Africa. And that's when I would start learning, over time, who Beneatha [Beneatha Younger] really is. And because so many people in the country had produced this play, like I said earlier, it had become a cliche of itself. So, of course, you had the characters, you know, the mother that was heavy-set and old, and then Walter Lee [Walter Lee Younger], who was angry and black, and people didn't understand him. But, you also had an overstatement of religious values because Lena [Lena Younger] is, she is a believer, and she's, I think she's a Christian. But, some productions would have a Bible that was bigger than the house, on the table, and some people would say, well, they're poor, so they would have the fabric of the dress be the fabric of the couch, you know. It would be the fabric of the curtains, so. Or, it's like August [August Wilson] said to me sometimes--he went to one production of this play, and the guy hit somebody on the back, and the dust flew out of his coat. So, some people in their head have an image of black people and poor people being dirty. But no matter how poor black people are, historically, we've never been dirty. We've always been what we thought was stylish. We might wear a green suit, you know, but it's like a green suit and a green hat, but never dirty. So, I learned about 'Raisin in the Sun.' And by the way, the acting coach that I was talking about earlier was Susan Batson, the great Susan Batson. Doing--an Esther Rolle doing 'Raisin' was very different from a [HistoryMaker] Phylicia Rashad doing 'Raisin,' doing Lena. And, they both did great jobs, but I think Phylicia has defined it for the next generation or two, because she's added a sexuality to it, a liveliness to it, an excitement to it, a sensuality to it. You understand the relationship between her and her son, I think better than was understand in previous productions, you know. And especially when the film comes out, people will really see that this woman will do anything for her son. Like most people will do anything for their kids, Lena will do anything for her son, including give him all the money that she has to her name. But, she also will be the same person that would forgive him and love him for blowing that money, too. A lot of people can't understand that, but more than anything, Raisin in the Sun is about love and the beauty of forgiveness and the beauty of love and the beauty of family, which is why it's a universal story, and not a black story. Story_ID: 487390 Speaker 1: After 'A Raisin in the Sun' [Lorraine Hansberry], the same year, was it 2004, am I right, that you directed the 'Gem of the Ocean' [August Wilson]? Speaker 2: 'Gem of the Ocean,' yeah. Speaker 1: Tell me about that. Speaker 2: 'Gem of the Ocean' was great, because we were doing--'Gem of the Ocean' was August's [August Wilson] ninth play in his cycle of ten plays. So, he knew he had two plays to go. And I created the role of Citizen Barlow, as an actor when the play started in Chicago [Illinois], and usually he goes to like four or five cities before he goes to Broadway, and he re-writes the plays as he learns along the way. So, I was just going to do Chicago. In fact, I left Chicago a week before the run was finished, because I had to direct 'Much Ado About Nothing' [William Shakespeare] in Atlanta [Georgia]. So, I thought that was it. I was going to act in it, and I was going to be heading in. The play left there and went to--Marion McClinton was directing--and it left and went to L.A. [Los Angeles, California], and then it went to Boston [Massachusetts]. And in Boston, the director became ill, so August called me, you know, late one night, and they said, "Hey man, we need you to come in and direct a play, man, we really would like you to do that." I'm like, "August Wilson? You're asking me to come in and direct your play in Boston and then take it to Broadway?" "Yeah." I said, "Man, I'm honored and humbled, I can do it. I've been waiting on this, and I know you haven't worked with but two other directors before, but I can do it, the only thing is, my company, True Colors [True Colors Theatre Company]," which August is on our advisory board. I said, "True Colors, we're producing a play in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] and so, I'm in rehearsal for this play that we did in Atlanta, but the only thing is, I lost two of the main actors--two of the leading actors, I don't have anymore, so I have to put two new actors in this play in a week, and then we got an audience. And, it's at the same time that you want me in Boston." So, he said, "Well, we'll do anything to try and make that work." So, I said, "Well, I'll go physically--I will go back and forth from Boston to D.C. every day for a week. I will have rehearsal of 'Gem of the Ocean' in Boston, and then I will go to D.C. and rehearse that play, and work those actors in at night." So, needless to say, that was the hardest thing I've ever done professionally in my life, and I really got close to August during that time, because he couldn't believe I was doing it, but he wanted me to do it, and at the same time, you know, we had to replace an actor in the show in Boston, in 'Gem of the Ocean,' so we replaced an actor, and then they had to write the script there, and then I had to also--those were the hardest things. So, it was like, you would rehearse, get on a plane, get off the plane, rehearse another play, go to bed, rehearse that play in the daytime, fly back to another city and rehearse that play. And so that was my experience with that, and we did that, and then we took it into Broadway and we had a great experience. We cut an hour off of the play. August and I really got to know each other, and his drama attorney at the time was Todd Kreidler, who was a great friend of mine, and is now working with our company here in Atlanta, and it helped us learn about each other, and the rhythm of putting on these plays. So, on the night before we opened 'Gem of the Ocean' on Broadway, he came to me, and I'll never forget, as he said, "Hey man, let's go to dinner." Went to dinner, "Yeah, man I've got one more play, 'Radio Golf' [August Wilson] and then the cycle will be complete." Story_ID: 487391 Speaker 1: What was it called? Speaker 2: 'Radio Golf' [August Wilson]. "And I want you to direct it." This was before the critics. He said, "I just enjoyed this process, and Todd [Todd Kreidler] and I, and you, we've had a great time, and I want you to direct the last one." And, I said "Yeah, man," I said, "the only thing is, you're trying to open that play up at Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] that's due in February. In February, I'm doing this new thing with Toni Morrison, an opera that she asked me to do, 'Margaret Garner' [Richard Danielpour]." And I'll never forget, August said, "No, man, Toni Morrison--you've got to do Toni Morrison, that's Toni Morrison. You've got to do the opera. Don't worry, the play will work out." And, he was hoping it would work out, but the people at Yale couldn't change the schedule, and so--August was a very loyal, person, too, so at the time, he said, "Well, I wanted this to work, but we're going to have to go with another director, and maybe we'll get you back before we get to New York [New York]." And, so he gave this other director an opportunity to direct the play at Yale, and it didn't work out the way he wanted to, so on the night that the play opened there, he called me and said, "Okay, can you come and direct the play, and open it and take it over as your play and do it at Yale, and then we can do it in Baltimore [Maryland] or wherever, and then we take it to Broadway." I said, "Yeah, man, cool." And then, of course, we started working on it. We made some casting changes and we made some--I gave all my notes about the production, the script and we agreed on stuff and we started working on the play, and then about four weeks later, he found out that he wouldn't be with us. But, you know, he knew he had a short--didn't have many days left on the planet. So, but he wanted to finish the play, so I, knew--I don't have a cure for cancer, if I had a cure, man. But I knew that I could do the work, and I knew that he was depending on me, and I knew that his dramaturge was depending on me, so between the three of us, we just kept meeting and working up until the end, and he finished his tenth play, and that's one of the greatest things for me in my life. I will never forget that. I'll always be grateful for that moment in life where we finished this cycle of plays, you know, and without that play, it's not a cycle--it's just nine plays. And because of that, you know, it makes all the other plays even more wonderful than they are. So, I think the greatest gift to me was August Wilson, and his entrusting me to work on the last two plays, which represent the beginning and end, because 'Gem of the Ocean' [August Wilson] was the first play chronologically, and 'Radio Golf' was the last play. And, I always ask myself, "Why did that happen, why didn't we work together like that before now?" And it was like, it was meant to always be that, it was meant to be that. And, you know, before that he used to always come to Atlanta [Georgia] and work with me on the productions here or work with me on the productions in other parts of the country, so he would always come in and be a part of the previews and the opening. But, it's sort of different when you get to work with him from scratch, or work with him on the play, and prepare it for Broadway, so it was a gift to me. Story_ID: 487392 Speaker 1: You talked about 'Margaret Garner' [Richard Danielpour]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: There's not very many, well maybe I just don't know, well you can tell me--because the only other black opera that I can think of is 'Porgy and Bess' [George Gershwin]. But, are there many more or just a few (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not a lot. They did, you know, they had one on Malcolm X ['X: The Life and Times of Malcolm X,' Anthony Davis] a few years ago that Thulani Davis did. George Wolfe [HistoryMaker George C. Wolfe] did an opera. So, there are a few, but you know, in the repertoire, 'cause operas book five years out, but the opera singers learn what's in the repertoire, so 'Porgy and Bess' is there, so they all know 'Porgy and Bess.' The thing about 'Margaret Garner,' it was the attempt to create a new opera that could be a part of the repertoire, and that doesn't exist. So, the idea is like, we need another opera that all African American opera singers can learn and be a part of that, and that's a part of history. And this opera was based on the character in 'Beloved' [Toni Morrison] that you know, killed her kids instead of allowing them to go back into slavery, which is a great thing, you know. It's totally operatic, the story is like--that's great drama. You know, you have three or four deaths, you have (laughter)--but [HistoryMaker] Denyce Graves, the great Denyce Graves, was incredible and Gregg Baker played her husband, and we had about a hundred voices, we had over a hundred musicians in the pit. It was my first time doing an opera, and it was a great, great experience. And now, we're going to open it in Chicago [Illinois] next year which will probably be--you know, Chicago is the third greatest opera city in the world, so that'll open that opera up to many more audiences. And what it's also doing, it's bringing black folks to the opera house, and that's a great thing. And hopefully we'll do the same opera in Paris [France] as well. So, my thing is, like, people always ask me, it's like, "What's the difference between what you do and what Tyler Perry does, you know, he does those plays, and you do the plays." And it's like, there is a difference, but it's like we have to have the appetite for variety. So, you can see a Tyler Perry play, which is different in structure, different in character development, different in plot structure. There's a whole different writing and sensibility. But, it doesn't have to be either or. Some people go out to see that, and it's like, okay, you went to see 'Mama, I Want to Sing!' [Vy Higginsen]. But then leave that and come see 'Fences' [August Wilson], or leave that and go see 'The Color Purple,' or leave that and go see '42nd Street' [Michael Stewart and Mark Bramble], or 'Chorus Line' [sic. 'A Chorus Line'], you know, variety, you know. So, that's what I say about opera. Don't just, don't just go see jazz, don't just go see blues. Go see opera, go see blues, go see rock, go see--you know, see all of that. Story_ID: 487393 Speaker 1: What are some of the other things that True Colors [True Colors Theatre Company] hopes to accomplish? Speaker 2: I think True Colors, you know the thing that I would like for, to happen for the company, is that, you know, right now we started trying to produce plays in more than one city, and to have sponsors work with us in two or three cities, and develop audiences in two or three cities. And I felt that if that model worked, then somebody else can say you know what, we can do this theater over in San Diego [California], in San Francisco [California], and Seattle [Washington], and we can be in the Midwest in Chicago [Illinois] and Indianapolis [Indiana]. And it's like I think that we have to devise new models in terms of how to produce work, especially culturally specific work and African American work, since so many of our black theaters are falling by the wayside. There's a way maybe that you can get people to cooperate. If you can get Coca-Cola [The Coca-Cola Company] to sponsor you in two or three different cities, if you can get AirTran Airways to be involved in more than one city, that's the first thing. The second thing is that, you know, I want the vision to outlast me. I want the vision to be about diversity is good, that it's no joke when we say people bleed the same blood. It's like, people are the same. We are letting things like skin color and cultural background separate us, and also we can't--that doesn't mean there can't be pride and uplifting of who you are and what your culture is, you know what I mean. And so many times, black people feel they have to sacrifice that to embrace it all. I'm like, no, no. And that's why the worst insult someone could say to me is, "I didn't even know you were black, Kenny [HistoryMaker Kenny Leon]. You're my friend, I didn't know you were black." No, I want you to know I'm black. I'm very black, you know what I'm saying (laughter). This is who I am, and I'm proud of who I am. I'm proud of my culture, I'm proud of where I'm from, you know. And, let that be a gift to you, if you're a non-black person. Let it be a gift to you that I'm different, and I'm your friend. You know, it's the same thing if my Jewish friends--I love Jewish weddings. I learn things when I go to a Jewish funeral, I'm like wow, you know. But I think we can learn from each other. We can share with each other, we can break bread together, and be better and greater people if we just embrace who everyone is, and then share that, and I think True Colors can be about the sharing and about the inclusion, and also about preserving history. If we don't preserve that history, it's going to go. Why shouldn't a ten year old living today know about James Baldwin? Why shouldn't they know about Mario Van Peebles? Why shouldn't they know about Leslie Lee? Why shouldn't they see these stories that make us all laugh, think and cry? You know, it's like, if not, these things were just--, "Oh, that was back then," like, we just discard them. So, I think that True Colors could be part of the picture, part of the preservation, part of the pride, part of the uplifting, part of the healing, because the country--still, I think--the number one issue has something to do with (unclear) racism or the arrogance of what an American is. I remember August Wilson saying that America--all of us have a claim to that name, whether you came here in the bottom of a slave ship or you came here seeking political freedom or running away from political oppression or religious tyranny, or whatever it may be, however you got here, you still are an American. There's no one that says, well, I'm an American and you're not. No, no. We all were from somewhere else, and I happen to be brought here against, you know, my will, but I'm still an American. So, I want to see the day when everybody can say, I'm an American and everything that comes with it, all the pain, all the pleasure, all the pride--everything that comes with it. But, continuously, we're looked at like well, these people are American and we're just letting you be here. So, I want True Colors to be a part of that picture. So, I would love the company to be part of building the world the way I think the world should look, and the way the world should be. Story_ID: 487394 Speaker 1: In preserving some of the black classics, I know that--let's take for example, 'The Wiz,' that you had a diverse cast in 'The Wiz.' Was this a part of you trying to bring all people together in--? Speaker 2: Yes, there's always something behind everything we do at True Colors [True Colors Theatre Company]. There's always--I mean, you got to understand, I wasn't trying to start another theater company, you know, I think I was just supposed to start it, so this is what I'm doing. And, with 'The Wiz,' it is twofold. It is trying to diversify the cast so that blacks and whites see that that story is greater than race. And it's interesting because usually we don't diversify back the other way. And, people say, "Well, 'The Wiz'--isn't that black?" It's like, yeah, but it has so much more to say about being home, or being who you are, or the power of dreaming. It has all that, so if we can change the cast and tell that same story, people will look at the story in a different way, and it will bring them closer together. So, that's one thing. And the second thing is that generational thing, which is what I want to do it with young folks, because I think we have a disconnect between the older and younger folks in our country. It used to be that there was a great tie between a young person and their grandparents, and now, in this country, I think we discard seniors, and it used to be like the older you got, the wiser you were, and everybody understood that. And now, it's like, if you're old, you're not sexy. If you're not sexy, you're not worth anything, you know what I mean. And I think we're like missing so much more, where other cultures do embrace that, and cherish that. I mean, if you want to get me to shut up, you sit me down and an eighty year old man starts talking, I'm like wow, because they have so much to share and to give, and I just see people that's pushing our seniors away. So, with 'The Wiz,' I'm trying to work on that generational divide, too, and I think that's what we're missing it as well. Story_ID: 487395 Speaker 1: Tony Award [Antoinette Perry Award for Excellence in Theatre] nominations. Which plays have been nominated? Speaker 2: Well, all the plays I've directed have been nominated for Tonys. And the thing I'm proud about, is three of the plays, 'A Raisin in the Sun' [Lorraine Hansberry], 'Gem of the Ocean' [August Wilson], and 'Radio Golf' [August Wilson], all were nominated for best play. And, even though I think they all should have won, I really think 'Raisin in the Sun' was definitely the best revival of 2004. I mean, that's just--that was just--I think that probably had something to do with racism, I think that was. And I think with 'Gem of the Ocean,' I think that 'Gem of the Ocean' is the greatest play August [August Wilson] probably wrote. You got 'Joe Turner's Come and Gone' [August Wilson], but 'Gem of the Ocean' is just incredible. And I think 'Radio Golf,' what hurt 'Radio Golf' this year was we had twelve new plays that all opened at the same time. So, but, each play got nominated for four or five Tonys, so that's like fifteen Tony nominations for three plays. So, I want to be like Susan Lucci of theater. I just want to keep getting nominated and not winning, you know, it's like, I do want to win, but if I don't win, that's okay, but maybe one day like I'll have a hundred nominations. But as long as somebody is nominating the shows that you're working on, I mean, all these plays were voted best play, and that's an honor and a blessing. And something August Wilson said to me was, "You know, we're only owed the work. We're not owed the money, we're not owed the rewards, we're only owed the work, and if you keep an eye on just doing the work and being satisfied in delivering the work and doing the best you can with the work, and if it touches people, that's a beautiful thing." Story_ID: 487396 Speaker 1: 'Radio Golf' [August Wilson], I just want you to talk a little bit about what it's about. I'm not sure I know what it's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 'Radio Golf' was the last of the ten plays that August [August Wilson] wrote, and each play dealt with that specific decade. What he was trying to say in 'Radio Golf' was that we have now economic and political and social success, we now can buy these big houses and cars and do things that we couldn't do in 1904, which 'Gem of the Ocean' [August Wilson] was written [sic. set] in 1904. In 1904, it was the end of slavery, but slaves had nowhere to live, nowhere to work, no money. So, you had all these folks, and it was worse than in slavery in many ways. But, of course, some of us say nothing is worse than slavery. But it was almost worse than slavery. But what they did have, they had a sense of community. They had a sense of right and wrong, and they had a sense of, we're going to take care of everybody. And what August was trying to say in the last play is, what do we care about everybody? What do we care about the community, or do we only care about the money, do we only care about self? What happened to those great values that were with us in 'Gem of the Ocean,' and 'Joe Turner' ['Joe Turner's Come and Gone,' August Wilson] and 'The Piano Lesson' [August Wilson]? It was always about family, community, what makes a good American. And so, he's asking now, what makes a good American? Is a good American the person that can make the most money, and when you make it--and that particular play deals with like redeveloping a black neighborhood in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania]. And he's saying well, how can you redo that whole neighborhood without talking with the people that live there? And most of the time when we redo these neighborhoods, we're like, "Oh, we're going to bring in a Starbucks and we're going to have these condos." But who can afford the condos? Who can afford the Starbucks? Not the people that live there. They're going to be displaced. So, that's what he was trying to say in 'Radio Golf.' But, he ended the cycle hopeful, because he was like, it's not too late--what are we going to do about this? And the main character in that play decides to go with the people. You know, it was the last scene where they're going to tear down this house, because this house--but this man who owns the house, he says, "I don't want to sell the house for this redevelopment purpose, that's my house, and I don't--there's no price that I would sell this for." So, they decide to still tear this man's house down. So, the main character in this play, who is very successful, instead of siding with government and becoming politically successful and all that stuff, and even losing his marriage, he decided to go and stand with the people, with the bulldozers coming to tear the house down. Speaker 1: And now, that play, that was in 2002 (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was on Broadway this year. Speaker 1: This year, 2007. Speaker 2: Yeah, it just closed like a month ago, in New York [New York]. Speaker 1: Two thousand seven [2007]. Story_ID: 487397 Speaker 1: What play, if there is one, that you enjoyed the most of directing? Speaker 2: Oh, I always, I always enjoy the last one that I directed (laughter). So, 'Ceremonies in Dark Old Men' [Lonne Elder III] presented by True Colors [True Colors Theatre Company] was my favorite play, because it's the last one. And then, I got some plays coming up, 'Guess Who's Coming to Dinner' [Todd Kreidler], and that's my favorite play now, because that's my next job, you know. Speaker 1: Plays by Tennessee Williams. Do you--? Speaker 2: I love Tennessee Williams. Yeah, I studied Tennessee Williams, and I used to do workshops of all of his plays. I presented him at Cornell University [Ithaca, New York], I've studied his short stories, and it's funny--my relationships with writers, the writers that I love, we usually have things in common, like [HistoryMaker] Pearl Cleage, August Wilson, Tennessee Williams, Chekhov [Anton Chekhov]--they all were poets, you know, so I like playwrights with a poetry background. They have a kind of musicality to the language, but also who's saying some very strong social things as well. So, my writers have to be poetic, because there's a beauty to, to the written word. Story_ID: 487398 Speaker 1: What are your main concerns for the African American community, and that of, of theater in general? Speaker 2: My concerns for the African American community and the African American audience and those that want to be in this business, is that they're misguided, you know. I think folks can sometimes look at say, 'American Idol,' and think that's what entertainment is. Or, if I were to ask a student about who was [HistoryMaker] Lloyd Richards, it's like they don't know Lloyd Richards. How can you be a black theater student in America and not know Lloyd Richards and not know August Wilson, and not know Woodie King [HistoryMaker Woodie King, Jr.]. So, what concerns me most is the passing of the baton off from one generation to the next. It's almost like the next generation has to start over, because we're not doing a good job of passing it off, or--I was talking to my assistant the other day and just realizing that some of the movies that came out twenty years ago, you know, some of the young people don't know what those movies are, they don't know great movies, they don't know great actors, and they don't know the roads we walked, so how can they build on that? They can't build on it, so they've got to start over, you know. I'm concerned about that. I'm concerned about intolerance, and I think people are intolerant of difference--anything that's different from the way they are, it's like, that don't work for them. And I think that it continues to be a problem for people to find their passion in life, what they want to do, how they want to spend their life energy, their life's time, and they figure it out too late, or they're afraid to trust it, they're afraid--because it's like--wait a minute, my parents--I've got to make money, I got to get a job. And I think that you need to find the passion first. The money is going to come, the money is only a tool. The money is only something that--you'll figure that out, you know. So, I would like to see people discover their life's value and their life's passion, and I would love to see audience members just do what they want to do, find what they want to do individually. Go see a play because you want to go see a play, because you're curious. "I can't go to see a play because my husband don't want to go." Go see it, he'll come. Story_ID: 487399 Speaker 1: When you look back over your life, is there something that you would change. Speaker 2: (Laughter) I mean, I'm sure if you look back over your life, there's something you would change, but we don't have the gift of--that wouldn't be life, that would be something else, that would be a movie. So, for me, it's like, I don't want to change anything about life, because life--that's what makes life, life. Life is like--what do you say, life is this thing that we're doing now, while we're trying to figure out what we're going to do. Life is what's happening, you know. So, life is full of unexpected things, it is full of surprises--that's what makes it life, you know. There's a time for everything. There's a time to die, a time to laugh, and all that stuff they tell you. So, sometimes my nephews or my godchildren, they say, "Well don't you want to be young?" It's like, I have no--I don't want to be young at all. If I had a wish, it wouldn't be like, "Oh, I wish I was twenty again." That would be like hell to me (laughter) to go back. I don't want to be--I want to be what I am now, because there are things that come with age, and life is so complex and beautiful, and the same thing. So, if you get something else, you've got to give up something, so if there's a way to keep your wisdom, keep all the things you gained by growing old, and at the same time, keep the things of your youth, then that would be perfect, I guess, you know (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) We know that's not going to happen. Speaker 2: That's not going to happen, you know. So, I'm enjoying, I'm enjoying life, and I'm enjoying getting older. I'm not ready to leave yet, but if I had to leave, it was like I have already lived enough to be so thankful for and blessed. So, I could leave tomorrow, and it will be okay, because I've had like, just a great, great life. Story_ID: 487400 Speaker 1: So, what do you want your legacy to be? Speaker 2: That I did my little part in helping people understand each other, tolerate each other, and see the beauty of the human spirit, the positive of the human spirit. So, if I did that little bit to make people understand that we have a lot more in common than we do that's not, then I think I would have did my little corner of the world, you know, but--. Story_ID: 487401 Speaker 1: What, personally, would you like to do that you have not done? Speaker 2: I'd like to direct more film. I'd like to do some feature film work. I'd like to touch a lot more lives. It's always been about, like, how do you take what you do now and reach more people. So, it's always been about that for me, so when I was at the Academy of Music and Theater [sic. Academy Theatre] and just working in the prison and high school, that was the same thing that I did when I went to the Alliance [Alliance Theatre], the same thing that I did when I went to Broadway. If you look at the projects I choose, it's always been like very careful, you know. 'Raisin in the Sun' ['A Raisin in the Sun,' Lorraine Hansberry]--I'm trying to diversity Broadway, you know. 'Raisin in the Sun' for television--I'm trying to diversify who's going to watch TV. Do I want the kids to sit down with their grandparents and sit down with their parents, all at one time to watch something? To do an opera, you try to bring more people to the opera world, you know. So, I just want to go to that next bigger stage. I want to do feature films that matter. I don't want to do blowing up cars. I want to do feature films where we can reach millions of people, but saying something about all of us, saying something specific about us that will have a universal appeal to us, to help us be, you know, better, more positive, to understand more of our connectedness to each other. Story_ID: 487402 Speaker 1: Because of this information, your story will be available for future generations. What message do you want to send to the future generations? Speaker 2: I want to say to young folks, you know, you got to find what you love. I know sometimes people say, "Well, how do I do that?" You know, it's like every day I go to bed, I know I get to wake up and do what I do. I can't think of anything I would love to do more than work on plays with the hope--or work on stories, in the hope of touching somebody's life, to help shape their lives. So, I would say you got to find that passion. If that passion takes you ten years, then work to find that passion, don't just work to work, you know what I mean. And no matter, if you're in America, your whole twenties, your whole twenties, is still about education and finding and discovering yourself. No matter what road you go, that's what everybody's doing through their twenties. You don't really start really working, I think, until like thirty, thirty-one, whatever. So, use that to discover what you want to do. Don't end up just doing something, because then twenty years from now, you'll be like, "I hate this. I'm making a million dollars, but I hate it." I hate to see people, like The O'Jays said, "Living for the weekend, you know, I got through Monday through Friday so I can get to the weekend and have fun," ['Livin' for the Weekend']. I think people should find what they love to do, and I think a lot of people in life--I don't even know Katie Couric, for instance, but I think she loves what she does, you know what I mean. People like Michael Jordan--I'm sure Michael Jordan loves what he's doing. I think there are politicians, you know, Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama], I think he loves what he is doing. I think Oprah Winfrey loves what she is doing. I don't think anybody is really out there hating what they're doing and really--that's not fulfilling, that's just making money, that's just paying your rent. You can do that. So, I would encourage young people, like, whatever it is, find what you love to do. If that means that I'm going to spend the summer in this professional institution so I can learn if this is what I want to do, do it. You know, if it means I want to spend a year abroad in Spain to figure that out and I'm going to get all my savings--then do that. But we're all on the planet, and if you're African American, you figure somewhere between probably sixty and eighty-five, you're not going to be here, because (laughter) you know, but--so you got to look at it--you know you're not going to live forever, so we don't have to fool each other. It's not that I'm saying you're morbid or anything like that, but you know you're going to live for a certain number of years, it's like how do you want to spend those years? And, so, I would encourage you to look at the reality of life, and look at how you want to make a contribution, and then devise a plan to make those contributions. If you have no dreams, if you have no plans, then the likelihood is that you won't succeed. So, at some point, you've got to start building building blocks to live the rest of your life, to make a contribution. Speaker 1: Well, I want to thank you for taking the time to tell us your story and share it for our archives. So, I really appreciate it (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, I forgot to say one thing, too. I have a fiancee. Her name is Jennifer Thompson. And I have a great god-daughter, Maria Thompson [ph.]. Speaker 1: What date? Speaker 2: What day? Speaker 1: What date? Speaker 2: Soon, very soon, by the time this comes out. Speaker 1: Is she an actress? Speaker 2: No, no, no. Speaker 1: Okay. All right, thank you so much. Speaker 2: Thank you...