 Story_ID: 663549 Speaker 1: So we slate the interview, and we change every thirty minutes. And you know oral historians say that the making of the history is the interaction between the interviewer and interviewee, but my--I'd like to have you start out by stating your name and spelling it for us. Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Edward Lewis: E-D-W-A-R-D, L-E-W-I-S. Speaker 1: Okay. And I need to have your date of birth, and today's--your date of birth and place of birth. Speaker 2: May 15th, 1940. Bronx, New York--Morrisania Hospital. Speaker 1: And today's date and location? Speaker 2: Today's date is October 7th, nine- 2014; and this is at Solera Capital [Solera Capital, LLC, New York, New York]. Speaker 1: And I, (laughter) I would say a historic date, too, because I've been working to get Mr. Lewis' interview for a very long time for our project. And then the other thing I'd like to ask is your occupation. Speaker 2: Currently, my (unclear), senior advisor to Solera Capital. Speaker 1: But you would call yourself either--would you say, entrepreneur, maga- ? Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Entrepreneur, businessman. Speaker 1: Right, business--okay. So, also I want to say my name is Julieanna Richardson, I'm the interviewer; and Isaac Feldman is the videographer. Story_ID: 663550 Speaker 1: And we ask five People magazine-ish questions of everyone, so-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: --your favorite food? Short answers. Speaker 2: My favorite food? Sweet potato (laughter). Speaker 1: Favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Thanksgiving. Speaker 1: Favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue. Speaker 1: Favorite place to vacation? Speaker 2: Bali [Indonesia]. Speaker 1: And favorite phrase or saying? Phrase or saying? Speaker 2: No doubt about it. Story_ID: 663551 Speaker 1: I want to start out by asking you to give your father's name, and what you know about his background. Speaker 2: My father, his name was Edward Lewis. He was born in New York [New York]. His family was from Virginia. My father was a janitor at City College [City College of New York, New York, New York]. Barely finished high school. But he was a janitor at City College on 137th Street and Convent Avenue for twenty-five years. Speaker 1: Do you--what do you know about his background? How much do you know about his growing up? I know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Regrettably, very--very little. Speaker 1: Very little. Speaker 2: Very little. Speaker 1: Okay. Because I know your parents separated. Speaker 2: Yes, they did; separated when I was eleven years old, 1951. Speaker 1: Can you describe his personality though? Speaker 2: Smile, great dancer, hard worker, and in his own way caring. He--when my, my mother told me that when she became pregnant with me, they were not married. And he said to her, "Jewell [Jewell Spencer Clarke]," that was my mother's name, "the right thing for us to do is to get married." And I appreciated that coming from my father because there was a point in our li- in my life--I did not think that he loved me but that was certainly, is an indication from my standpoint of, of doing the right thing. Story_ID: 663552 Speaker 1: Tell me your mother's name? You said Jewell, her? Speaker 2: Jewell Spencer--Jewell Phonbia Spencer [Jewell Spencer Clarke]. Speaker 1: How do you spell Phonbia? Speaker 2: I think it's P-H-O-N-B-I-A. But we can--I can get that for you. But it's Phonbia. Speaker 1: So talk about her growing up. Speaker 2: Well, she grew up--and my mother was born 1917--March 8th, 1917 in a town--a community--called Prince Edward County [Virginia]. The town was called Farmville, Virginia. And my mother is one of nine siblings, but in addition to that she had five other stepbrothers and sisters. So together there were fourteen. Her mother, my grandmother, Mary Spencer [Mary Spencer Croner] had been married to Charles Spencer; and Charles Spencer was killed in the steel mills in 1927. My grandmother was given a settlement of five thousand dollars, so she bought this 110 acres of land in Darlington, Virginia [Darlington Heights, Virginia] where she grew--raised all her children--her nine children. And then she married a Mr. Robert Croner who had five children. So together they grew fourteen, but my mother is a part of the nine--she had nine brothers and sisters, and then she has five other stepbrothers and sisters. Speaker 1: So where did your mother fit in the birth order in that f- ? Speaker 2: She was number five. Speaker 1: Okay. So did she share any stories of growing up in Farmville? Speaker 2: My mother was, according to family and her mother, was a fighter. She would fight at the drop of a hat; she was fearless. It was--even though we, we lived, or they lived on a farm of 110 acres of land--and even, they raised food, tobacco; had hogs. Having enough food was still a issue during her time of growing up. And if you were to go to any of my aunts and uncles' home, as we did when I was growing up, if you would go to their refrigerators, the refrigerators would be packed with food because they--she would recall to me, during the Depression [Great Depression] in the 1930s there was just very little food with- amongst the family. And amongst the, her brothers and sisters, the oldest brother [Dehart Spencer] and the oldest sister [Violet Spencer Johns] took care of the, their siblings because their mother was ill for almost a year away from the hospital. And so the caring of my mother was really under the--her oldest sister and her oldest brother. And as you look at our family in terms of how we, we all take care of each other. If I were to go--most of my family lived in D.C. [Washington, D.C.]--if I were to travel to D.C., I would say with them. Or if their--my cousins to New York [New York], they would stay at my mother's house. And my grandmother was always a welcoming individual. If you come to her home, you must come and have food with us. Her mother was, truly believed in God; Christian, was a pillar of the church, the Triumph Baptist Church in Darlington, Virginia. My grandmother raised more money for the church, as well as the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]; and her daughter followed. My mother also became the, the largest money raiser for the church, and she raised money for the NAACP, too. But family and taking care of each other was very paramount. The work ethic was in our DNA. My grandmother truly believed that hard work killed nobody, and proceeded to work all her grandchildren. Story_ID: 663553 Speaker 1: Out of the fourteen siblings, there were a lot of children. I was an only child. The rest of my aunts and uncles had two, three--some, in some cases five or six kids. But my mother had only, only me. And I will tell you the story about it. I always wanted to have siblings, but she was just not able to. And I found that out when I was twenty-five [years old] at the breakfast table, here in New York City, in the Bronx [New York]. My mother said to me, "When the nurse brought you to me, she said, 'Mrs. Lewis [Jewell Spencer Clarke], I certainly hope this boy makes you proud.'" And she said, "Son, I just want to let you know, you made me proud." She didn't say anything else. It wasn't until I was thirty-five, sitting at the breakfast table again that my mother then said to me--let me back up. I had heard stories growing up as a kid that my birth was difficult. But my mother never said anything to me about it. So I (gesture)--so there were stories running around within the family. But at the breakfast table at thirty-five, she said to me, "When you were born, I had a very difficult time at the hospital [Morrisania Hospital, Bronx, New York]. And the operation, they performed poorly. They cut me wrong, and I, it was very, very difficult. And the reason why I didn't tell you this is because I didn't want you to feel obligated to me." (Laughter) I looked at her--I broke down and cried. You didn't want me to feel obligated? That's the kind of proud woman that she was, and--and so she just, physically she could not have any, any more children. Story_ID: 663554 Speaker 1: My mother was a school crossing guard, beautician; and she became--after her mother [Mary Spencer Croner] died, she became the matriarch of the family. She kept the family together. And her last name--I mean, her first name Jewell [Jewell Spencer Clarke], in terms of what jewel means--she's a real jewel. Outtalk anybody. In fact, I used to tell her, "You talk too much," and to let someone else have a say. But if she didn't think you knew what you're talking about, (laughter) she would just outtalk you. And in part, I would say that I was considered very quiet because my mother outtalked everybody including me, so I didn't have very much to say. But she was a very principled woman in terms of what was right and what was wrong. She had four things, four commitments that she wanted me to adhere to. She said, "I want you to be a proud black man. I want you to take care of your family. I want you to get a good education. And a final commitment to me was, I always want to try to do the right thing because I know you're a man of the world. You've been exposed, but even with that, I want you to try." And so that little nugget has always been a part of how I've conducted myself because that's what my mother wanted; and whatever I am today--and she had everything to do with her, her, how she conducted herself. How she--my aunts and uncles, my aunts particularly were well dressed women, they, and they took care of themselves. They loved the way they presented themselves when they went to church on Sundays. They were the best in terms of how they put themselves together. My mother was the same way. She was a good looking woman, well put together, and, but--she didn't smoke, but as I said very principled, outspoken and fearless. Story_ID: 663555 Speaker 1: The values that she instilled in me, or--helped me to be where I am in terms of having, as I was growing up in--I was born in the Bronx [New York]--but, and my family, as I said to you is from Virginia. And we own this 110 acres of land, seems to me (unclear) school's starting at five years old. My mother [Jewell Spencer Clarke] had me on the Trailways or Greyhound bus going to live with my grandparents during the summers. And that's the way it worked. And that--if you like camp (laughter), it was very instrumental in how we as a family, we came together. We were struck by the incredible ability that my mother's mother, my grandmother, how she touched us individually. None of us know how she did that, but she had such a powerful impact on all--not only her children, but her grandchildren--that when, before she died, we had already had family reunions at the family compound. Every August, every fourth weekend in August, we started--she started this--and before she died, she had a conversation with her children, and asked that we continue to do this. This past August was our fifty-eighth year. We do this in honor of her, even though she left this earth in 1971, because none of us want to disappoint Mary Spencer [Mary Spencer Croner]. She had such an impact in terms of, again, how she conducted herself. Very moral, very--truly believed in God; and I can tell you when her oldest daughter passed away and--in 1963--I was in graduate school at the University of New Mexico [Albuquerque, New Mexico] and I flew back to the wake in Washington, D.C. Her daughter was named Violet [Violet Spencer Johns], incredibly, beautiful, beautiful woman--and she died of cancer, leukemia. And I'm sitting with my grandmother, and my grandmother's looking at her daughter, and she said, "God, I can't--help me to understand why you would do something like this? This is my oldest daughter. Why didn't you take my life? I've given you everything you've asked me to do as a Christian. How could you do this to me?" I mean that's just the kind of human being she was. And even though she was soft on the inside, she was tough. One of her nieces, for example--my aunt Violet's daughter, young lady by the name of Barbara Johns. I remind people that we all know about Rosa Parks, and what she did in 1955. But there's another young lady by the name of Barbara Johns, who in Prince Edward County, Virginia in 1951 persuaded her 450 classmates to boycott the school [Robert Russa Moton High School, Farmville, Virginia]. And because she just had become fed up with how black kids were treated, and as a result of that, Thurgood Marshall, James Nabrit [James M. Nabrit, Jr.]--all the great civil rights lawyers came to Prince Edward County, Virginia--Farmville [Virginia] to meet this fiery sixteen year old young lady by the name of Barbara Johns. Well, Barbara Johns would tell you that her grandmother, Mary Spencer, infused her with the toughness and fearlessness to--at a pivotal time in our history, make a decision to lead an effort to, that ultimately fed into--there were five counties when the [U.S.] Supreme Court made its historic decision, Brown versus Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka], 1954, and one of the counties was Prince Edward County. That county came- became a part of that because of my first cousin, Barbara Johns. The whites in 1954 to 1959 closed the schools, so no black child saw the inside of a public school for five years. And we had to send my cousin down to Birmingham, Alabama, because her life was threatened, to relatives down there. But if you go to the state capitol [Virginia State Capitol] in Richmond [Virginia] now, you see a statue of her [Virginia Civil Rights Memorial]. She's now recognized for what she--the role that she played in, in navigating and helping make life better for all Virginians, and more specifically, for blacks. But that's a part of the family that I'm about. Story_ID: 663556 Speaker 1: My mother [Jewell Spencer Clarke] believed, for example, that welfare was the greatest crime ever committed against black people. Because, as a result of welfare, she believed that we became lazy, and didn't do enough for ourselves. And she was just totally against the whole concept of welfare, and was outspoken about that. But, and her--but she had a genuineness about her, even though she may have talked too much, but you knew she was not trying to manipulate you. She just had a deep feeling about a number of topics. My mother always read. She was always reading newspapers, magazines, loved to go to the movies, was a moviegoer. And of the--my hobbies is a result of that, is I love going to movies, too. My mother loved travelling. I was able to send her to China; cruises; she had a curiosity about life, about people. I felt that she had a, she had a sixth sense regarding human beings, whether they were phonies or the real thing. And she could--I can say she could spot a phony a mile away. There was, there was just something about her--she had a, just an inner compass about how she judged people. And by and large, she was pretty good in terms of her conclusion about people that she became, interacted. But family was most important. When I was seven years old--let me back up. My father [Edward Lewis] was an abuser; and when I was seven years old, I saw him hit my mother, and I said to him, "If I ever see you hit my mother again, I will kill you." I'm a seven year old boy telling a grown man that this is what I was going to. But I will say, he never did that again. But as a result of that, then my mother began to say, "I cannot stay in this relationship." Because I--one thing I knew about her, and it's the same thing with me I know about myself, I will let a lot of things fester within me. It's not a good trait, by the way. And then I explode. And my mother was the same way. And I knew she had reached the point of this relationship with her husband--my dad--that if she had stayed in that something would have happened to him. So she decided to separate when I was eleven years old, and I went to live with an extended family in Brooklyn [New York] for two and a half years. (Laughter) And the family got so used to me because I--frankly I did everything, I was almost (laughter) I was almost treated like a little slave. I mean I took care of my two cousins, cleaned, everything and one of my, her, my mother's cousins said to her that, "You know, we think we would like to keep Sonny [HistoryMaker Edward Lewis]." (Laughter) My mother looked at them--by the way, Sonny's my nickname. "You must have lost your mind," (laughter), "that is not going to happen." And my mother moved me from my extended family in 1953 and I went back to work in nineteen fifty--went back to live in the Bronx [New York] in 1953. But family was important. Doing the right thing was important. And she's just someone--and I lost her Christmas day '99 [1999]. And so when you ask me about the best holiday? It's not Christmas because it brings back memories of what she did for me. Speaker 2: But you were a, I mean you were a couple. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I mean, you know, she had profound love for you. Speaker 1: Oh yeah, I knew that she did. She did. Speaker 2: And you have profound love for her, you're like-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Can't help it. Speaker 2: I know. Well they say that there's nothing like a mother's love, my mo- there's--they say that. Story_ID: 663557 Speaker 1: How did she come to--to New York [New York]? What--how did the family come? What brought her to--from Farmville [Virginia] to New York? Speaker 2: Work. Oh, it's very interesting. All my aunts and uncles scattered--with the exception of one, my uncle [Tracy Spencer] who still lives in Virginia, he's ninety-six years old as we speak; he was a logger. I used to work for him as a kid. That's where my business, entrepreneurship came because when I worked for him as a kid, he came out of the woods at ninety 'cause he physically could not do it anymore. But when I was a kid going to Virginia working for him as I was growing up, he used to talk about having control over one's life, having control over one's destiny; and the only way you can have that is have something of your own. And I didn't necessarily know that I was going to be in publishing, but I knew I wanted to have something of own. I saw how my uncle worked, how hard he worked, I saw the rewards, and so that little seed got planted within me. But the family went to Washington, D.C. or New York; and they all worked, and--but they all found a way to take care of each other in terms of what their mother [Mary Spencer Croner] expected of them. And so my mother [Jewell Spencer Clarke] came to New York for a better job, better opportunity. Then she met my father [Edward Lewis], I believe in year 1938 or 1939--but it was for more opportunity. Story_ID: 663558 Speaker 1: Just to give you a little glimpse about how this--the family was, I have an aunt, her name is Matilene Berryman [Matilene Spencer Berryman], who I wish, if she was alive, you'd be--one of the HistoryMakers. The family determined that of all the siblings, that she had a gift. She was very smart, a wiz in math and physics. So together they pool their money and sent her to college. She was the only one of her brothers and sisters that went to college. And she ended up, she went to, ended working for the [U.S.] Navy as an oceanographer. She was the only woman, much less black woman, in the whole field of oceanography. She became an expert. She's written books. She spent many years at the naval department. And then at age sixty, she decides to leave the Navy because she wanted to follow her passion. The law was her passion. So she went to Howard's law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] and graduated magna cum laude at sixty; and she practiced law until she transitioned to another world. But the important thing is how my family--her brothers and sisters said my aunt Matilene, "You have a special gift, we're going to pool our money and help you go to college." Speaker 2: And that was, that happened in the black community where you would identify the-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --the best of in the community, you know, but your, in this case it's your family. It's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 2: --you know it raised the--raised people up, so-- Speaker 1: And the importance of education, I mean if I can even add more to that, at our family reunions what we do is that we raise scholarship monies amongst ourselves to give those to our cousins who are going to college; and for those who graduated, we give a bonus because we want to make sure that this issue of education is infused, becomes a part of their ongoing life support, if you like. Speaker 2: So what is your--you know, the whole thing about oceanography--we, there are only a few black oceanographers today as we speak, so? Speaker 1: My aunt was the forerunner, Matilene Berryman. You can look her up. And quite a--she was really extraordinary woman, outspoken, very articulate, very well read too, and, but she--she was quite something. Story_ID: 663559 Speaker 1: So what is your earliest memory growing up? Speaker 2: My what? Speaker 1: Earliest memory? What is your earliest memory growing up? Speaker 2: Oh, when I think of when my mother [Jewell Spencer Clarke] and father [Edward Lewis] lived in a, in the Bronx [New York], 1314 Brook Avenue and we lived in a basement. I remember living in a basement with my father's mother [Alice Lewis] and father [Randolph Lewis]. I remember my mother telling my dad that we have to move out of this, living in a basement. We need to go to live in an apartment ourselves. And so they did do that. And while my mother worked during the day, my father worked at night. My grandmother took care of me during the day. (Laughter) And I can remember when I was out in the streets with--running the streets with my friends, I can hear my grandmother saying, "Sonny boy [HistoryMaker Edward Lewis], come take your nap." I was--most embarrassing. I had to take a nap every afternoon. (Laughter) I could hear her voice, but that's one of my early memories. And I was always fascinated by cars, fascinated by policemen, fascinated by airplanes. I wanted to drive trucks. I don't know where this all came from. My mother would remind me of these things that I would do. I used to hate shopping because my mother would shop, go shopping and she would take me. And of course, there's nothing I could do but look and be with her, but that was just a part of being a part of my mother. So I remember those things. I remember taking the trolley cars in New York City [New York, New York]. I remember going to school. My mother had no problem (unclear) me, going to school. I loved going to school. I'm an only child, but as a loner I liked, loved reading, so I did a fair amount of reading. And I also dressed well. I always wore tie--bow tie, knickers--when I was in public school. And those are some of my early memories (simultaneous). Story_ID: 663560 Speaker 1: Let's talk about--so the--the place you were living in the basement, what's the address again? Speaker 2: 1314 Brook Avenue [Bronx, New York]. Speaker 1: So can you describe the neighborhood? Speaker 2: It, the neighborhood--excuse me--of, majority were white. Then the next ethnic group were blacks, few Hispanics. I don't ever remember seeing any Asians in that neighborhood. Jewish--it was very Jewish neighborhood. And by the way, it was the same on Washington Avenue, when we moved to 1376 Washington Avenue. But I say majority were white, Jewish then black made up the neighborhood. Speaker 1: And so were there--on your block, were there other blacks-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --on the block? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: Indeed. Speaker 1: I want, so take--I want us to go back to the neighborhood and you tell me what sights, smells and sounds remind you of growing up? Speaker 2: Grocery store. Regrettably, particularly on my father's side, the smell of beer, I remember, because my father [Edward Lewis] drank--could outdrink anyone in terms of beer; and I made a vow that I would never do that. So I don't, I don't even to this day really drink alcohol. I drink wine, but. Food--the smell of food was--(laughter) all the, when I think back upon, my [paternal] grandmother [Alice Lewis] who took care of me--black coffee was something that I remember in part, because my grandmother used to say to me that if you drink black coffee, you're going to get blacker. And, as a result, I did not drink (laughter) as much black coffee. But I can, the aroma, I can remember that very clearly. The, regrettably, when I think back upon it, the aroma of garbage, and (laughter) I never thought about this. But I can remember on the streets, garbage in garbage cans, but there was still a smell. Speaker 1: So this is New York [New York] streets with garbage? Speaker 2: Oh, yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 2: Absolutely--on both Washington Avenue and Brook Avenue. Um-hm. Speaker 1: How far are the avenues from each other? You know, are they--? Speaker 2: Oh, I would say three, four blocks from each other. Because they were--it was, I can walk to my grandmother's home, or I can walk back to my home easily. Speaker 1: Now, what about sounds? You gave me smells, what about--you gave me some sights, but what about? Speaker 2: Music. Big bands; Duke Ellington, Glenn Miller, Tommy Dorsey, Count Basie, Jimmie Lunceford--blues. My introduction to blues--that was part of what I would remember of the music that was played in households, and sometimes (unclear) for people to--I remember 1947, we had the biggest snowstorm in the history of New York. I believe there may have been twenty-five, thirty inches of snow. It was, I mean, as a kid, I loved it--didn't go to school--but it was humongous snowstorm that took place back in 1947. But those are the--some of the memories I have. Story_ID: 663561 Speaker 1: And I know you're an only child, and you had talked about you know sometimes, a lot of times only children you know live inside their head in some respects. So what are you thinking? I mean, you know, you're--what are you thinking that you want to be? I know that when you were describing the things tra- you know, planes--a lot of transportation--you know sort of things moving seemed to fascinate you. Speaker 2: We had trolley cars, buses, of course. But I became fascinated with baseball because of Jackie Robinson. And when he came into the Major League [Major League Baseball] in 1947, he had such an impact on me that I wanted to be exactly like him. I wanted to emulate him, and I wanted to be pigeon toed; I wanted to run like him. And as I--and I wanted to be--frankly, I wanted to be the next Jackie Robinson in terms of what he represented. And I've used him as an example when I'm giving speeches to young black men, to--particularly athletes, to remind them that when he went to UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California], he excelled in track, baseball, football, and baseball; and he made Bs at UCLA. So you can't tell me that you cannot do well academically and also excel in sports. But then later on, football--I began to get involved in playing football, and certainly that's what propelled me in terms of when I went to high school. I was a good football player, and I was all-city, City of New York [New York] and that's how I got scholarship to University of New Mexico [Albuquerque, New Mexico]. And I went--living in the Bronx [New York], I went to really the upper Bronx, Dewitt Clinton High School, which is a--five thousand boys school by the way. And I would say close to 85 and almost 90 percent of the students were white, maybe 5 to 7 percent were black, and maybe less than 2 percent Hispanic. (Gesture) (Makes sound) Today it's the other way around (simultaneous). Story_ID: 663562 Speaker 1: This community, are there racial things happening in the community growing up? Because-- Speaker 2: There are. There are racial things because in, in our neighborhood [in the Bronx, New York], we had our own groups of little gangs; and we got into fights with a group of Italians called the Fordham Baldies, and they had a reputation of being evil and the guys that I hung out with, we were also evil, too. So it was about territory, and you're not supposed to come in my territory and we're not supposed to go in your territory; and when we did--so there were gang fights. But it was Italians against the blacks. Speaker 1: So you have Italians, you have Jewish, you have a little of (unclear)-- Speaker 2: A little. Speaker 1: --and (unclear) okay--so the two sort of whites are Italians and Jews. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So what are their dynamics? Or you're not aware of that--? Speaker 2: I'm not really aware, except to say that the Jews really kept to themselves, (laughter) and the Italians really kept to themselves. So I didn't sense any, any interactions. There were more interactions between Jews and blacks because we all lived in the--in the same neighborhood or apartment buildings. But I don't, I didn't sense that with the Jews and Ita- and Italians. Story_ID: 663563 Speaker 1: Where are you going to elementary school? What's your elementary school? Speaker 2: It was--the elementary school was P.S. 2 [Morrisania School, Bronx, New York], 169th Street and Third Avenue. Then I went to Junior High School 55; and then I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) P.S. 55 [P.S. 55, Benjamin Franklin School, Bronx, New York]? Speaker 2: P.S. 55. And then my mother [Jewell Spencer Clarke] and father [Edward Lewis]--was it before or after--I think it was before. Speaker 1: Well junior high would have been fifty--yeah, you would have been, you would have been in junior high. Speaker 2: Would have been junior high. Speaker 1: I think. Speaker 2: So I went to live in Brooklyn [New York] in 1951 with extended family; and I went to a highly regarded school called P.S. 35 in Brooklyn--Bedford-Stuyvesant. And if I had stayed, I would have gone to either brook- Boys High [Boys High School; Boys and Girls High School, Brooklyn, New York] or Brooklyn Tech [Brooklyn Technical High School, Brooklyn, New York], one of the other schools that I was (unclear) to go. And speaking of gang fights, I had a habit of keeping a lot of change in my pocket. And my mother's aunt told me you should not carry so much change in your pocket because it'd jangle. I came out of class about to go home, and about eight to nine guys pushed me up against the wall and took all my change and stabbed me right here. The gang--they were called the Nits--blacks, really had a very, very bad reputation; and most of the fights were over girls. Someone messing with someone else's girlfriend, and it was a mess. Speaker 1: So that fight was when you were in high school [DeWitt Clinton High School, Bronx, New York], or junior high? Speaker 2: Junior high. Speaker 1: So in Junior high? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, are you a good student in school? Speaker 2: Yes. I'm a good student--I'm, I'm--well let me, let me back up. I make Cs and Bs. Now, I don't whether one considers that a good student, but I did well. I did well in--my high school grades were really quite good, in part that's why even though I went to the Southwest, to New Mexico, I had good grades in high school and the courses that I took as a, as a freshman year--it wasn't basket weaving or physical education, I took English, biology, chemistry, and Spanish at University of New Mexico [Albuquerque, New Mexico]. But I was already skilled in taking those courses in high school. So I made a fair amount of Cs and fair amount of Bs. I don't recall making A's, but I'm quite sure I did, but I just don't recall, be honest about it (simultaneous). Story_ID: 663564 Speaker 1: Where does church play a role (unclear)? Speaker 2: Oh, church was a most important part of my family, my upbring- my upbringing. A church in the same block, Washington Avenue, was Gethsemane Baptist Church [Bronx, New York]. And my mother [Jewell Spencer Clarke] had me going to Sunday school. I sang in the choir, and so I--I loved singing in the choir. The one thing I do miss even today is good gospel singing that I crave for. In fact, if I don't go to church, I put on Aretha Franklin's 'Amazing Grace' and that's for me is going to church because of all the songs that's the classic that she did of 'Amazing Grace.' But church was very important, and I will tell you the story that I had a group of guys and we we would go to the movies to go see comics. And we decided to go, living in the Bronx [New York], living on Brook Avenue we decided to go all the downtown to 14th Street, ride the subway. There were six or seven of us, so we did this. My--told my mother and father [Edward Lewis] that I was going to the local movie station which only cost five cents, as I recall. And so when we got back home, later on that afternoon, my father was a janitor, was taking care of the building that his mother [Alice Lewis] and father [Randolph Lewis] lived in. He was throwing out the garbage, so he happened to see one of my friends. He asked, he said, "What did you and Sonny [HistoryMaker Edward Lewis] do today?" And my friend says, "Oh, we went down to 14th Street." Okay. So when my father saw me, he said, "What did you do today?" "Oh," I said, "dad, I went to the Fenway [Benenson Theatre, Bronx, New York]." He said, "What did you today?" "Dad, I went to the Fenway." Well, he got so angry with me in telling a lie--only now as I think back upon it--of me going down- way downtown on the subway from the Bronx that he took his belt off and hit me with the belt buckle across my eye. My eye swelled. This is on a Saturday, and I did not want to go to church the next day because I know everyone is going to ask me what happened. My mother and father say, "You're going to go to church." So I had to go to church, sing in the choir with my swollen eye, and asking--answering all these questions, "What did you do?" But church was very important, and my father didn't really go to church, even though his mother--his mother was a major churchgoer in the church that she belonged to in the Bronx. But my dad--but my mother was a churchgoer. Speaker 1: So church is an important part. School is an important part. Chores, what about chores and things like that? Was that expected of you? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Chores were expected of me. My mother always made me make up my bed. I had to sweep the floors; dust. And in Virginia with all my cousins, there were maybe ten, fifteen, twenty--around there. My [maternal] grandmother [Mary Spencer Croner] never made any distinctions about girls did this, or boys did this; we had to do it all. So we had to do all the housework. We had to do all the field work. And so I didn't grow up thinking that, as I said boys are supposed to do this and girls do that. I had to do it all, and so keeping a house relatively clean was a part of my DNA. I would say to you, I have been involved with young ladies over the years that have embarrassed me. Because I was, if I--in my own home, I make sure that I took care of things: washed the kitchens, bathrooms; and that's just the way I am. Never threw my clothes out on the floor because if I did, my mother would say, "Why are you doing that? Who's going to pick that up?" So that was just a part of my, part of my upbringing. Speaker 1: I see. So there's a lot of emphasis on work-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --education-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and a stru- and a structure. Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So-- Story_ID: 663565 Speaker 1: When your parents--when your mother [Jewell Spencer Clarke] basically leaves your father [Edward Lewis], right? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: You know, is that, is that hard for you? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. That was--I was eleven years old. Didn't quite understand all that was going on, but now realize that my mother and father should have separated years ago. But they stayed together because of me. In fact, I don't even think my mother and father even had sexual intercourse for good number of years in terms of how they interacted with each other. She met my stepfather when I was eleven or twelve, and they came together. And back then, by the way, he had been married and was in the process of separation, but you had these abominable laws that the only way you can get a divorce was, you had to catch your other partner in adultery. And so my stepfather spent money trying to catch his ex-wife in an adulterous act. It was just ludicrous. But they met in either '59 [1959] or '60 [1960]--I'm sorry they met in 1951 or '52 [1952]. Got married in 1960; and then stayed together until he died. He died of leukemia and, cancer in 1985. So there was--there was a structure. Speaker 1: And your stepfather's name? Speaker 2: George Clarke. Story_ID: 663566 Speaker 1: So were you feeling--how did you navigate those worlds? I know you talk in your book ['The Man from Essence: Creating a Magazine for Black Women,' Edward Lewis with Audrey Edwards] about not really understanding your father [Edward Lewis], him not being a man of words. And then, you know, even that court scene that you talk, you know where--because (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, you have read the book (laughter). Speaker 1: I did. Speaker 2: Yes. Yes. It was a--my mother [Jewell Spencer Clarke] said to my father that, "I want you to pay child support." He said no. And my mother said, "I don't--I'm not asking you to pay alimony, but I want you to pay child support." So he refused, so my mother took him to court at Grand Concourse. And I tell that story because if you were to go to the Grand Concourse, you'll see my name on the marquee--on the street there--my name is in, right in front of the courthouse. And I tell that story because the judge is reviewing the records, and he says to my father, "I'm looking at the records, your son goes to school, gets good grades. And, but you don't want to pay any child support." And I heard my father say, "No, I don't want to do this." This had a powerful impact on me. And the judge said, "You're going to pay forty dollars a week." My mother said, "He can't afford that," because he was on a janitor's salary; and so the agreement was that he pay twenty dollars a week, and I, and he would have visiting rights to me on Sunday. So with living in Brooklyn [New York], I would go see my father every Sunday but we hardly ever talked; and, as I said, I really believed he didn't really love me. But my mother said, "No, no, no, he loved you. He just had a difficult time expressing it." And one of the things I write in the book that helped me realize that in his own way that he cared for me is because his brother was a numbers king in, on that particular street. And I--and my uncle Freddy [Freddy Lewis] had me running numbers. And, you know, when I think back upon that and when I think about my aunt being an entrepreneur and being in business, cash is king, queen, jack and everything else to me. And I suspect it may have come from running the numbers, or keeping the numbers in my head and having a familiarity and understanding about that. And my mother's brother lived in the same building, 1314 Brook Avenue; and my mother came to pick me up that evening and my aunt said, "Sonny [HistoryMaker Edward Lewis], I saw you running up and down the street. What were you doing?" And I said, "Oh, I was running numbers for Uncle Freddy." And my mother said, "You were doing what?" I said, "I was running numbers for Uncle Freddy." She took me by the hand, went down to the first floor. My father was taking out garbage, said, "Your hus- your brother is using your son to run numbers." My father took me by the hand, knocked on his brother's door. My- his brother opened the door, and my father said, "If I ever see you using my son to run numbers, you will not be in this world." That said to me, my dad, he really did care for me. Speaker 1: He did care. Speaker 2: Yes, he did. Speaker 1: But, you know, but you also, you also talk about the fact that he just sort of, you know, he went and lived in the base- of his mother's house, right? Speaker 2: He lived in, with his mother [Alice Lewis]. Never remarried. I really believe that he died of loneliness, bitterness, smoked too much, had health issues, too. And, as I said, he passed away in '53 [1953]. And I'm now seventy-four, and I still marvel that I'm still here. By the way, my father worked twenty-five years. I have his last paycheck. After twenty-five years, he made $5,200. I keep that as a reminder of what his son-- Speaker 1: What he's done. Speaker 2: --in terms of what his son has done. Yes. Speaker 1: So when you, so when you are in elementary school [P.S. 35, Brooklyn, New York], does that affect your grades or anything? Or are you acting out 'cause sometimes-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --no, none of that. Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) None of that. Speaker 1: Okay. Because, but is that the time you're living in Brooklyn for a while? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 663567 Speaker 1: Your grandmother, is this the maternal grandmother that your-- Speaker 2: This is my father's mother. Speaker 1: Your father's mother. Speaker 2: My father's mother, yes. Alice, Alice Lewis. She was--she had three kids: two boys and a daughter. And one of the things I've learned at being an adult and having--I mean, I'm an only child, but I'm now married [to Carolyn Wright Lewis] and have two daughters [Haydn Wright and Nikki Wright]. You don't play favorites. She had her oldest son [Freddy Lewis] was her favorite, then a daughter [Mary Lewis], then my father [Edward Lewis]. And she outlived all her children. And I remember when, after my father died--let me back up. When her son and daughter died, my mother--my grandmother didn't cry at all, didn't even shed one tear. When my father died and she was still alive, something got to her. She broke down which was pretty amazing and cried. But, and it's pretty remarkable when a parent outlives three of her children. And she was such a strong woman, I ended up having to take care of her. And it taught me about one's will, if you like, she had to make a decision to amputate her legs--one of her legs, because she had gangrene. And so she was in a wheelchair. I went to a trip away for the weekend, and I--what she did on Friday, late Friday afternoon, she went to the bathroom and lifted herself off the wheelchair, sat herself on the stool and she couldn't get herself up for--no one knows how, she stayed there until Monday morning. And she just had this incredible will to live. And I know myself, when I latch on to something, I mean I stick to it. I think that-- Speaker 1: This is on the Lewis side? Speaker 2: This is on Lewis side. This is on Lewis side. And I thought my grandmother did not really like me. She had her niece, my first cousin--there was a color issue. My niece--my cousin, (audio disturbance) was very light skinned, very attractive, pretty. And my grandmother and my aunts all did everything for her. Even got her into college, clothes, where they were giving me hand me downs. And I kind of resented my first cousin. And I really got upset because she did not look in on her grandmother, and my grandmother just doted over her. But she didn't respond I thought in a way I thought she should, so she and I--I really had it out with her with regard to how she treated her grandmother. Story_ID: 663568 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, there was also the, the issue with your--I think the story about your mother [Jewell Spencer Clarke] you know having to walk, or being dropped off? Speaker 2: But that--that's on my extended family. Speaker 1: That's extended family. Speaker 2: That's the--that's extended family, so that's the family I was staying with. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They were coming back from Virginia, and they put my mother off at the Holland Tunnel. I've never forgiven them for that, if you like, but (gesture). Speaker 1: So you're also bicoastal in a way that you're spending sum- you know, the summers in Virginia? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. And so how is that freeing for you, in some respects? You know, because you go down, you know, you're a city kid and you're exposed to outhouses, and--? Speaker 2: Oh yes, no--outhouses, no running water. And my, my uncle that I spoke to earlier with, he was married-- Speaker 1: His name? Speaker 2: Tracy, Tracy L. Spencer [Tracy Spencer]. And his mother-in-law had a beautiful home down in another section of--not too far from my grandmother's [Mary Spencer Croner] home. And what he would do for me, he would--every Friday he would take me to his home so I could take a bath (laughter). There was something about being clean. Because all we were doing, worked every day; worked out in the fields in tobacco, grew crops and all that. But we had to wash ourselves up using pans and stuff. But every Friday, I would go down and got a bath--and I have fond memories of that. But, listen, I've lived on this earth for over seven decades and I can remember outhouses, no running water--we, that was just a part of my growing up. Speaker 1: Taking baths in a tub, right? Speaker 2: Taking a bath, absolutely. Absolutely. Story_ID: 663569 Speaker 1: But I, I certainly interacted with all my cousins, my--because we were wor- always working in the field doing something with tobacco, or cutting down trees, or plowing; that kind of thing. Speaker 2: So when, when you, so when you finish, so--is junior high school, is it sixth, seventh or eighth? Or it's? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And then so-- Speaker 1: Then I went to high school [DeWitt Clinton High School, Bronx, New York]. Speaker 2: --high school begins at nine. Now is, is this the time--so how--by this time, you're living with your mother [Jewell Spencer Clarke] and-- Speaker 1: My stepfather [George Clarke]. Speaker 2: --your stepfather. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: And so is your-- Speaker 1: We're living in the projects. Speaker 2: You're living in the projects, okay. Speaker 1: 671 Westchester Avenue; in the projects. Speaker 2: So what is the--but that's not far, is that far, that's not far from where you lived before, right? Or is it? Speaker 1: No, it wasn't, no it's--it wasn't too far. I could walk, but it would take some doing, no it wasn't too far. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: It's all still part of the Bronx [New York]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: South Bronx. Speaker 2: So what were the projects at that point? What was the name of the projects? Speaker 1: It was called--it was 671--oh, my god--I think it was 671 Westchester Avenue. I think it was called the Westchester projects [St. Mary's Park Houses, Bronx, New York], but let me refresh my memory on that. Speaker 2: Okay. Okay. So what is the racial composition of the projects because this would have been--this is still in the, you know, mid, mid, mid-fif- mid (unclear)-- Speaker 1: I would say the majority black and Hispanics. Speaker 2: Okay. And-- Speaker 1: Very, very few whites. Speaker 2: Very few whi- okay. So things are starting to change-- Speaker 1: To change, yes. Speaker 2: --in some respects, okay. And, and is the neighborhood changing overall? Do you see that change happening? You know, because the Ital- remember you were talking about Italians. Speaker 1: Yeah, I see more blacks, see more Hispanics and less whites than when I grew up in my earlier, early years; so I'm beginning to see that change, yes (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. Story_ID: 663570 Speaker 1: So the school, how is it decided which school then? You know, that, that you end up going to? Speaker 2: You know, that's--to this day, that's still a mystery because where I lived in what is--we didn't make any demarcations about the Bronx [New York]--South Bronx or North Bronx. But it was a part of the South Bronx where I lived. And how I got to DeWitt Clinton [DeWitt Clinton High School, Bronx, New York] is still a mystery to me because of where I lived and being on Mosholu Parkway to five thousand boys--I'm not quite sure how I got selected, why I got selected to go. It had, it certainly had something to do with where I lived, and my going to high school--but I could have gone to Taft [William Howard Taft High School, Bronx, New York], I could have gone to Evander Childs [Evander Childs High School; Evander Childs Educational Campus, Bronx, New York], or Monroe High School [James Monroe High School, Bronx, New York]. One day I'm going to try to look that up--I'm not sure how I got to Dewitt Clinton, but it's one of the best things that ever happened to me, in the end. Speaker 1: So talk about that then, you know your experience there. Speaker 2: Teachers who took an interest in me, or at least I felt that they cared about wanting to teach me. There was a Professor Sapp [ph.] who had his own clothing store, and I can remember he always dressed well when he taught his classes. I had another professor who taught history, doc- Mr. Morrison [ph.]. We had several English teachers there--Doc Guernsey [Irwin Guernsey] and Mr. Katz [ph.]. All these teachers had an impact on me in terms of helping me learn, and having an appreciation for wanting to learn. And so that kind of stuck with me, even though I was playing football and had to practice after going to classes, but I had to do my homework and make sure I did my homework because I had to interact with the teachers, or my other fellow students. And the school, as I said, was majority white; and I think in part too, there's something is said to me you have to keep up. You have to--you're in a competitive environment. You don't want these individuals to think that you're stupid. But, and so, that, I think that motivated me to make sure that I came to class, did my homework, participated in the discussions when I was called upon by my teachers. And then getting involved and playing football was very important in terms of meeting just a whole new group of individuals--mixed; whites, blacks. And having an understanding about the importance of teamwork, in terms of--if we're going to win, we got to work together in order to be able to achieve a goal. You--I understood the importance of discipline, practice; but it was also stressed even in high school about the importance of going to class and studying. So I think all these things were very helpful to me, in terms of enabling me to wanting to go to college. Story_ID: 663571 Speaker 1: And I got offers to go to Michigan [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan], Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York], Iona [Iona College, New Rochelle, New York], Hofstra [Hofstra University, Hempstead, New York]; but a Jewish scout saw me play. He lived in Virginia. He obviously was watching me play football; and he then told the coach of the University of New Mexico [Albuquerque, New Mexico], Marvin Levy [Marv Levy], about me; and Marvin Levy came to New York [New York]. And I just saw today that the Waldorf Astoria [Waldorf Astoria New York] is being sold, and that was my--I met Marvin Levy, my mother [Jewell Spencer Clarke] and I, in the Waldorf Astoria back in 1957. Speaker 2: So he came to recruit you there? Speaker 1: Yes, he did. Speaker 2: Oh, and so the recruitment was at the Waldorf Astoria? Speaker 1: Came--that's where he took my mother and I to dinner and told me about the University of New Mexico, and we listened and my--and he said four year scholarship--which I decided to do that. Speaker 2: So this is--you know, I say this because it's the late fif- you know, you graduated in 1958 [from DeWitt Clinton High School, Bronx, New York]-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Right? Yeah. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: And there's--you know, this, we think of, I mean this is right in the civil rights, modern day Civil Rights Movement, that we often think of this, you know, early '60s [1960s]. I'm just wondering what--and you know, we also think of Jackie Robinson breaking the color--you know in sports. And you know in--but at--where is football, where is football as a sport at that point? And where is college football because you talk a lot (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You're just beginning to see more blacks playing college football. I remember a fellow by the name of Sam Cunningham, who ultimately went to play for the, I think, the Buffalo Bills [sic. New England Patriots] who was recruited by Bear Bryant of University of Alabama [Birmingham, Alabama]; one of the first blacks to really play in college football--in, I mean, in the South. Jim Brown who, ultimately, for me in my generation is greatest football player I've ever to see play the game was at Syracuse [Syracuse University, Syracuse, New York], 1957--'56 [1956], '57 [1957] as I recall. So you really begin to see blacks, really begin to see more in college football. Speaker 2: And so this--when you were recruited--he was really trying to--there were several, how many I think what, were there four black players, or-- Speaker 1: Well, at the University of New Mexico, the thing about Martin Levy--who by the way is eighty-eight, eighty-nine [years old], he lives in Chicago [Illinois]--he had recruited in Waterloo, Iowa [sic. Davenport, Iowa] an African American quarterback, Chuck Roberts. He also recruited the star football player, Don Perkins, who went on to play for the Dallas Cowboys for almost ten years, came out of Davenport [sic. Waterloo, Iowa]. And, and so--but Levy was way ahead of his time in 1957, 1956 when he recruited Chuck Roberts to be a black quarterback back then, to come to University of New Mexico. And when I--he recruited me there were five blacks at the university out of eight thousand students, and one black woman. And the year that I came in, several of us came in; and so there were twelve, still one black woman. We're all on athletic scholarships, football scholarships. One of my friends was on a wrestling scholarship, and fine arts--black. Story_ID: 663572 Speaker 1: And, you know, you speak of this in your book ['The Man from Essence: Creating a Magazine for Black Women,' Edward Lewis with Audrey Edwards] but it's--isn't going there, is like being on the other side of the world? Speaker 2: Oh, my god, it was (laughter)--the only thing I knew about New Mexico then was that the atomic bomb was built in Los Alamos [New Mexico] and exploded in Alamogordo [New Mexico]. Twenty-five hundred miles from New York [New York], I can remember as we're about to land, I'm seeing this incredible barren territory that's--what did I come to? And trying to adjust being seventeen, eighteen years old and having to play football, too--having to compete. And when I think back upon it, too, I did not--the--Albuquerque [New Mexico] is 5,200 feet high and so breathing was very difficult. I probably would have done better if I had been at a lower altitude with the respect to those first two years of playing football. So I had to get used to that. And then I was worried about my family situation back in New York, worried about my father [Edward Lewis]--my mother [Jewell Spencer Clarke] and father. And so I couldn't adjust to Albuquerque until I went to Missoula, Montana for four days. We played the University of Montana, and after being in Missoula, Montana for four days, I said, let me stop complaining. Let me accept where I am. Go with the flow. And I adjusted in Albuquerque and the university [University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, New Mexico] became a place that, ultimately, I went to undergraduate and graduate school there and turned out to be a wonderful place for me. Story_ID: 663573 Speaker 1: No, you lost your scholarship though? Speaker 2: I lost my scholarship--Marvin Levy [Marv Levy], after being the coach for one year, accepted head coach position at the University of California [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California]. And so the new coach [Bill Weeks] was the backfield coach for New Mexico; and he went to--he was elevated to be head coach. We had a great spring training, this is 1959, and I was coming to my own, I was doing very well. The coaches said it, "You had a great spring training," and, in fact, I was going in New Mexico, work for the grounds department; but I decided to come back to New York [New York]. I came back to New York, and in mid-August, I get a letter saying that "We're not going to ask you to come back." And that was a devastating blow to me, and I didn't know what I was going to do. Fortunately, the dean of men at the University of New Mexico [Albuquerque, New Mexico] took a liking to me and he told my mother [Jewell Spencer Clarke], "I'm going to try to find a way to get your son back." And he facilitated several National Defense Loans [National Defense Student Loans; Federal Perkins Loan Program], two small scholarships, I became a dormitory counselor at the dorm; and that's how I got back to the University of New Mexico. And I thought that the reason why I lost my scholarship was because of my lack of athletic skills, but I learned in 1985 that the reason why I lost my scholarship is because I was a--considered an activist. Outspoken, even though I was quiet, but when I did speak I apparently made some people uncomfortable; and so the athletic department did not want to have me come back as a--on a football scholarship, which surprised my other colleagues--I mean, the football players that I was not coming back on a scholarship to play football. But hey, you know as I think back upon it, it's one of the best things that happened to me. Story_ID: 663574 Speaker 1: Well, you also took up Russian studies and? Speaker 2: I was very--my curiosity in terms of reading, I read some of the great Russian novelists: Tolstoy [Leo Tolstoy], Dostoyevsky [Fyodor Dostoyevsky]; and I decided to take Russian history. And--I had already taken Russian civilization--that's required when you, in your first years at the university [University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, New Mexico]. But my interest in Russian history, the professor there was a man named Henry Tobias [Henry J. Tobias]. Henry was a graduate, from Paterson, New Jersey, went to Ohio; got his Ph.D. in Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California]. But he taught Russian history, and I took this course. And just--I just ate it up. And I did not know that Professor Tobias was interested in me; and I was on my way--I had gone to the student administration building. I was on my way to the student union to get some coffee, he was coming out, the professor, and he said, "Ed [HistoryMaker Edward Lewis], are you going to have some coffee?" And I said yes. He said, "Do you mind if I sit with you?" I said, "By all means, please." And we sat and he proceeded to--he and I proceeded, to talk for the next three and a half hours. I had never had anyone do that with me. And so as a result of that, this man just opened my head up intellectually; and then I took Russian history. He also taught Chinese history, so I took Chinese history. And so my background in terms of--I was a political science major, but I had an interest in international affairs--particularly, Russian and Chinese history. And so in my travels, I've gone to the Far East, I'm going to China, I've not been to Russia yet but I hope to go to Moscow [Russia] and St. Petersburg [Russia] at some point. But I have a, just a familiarity of Russia, in particularly how serfs, serfdom was portrayed, and how these Russians had to overcome that; and I compare that to how we as blacks had to live in a society in terms of how we had to overcome, too. So I just sort found some familiarity in things of--and when I looked at what happened to the people who were really slaves too and looked at what is happening to us. Story_ID: 663575 Speaker 1: You're not having--which strikes me--is you're not having--well, this is a little early--but you're definitely not having the urban experience, you know, that you would have had. Because there's, starting the- in a few years, there's going to be a lot of turmoil coming at that time-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --but you're having a very sort of intellectually growing t- you know, which college should be anyway. But-- Speaker 2: But at the same time, I was still aware-- Speaker 1: You're aware-- Speaker 2: --what's going on-- Speaker 1: So talk about that. Speaker 2: Going back to my cousin [Barbara Johns], I knew what she did in '51 [1951]; Rosa Parks, '55 [1955]; Selma [Selma to Montgomery March]--and so I was certainly aware of the Civil Rights Movement and the beginnings of SNCC and the beginnings of CORE [Congress of Racial Equality]. Jim Farmer [James Farmer] and all folks like that. And I also, as a result of not being involved in football I became a big man on campus [University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, New Mexico]--became a student leader. I was on the student council and I ran for student body presidency, and I lost by 100 votes. So I was a student activist on campus; and there was an organization called NSA, the national students association [U.S. National Student Association] that purported to represent all the college students all across the country. And they heard about me and asked me if I wanted to join the organization and go represent the organization in Africa. I would have gone to the Congo, Patrice Lumumba--which is where I was going to be stationed. And in spreading, for lack of a better--propaganda about the importance of democracy and being an American. And I got selected, with a small group of other people, and we were flown to Bryn Mawr university [Bryn Mawr College, Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania] during the summer, and we took courses in political science, history, communism. And at the big convention, Bloomington, Indiana--NSA conference--that's where I met Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson], Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture]. And because I was a--I'd been selected by the powers to be of national students association, and I didn't talk very much, a number of the blacks thought I was an Uncle Tom because I didn't speak out very much, except to say that--NSA was also providing funds for the Civil Rights Movement, and one of the counties that they selected was Prince Edward County, Virginia. So I was out front about getting them to support Prince Edward County, and Stokely was out front about getting the organization to support nonviolent coordinating committee; so they had to make a decision. Because I was a part of the inside, they made a decision to help Prince Edward County providing funds, hiring teachers, because I said to you, the schools had been closed. The people on Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee were very upset with me, and said some very uncomplimentary things about me. The former founder of this organization, a legend in the student world by the name of Allard Lowenstein [Allard K. Lowenstein], had been president, stepped down and he was going to re-run for president again; and he asked me if I would nominate him. I said to him I would do that, "But you may not want to know what I'm going to say and it may cost you the nomination." And he said, "I'll live with that." And I gave the speech right after the March on Washington. And I talked about from my standpoint, wha- the meaning of the March on Washington. It was a fiery speech, two thousand students out there; and I had on a African--Nigerian, African robe, coat, because one of my dearest Nigerian friends--one of my dearest friends was Nigerian and he gave me this beautiful clothing. And in fact, he wanted me to come to Nigeria to teach, which I didn't do. But I gave this speech; and after I gave the speech, I come off the stage and I'm walking down, and Stokely comes down to meet me and he puts his arm around me and to say, "Good speech, brother." And as a result of that, and then I was no longer considered quote an Uncle Tom; I was one of the--I was considered an activist. I was always an individual, as I said, didn't have to talk very much but I had some very deep feelings about how we're, blacks were treated; and wanted to make sure that, that we do the right thing. Story_ID: 663576 Speaker 1: And when I went back to the University of New Mexico [Albuquerque, New Mexico]--this is '63 [1963] now--a horrendous act took place September 15, 1963. The four girls were killed [at the 16th Street Baptist Church, Birmingham, Alabama]. I was so upset about that. I was ready to trunk everything, quit school, go work for Stokely [Stokely Carmichael; Kwame Ture], Bob Moses [Robert Parris Moses]--by the way, did you interview him? Speaker 2: We haven't and that is-- Speaker 1: Ooh-- Speaker 2: --no, we've been trying. We have been trying-- Speaker 1: --ooh. Speaker 2: --no, the Algebra--I mean that was on--he was, he's been on our list. I saw him at Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts]-- Speaker 1: Let me, let me see if I can-- Speaker 2: Please, because we-- Speaker 1: --get someone. He needs to be here. Speaker 2: I know-- Speaker 1: Whatever you do, he needs to be a part of this history. Speaker 2: No, we've been trying and we, and-- Speaker 1: In part, where people don't realize, too--he was an extraordinary mathematician. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And he enabled a lot of kids to understand, or at least have a better ability to be able to--he-- Speaker 2: Now, are you talking about then or now? Because he's been doing the Algebra Project. Speaker 1: Oh, I know that. Over the years-- Speaker 2: But before? Speaker 1: Before then. Speaker 2: See because this is what--so this right, so your group there that--of the twelve of you. Does it ever grow? Does it grow each year that you're there, or? Speaker 1: It grows--oh, yes it does. Speaker 2: It grows. Speaker 1: It grows. Speaker 2: It grows to what? Speaker 1: And we call ourselves the Jocks Before Civil Rights. It grows and, and you have more blacks coming into the university, some on scholarships, and some not on scholarships. Today, the university has close to almost a thousand--out of thirty thousand they have about a thousand blacks there. Speaker 2: But it was eight thousand when you were there, right? Speaker 1: It was eight thousand when I was there. Speaker 2: (Mumbles) Still about the same. Speaker 1: It grew slowly, but it continued to grow. Speaker 2: So what are your, what are you--and your, you say you call Jocks Before Civil Rights--is that the term (laughter)? Speaker 1: (Laughter) Yes. Speaker 2: But what are your, what are you thinking and planning to be, and wanting to be? And I want to ask you about Richard Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] because that's also around-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --that time. Speaker 1: Yes. Oh, I had plans of, particularly after getting out of undergraduate school I went to graduate school with political science--and there I made A's and Bs. And I got accepted into Georgetown Law School [Georgetown University Law School; Georgetown University Law Center, Washington, D.C.]. I knew I was going to be a big time lawyer--civil rights lawyer or corporate lawyer, or one of the other. And so I had plans of being a lawyer; and getting into Georgetown was, for me, a major coup--and got there, in part, because I became a member of the Omega Psi Phi Fraternity. And I tell my former, my--not former, my Omega brothers that I was the individual who prevented the Omegas from coming on the university in the early days at the University of New Mexico because I had this thought that to become a fraternity brother that you had to be light skinned. That they didn't like people like myself, which turned out to be absolutely not true. In part, because the university signed a large contract, Peace Corps contract to teach Peace Corps volunteers for--in Latin America. And the head of the Peace Corps program for Latin America, was a doctor--Ph.D. doctor at Howard University [Washington, D.C.]. His name was I. Gregory Newton. I. Gregory Newton was the grand basileus of the Omega Psi Phi. He comes to the University of New Mexico, he--the professor who taught me Russian and Chinese history [Henry J. Tobias], they'd asked him to oversee the teaching. He calls me in and says, "Ed [HistoryMaker Edward Lewis], I want you to lecture--give the lectures because you know this stuff as well as I do." So I lectured world affairs and communism. I. Gregory Newton comes to New Mexico to oversee the program, he meets me and he starts talking to me, and I said, my god, this guy is--he was so well prepared, intellectually. I said, who is this guy? And he starts telling me about Omega Psi Phi, so I said wow. And this is the kind of individual that belongs to Omega Psi Phi, I want to be a part of this fraternity. He then introduces me, another gentlemen by the name of H. Carl Moultrie. H. Carl Moultrie became a federal judge in Washington, D.C. H. Carl Moultrie was a graduate of Georgetown Law School. H. Carl Moultrie wrote a beautiful letter to Georgetown that enabled me to get into Georgetown. That's how I got to law school. Story_ID: 663577 Speaker 1: But you're saying that your group had great aspirations. I mean, all of you (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. We-- Speaker 1: Even--but how did you differ from the, you know, the other people who were playing sports. Some of you talked, went into professional sports; but what are the others--you know, are they similarly having high aspirations? Speaker 2: Yes, they did. They, the individuals who came and subsequently, those who came afterwards went into a variety of other fields. Some stayed in education; engineering, a very dear friend went to Boeing [The Boeing Company], works for Boeing; so they went off into a variety of other careers. And have all done well. I mean, married, have children; and we have reunions every two years of the individuals who came to the University of New Mexico [Albuquerque, New Mexico]. So that's how we have been able to keep up with each other. The fellow, Chuck Roberts from--the quarterback was, he became a former dean admin at the university. So each of these individuals-- Speaker 1: Dean of what? Speaker 2: Dean admin? Speaker 1: Dean admin at the university? Speaker 2: At the University of New Mexico. He went on to do well. Don Perkins, after retiring from the Cowboys [Dallas Cowboys], came back got involved in education and became a sports announcer for the University of New Mexico. So a number of them did a number of other things. Story_ID: 663578 Speaker 1: I want to just touch upon Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] a little bit because (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: --you got into a whole, really sort of discussion about that. Now, the reason, the reason that--tell me your attraction to Nixon. I know that, I know what you thought of Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy]--and actually my mother was wanting to vote for Nixon. I always thought-- Speaker 2: Is that right? Speaker 1: (Laughter) She did. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Well, I just thought that the Kennedy family, well the president, particularly the president, his--did really not believe in the cause of civil rights. And not that I thought that Richard Nixon did, but at least from the standpoint of--he did more as a Republican president to open up access to capital than anyone else. And when blacks came--in the late '60s [1960s], when there was, in '65 [1965] we had riots; '68 [1968] King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] being killed, Robert Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy], being killed. So there was a desire to get young blacks in the business. And so he facilitated several programs out of government to set up minority economic investment vehicles for young blacks to get access to capital; and he got his--the secretary of commerce, Maurice Stans to make sure that his program takes hold. He's a father of affirmative action, which I don't think people realize in terms of--so they call the Philadelphia Plan now that he initiated. And I tell women that women owe all their expansion in women in sports because Nixon signed something called Title IX back in 1972. So this is very complicated president who did what he should not have done in the Watergate, did some other things, notwithstanding China too, but he did some other things in terms, as it relates to helping blacks become a part of the business environment, and helping blacks get access to capital. So that's where my support of Nixon came from; and I also thought that the Democratic Party took blacks for granted. I've always been a proponent that blacks should be a part of the Republican Party, but Republicans make it so difficult because of their ideology to be a part of the party. And so what we have ended up now being, blacks are more, obviously more associated with the Democratic Party in part now because of President Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] being in the White House. And with regard to the upcoming elections, if I can jump--talk about the midterm--I'm, hopefully the [U.S.] Senate, we will be able to retain on a Democratic side, the Senate. But Republicans are not going to get into the White House, either 2016 or four years later unless they change their tune about immigration, in terms of how they talk to the Hispanic community. And with Obama, we saw the highest percentage of African Americans vote--2008, 2009 [sic.]-- Speaker 1: Two thousand twelve [2012]. Speaker 2: --two thousand twelve [2012]--and I think that's a trend that's going to continue. I think we are now--but again-- Speaker 1: But I want to take you back though-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --to Nixon. So are there other of your, I'm just asking of your age group who are thinking that way--and the Philadelphia Plan was Arthur Flet- well no, was it Art Fletcher [HistoryMaker Arthur Fletcher] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. That's right. Art Fletcher. Speaker 1: (Unclear) yes. Speaker 2: Yes, indeed. Speaker 1: He was also, he played football, too. Speaker 2: Yes, he did. Yes, he did. And it was Art Fletcher-- Speaker 1: But are you aware of this as a--I'm just saying you're in college [University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, New Mexico], are you aware of these things? Or you become aware of them later? Speaker 2: I'm aware of these things. I'm, well-- Speaker 1: A little later? Speaker 2: A little later. Little later. Speaker 1: Little later. Speaker 2: A little later I become aware of these things because I'm now work- I'm a budding banker at First National City Bank [Citibank, N.A.]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and I'm coming (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, okay. Okay. So let's start--that's right and you're in D.C. [Washington, D.C.]. Okay. Story_ID: 663579 Speaker 1: But at the time, it's just that you, you're thinking that you can trust this--sort of, you can tr- Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] comes from not a Brahmin environment-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --and maybe--so when you get into law school--let's talk about that. So you're wanting--this is the thing, you know, maybe to be a civil rights lawyer or--I mean, were you thinking corporate law at that ti- ? Speaker 2: Yes, I was. Yes, I was also thinking corporate law, too. And Georgetown [Georgetown University Law School; Georgetown University Law Center, Washington, D.C.] is one of the finest law schools we have in this country, and I said I just knew my life was, was--that I was going to have a very rich life, being a big time corporate lawyer. And I studied, I worked hard. The first half of the year, I did fine. The second half, I bombed. And that was a real major blow to my ego. I--by the way, I've subsequently found out that, I have another colleague who was also at Georgetown who we--he's now saying to me that I may have gotten, lost my scholarship I mean at Georgetown because I was black. He lost his and he had certainly better grades than I did; and I mean this just happened--he just read my book ['The Man from Essence: Creating a Magazine for Black Women,' Edward Lewis with Audrey Edwards], realized I had gone to Georgetown. He called me, he said, "You won't believe this Ed [HistoryMaker Edward Lewis], I was at Georgetown and I found out that some other blacks, including myself, we did not make it because we now feel that--because we were black--and the same thing may have happened to you." I mean in terms of the professors, someone made a decision that they didn't want any more blacks there. Now having said that, however, my former roommate, a fellow by the name of Curtis Smothers did graduate, and there was a black woman who did graduate, so I'm you know I'm unsure about that. But hey, you never know about these things. Speaker 1: I know but fate had its way 'cause-- Speaker 2: Fate-- Speaker 1: --you wouldn't have made the money-- Speaker 2: --faith had its way--when I-- Speaker 1: But you, but you were, but it was your grades, right? Wasn't it? Your grades? Speaker 2: At Georgetown? Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: That's what they said, yes. Speaker 1: But they said it was your grade? Okay. Speaker 2: Yes, they said it was my grades. Yes. That's what they said. Speaker 1: So, but, how many, how many blacks were there then, how many in your--how large was a law school class at Georgetown then? Speaker 2: I honestly don't remember. There were, there was two other, two other blacks--I, they made it. I did not make it. And one was a woman. But I don't remember how large the class was. Speaker 1: Okay. So this is, this is 19-- Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-five [1965]. Speaker 1: --sixty-five [1965]. Okay. And you, you--this is after you, both have your B.A. and M.A.-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --degree in political-- Speaker 2: Science. Speaker 1: --science and international relations [from the University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, New Mexico]. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And Georgetown, even at that point, has this, you know, it's starting to develop a relation- a reputation in its international affairs (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Story_ID: 663580 Speaker 1: I want to ask, what happens when that happens? Talk about that. You talk about that in your book ['The Man from Essence: Creating a Magazine for Black Women,' Edward Lewis with Audrey Edwards] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, I was at a low point ultimately in my life; I thought I was a failure. I couldn't talk about it; didn't even tell my mother [Jewell Spencer Clarke] and my stepfather [George Clarke], or my father [Edward Lewis] that I had flunked out. Kept it very quiet. Had no money. One of my cousins fed me, or made sure that I had food. I was too ashamed, I really thought I was--that my world had ended and I was a failure at twenty-five years old. I remember calling the dean admin [dean of admissions] at the University of New Mexico [Albuquerque, New Mexico], the same dean who helped me with my getting back to New Mexico and I told him that I had flunked out of Georgetown [Georgetown University Law School; Georgetown University Law Center, Washington, D.C.]. And he said, "Ed [HistoryMaker Edward Lewis], you like international affairs, I have a colleague at First National City Bank [Citibank, N.A.], why don't I call him and facilitate an interview?" He did. I got the call to First National City Bank (laughter) and they put in the Waldorf [Waldorf Astoria New York, New York, New York], as I recall; and I was interviewed by ten different people at First National City Bank. And I kept saying to them, I said, "You know, I have a master's degree in political science and international affairs." And they said to me, "If you want to learn, we'll teach you banking." I said, "I'm not interested in being the spook beside the, next to the door. But I want--you know I want you to really teach me." And they said, "No, if you're willing to learn, we will teach you." And they did. When I got hired by First National City Bank, they put me into this, what they call, this executive training program. And they brought in professors from Harvard [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts] to teach corporate law--corporate loans. They brought professors in from Columbia University [Columbia Business School, New York, New York] to teach accounting; and so it was a very intense program. And then they put you out in the field. My activism kicked in because there was a particular division of the bank called financial engineering that all the M.B.A. students from Harvard, University of Chicago [University of Chicago Graduate School of Business; University of Chicago, Booth School of Business, Chicago, Illinois], Wharton [Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] went into this division. And it's a euphemism for credit analysis, but they called it financial engineering. And two of my other colleagues, African American, one was a graduate of Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia], the other one went to Michigan [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan]; we were, we came together and had a meeting with the senior people at the bank. Some of the other blacks and other whites thought we had lost our minds, weren't we fearful about asking questions about going into another division and your being black. And our feeling was, we had nothing to lose; and so the bank responded in a positive way. And one of my colleagues from Atlanta U, he was put into this division. I came in one second (laughter), when I got into this division, I said, oh my god, what did I come to? I couldn't understand the nomenclature, but it turned out that it was my introduction into cash flow analysis and using the computer. And that's why I became--when I say cash is king, queen, jack and everything--it all stems from my going through that learning period of working in that division. And I was the only black out of twenty-five, and no women; and I was--I looked at my other colleagues who were white, and I said I am determined not let them think that I was inferior to them. So I saw them come in at 6:30, 7:00 in the mornings, and work all day--I started coming in at 6, 6:30. I learned the nomenclature, learned the computer; and I was even given not only a nice bonus, but they were giving me a two month trip in the entire state of Canada if I had stayed, except something happened. I got invited to a very important meeting, November 8th, 1968, and then history changed itself. Story_ID: 663581 Speaker 1: So how did you know Russell Goings [Russell L. Goings, Jr.] because he's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Russell Goings heard about me as one of the up and coming young blacks at First National City Bank [Citibank, N.A.], and he tried to recruit me to come work for Shearson, Hammill [Shearson, Hammill and Co.]. Russ had been helped by Shearson to set up his own (unclear) investment business, and Russ was out recruiting. And as I said, he had heard about me, and when he was not able to get me to come to Shearson, he then, 'cause Russ had this desire to get--he persuaded his bosses at Shearson and Hammill to want to be helpful, giving advice or giving money if he could bring a group of blacks together who wanted to start their own businesses. So he told me about this meeting, "I want you to come," and twenty-five of us showed up November 8th, 1968 at 14 Wall Street [New York, New York]. And at this meeting, the number two guy at Shearson is talking about business, capitalism, and he said there must be a need for a magazine for Negro women--that's how we were considered back then. And my former partner raised his hand and said, "I have an idea for a magazine for Negro women." And Russ Goings said, "Well, there's Ed Lewis [HistoryMaker Edward Lewis] over there, he knows a thing about money. Why don't you two get together at the end of the meeting?" And my two other--we didn't know each other--came over to meet, and we made a decision to put some flesh on this idea about a magazine for Negro women. But that's how--and Russ became a board member during those early years, and a mentor. And so he played a very crucial role-- Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: --in the beginnings. Speaker 1: --who are the, who are the other black people in this space that would be similar to, you know--in his same arena--who would--? Speaker 2: In investment banking? Speaker 1: Um-hm. In investment banking because, you know, you hear-- Speaker 2: None. Speaker 1: So this is before-- Speaker 2: This is none. Speaker 1: No one. Speaker 2: No one. Russ was a real trailblazer. And you had some of the individuals who came afterwards--a fellow by the name of Willie Daniels [Willie E. Daniels]-- Speaker 1: You have Bell (unclear)-- Speaker 2: --Travers Bell. Speaker 1: --Travers Bell. Speaker 2: But they, they-- Speaker 1: They came after. Speaker 2: They came after Russ. Speaker 1: They came after. Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: Russ was a trailblazer. Speaker 1: Okay. And was, you know, 'cause I've heard him speak also, Clarence Jones [sic. Clarence Smith], but? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So he's after Russ, too? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Right, he's after. Okay. So this fateful meeting, I mean, he, what Russ is trying to do is--he's trying to present oppor- look for people like yourself-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and present opportunity. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And there's a focus on business, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: This is about setting up your own business--really going, being an entrepreneur and getting funding, and, you know, having the ability to, to want to go out on your own, instead of continue to work in, in Corporate America. Story_ID: 663582 Speaker 1: The two, the--the group comes together then? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. And who is the group? Speaker 2: We come together--Jonathan Blount who-- Speaker 1: He's the one who said this was-- Speaker 2: "I had an idea." He, Jonathan was, I believe, from North Carolina. He worked for New Jersey Bell [New Jersey Bell Telephone Company; Verizon New Jersey, Inc.]. Another fellow by the name of Cecil Hollingsworth was--he was doing brochures for the advertising industry. He was a printer broker but, in fact, he had stationery that said The Hollingsworth Group, so when we came together, we didn't know what to call ourselves. We called ourselves The Hollingsworth Group [Essence Communications, Inc.]. There was a fellow by the name of Tony Janniere. Of all the--of the four, of the five of us, he had the most experience. He worked for The New York Times and sold advertising; and we ultimately made him the president of our group--The Hollingsworth Group. And then there was Clarence Smith. Clarence sold, was a very successful insurance salesman for Prudential [Prudential Insurance Company of America; Prudential Financial, Inc.]. But he decided to be a part of this group. And that's how we came together. Speaker 1: Right. Group dynamics are hard but at the beginning, everybody's looking at opportunity, I take it? Speaker 2: Everybody's looking at opportunity. We were four equal partners-- Speaker 1: Well, five at the beginning, though? Speaker 2: Five at the beginning because Tony Janniere--when we--we were five and then we had to make a decision whether we were going to go out on our own and start this, and so we had a meeting amongst ourselves and Tony said, "I--this is just too risky for me." And he left. So it was just the four of us. And Tony, to this day, thanks me for remembering that he was a part of the original meeting. Clarence was not even a part of the original--Clarence came two weeks later at another meeting that Russ [Russell L. Goings, Jr.] had down at Shearson [Shearson, Hammill and Co.]. But Clarence decided to come a part of this, a part of this group. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you find that--I mean everybody--is everybody still alive now-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --of the gr- ? Yes? Speaker 2: Yes, they are. Yes, they are. Speaker 1: So has everybody read your book ['The Man from Essence: Creating a Magazine for Black Women,' Edward Lewis with Audrey Edwards]? Speaker 2: That I don't know. I asked--tried to get them get in touch-- Speaker 1: To the interview. Speaker 2: --to be interviewed, they each declined; and so I have no way of knowing. I hope they did because I really do believe that I betrayed them in a way, that--it was not about I, Ed Lewis [HistoryMaker Edward Lewis], did all this; it was about how we came together. It was about four black men who came together to celebrate the beauty and intelligence of black women. And so they need to be acknowledged. And we need, we made decisions as it relates to what skillsets we had, and what we would do in the beginning. But in the end, as you just mentioned, group dynamics, partnerships are difficult, egos; and just trying to get to know each other. I was twenty-eight [years old] (laughter); Blount was twenty-four; Smith was thirty-five--he was the oldest of the group; Hollingsworth was, I think, twenty- twenty-eight. And so we were all just trying to feel our way in terms of how to make this thing work. Speaker 1: Well, because at that point, you know, between thirty-five and twenty-four is a lot of years-- Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: --you know. Speaker 2: Oh yes. Story_ID: 663583 Speaker 1: Talk about the process of coming together, you know, what happened; so Hollin- so you get--first of all funding. Talk about the funding. Speaker 2: Well, in talking about the funding, for example. We had four partners at Shearson, Hammill [Shearson, Hammill and Co.] that loaned us twelve thousand dollars--that was really the first funding that we got. That was very helpful. Then Bill Hudgins [HistoryMaker William Hudgins] comes into play. Bill Hudgins, the former president of the Freedom National Bank [New York, New York], started by my hero Jackie Robinson in 1964. I go to Bill Hudgins in 1969 and ask him to loan me thirteen thousand dollars; and I got an audience with him because the number two guy at Shearson, Michael Victory, he and Bill Hudgins knew each other. Bill liked him, and he said to me, "If Michael Victory recommends you coming to see me, I will listen," and he made a decision on making the loan to me, "because you have no way of, no collateral, no way of paying this back--but Michael Victory believes in you and so I'm going to trust you, too," and so he loaned me thirteen thousand dollars. If he had not loaned me that thirteen thousand dollars I may not be talking to you now. So that's how we came together. There were two partners: we were bo- Blount [Jonathan Blount] and I were the bachelors. And the other two partners, Smith [Clarence Smith] and Hollingsworth, were married with children. And so whatever monies we had, we gave to the married partners and Blount and I took no money. I was still living at home with my mother [Jewell Spencer Clarke], and Blount--I don't know what Blount was doing, but we didn't take any salaries during those early days (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, so that's what I'm, how did it come to be [Hollingsworth Group; Essence Communications, Inc.], I know--is it because of the fact that you worked in a bank [First National City Bank; Citibank, N.A.] that you became the business-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --person, so-- Speaker 2: Indeed. Speaker 1: --that, was that a conscious discussion-- Speaker 2: Yes, it was. Speaker 1: --when everyone is deciding their roles-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --you know that? Speaker 2: I knew something about finance, I knew accounting; I knew assets equal liabilities; I knew how to set up a book, and I knew the importance of cash. So that's--that was my skillset, even though my background was political science and international relations. Hollingsworth had a familiarity with brochures, printing. Clarence, as I said, was a sales- incredible salesperson, so he took on--became the advertising director. And Blount, because it was his idea initially, we said okay you're going to be the president. Blount was a very articulate, fiery young man. He could look you dead in the eye and you, you know you would believe him. He just had that kind of passion about him. And so that's how we delineated our division of labor; and we were four equal partners equally making decisions about how to run a business. So what we would do at the--every day at the end of the evening, we would get together and we would talk about issues and we would agree on a set of things that we would do. And we said, "Jonathan you will be our spokesperson, and--because you're representing the group." Invariably, he would do the opposite. And so it became difficult internally and externally as it relates to how we were conducting the business. So we had to make a decision about--one of us was going to become the person that's going to say yea or nay, and we had a decision amongst ourselves and each of us went around the table. Clarence talked about why he should be the CEO; Hollingsworth talked about why he should be; Blount talked about why he should be; and I talked about why I should be. And then we had a vote, and in the end all three of them voted for me to be the person. But even after that vote, Blount still began to do things that would just continue to cause confusion; and so, ultimately, I had to make a decision to ask him to leave in 1971. I asked Cecil Hollingsworth to leave in '74 [1974]. Those two didn't really get along in the early days, but they came together in '77 [1977] because of their dislike of me and had a--mounted a control fight. Story_ID: 663584 Speaker 1: This equality of, of everybody coming together, that, did that work at all I mean at the be- was that really working? Because is there so much energy going like, you know, you're trying to find funding; you know, there's the whole thing that Clarence [Clarence Smith] is doing with the sales--I'm just wondering--and you describe it very well in the book ['The Man from Essence: Creating a Magazine for Black Women,' Edward Lewis with Audrey Edwards] but, I, you know, this coming together every, I mean, or you know to have, to make decisions, did that work? Speaker 2: In part, it did work. I mean in terms of the dynamics of at least Hollingsworth [Cecil Hollingsworth], Smith and myself it worked. Blount [Jonathan Blount] really was an outsider in the end. But in the beginning, it was working. Speaker 1: Well, he's the youngest. Speaker 2: And he is the youngest, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And he is--so, let's talk about who, so I want to go back--let's go back to Hudgins [HistoryMaker William Hudgins], though. Because your description of that, I was sort of surprised how that story turned out actually, you know, 'cause I didn't know the story before. And I was thinking he was going to turn you down-- Speaker 2: I thought so too. Speaker 1: --completely. Speaker 2: He didn't turn me down because of--because his knowledge and relationship with Michael Victory. Speaker 1: So he was really operating, like we know banks operate, you know, whereas--relationships-- Speaker 2: It's about relationships, it's about character, integrity--no doubt about it. Speaker 1: So that money really helped--because you were almost at the end, right? Speaker 2: Oh, we had--what we brought to the table, the four of us, my partners, was sweat equity. We didn't have any money to put into starting this new business [The Hollingsworth Group; Essence Communications, Inc.], and so the money that we got from the four partners at Shearson [Shearson, Hammill and Co.]--that was helpful. But we needed this thirteen thousand because we were also in the process of trying to raise money on Wall Street. So we were making many presentations, trying to get money. We had a business plan, trying to raise a million five hundred thousand dollars, so this thirteen thousand was to keep body and soul together; to help us do--to help us try to do this magazine. And so that's how it was used. But, ultimately, we finally did have a closing. We did not get the million five hundred thousand dollars, we only had 130,000, so we were undercapitalized in the very beginning. And I've often said, if I'd had the million five hundred thousand dollars, I may not be here because it's amazing what you can do with less. We were forced--because we didn't have the money, we had to keep it together; and so we had to do with less and keep it all together. It was about survival. In 1972, we are in the midst of a recession. I didn't even know what a recession was. I didn't even know I should be concerned about that because it was just about survival. That's what it was: survival. Thirteen pages of ads-- Speaker 1: Your first issue. Speaker 2: --and five pages each. Plus, in terms of having the dynamics of being a new magazine, we thought we were going to have great luck selling the magazine off the newsstand. But what happened is that for one year, here in New York City [New York, New York], we were not in a port authority, no subway outlets, no airports, because the wholesaler and the distributor got into a fight. And so the distributor took all our magazines--all the magazines that they we were responsible, off the newsstand. So we had no money coming in. It was hellish that first year in terms of getting Essence off the ground. Speaker 1: But the first issue was published what date (unclear)? Speaker 2: May--May 1970. Speaker 1: And so who works on that issue? Speaker 2: Oh--I have a copy of the first issue to show you. I mean, all the four partners, the editor in chief-- Speaker 1: The editor in chief is? Speaker 2: Ruth Ross who gave us our name, by the way, of Essence. You want the names of the people, or? Oh, I need to get the first issue out-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and let you, let you see that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But they're all there. Story_ID: 663585 Speaker 1: --Travel the country, and that stems from my going to New Mexico [University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, New Mexico]; traveling--Montana, Wyoming, Utah--all these different places--Arizona, Texas; and I realized how big this country is. People are very different, and so I wanted Susan [HistoryMaker Susan Taylor] to interact with all these ladies and find a way to translate that back into the magazine [Essence]. As a result of Susan doing this, Susan became an icon. Very articulate. And many people thought Susan started the magazine, ran a magazine; they had no idea that there were two guys back there--the, the founders. In part, I wrote this book ['The Man from Essence: Creating a Magazine for Black Women,' Edward Lewis with Audrey Edwards] because I wanted black women to know that there were black men who came together to do this for them; something that they can, they can call their own. Story_ID: 663586 Speaker 1: I want to go back--so there are the four of you; and you are--you--can you talk about your launch party? Like that first--there are a lot of personalities. You've got the hottest ticket in town, right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Ooh yes, it was the hottest tickets in town. It seems to me we had politicians, we had celebrities; and it was just a--there was just--what's the word I want to use? The air was just filled with excitement about a magazine that's now coming into, to being to talk about black women. We didn't have any way of, of, of promoting ourselves. And--but we got a lot of good publicity, New York Times [The New York Times], Amsterdam [New York Amsterdam News], pe- papers in Chicago [Illinois], Chicago Defender; or the Sentinel [Los Angeles Sentinel] out in, in--excuse me--in Los Angeles [California]. The way we (unclear) ourselves--'Soul Train,' Don Cornelius, was one of our biggest earliest supporters--owe him a great deal of debt, Don Cornelius. And [HistoryMaker] George Johnson of Johnson Products [Johnson Products Company]--(gesture) hair care. Speaker 1: Yes. Johnson Products hair care. He, he was very helpful with 'Soul Train'-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --so-- Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: --so--so he-- Speaker 2: And very helpful to us, and really, one of our, our biggest advertisers during those early years of, of helping develop--help developing Essence. Speaker 1: So who else were your adver- big advertisers during those early year- ? Speaker 2: Well, I wouldn't say big. Speaker 1: I mean, well--? Speaker 2: They, they, they were--what happened is that these advertisers did not really want to make a commitment to the market, so they would say, "I'm gonna advertise one time," and we would discourage them from coming in one time because you're not doing yourself, you're not doing us any good. And we would say if you're going to advertise, treat us just like you'd treat the general market. Make a commitment; and in the end, you've got a return on your investment because black women will see that you're advertising in their medium, and they will get an understanding that this is a company [The Hollingsworth Group; Essence Communications, Inc.] that cares about them and they will pay you back. But if you don't--come in there one time and think oh, I've done this and they get no response. And so that's why it was, it was very difficult because we turned away advertisers. You're not doing us any--and then we had the issue of, of, of how blacks were being portrayed in the advertising. (Cough) We did want black women to be in the ads, and, and so a lot of these companies didn't want to do that. So (gesture)--but we stood by our principles, one of the things I, I feel very good about, in terms of, of we wanted our images to be shown. We initially started out--we, we thought we were gonna be a total black company and we realized that, that, that was not going to happen in terms of reality of what was happening out here in the world. There's so few of us in, in magazines, few of us in advertising, few of us in circulation; so we had to join people who were committed to wanting to be in this business, and, or committed and wanted to be helpful in, in, in the, in the black community. Speaker 1: So the- then--then you--there's the role of the black advertising agency too that--'cause they're coming of age around that time? Speaker 2: They're coming of age--Tom Burrell [Burrell Advertising Agency; Burrell Communications Group, Chicago, Illinois], UniWorld [UniWorld Group, Inc.], [HistoryMaker] Byron Lewis. And in some ways, we, we, we helped each other because we did have a product out there that--at least a magazine out there and it--and if they had a--they, they were representing a, a, a company, they could make sure that they could make the case for wanting to, to advertise in, in, in Essence; and that's certainly what Tom [HistoryMaker Thomas J. Burrell] did with all the companies that he had--Coca-Cola [The Coca-Cola Company], for example, or P&G [Procter and Gamble Company] over the years--yes. Story_ID: 663587 Speaker 1: The other thing is that you're--you are creating jobs and careers in many ways, because like you said, you had to go outside the race to, to attract certain people. You know, I, I think, you know, also, the, the whole thing about [HistoryMaker] Gordon Parks, that was, you know, and the editorial; the--your, your, your, your focus is keeping the doors open-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --right? Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: So can you talk about that part of sort of, what are some of the conflicts that are involved with keeping the doors open? You know, 'cause you've got sales over here, you've got the fash- ? Speaker 2: We got, we've got very little money coming in from advertisers. We were relying--there are two sources of revenues: advertising and the reader, subscribers or newsstand; and you want to make sure that there's hopefully a balance (laughter)--certainly, more money coming in than money, than money going out. You had the whole issue of, of, of salaries, personnel. We couldn't pay people the salaries that they were asking, so we did give stocks to the employees as a, as a means of, of compensation. We had to negotiate a printing contract. The largest printer in the United States was a company called Arcada [ph.]. We did not realize they were taking us--charging us too much money. And when we found out and I decided to move and we put our bid out there for other printing companies to bid on us, Arcada came back, lowered their price. And I said, "As long as I'm the CEO of, of Essence, I don't care how much you lower your price; you will never get back into the door here because you took advantage of us and we, we didn't know that." So those are just--you know, the learning process of, of, of trying to stay in business and we were still in the process of trying to raise money. We--that initial 130,000, and I was able to do that; then I got Playboy [Playboy Enterprises, Inc.] interested in putting 250,000--Hugh Hefner. And then I went back to the original investors and ultimately, they put in two--over $2.4 million--that was the ultimate capitalization of Essence [The Hollingsworth Group; Essence Communications, Inc.]. So we were always in a process of trying to raise money to keep the doors open. We, we didn't make our first profit until 1976, and that was only $176. Then we made a real profit in the next year, '77 [1977] of $167,000. So those things are paramount in my mind, in terms of, of postage, people, paper (laughter)--printing. Speaker 1: You know, that's interesting. So postage, the cost--so postage was a, a real cost? Speaker 2: Oh, yes, because-- Speaker 1: How much-- Speaker 2: --we subscribe--we were, we were sending the magazine--we init- we, we first thought, as I said, we're gonna be a newsstand, we're gonna get 60--70 percent of our sale would come through newsstand, 30 percent would come from subscriber; turned out not to be. Turned out to be 75 percent from the subscribers, and 25 percent to 30 percent from the newsstand. So you have a cost of, of, of postage that you have to take care of; and so, so that, that--postage has always been a big issue for, for all of us within the, within the publishing realm. Story_ID: 663588 Speaker 1: So how are you--who are you counting on in your learning curve? 'Cause I'm not sure that comes across in the book ['The Man from Essence: Creating a Magazine for Black Women,' Edward Lewis with Audrey Edwards] so much. You know, I mean, you know, you--we see the personalities, you know, we--but how are you learning, and who are you counting on? I mean, I know that Michael-- Speaker 2: Michael Victory. Speaker 1: Victory, that he-- Speaker 2: Yeah, he was a good source of information. I counted on--I didn't have a kind of relationship that I would want to have had with John Johnson [HistoryMaker John H. Johnson] or Earl Graves [HistoryMaker Earl G. Graves, Sr.]. Black Enterprise came out in 1970; and John Johnson had--Ebony had been out since 1945, but we were not, regrettably, having an ability to talk to each other, help each other because we were out here trying to, to stay alive, although John Johnson was the, was the person, in terms of, of publishing. And so I was relying on--we had, we had other people within the publishing industry who wanted to help us: people in Time Inc. magazine, people in New York Magazine, CBS; and so we would, we would invariably be talking to a number of people just, just trying to understand the dynamics of the art of publishing. I had a small network of, of dear friends who are in the book. We would get together--they were in business, Chase [Chase Manhattan Bank; JPMorgan Chase and Co.] or Citibank [First National City Bank; Citibank, N.A.] or--and we would get together on Friday evenings to network, to talk, share problems, but we, we felt we had the burden of being black and working in Corporate America, that we had to succeed and so we were trying to help each other--very helpful. I was talking to a lot of women (laughter). I was a bachelor during those days, just trying to get a perspective of, of the whole idea of a, of a magazine for, for black women. Are we doing--are we relevant? What kinds of things should we be covering, or not covering? And so I, I, I, I began to attend a lot of conferences--National Urban League, NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]--w- I became a part of the, part of the industry, the Magazine Publishers Association [MPA - The Association of Magazine Media] in, in 1972, when we became a member, I was the only black; John Johnson was not a member. I was the only black guy out of two thousand people who would come down to Florida and you, you obviously, could spot me (laughter) I was--. And--but that's how you learn, you try to keep abreast of what's going on within your industry--that's, that's what I relied upon. Story_ID: 663589 Speaker 1: Because John Johnson [HistoryMaker John H. Johnson] didn't really--he--let's say he didn't trust white people-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --right. Speaker 2: That's right, did not. Speaker 1: So where was Earl Graves [HistoryMaker Earl G. Graves, Sr.] in that then? Speaker 2: Earl, Earl, Earl wanted to, to believe that he was king of the mountain. And he--and so how he--Earl Graves, and my partner [in The Hollingsworth Group; Essence Communications, Inc.] Clarence Smith, are two of the greatest salespeople I've ever seen in terms of how they perform in, in, in bringing home the bacon. Earl was a great, tremendous promoter of his magazine--promoting himself and by extension, everything that's associated with, with Black Enterprise. Earl's philosophy always: "I am just as good, or better, than white people; and I deserve and will have all the entitlements that whites have that blacks should have too." And that's how he, he conducted himself. And for a while, many people thought Black Enterprise was a--really a gigantic magazine, in terms of circulation, but, but it--Essence was always bigger (laughter) in terms of its circulation than, than Black Enterprise. But Earl had a--the way he marketed himself and, and it just paid wonderful dividends for him. I think, in part why Essence did not get the kind of recognition that it did because it was a woman's magazine and, and portraying black women. And I remind people, in terms of selling black women, in terms of how black women were thought of in 1970--loud mouth, uncouth, un- not feminine, certainly not beautiful, on welfare and poor; we had to overcome that, always overcome that. And we know how women are portrayed in media in general. And, you know, also, every woman's magazine in 1970, with the exception of Glamour and Cosmopolitan--the editors in chief were men. We came along, we just said it seems to me that the face for the magazine should be a woman; and so we always had a woman as the editor in chief of the magazine. But I think Essence and I get the kind of recognition precisely because it was dealing with not only women, but being black women too. Story_ID: 663590 Speaker 1: I mean, because it's a beautiful front--first cover-- Speaker 2: Yes. Oh, yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) that you have, yeah. Speaker 2: She just recently passed away, regrettably. Speaker 1: Oh, she did? Oh. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: You know, it's a beautiful front cover. So was there a lot of discussion about this cov- front, front--first cover? And are you, are you really not involved in those discussions, you're just trying to keep things--the door--? Speaker 2: We, we are trying to keep things (unclear) but we did discuss with the editors what was gonna go into the magazine [Essence] and what they were thinking about. One of our great strengths is that we listen, as men, and really let the editors make the decision about what should go into the magazine; and, and I think that paid big dividends in the end with respect to, to how the editorials came together and-- Speaker 1: But this is Bernadette Carey at the beginning? No, she had left (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She was, she was the first editor. Speaker 1: But then she-- Speaker 2: She had left. Speaker 1: She had left. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And you were at Sapphire--you were operating under Sapphire for a little bit? Speaker 2: That's right, the working title (unclear) Sapphire. Speaker 1: Okay. But who, when that issue comes out, it's Barbara Kerr, right? Speaker 2: Well she, well she was exec- executive editor--she was not the editor in chief. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She was the executive editor. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She was one of the few white editors who worked in Seventeen, Glamour, and she gave us able--helped us just editorialize what it takes to, to do a magazine. But it was, it was Ruth Ross; and then Ida Lewis [HistoryMaker Ida E. Lewis] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's right, Ruth Ross is. Speaker 2: And then Marcia [HistoryMaker Marcia Ann Gillespie]. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Story_ID: 663591 Speaker 1: This is the thing, when I--when we--I hear this story from 1970 to really 1984, you know, when you're productive--that fourteen years, how are you--there must be something--you know, 'cause when you're in business, first of all, the--well the fi- no, first five years, I'm sorry, it's the first five years that people say if you can last five years, then, you know, you're, you're gonna be okay. Speaker 2: Not so much magazines. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: It's even shorter. Speaker 1: So what is--is it because your costs were so low? You know, I mean, was it--well, no I'm saying--I'm sorry, that the, the staff costs, you were man- managing low staff costs, is that--? Speaker 2: I think that's in part. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We--certainly, we not--could not pay comparable salaries of like any other--the Conde Nast or the Hearsts [Hearst Corporation; Hearst Communications] of the world. So we did our best, that's why when we--we're not able to make the, the--meet the salary needs, we also, as I said, provided them with stock. Speaker 1: Give the stock. Okay. Speaker 2: And that was, I think--not think, I know, it was helpful. Speaker 1: But the other thing, I think, is you've got--you really have, I mean, besides Merr- is it Merrill--no, it's Merrill--I'm gonna say Merrill Lynch [Merrill Lynch and Co., Inc.; Merrill Lynch Wealth Management]. No. Speaker 2: Shearson, Hammill [Shearson, Hammill and Co.]? Speaker 1: Shear- Shearson. Beside- you have Shearson, you have very good legal, it appears-- Speaker 2: Oh, yes, I-- Speaker 1: --you know, so I, I have to say because--? Speaker 2: We had, we had excellent--one of the unsung heroes in this Essence history is a woman by the name of Suzanne Warshavsky. Suzanne Warshavsky is a graduate of, of NYU law school [New York University School of Law, New York, New York] and was in the same class as Rudolph Giuliani [Rudy Giuliani], as I recall--didn't know him at that point. But she--we--she became, she became--she started working for Dewey Ballantine [Dewey Ballantine LLP], big law firm. And Dewey Ballantine was Michael Victory, who introduced us to Dewey Ballantine because Dewey Ballantine did all the work for Shearson and Hammill. And Dewey Ballantine had a Hispanic partner, Benito Lopez. And Benito Lopez chose this young lady, Suzanne Warshavsky, to work--the two of them would work on the Essence [Essence Communications, Inc.], pro bono by the way during that period of time, to work on the Essence account. But over the years in terms of working with her, she went with another firm; and then she decided to go on- go out on her own and started her own firm, and I had to make a very crucial decision when my former partners [Jonathan Blount and Cecil Hollingsworth] launched a control fight. I got pressure from my board and others: you need to fight fire with fire. So my former partners had, had engaged the firm of Mudge Rose [Mudge Rose Guthrie Alexander and Ferdon]. You know who Mudge Rose was? Richard Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon]--that was his law firm (laughter), his law firm and they were wondering, you know, they're like, Wachtell, Lipton [Wachtell, Lipton, Rosen and Katz] now, Skadden, Arps [Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher and Flom LLP]; and, I was asked to, you know, "Why don't you also get a comparable law firm?" And I said to myself, if I'm going to go down, I'm going to go down with someone I know--that I know who's gonna fight the fight. And what my former partners and others did, they underestimated this woman Suzanne Warshavsky, 'cause she was a woman. They didn't know she was a--she was street fighter par excellence and just a quick, quick thinker and can write very well; and she was a person that I talked to a great deal of the meaning, particularly on issues as ways to--legal issues, but she's a--she's an unsung hero, I would say, in terms of, of how Essence was able to overcome all these obstacles-- Speaker 1: Well, that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) that we had in the way. Story_ID: 663592 Speaker 1: I mean in many ways while you were all neophytes--that's what I think is stellar about this story, is that--and, and, you know, 'cause you had--I mean, on the editorial side--you know, you did have the affiliate issue with [HistoryMaker] Gordon Parks, you had Shearson [Shearson, Hammill and Co.] there, you had Playboy [Playboy Enterprises, Inc.], you know, even though that backfire- you know, you said that-- Speaker 2: (Unclear). Speaker 1: --it didn't backfire originally, but even to get that, I mean-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --how much was--talk about how much you got when you went to--? Speaker 2: We--we were able to get Mr. Hefner [Hugh Hefner] to, to put in 250,000. By the way, Christie Hefner will be at the party, at the reception. And he was--his, his--two of his principal people who, who worked at Playboy, a fellow by the name of Robert Gutwillig, and the number two guy at Playboy, had heard about us, knew that we were seeking funds; Playboy had a, a large black following and he, I surmise, concluded that this idea about a magazine for black women, I know blacks read, I'm seeing black men supporting Playboy, so there may be, there may be something to this idea. He was stunned that I was able to get Chase--to Chase Bank [Chase Manhattan Bank; JPMorgan Chase and Co.], Morgan [J.P. Morgan and Co.], Citibank [First National City Bank; Citibank, N.A.] and several others to be the initial investors. And he said, "If you were able to do that, you must be onto something." And so--and--but he made the decision to put 250,000 dollars in; and as a stipulation, one of his individuals would become a board member, this fellow by the name of Robert Gutwillig. So he had a long history of being in publishing, understanding the dynamics, and he represented Playboy on, on, on the Es- on the, on the board. Speaker 1: Now I want to te- ask you, so did ultimately, with Robert on the board, so how, how large was your board at that time? Speaker 2: Oh, no more than seven or eight. We, we always--Essence, we always--let me back up. The day we opened our doors, we always had a board of directors, unlike most private companies do not have any boards. But we always had a board and I, I think that was helpful to us, and in fact, I don't think, I know it was helpful to us in terms of how we were able to overcome--this is a board, gave us constructive criticism and kept our feet to the fire, held us accountable; and, and, and so--but he was a, he was a board member. He, in part, the difficulty that we got in the controversy with Playboy is because when I let my former partner go, he, in turn-- Speaker 1: That's Jonathan [Jonathan Blount]? Speaker 2: That's Jonathan. Got--he--and I also fired Ida Lewis [HistoryMaker Ida E. Lewis], the editor in chief, they came together and had a press conference and said that Playboy owns Essence magazine, and that he showed a document or memo that Gutwillig said that we, we now effectively control the board, which was never true. In fact, we wrote an editorial, Cecil Hollingsworth, Clarence [Clarence Smith] and myself, refuting all the charges that had been made by Jonathan and Ida Lewis. But he put a quarter of million dollars in, and, and that was very helpful to us. Speaker 1: So what role did he ultimately play as a board member? Speaker 2: Just an editorial--experienced editor. Would make suggestions about articles that you may want to consider going into the board-- Speaker 1: So (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) but beyond that, he had--he never got involved in the day to day operations of the, of the company. Story_ID: 663593 Speaker 1: Seventy-five [1975], you, you were--what, what was the level that you felt you needed to be at, to be successful as a publication? Because by '75 [1975], you're at a circulation of 450,000. So-- Speaker 2: We were on our way. Speaker 1: So you're--so that is (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We're on our way. Marcia Gillespie [HistoryMaker Marcia Ann Gillespie] was in the editor in chief, we all were feeling good, advertising was beginning to come in, even though we were still in the midst of high inflation and a recession. And as I--in the next year we made--we broke even, effectively; when I say $176, it's really we broke even; and in 1977, we made 170--$167,000. That's when I really thought we were on our--we, we, we had made it, if you like. Speaker 1: In 1976? Speaker 2: Nineteen--1976, 1976 and 1977. Speaker 1: Seven [1977]? Okay. So you're--at this point, you've got your team. The team is--has coalesced with, with Marcia-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: I mean, you talk about--you even talk in the book ['The Man from Essence: Creating a Magazine for Black Women,' Edward Lewis with Audrey Edwards] about having a personal relationship, but-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --but you--but she really represents, as you say, the, the--her vision-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --represents the woman-- Speaker 2: Getting (unclear)-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --really relevant editorials, in terms of how she felt about issues or how she felt about being a black woman. Marcia was--she was a history major. I mean, cared about and just had just an appreciation for what black women were going through, looking at her own family. She'd travel, but--I mean she was a very good writer, Marcia--heard about Marcia, she works at Time Inc. She's one of the few African Americans working back--Time Inc. back in the early '60s [1960s]. And so, so we were lucky to, to get her and, and she had, for lack of better words, she had all the gonads in terms of wanting to be the editor in chief and went for it; and I believed in her. I, I trust my instincts, and my instincts said she was the right person to do this; and she did. Speaker 1: And then did she burn- like burn out? Is that what happened sort of? Or you think that--? Speaker 2: I, I don't--let me say this, I honestly believe--and this happens to, I think, some people: Marcia had become an icon, and I think Marcia also thought that, that because she was so well known, (snaps fingers) that the world was going to open up to her just like that; or the world would be, be easier. I would say to her, "The reason why the world is responding to you, it's because of Essence," but she felt it was because of her. And, and I thought she felt that she could do better, which is not to say she could've been tired, burnt out, but, but I think that's what was going on. And I, I, I just try to remind people, no one approaches Ed Lewis [HistoryMaker Edward Lewis] if I'm Blow Joe in a block; they're approaching me because of, of Essence. And I'm, I'm, I'm very clear about what Essence means and, and the role that I play and why, why people approach us. So I, I, I think that's what happened with her. Story_ID: 663594 Speaker 1: So let's talk about--[HistoryMaker] Susan Taylor in her interview talked about you having dinner one evening with her, and telling her that you thought that maybe she, she could be the next editor. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So can you talk about that and the, the, the time p- you know, the--talk about your, your, your time with this--'cause she was there for almost twenty years? Speaker 2: Well, Susan started as a consultant back in 1970. I remember coming with her one year old daughter, Shana [Shana Taylor King]; then she became the fashion consultant, then beauty consultant; then we made her the fashion and beauty editor of the magazine [Essence]. And I remember having dinner with Marcia Gillespie [HistoryMaker Marcia Ann Gillespie] in 1978; and Marcia said to me that, "You may want to keep your eye out on Susan for the potential of being the editor in chief, at some point." And certainly when the opportunity presented itself in '81 [1981], I, I, in terms of watching and observing Susan, how she did the fashion pages and just, just how--her thinking about what it is, what it means to be a black woman, I just felt that she had all the ingredients with regard to being the editor in chief of the magazine. And--but I also asked Susan if she would prepare a, a memo, in terms of what will go into the magazine; how did she see the vision? Which she did. Then she gave a copy of that to myself and to Clarence [Clarence Smith], and we both felt good about that. My partner was lukewarm about Susan, but-- Speaker 1: You mean Clarence? Speaker 2: Clarence, yes. But I made the decision that she should be the editor in chief in '81 [1981]. And she's--as I said, she did a--she did one helluva of a job, in terms of how the world ultimately came her way and, and, and with her signature hairstyle, she really became the face. And, and we--whenever Susan and I would close our doors and, and talk about issues as it relates to what her needs were, it was always about the magazine. It was always about black woman. That's one of the ways I always judge managers, if they came in and talked about themselves, that was a no-no with me. They may not have known that, but that's how I judged them. But if they came in and talk about what we should do about our audience, what we should do about getting better employees or should we be compensating someone better--that's--those are the kinds of things that I look for in terms of how I make judgments about people. And Susan was always about her--black women and about her people, less so about herself. But, ultimately, that became a, a, a bigger (unclear), a bigger need with respect to what her needs were, in terms of being the editor in chief of the magazine. Speaker 1: Right. Story_ID: 663595 Speaker 1: Do you think that she, she would have wanted, at some time, ownership? Was that ever an issue about ownership before--you know, before the, the ti- the idea of the sale came up? No. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: 'Cause the owners were the owners. Speaker 2: Yes. We--Clarence [Clarence Smith] and I were majority owners [of Essence Communications, Inc.], and then you had John Johnson [HistoryMaker John H. Johnson] and Cam- and Mrs. Camille Cosby. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: We were the principal four shareholders. But, but, but over the years, Susan [HistoryMaker Susan Taylor] was given stock as a part of being--part of the management team and being a part of the board. And one of the things I'm very proud of with respect to the sale is that we had sixteen African American women who became very wealthy, and Susan was amongst one of them. And I want black women to have--hope they appreciate that black women individually did benefit from the sale. And more importantly too, in terms of--I, I try to tell the, the broader audience that the value that Time Inc. paid to buy Essence is a testimony to how black women are viewed; and I want black women to feel good about that because they paid a hefty price to buy this audience and-- Speaker 1: 'Cause it was the largest amount they had paid-- Speaker 2: Yes, ever made. Speaker 1: --for a single-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --publication. So those, tho- that time period where really, it's really everything--you're in your stride as a publication, I mean. And, and this is before--and, you know, of the recent years that we have seen, the, the meltdown of media period-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --you know, and the, and the re- you know, the, the up- the aggressive onslaught of the, of the Internet-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --dot--you know, dotcom industry. So talk about during that, that--the--those, those years, what are the critical markers for you, from a business perspective? Speaker 2: The most critical marker continues to be how editorially we are touching the needs of black women. Certainly, advertising was much better. Circulation was over a million and holding. Renewal rates--I always judge an editor by the renewal rate, and as well as newsstand--newsstand sale, but for me, the real marker was how much cash was on our balance sheet. And magazines--the reason why people don't--may not realize why magazines are going to be around for, for quite a while, a long time, they may--their bottom lines may not look particularly good, but they generate a tremendous amount of cash. At one point, Essence was sitting on $40 million of cash, and that's when they were made to, to help fund the magazine for Hispanic women called-- Speaker 1: Latina. Speaker 2: --Latina. And I put $20 million into, into Latina, and I still had a bucket full of cash left with respect to making sure that, that Essence takes care of all its needs. In part why Time Inc. became interested in Essence--in, in part, not only because of the market, but I had a balance sheet, no debt and I'm sitting there with a tremendous amount of cash on the balance sheet. So--and Essence still continues to generate good cash; and, of course, now has a wonderful revenue--another revenue stream, the music festival [Essence Music Festival] is really, I think, now is becoming its crown jewel. Mag- the Hearst--the Hearst Corporations [Hearst Communications], the Conde Nasts--in 2007, Time Inc. was doing a billion dollars on the bottom line--a billion dollars. That's a helluva lot of cash sitting up there. They're now doing 350 million. (Laughter) Three hundred and fifty million dollars--they're not going out of business. They're not making as much money as they would like to make. Newspapers, newspapers ten or fifteen years ago were doing 30 to 40 percent, some cases 50 percent was on the bottom line; they're now only doing 10 to 15 percent. They're still making a lot of money. They're still gonna be around; they just have to change the dynamics. We--with respect to--we're all trying to find--get more eyeballs, and so this is where the, the Internet comes in, the digital play, but I do think print will continue to be a solid way of, of how we get, get news. Story_ID: 663596 Speaker 1: So in the telling of the story in the editorial, so Marcia Gillespie [HistoryMaker Marcia Ann Gillespie] and Susan [HistoryMaker Susan Taylor] are critical, in terms of finding their, their, their--it's--becomes a symbiotic relationship-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --with, with, with the--your, your subscribers and your-- Speaker 2: (Unclear). Speaker 1: --audience-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Yes. Speaker 1: --your readers, so--but--so I, I understand that. And you also (unclear)-- Speaker 2: When, when I say, when I say Marcia and Susan--it's all the editors. Speaker 1: Okay. All the editors. Speaker 2: All the editors. Speaker 1: All the editors. Okay. But--right. Okay. But under their leadership, right? Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: Under their leadership. Speaker 2: Under their leadership. Speaker 1: And, then you write very well about Susan having a collaborative style-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --you know, that, that that--that worked for the time. I--what I'm trying to understand from your side of things is how does someone that is a poli sci [political science] major [at the University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, New Mexico], you know, really become a very sophisticated businessperson? Is it because you--and so bottom line, I mean, almost in a conservative--well, a conservative manner. Like-- Speaker 2: My high school sweetheart in her description of me-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --she said, "You're a wild man in a conservative way" (laughter). That was her--she--that's how she saw me. You're a wild man, but you're--you also--it's a contradiction almost, but you're, you're very conservative too, in terms of being prudent, but I'm a, I'm a big risk taker. I took a big risk when I started the music festival [Essence Music Festival] back in '99--1995. Susan and Clarence [Clarence Smith]--lukewarm; but I made the decision as the CEO [of Essence Communications, Inc.] to do this. I-- Speaker 1: Now, can you--can we talk about that? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Because that really--up until that point, you're really about just the publishing, at that point, right? Speaker 2: No. No. Speaker 1: Wait. What-- Speaker 2: No. No. Speaker 1: What was before that? Speaker 2: No. No. No. We, we-- Speaker 1: Well, I know you did, you did the TV shows. Speaker 2: We--oh, no. We had the Essence television show; we had Essence--we had a catalog [Essence by Mail]; we were in the licensing business. I even purchased a magazine for whites called Income Opportunities. So we were constantly trying to, to grow, to grow Essence and not be so dependent on Essence in and of itself. And, and I, and I think that was a good business strategy-- Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: --from the standpoint of, of making sure that we, we overcome. Speaker 1: So which of those opportunities would you, you thought were good that you did them and they helped. Speaker 2: Well, the cat-- Speaker 1: I mean-- Speaker 2: The catalog business was quite good. At one point, the catalog was making more money than the magazine. Speaker 1: So how, how, how, how good was the catalog business, I mean-- Speaker 2: We, we were-- Speaker 1: --in terms of revenue? Speaker 2: --doing--revenue, we were doing, I would say, four to five million, but on the other hand, we were doing--got a nice little bottom line that was generating cash for us. We've never made any money in the, in the television end--the, the Essence television that we had for those number of years. We didn't--we did pretty good in licensing--licensing the name of Essence on, eyewear, lingerie, children's books. But certainly, the, the music festival has been a, a game changer with respect to (gesture) how that has enhanced Essence, in terms of what it is today. Story_ID: 663597 Speaker 1: So talk about how that came, came about 'cause--? Speaker 2: That came about because--1994, I was having drinks with a legend in the jazz world, impresario, a man by the name of George Wein. He--George started Newport Jazz Festival, he has a New Orleans jazz festival [New Orleans Jazz and Heritage Festival]. And he and I were having drinks, and I was telling him about my upcoming, upcoming twenty-fifth anniversary of Essence [Essence Communications, Inc.]. And I'd like--and I, I said, "I'm gonna do the same thing, big party in New York [New York], thank all the advertisers and thank everyone," I said, "I'd like to do something a little bit different." He said to me, "Have you ever thought about doing a music festival in New Orleans [Louisiana] at the Superdome [Louisiana Superdome; Mercedes-Benz Superdome] over the 4th of July weekend?" I looked at him, "No, I had not thought about that." But there was a germ of a, of a, a synergistic opportunity. New Orleans, music, magazine--maybe there's something there. So I suggested he come to my office, make a presentation. He did to Clarence [Clarence Smith], Susan [HistoryMaker Susan Taylor] and my chief financial officer [Harry Dedyo]. Everyone was lukewarm. I listened and thought about it and decided to come to do it and he and I were partners. We were equal partners, 50/50 partners, and that's how we came together in 1995. Lo and behold we had about--roughly, about 100--between 100 and 145,000 people who came. And I can remember giving my speech to fifty thousand people at the Superdome, thanking everyone from the bottom of my heart. I was humble that people would come out and, and be supportive of Essence over its twenty-five years of being in business; and that's how it happened. And the very next year, however, I was about to pull the plug because the, the governor, the new governor of the State of Louisiana, Robert Foster [sic. Mike Foster], made the decision to eliminate all affirmative action programs for the State of Louisiana. I'm a big proponent of affirmative action; and, and, and the way we promoted the festival [Essence Music Festival] was through the magazine, and so word of mouth had gotten out that we may not be doing this, and as you can well imagine, that precipitated a reaction. Marc Morial [HistoryMaker Marc H. Morial], who is now leader of the Urban League [National Urban League] was mayor of, of, of New Orleans. I was--as I said, I was not going back, but then the lieutenant governor of Louisiana, Blanco [Kathleen Blanco], who ultimately became the governor called me and asked if I would be willing to meet with the governor of Louisiana and tell you a story. And I was open to that. And I was--and I also knew that the Urban League was going to hold its convention in New Orleans several weeks later. So I called Hugh, [HistoryMaker] Hugh Price, and told him what I was thinking: "Why don't you hold off doing the, doing the Urban League and you and I go together to Louisiana, Baton Rouge." We went and I explained to the governor why affirmative action is so important to me. I said there's one of our great entertainers, it was a man by the name of James Brown, he had some lyrics, one of his songs ['I Don't Want Nobody to Give Me Nothing'], open the door. And all I asked, in terms of how I define affirmative action, is to open the door. Once the door's open, you don't need to give me anything. I can compete with anybody, but what happens is that we don't even get a chance to open the door. And so if you don't open the door, I'm gonna fight you tooth and nail. And he listened, got him to modify his affirmative action edict enough for me to make the decision to go back in 1996. By the time I had decided to go back, word had gotten out that we were not coming back, we're not able to get the sponsors; I lost over a million dollars. And George Wein, who had been my partner decided that this was too onerous and so that's when I made another decision that Essence would do this on its own; and, and so the rest is really history. Story_ID: 663598 Speaker 1: So in that--I mean, that's just in a year, so were you concerned at all in making that decision that you didn't know how to run a music festival? 'Cause you were counting on his expertise. Speaker 2: We still did. We engaged his company. We knew--my ego is not such that I think I can do everything (laughter), and--but we knew that, that he had that kind of expertise because he, he's done festivals and done them very successful. So we engaged in festival productions and the--George [George Wein] leadership, and another fellow by the name of Quint Davis, to, to put the--take care of the production end of putting the music festival on and they did that for a number of years. And, and we went with our name, Essence [Essence Music Festival], and we were able to get Coca-Cola [The Coca-Cola Company] to be the title sponsor. And over the years, we brought in more sponsors and, and it's a--it's, it's a big time winner now. When I see this past July, 550,000 people who came, there is no magazine that has that capability of bringing that number of people to an event over the 4th of July weekend, in terms of what happens there. It's a shared family reunion. With all the problems that New Orleans [Louisiana] has had--crime--we never had one incident in the twenty years over that weekend, and people seem to be on their best behavior. And the theme is a party with a purpose, so people get entertained in the evening; they get food for thought during the day. It's a really--it's quite an event and so other companies are trying to emulate us. I mean, we were way ahead of the game, in terms of doing revenue streams. Today in The New York Times, they had a big story about how magazines are doing conferences about women empowerment. We were doing that ten years ago, Essence [Essence Communications, Inc.], but we were talking about black women then; now they're talking about of course white women. Story_ID: 663599 Speaker 1: Were--so at that time that you were doing--looking at those other revenue streams, was that common of, of publications (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: No, it was not. Speaker 1: --you were looking at tr- you had to be creative-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --to try to-- Speaker 2: Indeed. Speaker 1: --to supplement. Speaker 2: Indeed. Indeed. Speaker 1: And had Black Enterprise--they had--had they started at that point? Speaker 2: I, I think he-- Speaker 1: He started-- Speaker 2: --he started skeet--he started the-- Speaker 1: No, the skeet--the--no, it wasn't skeet-- Speaker 2: It was-- Speaker 1: --it was golf and tennis. Speaker 2: Golf and--golf and tennis. Speaker 1: Right. Right. And then-- Speaker 2: I'm not, I'm not quite sure what year-- Speaker 1: Skeet--skeet was the last-- Speaker 2: I see. Speaker 1: --okay, the last that came in. But you know what I also found interesting, and I want to ask you about John Johnson [HistoryMaker John H. Johnson], but I found--you're saying that, that you--edi- in terms of subscriptions, you were larger than Black Enterpri- ? Speaker 2: Black Enterprise-- Speaker 1: See-- Speaker 2: --circulation was only three hundred thousand. Speaker 1: See-- Speaker 2: And Essence was a million (laughter). Speaker 1: See, you know, you're right about--okay (laughter). I--'cause I don't think people really know that's-- Speaker 2: I know. Speaker 1: --they don't know that story at all. Speaker 2: They--the focus Earl [HistoryMaker Earl G. Graves, Sr.] had--and give him big credit for where he was able to, to generate the kind of publicity that he was--he became larger than life; and the magazine--and, and, and in addition to that, it was about business; it was a business magazine. And--but circulation was--it was, was small, and regrettably, it still is to- today. They're now doing just ten issues I think, instead of twelve. Story_ID: 663600 Speaker 1: You know, you talked about New Orleans [Louisiana] and making a political stand; and then you did it again with banning Revlon cosmetics. Speaker 2: Oh, that was before, yes. Speaker 1: That was before? Speaker 2: That was before. Speaker 1: But that was four hundred th- you were--? Speaker 2: We were--we, we, we felt Revlon [Revlon, Inc.] had insulted us, insulted our community; and we were prepared to walk away from, from the advertising. I got some heat from my, from my board of directors, but it was, it was the principal of, of the--of what was going on. And they made some unfortunate remarks about black hair companies and--but let me say this about Revlon: even while we were in the process of legally fighting them, they said, "We will continue to try to start advertising--continue to start advertising in the magazine." But these are things that I, I care about. The Philip Morris company [Philip Morris Inc.; Altria Group, Inc.] was going to ki- approach us about doing a cigarette called Essence and was prepared to give us a whole lot of money for every cigarette that sold. If I'm talking about $40 million that Essence [Essence Communications, Inc.] had at one point, multiply that three times more if I had allowed Essence to, to put our name on the cigarette. I said to them, "There's no amount of money that you could pay me for me to put Essence on the name of a cigarette." They said, "Do you know who we are?" "Yes, you're Philip Morris, and I'm Essence. I don't--." "But we have one of the biggest--?" "That doesn't matter to me." And so the General Motors Company [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company] were going to come out with a car, a Buick called Essence and aim that at our audience. I said, "I can't--I won't let you do that." And, and so we, we took stands like that, you know. It's important. Speaker 1: 'Cause businesses don't always take stands like that (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I know. I know. Story_ID: 663601 Speaker 1: I want to ask you about John Johnson [HistoryMaker John H. Johnson], I want to ask you about Camille Cosby. Those--because John Johnson was--I--that was the--I was--about the hostile take- takeover of, I mean, the purchasing of--? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So at what point do you become aware that that is what, what, what is happening? Speaker 2: Well I knew there was some unrest with some of the investors who had been wanting me to sell or, or at least be able to give back some of the money that they had invested in the magazine [Essence] and they were just unhappy with me. And so they approached John Johnson. John bought their share of, of, of, of the, of the stock and he proceeded to try to mount a takeover--this is 1985. And fortunately, 'cause I had good legal advice, I was able to counteract his desire to, to get the company [Essence Communications, Inc.]. And when he lost he said to me, "You beat me fair and square. I'm not going to make any demands on you and all I ask you to do is send me the financial statements on a yearly basis." And, and he followed his--what he said. That's one of the things I always liked about him, he was a man true to his word. I mean, I like--it may be--he could be upsetting to you, but if he said, "This is what I'm doing," he was true to his word; and I always appreciated that about him. When I made the decision to sell the remaining-- Speaker 1: Interest to him? Speaker 2: --interest of 51 percent, I went to, I went to see him; and he had Linda [HistoryMaker Linda Johnson Rice]. And I said to him, "I'm going to get a lot of criticism. You may even criticize me for doing this." He said to me, "I don't criticize businesspeople for good business deals. This is a good business deal, and you're not going to hear anything from me in Jet or Ebony about the deal that you--that you've made with Time Inc." True to his word, he did not. And he was certainly a tremendous beneficiary. That's why it's--I don't know if this is--you're gonna put this in, it's difficult for me to understand what has happened to Ebony because they did very, very well. Speaker 1: Oh, they, they--he left it very healthy. Speaker 2: Very--he, he-- Speaker 1: No, that's, that's-- Speaker 2: He left it very healthy. Speaker 1: He, he left it very healthy. Speaker 2: And I--it, it, it pains me to know-- Speaker 1: Right. Right. Speaker 2: --that what has subsequently followed, in terms of-- Speaker 1: Right. That's right. No. He left-- Speaker 2: But I thought-- Speaker 1: No, that is con- that he left it--the balance sheet was a healthy balance sheet. Speaker 2: Yes. Yes. Yes. Speaker 1: That's right. So this was-- Speaker 2: So--but he, but he--I, I-- Speaker 1: So that was--so you point to a positive, because a lot of people--and I don't--you had--had you--I think you said you had come to him. Right, you had come to him for investment. Everybody went to him-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: --as an investor. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: Every black publication went to him. Speaker 2: Sure, we did. Early on we did. And he--and I--even I, I even approached him about us selling subscriptions--getting subscriptions together, buying paper together, (laughter) and he would say to me, "Ed [HistoryMaker Edward Lewis], I just can't--I just don't want to do that." And I even talked about him, at one point early on, I said, "I want to buy Ebony." He said, "Well, I want to buy you." He, he, he said to me, "If we were to come together," this is in the early years, "white advertisers--white America is not gonna let two black companies of the power that we have come together." And I said, "John, I don't believe that," but that's what he believed, unfortunately I believe, but that's, that's who he was. Story_ID: 663602 Speaker 1: Talk about Camille Cosby and her role; and how she came--you know, came to be on the board as an investor (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I, I, I give credit to my ex-wife--my first wife, who's an actress. Speaker 1: That's Michele Sh- ? Speaker 2: That's Michele Shay, who suggested to me that, "You should get to know Camille." Michele had several times been on Bill's show, Bill Cosby's show during his early years when he was at the height of his--of, of the show's popularity. And so I got to meet her and met her and we had lunch at the Four Seasons [Four Seasons Hotel New York, New York, New York]; and I asked her if she'd be interested in joining the board, and she said yes. And as a result of joining the board, one of the shareholders of Essence [Essence Communications, Inc.] sold his position, Pioneer Capital [Pioneer Capital Corporation], to Mrs. Cosby; so she became--that's how she became a, a large shareholder of the company. And again, when, when, when Johnson [HistoryMaker John H. Johnson] made his bid to try to get stock, she stepped up and was a part of a consortium that I had put together to prevent him from getting any more stock--that's why he was not able to get control. But she was a--a board member who was attentive, came to board meetings; and when we had to make a decision about the deal, I had to set up three independent board members to, to give an opinion for the best for the sh- as--for the shareholders. And I selected her, asked her, [HistoryMaker] Frank Savage and another fellow by the name of J. Bruce Llewellyn, who I wish you could've talked to before he, he--truly, one of our history giants. And they were the independent board members who said this is, you know, a good deal for the--for all the shareholders of Essence. So she played a very, very crucial role in the Essence journey and I'm very grateful for the foreword that she-- Speaker 1: It's a, it's a nice foreword. Speaker 2: She set the tone, I believe, for, for the mag- for the book ['The Man from Essence: Creating a Magazine for Black Women,' Edward Lewis with Audrey Edwards]. Story_ID: 663603 Speaker 1: So I want to ask you, w- how did you come to the decision to, to, to-- Speaker 2: Sell? Speaker 1: --sell--the first sale--you know, sell a portion and then-- Speaker 2: Forty-nine percent. Speaker 1: --to do--right. And then--? Speaker 2: Sold 49 percent to Time Inc. in, in 2000. It began in 1999, I was looking at the strategy of Essence [Essence Communications, Inc.], where I wanted to take it, but I knew I wanted to talk--look at the value. What--how--what was the value of Essence? So I had engaged the--I had all--had had a long term relationship with Goldman Sachs [Goldman Sachs Group, Inc.], so I, I called the, the majordomo there and he, he agreed to work--he agreed to assign someone to work with me. And so in the process of doing an evaluation of Essence, the magazine Vibe was up for sale. And I thought Vibe was the hot magazin- young, music, and would be a nice complement to, to Essence. And during the course of the sale, I was invited, along with Goldman Sachs, to hear the presentation by the investment bankers representing Vibe. And one of the board members of Vibe--one of the owners of Vibe, was also a board member of the Magazine Publishers Association [MPA - The Association of Magazine Media], which I was chairman of the board. I was in the last year of my chairmanship; and at the board meeting in Scottsdale, Arizona, he said to me, "Ed [HistoryMaker Edward Lewis], do you realize that Time Inc. is rebidding on Vibe?" Time Inc. started Vibe in the early '90s [1990s] and then sold it, and now they are rebidding. I said, "You got to be kidding me? They're rebidding?" And, and I said to myself in an auction process, everyone should step back, there's no way that I could compete against Time Inc. But then a light bulb went off in my head. I said, well, wait a minute. If I'm interested, they were interested, and I have Goldman Sachs, maybe we can work together. But before I did that, I called Dick Parsons [HistoryMaker Richard Parsons]. Dick was then the president of Time Warner [Time Warner, Inc.]. I had known Dick for a number of years, and I said, "You need to tell me if I'm off the ranch about this idea and be straight up with me." He said, "No. You know the CEO of Time Inc., Don Logan, go talk to him. Keep me in the loop about the conversation." January 10, 2000, Don Logan and his principal strategist, the lady who's now the president of Essence, Michelle Ebanks, I have my counterbar- from--counterpart from Goldman Sachs, Richard Wayner [Richard A. Wayner]; and just before the meeting, breakfast is about to take place, Jerry Levin [Gerald Levin], who is the CEO of Time Warner walks into the meeting with Steve Case. I had known Jerry; he said, "I know why you're having breakfast. I hope things work out. I want you to meet Steve Case because we're about to make an announcement." He didn't tell me what the announcement was--noontime, AOL [America Online, Inc.; AOL, Inc.] is buying Time Warner. Return to the breakfast meeting, I said to Don Logan, "The reason why we're having this meeting, I want to buy--I want, I want us to talk about us working together to buy Vibe." And he says to me, "Before we do that, why don't we talk about investing in you." (Gesture) I was quite taken back. Genuinely surprised. That was, that was not on my radar screen. And so we started talking about that. He said, "We may be interested in 10 percent." Then we talked about 20 percent, 30 percent, 40--he said, "We'd like to do it 50 percent." I said, "I'm not ready for Essence to be sold at 50 percent, and I don't think our audience would be ready for that." And I said, "If I'm going to sell 50 percent, I might as well sell all to you." And he said, "Well, we don't, we don't do deals unless we are majority owner." I said, "Well, I'm not interested." Fortunately, he came back and suggested, "Okay, we will buy 49 percent, you retain 51 percent. We will set up a twelve persons board--six people from Essence, six people from Time; and you become chairman of the board, and we will work things out." And so that's how the deal got structured. Story_ID: 663604 Speaker 1: We were supposed to, to reengage about the deal, 2005. Fortunately, they came to me in 2004 and said do we want to buy the remaining 51 percent. But during that interregnum, during that period, I got to know them--we got to date each other. They got to know me. I realize the enormous resources that Time Inc. had; and I also knew--I like to stay ahead of the headwinds in terms of what was going on in print, paper, people, printing, postage--all increasing. And so being the one company magazine, even though Essence would continue to do well, it was going to become even more difficult. I wasn't even aware of the incident (laughter), but I knew being in a one company magazine, life was gonna be just, just, just harder. And, and, and being with a magazine company that cares about magazines, cares about brands, he [Don Logan] also said this to me, "Black women are just as important, just as important as white women. Let's see if we can work together. You have an underserved market, let's see if we can build that market up. Use our resources. We got so many resources up here, use what you want; discard what you don't want." And so for me, it was about continuing empowerment of black women and making sure that this magazine's going to be sustained for years and years to come. And then I realized I had these shareholders too, had been with me for a long time, so the opportunity to give them back a return on their investment--all these factors weighed in when I made the decision to sell. And I did not want to see myself being--managing a company in my seventies and eighties. I had a management team and, and I felt it was, it was the right time to, to, to move on and let someone else run Essence [Essence Communications, Inc.]. I always said, whoever succeeded me, I wanted them to do a thousand times better than I did. It's not about what I did, it's about how this magazine is going to be continuing to empower black women, sustain itself and be able to serve black women from a (audio disturbance) greater degree. Speaker 2: Do you think that's happened? Speaker 1: It--oh, it's happening now. The circulation is over a million--million hundred thousand. The readership is over 8 million, the magazine, when you add the digital component, Essence is reaching almo- almost 11 million people on a monthly basis. And with the, with the, the music festival [Essence Music Festival] they, they just signed another five year contract with New Orleans [Louisiana] over the next five years, so that's gonna be there. And they're in the process of looking at the possibilities of doing a music festival in South Africa. So it's, it's--and I, I always ask black women, when they find out who I am, "Is there still a need for a magazine for black women?" They look at me as if I lost my mind. "How could you even ask that question?" I said, "Because I don't take black women for granted. I like to think every black women reads Essence, I know they don't, and Essence has to prove itself every month." And so that's one of the things I like about being in the magazine business: you have to prove yourself, beginning, middle and end in order to get the, the consumer to want to, to continue to buy your product. And so as long as Essence does that, and as long as we, in this country, have an appreciation, yes, we're Americans first, but we are African American second--with regard to what that means, in terms of opportunities or obstacles. We know how we're viewed, all we have to look at is Ferguson, Missouri in, in, in terms of how we, how we're being viewed. And so I say to black women and I've said to others, black women are going--they read other magazines, the Vogues, Harper's Bazaar, Elle; but if they want to see themselves--if you want to, to, to really reach them, you need to reach them in a medium that, that they can call their own. And the Elles of the world or the Vogues are not going to be having black women on their covers every month; and that's why Essence is gonna continue to have a, a, a--I think a whole--I mean a--I mean touch base with black women because Essence, it's become a friend. Black women know that it's dealing with some of their issues--not all their issues, but some. And Essence cares about them. And, and I'm, I'm, I'm hopeful that, that black women will continue to be supportive. Story_ID: 663605 Speaker 1: People were upset though when that--when, when the sale happened. Speaker 2: Yes, they were. Speaker 1: And, and--because of what it represented. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So in the book ['The Man from Essence: Creating a Magazine for Black Women,' Edward Lewis with Audrey Edwards], and I think, you know, that, you know, that's the same thing [HistoryMaker] Berry Gordy went through [at Motown Records]. I mean, when people--'cause there's--the community felt it owned it. Speaker 2: Yes. We have a, we have a pride in ownership about there are ver- so--there're so very few things we can call our own, and, and so when we care about something as, as, as we have done within our community, there's going to be--people will be not satisfied with, with what has happened. But I'm essentially living the American dream of helping bring something into the world--a minority company, selling it to a majority company and that's what capitalism is all about. And I also want--as I said, I want to make sure that Essence [Essence Communications, Inc.] is going to sustain itself and so that's--that was overriding to me with respect to the continuing sustainability, continuing empowerment. And I've said, if you see all white people in Essence, if you see white management or white women on the covers of the magazine, you should stop buying it. And Time Inc. didn't pay all this money to change the voice of the magazine, and, and if they did, they'd be some of the greatest fools that ever came down a pipe. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: But they're not that. And they wanted this voice, and this voice is important. And they have a, you know, a magazine for Hispanic women--I mean, Hispanic community called People en Espanol. One has to recognize the reality, realities demographically, how this country is changing and will change and look in ten to fifteen years from now--it's gonna be Hispanic, black, Asian, and that's gonna be the majority. And so people get--they just got to get used to that because that's what the world's going to be. And so blacks are going to play a continued role; and black women are going to be in the forefront because they vote and, and they're gonna be crucial with regard to helping keeping the family together. And I've heard a number of black men who've thanked me for Essence because they have learned, and have an appreciation for what our women are thinking, and hopefully been helpful in terms of their, their relationships. Story_ID: 663606 Speaker 1: Did it take you time to get used to life after--I mean this is-- Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) literally, I mean, you could talk about your job at First Chica- with First, First National Bank [sic. First National City Bank; Citibank, N.A.], but that was a blip on the radar screen. Speaker 2: Indeed. Speaker 1: So this is really the only job that you had had. Speaker 2: That's right. When you, when you think the idea was conceived in '68 [1968], the Ess- the first issue came out, I left Citibank in '69 [1969], the first issue came out in May of 1970; and I sold it in 2005--long, long history. After the sale, Dick Parsons [HistoryMaker Richard Parsons], who was then the CEO of Time Warner, Time Inc. [Time Warner, Inc.] had me over for breakfast and he said to me, "Ed [HistoryMaker Edward Lewis], I'm gonna recount you the meeting we had with Ted Turner when he sold his company [Turner Broadcasting System, Inc.] to Time Warner. Ted, you sold your company; Ed, you sold your company [Essence Communications, Inc.]." That was very helpful to me in letting go--or the process of letting go. And knowing that the person who was succeeding me has to now be the person that people are going to gravitate towards, we signed--Susan [HistoryMaker Susan Taylor] and I signed three year contracts afterwards and we were still the eight hundred pound gorillas. Susan; I'm chairman and CEO; and--but we had to move off stage and go off in our different directions, and Susan's got a mentoring program [National CARES Mentoring Movement], which is, which is very needful; and here I am at the private equity--in the private equity world still dealing in finance, but keeping me engaged and, and keeping a watchful eye on, on the thing that I helped bring into the world and want, and want the best for it. Story_ID: 663607 Speaker 1: So where--I mean you just wrote your book-- Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) so that--and that is--it's a really stunning beautiful cover, I have to say. I mean, I--well, I don't know if there were--more people have told you that, but how did the title come, 'The Man from Essence' ['The Man from Essence: Creating a Magazine for Black Women,' Edward Lewis with Audrey Edwards]? Speaker 2: The original title was going to be 'The Last Man Standing' [ph.] because of the original partners, the five--I'm the last one standing. I began to rethink that; maybe that was a bit off putting. And started to think about another title, and I think that the role that I played in keeping it together after all these years--making de- making decisions that I had to make not only with my former partners [Jonathan Blount and Cecil Hollingsworth], making decisions about who the editor in chiefs were going to be, making decisions about what kind of businesses that we're going to be in, and making decision about the music festival [Essence Music Festival]. I think all these things coalesced in terms of man from Essence: creating a magazine for, for black women. Again, it's not about I did this, I had a lot, lot of help, standing in the back, so so many different people that enabled me to, to be here. I give a bucket full of thanks to my family, the Essence [Essence Communications, Inc.] employees, the Essence loyal readers who stayed with us. Business, black women made a decision this is something that we were gonna be supportive of, and I'm the beneficiary of that and I am eternally grateful for having this opportunity to serve the audience that I care about. And, and to serve the women of my family--my mother [Jewell Spencer Clarke] and my [paternal] grandmother [Alice Lewis] and my aunts who hopefully provided me with the sensitivity and understanding of what it means to be a black woman within our society. Speaker 1: So your mother passed away in what year? Speaker 2: Nineteen ninety-nine [1999], Christmas day. Speaker 1: So she never--okay. Speaker 2: Well, she, she saw-- Speaker 1: She, she saw a lot of your-- Speaker 2: Oh, she saw--yes, she did. Speaker 1: She saw a lot of your (unclear). Speaker 2: My mother, when I had the Essence by Mail catalog, Essence by Mail catalog, my mo- it was--my mother dressed--bought everything out of that catalog. Her church in farm- in Darlington Heights [Triumph Baptist Church, Darlington Heights, Virginia], they, they--every lady at the church would tell me, "Your mother singlehandedly dressed us buying products out of the catalog." She was wonderful. Story_ID: 663608 Speaker 1: I want to ask you, where are you right now in your life? Speaker 2: I'm at my--at this stage of my life, I want to think about how I can continue to make a difference in the world as--particularly, as it relates to education. I want our kids, black and Latino kids to have the opportunity to compete--reading, writing, and arithmetic. And so I'm involved in our charter school movement here in New York [New York] because I think education is our national security issue, and so I want to play a, a role in making sure that our kids have that opportunity. Beyond that, it's, it's--hopefully, Essence continues to do well in serving its audience. And as my mother [Jewell Spencer Clarke] said, "I want you to always try to do the right thing," and so that's, that's, that's what I'm gonna try to do in, in taking care of my family and, and keep going on. Story_ID: 663609 Speaker 1: So what are your hopes and concerns for the community, the Af- you know, this is a community you know-- Speaker 2: My, my-- Speaker 1: --intimately well. Speaker 2: --my hopes--we've had--we've made--if you just look at Essence '68 [1968] to now, when I think of how black women are viewed, when I think about the young lady who won the Academy Award, Lupita [Lupita Nyong'o], who's now considered one of the most beautiful black women in the world--black, color. Or Beyonce [Beyonce Knowles-Carter] who's considered one of the most influential. We have Michelle Obama in the White House; her two daughters [Sasha Obama and Malia Obama]--it's mind boggling to me to know that Essence may have had a role in changing how black women are viewed. And so that brings me a quiet joy; and I want black women to, to continue to feel fearless, to continue to feel that there are great opportunities for them. I want them to be outspoken. I want them to be independent. I want them to continue to take care of their families. I want them to, to--within our community, we're gonna have to find a way of, of stop killing ourselves. We have to take responsibilities of what goes on in our communities, in terms of the issue of crime. We need to, we need to be even more respectful of, of our own identity. We, as black people, cannot be calling ourselves bitches and hoes and niggers and stuff like that--that's, that's a no-no, from my standpoint. But we have to--I think we just have to be--we have to be ever vigilant because there's a slice--a large slice of this society that, for whatever reasons, still think of us as not being worthy of, of the entitlements that we should have as Americans. And I--we're all Americans, we are entitled to everything this country provides for its citizens and, and I certainly want black people to share in that, to be the beneficiaries of it. Our president's [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] greatest legacy is going to be the affordable healthcare [Patient Protection and Affordable Act of 2010] because that's gonna enable so many uninsured people to get insurance to be able to take care of their medical needs. And I just--I, I just want us to all get along (laughter) as Americans. Story_ID: 663610 Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be? Speaker 2: I want my legacy to be for people to, to say that this is a man who cared about black people; who tried to do his best with what, what he had, the tools that he was given. And he tried to give his best on behalf of black people, and in the end, on behalf of Americans. Story_ID: 663611 Speaker 1: A similar question to that: how would you like to be remembered, just? Speaker 2: I'd like to be remembered as a individual who, who has tried to do the right thing and has hopefully, been a, a beacon for others to want to understand and to perhaps follow in his footsteps of, of, of speaking out when, when he needs to speak out on issues relating to civil rights or equal justice or human rights. And--but, you know, we, we as human beings know what's right and what's wrong, and I think we just have to--that's what I want to be remembered--that I hopefully made the right decisions for the right reasons, for moving, moving people of color even more towards making sure that they are getting a part of all the wonderful goodies that this society provides us. Story_ID: 663612 Speaker 1: You know, have you--I, I'm sure you did this in the writing the book ['The Man from Essence: Creating a Magazine for Black Women,' Edward Lewis with Audrey Edwards], but I think about you as a young boy, and you as a seventy-four year old--seventy-four? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And when you look back, what would be the, the ingredients of your success? Speaker 2: Hope. If I didn't have that, that I knew that there was gonna be a better life--I remember my uncle, my unc- my uncle Tracy [Tracy Spencer], who was a logger and I asked him how did he--, "Why did you decide to go with the logging, start your own business?" He said, he says, "Sonny [HistoryMaker Edward Lewis], we were sharecroppers. And I, and I said to myself, there's got to be something better than this." And as I grew up, that four letter word, hope, it said to me life is--something has got to be better than what I see now in my own eyes. And, and so with all the, the interactions, family, traveling, just becoming sensitized and knowing that, that how people viewed us as, as, as, as human beings, I said, there's got to be something--something's wrong with this picture and maybe I can make a--maybe I can make a difference in just how I conduct myself or how I try to be--do a good job at my, my career, how I try to take care of my family. Jackie Robinson was my hero, in terms of what it is to be a male--in terms of how he took care of his family; and I wanted to be like him. And so that's, that's, that's what I--that's what I see. Story_ID: 663613 Speaker 1: You talk about family and you were late--you were late, late to the marriage. Speaker 2: Forty [years old]. Speaker 1: Forty, which is, you know, someone would say that you weren't gonna get married; you were--be a perennial bachelor. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: (Laughter) But so you've been married twice? Speaker 2: I've been married twice. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Six years the first marriage. My second marriage is now twenty-three years, but we've known each other twenty-eight. Speaker 1: Can you talk about your second wife? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Carolyn Wright Lewis, Carolyn Allston, her maiden name. She was born in Darlington, South Carolina. She comes from a family of, of high achievers. Her father [Allard A. Allston] was one of the most successful African American businessmen in South Carolina, maybe even the South. And he had a family where, where ed- she came from a family of educators, and she made all A's in high school [Mayo High School; Mayo High School for Math, Science, and Technology, Darlington, South Carolina] and her father accepted nothing less. She has two--a, a sister and a--and a brother. Her brother went to Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], sister went to American University [Washington, D.C.]. And so she married a physician at--they--she's a Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] graduate. My first wife [Michele Shay] and I did not have, did not have any daughters--didn't have any children, but when I met Carolyn, she had two daughters [Haydn Wright and Nikki Wright]. And I realized when we were--when something was happening between us I said, "Well, obviously, this is gonna be a package deal," with respect to my getting involved with this woman who is one of the most gifted, highly intellectually well read as any person I've ever met. And she's got certain values that she, she cares about, family being most important. Her ex-husband gives her big kudos for how she--they have been able to raise their two daughters because she went through a messy divorce with her ex-husband, and--but she made a decision that we have two daughters and we're gonna have to find a way to work together. And she was helped by his--her ex-mother in law, who--and I, I think this speaks volumes about how, how my wife is viewed--her ex-mother in law, when I came into Carolyn's life said to me, "My son made a very serious mistake, but, but I consider Carolyn my daughter. Now, that you're a part of her life, as far as I'm concerned, you're a part of my family." Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: And she would hold dinner parties for, for--of course Carolyn then in Los Angeles [California] and I was here in New York [New York] and I would fly to Los Angeles and her mo- ex-mother in law would hold dinner parties for me, in terms of, of our relationship. And when Carolyn and her first husband decided to separate and divorce, they always had family dinners--New- Christmas, Thanksgiving, and he announced to his mother that he's not coming to the Thanksgiving dinner because Carolyn would be coming; (laughter) and his mother said, "Fine. Don't come." Needless to say, he came and they had been able to develop a relationship. And when I go to California, he has Thanksgiving dinner, I'm there. He writes me notes thanking me about how I've interacted with his two daughters. And I--and we, we all say it's because of the mother who has set a standard in terms of what she expects of her two daughters. She's given them the kind of, of independence, family values, hard work. One daughter's a West Coast advertising manager of Essence [Essence Communications, Inc.]; she went to Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia]. The other daughter went to Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California]; the other daughter went to Spelman and NYU film school [Tisch School of the Arts, New York University, New York, New York]. So these--and these are beautiful looking, as you can--if you've seen the pictures of the book ['The Man from Essence: Creating a Magazine for Black Women,' Edward Lewis with Audrey Edwards]--ladies, but she's--she thinks out of the box. And she was there with me all in--early '80s [1980s] and when I went through my, my relationships--the principal relationships with my former partners [Jonathan Blount and Cecil Hollingsworth]. And wise counsel, helped me during my speeches and she's, she's the best, what I can I say? Speaker 1: So it's been really a full life in that way. Speaker 2: Indeed. Speaker 1: Indeed. Speaker 2: And still more to come. Story_ID: 663614 Speaker 1: Just one last question: what have you--what haven't you done that you would still like to do? Speaker 2: Oh, my god. Oh, I'm a frustrated blues singer. I want to sing the blues. And the great jazz artist [HistoryMaker] Dianne Reeves has said to me that, "When you step out, I will give you some lessons," and, and, and hopefully, I will take her up on that. But I, I have this desire to go out and sing the blues, that's something I've not done. If I had listened to my mother [Jewell Spencer Clarke], one of the few times I did not listen to my mother--she had me playing piano. I took piano lessons, but we didn't have a piano in, in, in the home, so whenever I left my home to go take practice, I didn't practice. I regret to this day that I didn't listen to my mother with regard to playing piano 'cause I, I love music. And I'm now, I'm, I'm board member of Jazz at Lincoln Center [New York, New York] and I sit on the Apollo board [Apollo Theater, New York, New York], and it's all about the culture of the music that, that we help bring into the world and the world enjoys so much. But, but if I could sing a little blues that would bring happiness to me. My good friend Tom Burrell [HistoryMaker Thomas J. Burrell] has stepped out and, and is singing jazz, and that's (unclear). I--it gives me great, great pleasure-- Speaker 1: Well-- Speaker 2: --in knowing that he does that. Speaker 1: --thank you very much. Thank you (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 1: I--there's--I bet there's no doubt that you'll be singing (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter)...