 Story_ID: 78540 Speaker 1: [My name is Julieanna] Richardson, I'm the interviewer and Scott Stearns is the videographer. And I'd like you to start by stating your name and spelling it for us? Speaker 2: My name is Willie Leftwich, W-I-L-L-I-E, L-E-F-T-W-I-C-H. Speaker 1: I need your middle name too. Speaker 2: Lorenzo, L-O-R-E-N-Z-O. Speaker 1: Okay, and your date of birth? Speaker 2: 6-28-37. Speaker 1: And today's date? Speaker 2: Today is March, Friday, March 14, 2003. Speaker 1: And our location? Speaker 2: We're located at my home, 1732 Sheppard Street, N.W., Washington, D.C. 20011. Speaker 1: And your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm a potter. Speaker 1: A lawyer, turned potter (laughter). Speaker 2: Lawyer, turned potter. Speaker 1: Okay, engineer turned lawyer, turned potter. Speaker 2: Engineer turned lawyer, turned potter. I'm a potter. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 78541 Speaker 1: So, I ask five questions. They're a little "People Magazine-ish", but I'd like to know, short answers, what your favorite food is? Speaker 2: Spinach. Speaker 1: Okay, favorite time of year? Speaker 2: My favorite time of year is March or October. Speaker 1: Favorite, (laughter) sorry, I was just thinking, that's unusual. But those are the beginnings of the change of the seasons? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Favorite color? Speaker 2: My favorite color is blue. Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Be West Virginia. Speaker 1: And, because? Speaker 2: I just love West Virginia, the mountains and the solitude. Speaker 1: And favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: I ain't what I'm gonna be. I ain't what I wanna be, but I ain't what I was. Story_ID: 78542 Speaker 1: Okay. We're gonna get started. And I'd like to ask you about your father and if you could state his name, cause that's your namesake, and tell me about him and what you know about his growing up? Speaker 2: My father's name was Willie Lorenzo Leftwich. He was born in Bloomfield, West Virginia in 1915. He went through grade school and most of high school there, and he came to Washington [D.C.] in about 1932 or '33' [1933], in the Depression, after apparent, and I have to say apparently, I wasn't here, having hoboed around the country. And my father was very much a disciplinarian. He loved books and wanted more than anything to be a lawyer. And my father went to the old Terrell, Robert Terrell Law School, which was the law school that a lot of veterans, black veterans of World War II went to. The school was located at the corner of 13th and U Street on the Southwest corner. It's gone, obviously, now. We lived at 1310 U Street in the S. H. Dudley Apartments. And my father went to law school there, and many nights people who subsequently became judges and politicians here in the city came to the house to eat dinner. My father did not complete the Robert Terrell Law School. He had three kids and simply did not have the money and the wherewithal to finish. And that's pretty much his story. Speaker 1: Did he talk any about his growing up in Bloomfield, West Virginia? Speaker 2: He talked about it, yes, in the sense of the way they lived. They lived, their father, my grandfather was born a slave, James Edward Leftwich in 1858 in Bedford, Virginia. He had twenty-three brothers and sisters who lived. And my grandfather worked on the N and W Railroad and the 50th anniversary of the Norfolk and Western Railroad actually had his picture on the front of the magazine, as their longest working employee. My grandfather also went back to Bedford periodically and removed his brothers and sisters and took them North, some to Chicago [Illinois], to Milwaukee [Wisconsin], to Gary [Indiana] and to a place I believe called Pointe Pleasant or Mount Pleasant, Ohio which is somewhere near Wheeling [Ohio]. But eventually he got most of his brothers and sisters out of Bedford and into the north, where they worked in various industries. I like to think that grandpa was a pretty good guy except for one thing. The white folks tricked him. He should have taken them to Tampa [Florida] and Orlando [Florida]. But he took them where the jobs there were then, not to where I would have wanted to go. Speaker 1: Did, you know, the whole thing about working for the railroad, did your father talk about him and the work that he did? Speaker 2: My grandfather was a brakeman. He was a man who, well, in those days, you stopped the train by a wheel that was on the top of each car. And the brakeman walked along the top as the cars came into the station and turned those wheels into a siding with a stick, a metal stick called the brake stick. And that's what he did. He worked from the time he was twelve years old until the fall of 1936 and a boiler blew up on his leg and he came home, that is, he couldn't work anymore, and he died six months later sitting on the porch in the Spring of 1937, a month or two before I was born. Story_ID: 78543 Speaker 1: Now, your mother, can you tell us about her and her background in growing up? Speaker 2: My mother was born in Orange, Virginia, and her family had lived in Orange, Virginia as slaves for might-near a hundred years. Her grandfather had been a slave in Orange, and there's a church there called the Wilderness Church that he built. It's on Route 3 across the road from Lake-of-the-Woods which is a pretty well-known development now. My grandfather, her grandfather was a well digger, and he was sent to Providence, Rhode Island in the summer to dig wells. And he came back to Orange in the winter and dug wells there for whoever it was that owned him. And my mother was born there at Pilgrim Church which is just inside of Orange, not too far from where Alex Haley's family apparently was enslaved in Spotsylvania, probably two miles on Route 3 and then take a right and you can see the cemetery where Haley's family was buried, or is buried. My mother came to Washington [D.C.] with my, with her mother and father, my grandfather. Her father was a bricklayer, and her mother did day work. And they lived here in Washington [D.C.], and she grew up here in Washington [D.C.] and went to school here. Speaker 1: Did she talk anything about her youth? Speaker 2: Not very much. My mother was very unusual in that she's tall. My mother is 5'9" and she had a twin brother, and she was much taller than her twin brother. And the things that you would normally talk to your mother about like having fights with other kids, she never had fights. So she never understood fights because she said she was the biggest kid in the third grade. She was 5'9" in the third grade. My mother's still alive at eighty, whatever it is, eighty-five or whatever, and she's doing fine. But my mother was a person who had no sense of humor, and my father had very little. My mother did not believe in listening to the cartoons or reading funny books. Both of my parents were very much into education, all forms, whether it was doing math, chemistry, but time was not to be wasted. Time was to be used wisely at every opportunity, whether you were reading the paper or whatever. It was not to read the funny paper. I've never looked at a cartoon. Speaker 1: Now, do you know how your parents met? Speaker 2: Yes, my mother and father met at Armstrong High School in, I think, 1933, '34' [1934], something like that. And they got married at Armstrong. Story_ID: 78544 Speaker 1: And what is your youngest memory of growing up? Speaker 2: My youngest memory of growing up was when I was three or four years old my father took me to West Virginia. And I remember leaving him and going to my grandmother. And that's my youngest memory of growing up. I also remember on that trip that I walked in front of a train. I was fascinated by trains and in the Lynchburg [Virginia] station, Lynchburg was the station where you got off of the train, the Southern which was going straight South. And you caught the Norfolk and Western going West through Virginia and West Virginia. And you had to transfer there. And I remember Lynchburg because you had to sit in the back. There were no railroad cars. You sat in cattle cars and cars for animals that benches had been put in because you were back. And I walked in front of a train fascinated by the light coming out of the train and the train, and my father had snatched me off of the tracks. And then I remember that. And then I remember meeting my grandmother, I guess the next day when the train arrived in Bloomfield [West Virginia]. Story_ID: 78545 Speaker 1: Do you--now, how long did--you don't know how long you stayed with her that time? Speaker 2: I don't know how long I stayed with her that time, but I essentially lived with my grandmother in Bloomfield [West Virginia] during the War [World War II] until I was six years old, and I was summarily extricated from West Virginia education one week after school started when I was six. My mother came, and we were having a great time playing with the sandbox. And the next thing I knew, I was on my way back to Washington [D.C]. Speaker 1: So your early years from like three to six, you were with your grandmother? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, and your father, you said he, was he in the War at that time? Speaker 2: No, my father never went to the War. He had bad eyes, and he became an auxiliary policeman. For a while, he was drafted or taken into the Merchant Marines, but there was something wrong with his eyes, and he was ultimately discharged. Speaker 1: Do you have any other memories of West Virginia during that time with your grandmother? Speaker 2: Oh, I have lots of memories of West Virginia Speaker 1: Can you share a few things? Speaker 2: We lived on a small farm, probably fifteen acres. We had mule, a mule that we rode. We had chickens, ducks, turkeys, who are the dumbest animals in the world, and pigs. And I remember when they killed pigs and chickens and things like that. And I also, I guess one of the things that I remember was that we got along well with everybody. And there was no sense of anyone being better off than anybody. A couple of things were, we had a phone, and none of the other people on the hill we lived on had a phone. So when their sons called from overseas, I would have to go and get these people in the middle of the night to talk on the phone. And I never understood why they didn't call in the daytime because they were in France or Japan. And I also remember the only people that I knew that were poor were the Gillespies. And the Gillespies were poor only because they ate blood pudding. When we killed hogs, we would save the blood. They would cut the hog's throat, and he would bleed in the pan, and we would give the blood to the Gillespies. And Mrs. Gillespie would always come the next day with this grayish blue stuff and give it to grandma and say, you know, this is for you. This is blood pudding. And grandma would give Mrs. Gillespie a piece of cake and some coffee and they would sit and talk, and as soon as Mrs. Gillespie left, she would take this stuff out and throw it to the chickens. So I assumed all my life that the Gillespie's were the only poor people in the world because they ate a piece of the hog that we didn't. And I mean that was only inkling of gradation of people as far as who was poor and who was rich. We had nothing. My clothes were made by my grandmother. I wore pants made out of feed sacks and things like that. But it was wonderful. It was wonderful. I had three dogs. I was fishing, I was swimming. I thoroughly had a great time growing up. And I remember going fishing and there was, and swimming, we had to go through Country Club Lane. And there was only one white boy on the whole lane that didn't throw rocks at us or start a fight. And his name was John, and he subsequently, turned out that he was John Nash, the famous mathematician. And all the other guys would bother you and sic their dogs on you and start fights, but this kid never did. He would always speak and be very mindful and even respectful of people. And he turned out to be John Nash, the famous mathematician. Speaker 1: And this is in West Virginia? Speaker 2: Bloomfield, Bloomfield, West Virginia. Speaker 1: Okay, now. Speaker 2: Can you just take yourself back there and tell me, you're telling me of sights, but can you remember any sounds or smells that remind you of being in West Virginia? Speaker 1: The sound of the train. The trains, Bloomfield, West Virginia had a roundhouse. I think it was the only roundhouse between Roanoke , I mean between, yes, Roanoke and Cincinnati [Ohio]. And that was a big deal where the railroad is, because a roundhouse was obviously where a train could turn around and go in another direction. But it was the sound of the train, the smell of coal burning in the trains. We did not live close to the train, but you heard them all the time. Speaker 2: And any smells? Speaker 1: No, I guess the only smell for me would again, have been the smell of the coal burning in the engines and things. I did all the things that any kid shouldn't have done. I hoped freights and I would hop on a freight train and ride it to Pocahontas when I was seven or eight years old and hop off and swim and hop a freight riding back if there was one coming back, and ride it back to Bloomfield. All of those things were silly, and in retrospect, you could have been killed, but everybody did it. Speaker 2: Well, isn't that similar to your father and his hoboing too? Speaker 1: Probably so. I don't know. I don't know. He would have killed me had he known I was hopping freights. Story_ID: 78546 Speaker 1: Now, so when your mother comes and, you know, grabs you, I mean to come to get you and you're brought here to Washington [D.C.], so that's a different-- Speaker 2: Completely different world. Speaker 1: So tell me what was like cause you're sort of--did your grandmother spoil you? Speaker 2: Yes. I would like to say, no, but my grandmother spoiled me, and my grandmother was a disciplinarian. And she had certain rules, and you had to abide by those rules. But once you abided, once those rules were taken care of such as cutting the wood and making a fire in the big stove every morning, the rest of the day was just bliss. And she made whatever you asked her to make, fresh, pecan pie, fried chicken, whatever it was that you might want, she would find a way to get it and serve it up. My mother came down, loaded me up, packed my clothes and brought me back to Washington [D.C.]. My first day at school here was kind of interesting because the old man took me to school. And I had never been to school, and it was Monroe, Monroe Elementary School. And at Monroe, he came in one door, and he was talking to the teacher, and I walked out of the other door. And when he came home, I was sitting in the kitchen waiting for him. That was the last time that ever happened. He was beyond belief that I had done this, and that, not only had I done it, it had cost him a day from work. And he took me to school, walked me back over that day, and said, I'm not gonna take you back this morning. But tomorrow morning, you're going back by yourself and you're never gonna miss another day of school. I did not miss a day of school again until my third year of engineering school. So, but school was completely different up here. It was very structured and it was about learning. Speaker 1: Now, at this point in time, do you have any brothers or sisters cause you have two siblings? Speaker 2: I have one sister and one brother. My sister is two years younger than I am. My brother is four years younger than I am. I had both of them. Speaker 1: But were you the only one in West Virginia at that point, before--? Speaker 2: They came to West Virginia, but they were only there for a short time because when I came back and started school, they actually were brought back and put into kindergarten or pre-K or whatever was appropriate for them so I got the full ride of West Virginia. They didn't. They never spent as much time there as I did. Speaker 1: So your father probably thought you had been spoiled, I bet? Speaker 2: I'm sure he did. Story_ID: 78547 Speaker 1: Now, okay, so school, what is that experience like then? I mean, you know, did you (unclear) but Monroe [Elementary School], was it a positive experience for you? Were there teachers that you liked? I'm just trying to find out, well, I mean were there teachers that influenced you there? Speaker 2: I went to, I think, the greatest elementary school that you could have ever gone to. I've never thought about it until you just put it before me, but all the teachers were wonderful. They were people whose lives were dedicated to teaching, and they taught. Mrs. Clark, Mrs. Brown, who happened to be General David's, Davidson or General B. O. [Benjamin O.] Davis's sister was Mrs. Brown. And they were just fantastic. Ms. Renfro, Ms. Throop, all these people were people, Ms. Clark, who taught, Ms. Reed, I think I've named just about all of them now, and I'd never thought about them in all these years. They taught you. You were there to learn and these were people who were dedicated to teaching. They tended to wear, as I remember, the boy scout shoes that laced up and black dresses and their hair was in a bun. And you did, they showed you respect and you did, showed them respect by doing your homework and your work and being prepared. I wouldn't have dared go to school without my homework and be ready every day. They were good people. They were tremendously good people. I never thought about role models because we had them. When I was in the sixth grade, Ralph Bunche came to the school, and I remember him because he came over and talked to me because I was assigned the seat that his daughter had sat in some years before. I mean I met General [Benjamin O.] Davis when I was in school. The person that I remember having a tremendous influence on me was Mary McCleod Bethune. Mary McCleod Bethune came to Monroe and spoke when I was a little kid. I don't know how old I was, and I went home and I told my father that I heard this colored lady who talked just like white folks. And my father was beside himself, and said, well, you can best be sure that you're gonna learn how to talk like that colored lady that talks like white folks because basically, she's speaking the correct English, and you're not. But I will never forget Mary McCleod Bethune. I mean these were people that were in our life every day. They were here. I mean, I guess today kids don't have that, but I had all these people. I had them around. They were people that were concerned about you. Speaker 1: So what impressed you about her? Speaker 2: Her carriage. Her carriage. She was, she was, you never forget her. I can see her today, standing on the stage talking in all black clothes. I can hear her talking to us, exhorting us to do better, that we can do better, always you can do better, and stuff like that. And it's sinking in. You don't know it's sinking in, but it is sinking in. But she was, she was incredible. Story_ID: 78548 Speaker 1: Now, what was the--what was little Willie Leftwich like? Were you a sensitive person, child? Were you rambunctious? Were you, you know, did your mind wander? Were you, I mean what were you like? Were you well mannered? I mean-- Speaker 2: I'm sure I wasn't mannered, at least not to the satisfaction of my parents. I'm sure I tried to be mannered. I did not know what I wanted to be. As a matter of fact, I caused a great deal of consternation with my parents because I decided I wanted to be a trash man, and when they took me to various people's houses, their good friend, Officer Thomas, who was one of the first black policemen in Washington [D.C.], and we would go to visit these people. And they would say, what do you want to be? And my sister wanted to be a doctor, and my brother wanted to be a dentist, and I wanted to be a trash man. And my mother got to the point that she would just set me aside. Don't ask that boy. He's gonna say something stupid. And it finally came out why I wanted to be a trash man. My father one day said, we've got to get to the bottom of this. Why do you wanna be a trash man? And I said, it's real simple, Dad. He only comes once a week, so that means I can play ball the other six days. Little did I know that when he wasn't picking up my trash, he was picking up somebody else's. So that week, my father made a point of coming home for lunch from his job and picking me up in his car and taking me to the other side of town to let me see that trash men worked in other neighborhoods on other days. So much for being a trash man. That was the end of that. I think I was six or seven then. But, no, I think I was a pretty good kid because my parents were disciplinarians. My parents worked very hard and everything was done by schedule. They were not at home, so when we finished school at 3:00 o'clock, at 3:15 the phone would ring, and we had to answer it and be able to explain that we were at home, had had our milk and cookies and were on our way out to the schoolyard to play ball. And that's the way we were raised. There was no babysitter. We took care of ourselves. My mother got home at 4:30 or 5:00 and my father got in at 5:30 or 6:00. Story_ID: 78549 Speaker 1: Did you, what about family life though? Can you recount any times around the dinner table or, you know, special events or, you know, gatherings, I mean anything like that? Speaker 2: We had dinner every night. Dinner was, in a military sense, a command performance. It was mandatory. We had dinner. Everyone ate dinner, and everyone ate breakfast together. Speaker 1: Were there discussions around those? Speaker 2: There were, everyone had an opinion. Everybody was discussing something. And I mean all the way through school, everybody had an opinion about everything. My father read the "PM" which was a newspaper put out allegedly by the Communists Party. And I read "PM" for years, and some people say it was the intellectual's daily worker. And we read "PM". We read the "Evening Star". I don't remember reading the "Post" or the "Times Herald" or the "Daily News", and we had discussions on world affairs every day and on your homework. And the old man had a simple rule. You had to stay ten pages ahead of the teacher. And the way he checked on that was you had to show him that you had outlined page 110 and the teacher was on page 100 from your notes. And he checked that, almost twice, three times a week. In every class, you had to stay ten pages ahead of the teacher. Speaker 1: So did you have trouble abiding by those rules, some? Speaker 2: I had the normal trouble that any boy would have abiding by the rules, but I did because the (chuckle) downside was too great. There was no such thing as child abuse in those days (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) Now, what about your friends? Did you have friends? Did you play with your, you know, brother and sister or were your friends outside and, you know? Speaker 2: Oh, no, I played with a bunch of kids, some of whom have gone on to do great things and some not so great things. But, no, we had, we were fortunate. Going to Monroe [Elementary School], we grew up with just some wonderful--Eleanor Holmes was in my class, just some wonderful people, Robert Jason, who I think became a doctor. This boy, Reason, who's a four-star admiral, lived a block from us. I don't remember his first name. His sister was in my grade, but we grew up with some wonderful kids, all of whom went to Monroe and on to Banneker Junior High with us. They were just, I mean we had a wonderful life. Speaker 1: What was your address then? Speaker 2: 2819 13th Street, N.W. Speaker 1: And can you just describe the community? Speaker 2: It's now two blocks from the subway exit at 14th and Irving, but in those days, it was a neighborhood of row houses, you call them brownstones. I call them row houses, and our house backed on what was Wilson Teachers, was then Wilson Teachers College, which was the white teachers' college in the D.C. school system. So we had a playground right behind the house to play ball on, football, baseball or whatever. It was just a wonderful neighborhood. I mean [HM] Harold Freeman who is a renowned cancer surgeon lived in the neighborhood and his brother, Clyde, who also was an oncologist. I mean there were just a lot of people who've gone on to do, I mean just great, you know, it was a great neighborhood. We didn't know that there was anything better, any place better. Sonia and Wanda Moore, the Hughes family. It was just a great place to grow up. Story_ID: 78550 Speaker 1: Now, were there any subjects that you gravitated to more than others or less or? Speaker 2: I gravitated to chemistry, math, physics and things like that. I don't know why, but I did. I gravitated to them, and I think a part of it was a push away from my father who was always interested in the law, language, Shakespeare, and I was not. Speaker 1: So what age do you think you started gravitating to those subjects? Speaker 2: Oh, probably the fifth, sixth, but by the time I got to seventh grade, Mrs. Whitehead was my homeroom teacher. Ms. Whitehead died a couple of years ago. I think her son just died in Chicago, Matthew. And she taught math, and she was my homeroom teacher, and she really honed my interest in mathematics and stuff like that. Speaker 1: But at this time, by this time, you're at [Benjamin] Banneker [Junior High School], right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Did Banneker start in the sixth or seventh grade? Speaker 2: Banneker started in the seventh grade. Speaker 1: And do you think she saw something in you or did you like the way she just taught it? I mean what was, why--? Speaker 2: She saw something in me, I'm sure. I think all of my teachers saw something in me and brought out the best in me. I'm sure that I was a difficult recalcitrant knucklehead, but they were good people. Mrs., at Banneker, they were good people. Story_ID: 78551 Speaker 1: And what other things were forming you as a young person? That's what I'm trying to sort of get at? Speaker 2: What formed me, I think at that point, was work. In 1949, when I went to Banneker [Junior High School], my father lost his job in the [Joseph] McCarthy Era hearings and the McCarthy investigations. My father's name appeared on a list of people who were meeting that the Shiloh Baptist Church. And this list was black and white, but his was one of the few names that was recognizable. My father had a big job working for the Federal Bureau of Investigation as a driver, a messenger. I think he was a GS-1. He had just broken his arm, and he was fired from his job when he could not tell the government who the other people were on that list. And I had to go to work. And I started working when I was twelve. And the work for me was serving papers. And I started every morning at 4:00 o'clock, and I served 360 papers. And then I came home, washed up and changed clothes and went to school. So work formed, was very much a formative influence in my life at that time. And I worked any way I could. I loaded wood for people who still had wood or coal furnaces. I carried orders. I did, I did whatever was necessary to help my mother and to make ends meet. And my father had to Cleveland [Ohio], and he became a sweeper on the Chevrolet floor in Cleveland for two or three years. And then he came back to Washington [D.C.] and got a job on the railroad. Story_ID: 77643 Speaker 1: You know, the discussion about your father and what happened, do you remember exactly about finding out and what, you know, what occurred within the family and whether, you know, the neighborhood as a whole? Speaker 2: I don't know whether the neighborhood as a whole knew. I assumed that the Kelsey family who lived next door to us might have known because we were rather close with them. But the way that it all happened was my father [Willie L. Leftwich, Sr.], one day four or five guys came to the house. They were apparently FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] agents or officials from the Justice Department, one of whom I subsequently realized was Robert Kennedy, who apparently worked for Senator [Joseph] McCarthy in some capacity. And they came into the house, and it was 5:00 or 6:00 o'clock in the evening. And they were in the living room, and I was lying on the floor on the second floor listening to the conversation. And they had a list of names of people who had been attending these civic meetings at the Shiloh Baptist Church which is still here, and it's a magnificent church, great church. And they asked daddy who these people were. And they only had a first initial and a last name. And most of them were R. Brown, J. White and what have you, and he was unable to identify the people. And they were ranting and raving about he was gonna lose his job and he would never get another government job, and he was fired. And that was that. I mean it was, there was nothing else to it. I mean as far as in the family is concerned, he tried to get jobs in Washington, and he could not get a job anywhere doing anything. And he had a cab, and he drove a cab for a while, but that apparently was not enough to support the family, and he had to leave Washington. And he went to Cleveland [Ohio] and became a sweeper on the Chevrolet line at night. We sat down as a family and talked about it. And it was explained to us that we were gonna have to essentially tighten the belt and pull together and try to make this thing work, and we did. Speaker 1: Did your father, did his spirit--did it sort of decimate him? Was he ever the same person again or he just got through it? Speaker 2: He never talked about it. He never had anything else to say about politics. I don't think he ever lost his faith in people, but he never talked about it. He never sat down and talked to me about it. He never discussed it or anything like that. He would pooh pooh politics. In later years when I was telling him about something in the Republican party, he always summarily dismiss it. My father was a liberal in the classic sense of the word. He was a 1948, '49' [1949] liberal. Speaker 1: And you were also saying that your father had great belief sort of in people, he was, I don't remember what the term you used was, but he was a believer, idealist, not an i-- Speaker 2: My father believed in people, white, black, purple, green or whatever. My father, if you used a curse word and you called somebody a white SOB or something, you would be skinned alive. If you called them an SOB, you'd be, you wouldn't lose your skin. But color didn't play any role in my father's life, not at all. He never did. He was a much bigger person than I would ever hope to be in that regard, but he did not deal with color, race and religion and things like that. Story_ID: 77644 Speaker 1: I wanna ask you this one question now and that is, of your parents, you know, because we take different attributes from our parents, what would you say you, how you're similar to your father and then how you're similar to your mother? Speaker 2: I'm not certain. I would like to think that I had the discipline of my father. My father was a man who weighed 180 pounds and was 6 feet tall, and when his weight went to 182, he stopped eating. And I'd like to think that I could emulate his discipline and his love for knowledge and for reading and books. From my mother, I hope that I took--my mother owned a beauty shop that was located where Georgetown University's Law School is. And this was fifty years ago or more. I was a small kid. And she was fairly successful at that. And I think I took my entrepreneurship from her in the sense of knowing how to satisfy customer and get the buck out of them and keep them moving. Story_ID: 77645 Speaker 1: Now, when you went to, now did you live in the same neighborhood all through growing up? Speaker 2: Yes, we moved out of that neighborhood when I was a senior, I think, in high school, and we moved to 3222 Sherman Avenue, NW, which was the home of a doctor whose name escapes me now. But his son won the Pulitzer Prize for music two years, George Walker, George Walker. He's a famous pianist, incredibly gifted pianist. He won the Pulitzer [Prize], I think it was the Pulitzer if you can win a Pulitzer for music. But we rented Dr. Walker's house. And we lived there for a year, and then daddy bought a house up on Longfellow Street, which is, by then, I was in engineering school. Speaker 1: Okay, now, can you give me the different neighborhoods you lived in? One was--? Speaker 2: I lived in Columbia Heights, and we then moved to Brightwood, 3222 Sherman Avenue was still in Columbia Heights. It was just three or four blocks north. Speaker 1: And then did you live in Park Pleasant? No? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: My, oh, Cardozo was in Park Pleasant. Cardozo High School? Speaker 2: Cardozo High School, it's in, they've renamed it thanks to the "Washington Post", Cardozo Area or something now, but I went to Cardozo High School. I was in the first class to go to Cardozo after white people gave it to us. It was an embarrassment. It was the old Central High School, and they did everything they could to the school before they turned it over to us, including taking the keystone of the, the corner block of the school out. And we took over the school. I was in the first class and went three years to Cardozo. Speaker 1: Now, do you know the circumstances about that changing? Was it the changing demographics or it's just that--? Speaker 2: There were no people in Central High School in the last couple of years. As a white school, it had been reduced to using only one floor, the first floor of the school and part of the cafeteria. But they would rather do that than to turn the school over to black people. Speaker 1: And you're, we're talking about, that's the other thing that, you know, people-Washington [D.C.] was very segregated. Speaker 2: Extremely segregated, extremely segregated. This is not the beginning of the North. This is the end of the South. Until Mr. [John F.] Kennedy became the president, this was no different than Richmond [Virginia]. Speaker 1: And had you had much exposure at all? Was your growing up primarily white completely or did you have exposure? Speaker 2: No, white people lived in our neighborhood. There was a boy Charlie, who lived four or five houses from us. I don't remember Charlie's last name, but in 1944, we both had our tonsils taken out, and I came face to face with discrimination at the wonderful Children's Hospital. Charlie was a ward across the hall from me, and he came and got me one day, and I went over, and they were having hamburger and all sorts of good things. We had pork and beans and hot dogs every day, two meals. And they ran me out of Charlie's ward back into the ward that I belonged in. This was an extremely segregated city, extremely segregated. Speaker 1: And would your parents, I know you said your father didn't see color, but would they message to you about, watch out or this is how you should be behave or? Speaker 2: We were more or less required to dress up to go downtown to buy a pair of tennis shoes. My mother and father's theory was that if you conducted yourself as a gentle person and as a well-educated person, well read, then you would demand that kind of respect from white people. Speaker 1: And, but in that, so there were no lessons you sort of learned along the way that sort of contradicted what your parents taught you? I'm saying, you know, through high school? Speaker 2: I'm sure there were, but in Washington, there was such a continuous barrage of discrimination until you got to the point that you just ignored it. I mean this was an incredibly segregated city. If you went into Goldheims and put a hat on your head, you bought it. You just couldn't go in. I mean you didn't go into Goldheims. Richey [& Co.] Shoes was the only shoe store that allowed black people to try on shoes. I mean this was a terrible city. People like to say it wasn't. It was. Story_ID: 77646 Speaker 1: It was a terrible city and to some extent, it's still a terrible city. The discrimination in Washington [D.C.] is here. It exists. It's real. I'm a potter now, and in Georgetown, in the studio that I'm in, they have private police. I'm coming out of the studio one night. I don't think I look like a criminal. And the black kid runs up to me and wants to question me. He's a private guard in the neighborhood, and I brushed him off and told him he could take the license plate number and call 911, but I wasn't gonna answer any questions for him. And he plaintively said, why? And I said, I've watched you and ten white people came out of here in front of me, and you didn't say anything to them. He said, but I knew them. I said, now you know me. This is Washington. There are still neighborhoods where you're stared at even though you live there. In this neighborhood, there was a garden club, and when we moved into this neighborhood thirty years ago, we tried to join the garden club, and we were told you can't join the garden club because that's white. You can join the civic association. I chose not to join either. You have to make your own way. You can't expect people to do anything for you, white or black. But this is a terrible city. This city is a city where white people still make fun of black people. It makes no sense to live in a city with black people in Anacostia who've never been to the Kennedy Center and can't get downtown to the public library. No, this is a terrible city. It's a terrible city. Story_ID: 77647 Speaker 1: But this was a city always viewed as a place that people even migrated to, you know? Speaker 2: They came here for jobs. They came here because of the government, because of jobs. People came here from North Carolina, Virginia and what have you because of the solidity of getting a government job, a guaranteed check, a guaranteed salary advancement. Speaker 1: Do you think that in the, you know, the mentality that was created, was, it ended up being just a worker's mentality, a job mentality based on, you know, the GS level that people had. That's what I'm just--but at the same time, it created, there was a strong middle-class community created here too. Speaker 2: There was a strong middle-class community created here, but the middle-class community here was fraught with its own color problems. The color of your skin among black people here meant more than anything. Speaker 1: And did you have any personal experience with that? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Can you describe a couple? Speaker 2: The best experience I can tell you about is that when I finished Banneker [Elementary School], I had never before in my life disagreed openly with my father on anything, but before I would go to Dunbar, I told him I would join the [U.S.] Army or the [U.S.] Marine corp. I would not go to Dunbar and be the only quote "dark-skinned person" in the section again. There were only two dark-skinned people in my section at Banneker, myself and a young lady, well, a woman. And she went on to Dunbar. I wouldn't go through that again. I couldn't stand it. The color of your skin, the hue and color of your skin meant more than anything. When I was in the eighth grade at Banneker, they gave us a test. I didn't know what the test was. I took it and apparently made a good grade on it. The counselor, Mrs. Gaines, who's as black as the side of a tire, called me in and said, you cheated on this test, and I'm gonna have your parents come to school. Well, I wasn't crazy. I wasn't gonna cheat on any test. And essentially, she gave me a note. I took it home, and my father was furious. And I said, I didn't cheat on the test. So my father went next door and talked to a woman who was something called a psychologist, Sarah Dorothy Mullins, and she was the first psychologist, whatever that was, that I ever met. And she explained, and her husband had a tremendous job. He was a draftsman. That shows you where we lived. And he was also from Connecticut, (chuckle) which was another, something else, but Sarah Dorothy explained to my father that it was an IQ test, and that I couldn't cheat on it. My father took me to school, and the teacher, Mrs. Gaines, explained to him that there was no way that as black as I was I could have gotten the score that I got on the exam and that it just wasn't possible, given that and my father working at some menial job and my mother being a char woman in the government. And it just couldn't have happened. Somebody else could have done it, but I couldn't have done it. So my father said, fine, give him the test and have him take it again. And I took the test, and this time I made like 185 on the test versus 145 or 50 the first time. Well, this got me into a lot of trouble because now I started walking around thinking I was a genius because I knew what IQ was. I, the first thing I ever looked up in the dictionary that I can remember was IQ, but that Mrs. Gaines was determined that nobody that was as dark as I was could ever--color means too much, meant too much when I grew up. It meant too much at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.]. It meant too much. I mean there were classes at Howard where you knew when you walked in the room that you, there was only a certain grade you could get. I mean it's devastating to people, and we can't ask George Wallace and white folks to integrate when we can't resolve our own color differences. It's terrible. Speaker 1: Did you, I mean were there things here in Washington, not just Washington, but other places, but about the brown paper bag test? Speaker 2: Yeah, well, they had the brown paper bag test. Speaker 1: But were there other things? Did you know of any people who had passed or that their families were passing [for white]? Speaker 2: Sure. I can tell you a story of when I came home from Korea, I got on a streetcar or bus, whatever it was, going up Georgia Avenue. And there was a guy on the bus who had gone through Banneker and Monroe and Banneker with me. And I went back to him on the bus, and I spoke to him, and said, How you doing, Pannie? And he said, you don't know me. I said, he said, you don't know me. I'm white. And I got up at the next stop and said okay, and got off the bus. I was livid. He had been in the first grade, second grade, all the way through school with me, but he was white. So that's his choice. I, you know, I, it took me some time to reconcile that. But, no, there were a lot of people, where people cross over and become white. I mean that's their choice. Story_ID: 77648 Speaker 1: Now, when you were set to go to college, were you, one, did you know what you wanted to go into at that time? Speaker 2: I was, I was very fortunate. My father determined that for me. My father said, I wanted to be a cartographer, whatever that was, a map maker. My father looked in the newspaper and said that he didn't see any cartographer ads in the papers, but he saw ads for electrical engineers. So I was gonna be an engineer. I had a football scholarship to New Mexico, and he told me if I got on the bus, don't ever come home. And in retrospect, he was probably right. Speaker 1: So you were very good at football then? Speaker 2: I got by. I wasn't that good. Speaker 1: Well, if you had a scholarship? Speaker 2: Well, I was good enough to get a scholarship. Speaker 1: And you also said earlier that you had a love for baseball? Speaker 2: No, I loved football. Speaker 1: Football, okay. Speaker 2: I played baseball as a kid, but I played football every day. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I've never played basketball and don't understand it. My brother was All American at Villanova [University] in '64' [1964]. Speaker 1: Did you have any sports heroes, people you looked up to? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Who? Speaker 2: Joe Louis. He's the only person I ever asked for an autograph. He was on a plane one day and I spoke to him. I've never spoken to, I mean he was everything, and yet he represented the worst of America because of what America did to him, took his money. They took his money. Speaker 1: That's true, and he didn't die too well either. Story_ID: 77649 Speaker 1: But now, so your father decides. Does he decide where you're gonna go also? Speaker 2: Well, that was real simple. He said he didn't have enough money to send only one of us to a good school. And my sister had a fellowship, a scholarship to Vassar [College] and she needed $1,500 more to go. And he said, no. So I went to Howard. My sister went to Howard [University], and my brother went to Villanova [University]. And he kept it within his budgetary constraints and in retrospect, it made sense. And I studied engineering, electrical. Speaker 1: So how did you find that whole, were you living at home, going there? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. So you lived at home. And so what was that experience like? Was it a continuation of your experience in Washington [D.C.] so it wasn't really much different or did it have sort of a, was it a different process? I mean did it expose you to--? Speaker 2: Not really. I did not want to go to Howard. I never wanted to go to Howard. I found the education at Howard to be, we were over-educated. We were taught by men who themselves had incredible backgrounds and had never been able, because of their race to use it. So we were over taught. Mr. Webster taught us electrical measurements. Mr. Webster's roommate at Carnegie in the early part of the 1900s was George Mester. George Mester's family owned U.S. Steel. Purnell was one of the first blacks to graduate from USC in Engineering. Dr. Daniels had a Ph.D. in stress from the University of Iowa, and he told stories of how he went to the University of Iowa and was an All American football there in like 1910, and they taught him alone in one room away from the white people. And these men, Prof Howard, who had a Ph.D. from Ohio State in Mechanical Engineering and the only job he could get in 1934 was greasing bearings in a mill. These men were incredibly well educated, but they over taught us. They didn't teach anything about money because they knew nothing about money themselves, but they knew the principles of engineering. So we were incredibly well educated on the principles of engineering, but we didn't know anything about the business side of engineering. Speaker 1: But that's different than being over taught. What do you mean by being over taught? That they love the theory, that they loved--? Speaker 2: They loved the theory. They loved the theory. They drove the theory into your head. The first job I had was at NASA, and they gave us a mechanical engineering problem. I did the problem faster than the mechanical engineers because I, my education was just that good. I'm talking about boys from M.I.T. and Purdue and places like that. At Howard, you learned to do everything. In some engineering schools, technicians hooked up the experiments. In Howard, we hooked up the experiments, conducted the experiments, took the readings, wrote them up, and plodded them and submitted the reports. Speaker 1: Now, were all those teachers at Howard, were they all sort of mentoring you or was there one versus the other that, you know, really sort of helped nurture you along? Speaker 2: I don't think any of them helped nurture me along. I did not particularly care for the Howard University, and I did not care for the engineering school. Story_ID: 77650 Speaker 1: By then, I knew that somewhere along the way, I was interested in economics, and I wanted to learn more about how to make money and about what went on in capitalism. My father had a view that if you had a job by definition in this society, you had failed, that you had failed; that you should try to be self-employed. And the people that impacted me at Howard [University] were not in the engineering school. The biggest impact came from E. Franklin Frazier, the sociologist. I took his class, and he was just unbelievable, and he opened my eyes on race, color. And the other person was a man that I don't think I took his class, but I would go to hear him speak, named [Emmett] Dorsey, who was a government professor who took on [Joseph] McCarthy barehanded and the whole McCarthy committee. But those were the people that had a tremendous impact on me. E. Franklin Frazier was just, his class was like being a tree and being in the presence of sun and water. He, you grew with him. He made you think about why you were the color you were. What happened down behind the barn with the master and your great-grandmother. I mean he was just a fantastic teacher. There was no trodding in his class. It was leaping, running, flying soaring. You had to think. You had to get out in front of him. Speaker 2: What kind of person was he? Speaker 1: Cynical, sarcastic, brilliant, challenging. It was always one-on-one. There may have been twenty people in the room, but when he called on you, you were facing him one-on-one. And you had to talk to Professor Frazier. You had to talk to him and address his concerns. And you had to beat him back or he was gonna swarm all over you. And he was great. He was great. Every black kid should read E. Franklin Frazier, the "Black Bourgeoisie." Speaker 2: So what were some of his theories that he taught in the class? Speaker 1: Oh, I'm not sure that I remember that far back, but I remember he talked about the color, of how we got to be the color we were and how the black woman and the white man were always integrated, that the black man and the white woman were the two people trying to resolve the social differences in America. And he talked about the Philouasians (ph.). That's what black people who were high yellow called themselves in Washington back in the '30's [1930s] and '40's [1940s], Philolouasians. And they, how they would drive their cars from 7th and U up to 18th and U and back down again. That was the extent of their world and how small it was, and how we needed to get beyond that. And he always harped on the fact that the color of a man's skin didn't tell you anything about the man. If it did, we'd have a real simple world because we'd be able to check off people just based on the color of their skin. And it didn't. It didn't have, it didn't tell you anything. The guy with the cure for cancer may be any color. Speaker 2: So to you, I mean for someone who there were issues about color, you had experienced, not the positive side of that? Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Okay. This was opening up a new world in many ways, his theories opened up a new world in some respects? Speaker 1: He took me out of the drudgery of engineering, anybody could do problems. I mean the drudgery of engineering was just that. It was just one problem after the next, after the next. Where does it all go? What do you do with it? There was no human side to engineering. I just knew that there was something else out there, and I defied the engineering school because I didn't read the journals. I read "Time", "Life", "Newsweek", "The Economist". I read anything except the engineering journals which did not bode well for me with some of the teachers. Speaker 2: Now, Dorsey, what did he teach? Speaker 1: [Emmett] Dorsey taught government. He was an avowed Communist. And he would hold forth, if you would go up to his class, he would just hold forth talking about [Joseph] McCarthy and how silly the hearings were and that McCarthy was stupid and didn't know what he was asking for. And I remember on one occasion Dorsey talked about the different kinds of Communism, that here McCarthy was talking about Communism as if what [Joseph] Stalin did and Chairman Mao [Zedong] was the same as what [Josip Broz] Tito did. And Dorsey went into the whole spectrum, horizontally of Communism, and then vertically, he cut it up. Story_ID: 77651 Speaker 1: And were there any other things at Howard [University] cause, like who was there when you were there? Give some of the names of people that were, you said--? Speaker 2: Toni Morrison taught me English when I was, every engineer took English from Toni Morrison. Her name wasn't Morrison then. She was a good teacher and she made you work. And she helped me a lot. When you left her class, you knew more than how to write the simple-minded engineering report. She was good. Speaker 1: And who else was there that we would know, of note? Speaker 2: Sterling Brown, they were all there. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: They were all there. Speaker 1: But see, that's, I mean those were sort of the strong days of Howard as a university-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --I mean people could not, I mean the strength was that no one could go other places. You know, there were limits-- Speaker 2: Right, right, right. Speaker 1: So you had a lot of-- Speaker 2: All the black engineers went to Howard in those days. I mean it wasn't half at Howard and half somewhere else. If you were a black engineer, you went to Howard. That was it. Speaker 1: And what were you thinking that you wanted to do with your electrical engineering? Did you have, I mean--? Speaker 2: I didn't have much ambition. I thought that the fellow, Alex Haley has a brother that most people don't know, who's a Naval architect, who took me to school many a morning because I would get to the front door at Howard and decide I was, of the engineering school, ENA, and decide I was gonna turn right and go down to "U" Street and shoot some crap or run numbers or do something stupid. And [Julius] Haley would open the door to the engineering school and said, "you've walked all the way here, and I'm opening the door for you. I'll give you a dime for a cup of coffee and a sweet roll. The least you can do is go to class." And he did that many a morning, and I haven't seen him in fifty years, but to me, he's far greater than Alex or the other brother. I don't remember his name, but he was a Naval engineer, a Naval architect for years. He's still alive. Speaker 1: That's not [HM] George Haley, is it? Speaker 2: George is the ambassador. Speaker 1: Right, he was an ambassador. Speaker 2: I know George well. I see George a couple of times, but there's another brother who's younger than George and Alex, and he lives out in Silver Spring [Maryland], but he was a Naval architect. But he would open the door to the school and put a dime in my hand and say, here's for your coffee and your donut. All you got to do is go to class. And I went to class. Story_ID: 77652 Speaker 1: So but you, I was asking what did you think you wanted to be with your electrical engineering or what were your hopes for--? Speaker 2: I didn't know. Speaker 1: You didn't know? Speaker 2: I didn't know. I was torn, I thought I wanted to go into power, which dealt with working on dams and things like that. And when I finished engineering school, I was offered a job in Arizona by the Bureau of Reclamation. In those days, there were very limited opportunities for black engineers. If you had the grades, you could go to IBM, Boeing and a few places like that, but most of us went into the government. And I was offered a job at Boe, I mean in Arizona building a dam. Fortunately, I didn't take it. I went to NASA at Wallops Island [Virginia] instead. And, but I didn't know. I really didn't have any idea. I-- Speaker 1: How did you find out about the job at NASA? Speaker 2: I think I applied for the job and went down and I was interviewed and hired at Wallops Island. It's a missile base right next to Chincoteague [Virginia] where they ride the, drive the ponies over every summer, terrible place on the Eastern shore in '60' [1960], unbelievable. There was no place that you could sleep, no place that you could rent a room, nothing. It was people picking vegetables and fruits and things like that. It was just stoop labor, unbelievable place. The police followed me every day. I worked on a missile range, and they would not let me go out to the range because they said one of the white guys would probably drop a wrench on my head, and I argued with the boss, a man named Abe [Abraham] Spinak who was a Jew. And he explained to me that even though he was a Jew and he ran the entire base, his wife couldn't go shopping in Pocomoke City [Maryland] in the store for people bothering her and his kids. It was a terrible place. I was given a choice of staying at Wallops Island and going to Korea. I went to Korea. Speaker 1: So you went to Korea for two years? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 77653 Speaker 1: So when you went to NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration], were you, that was in 1960, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, and were there other black people working, blacks working at NASA? Speaker 2: There were no other blacks working at Wallops Island [Virginia], [coughing] none. I was the only black on the facility. Speaker 1: And did you know the extent of work that was being done there, you know, when you started? Do you really know what you were coming into? Speaker 2: Not really. I had no idea of the extent of the work. I knew it was important when we got there and the Russians had a trailer parked three miles off the shore that sat there every day and watched us. Speaker 1: And what year did you go to Korea? Was it in 1963? Speaker 2: 1961, the day Mr. [John F.] Kennedy was inaugurated. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: June 20, 1961, I left, Travis Air Force base. Speaker 1: And where were you stationed then? Speaker 2: In Korea. Speaker 1: You were in Korea, okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, I'm sorry. I was thinking what branch of the-- Speaker 2: I was in the ]U.S.] Army, and I was in the First Calvary division. Speaker 1: Okay, and so were you, what were you doing Korea? What was your--? Speaker 2: I had a series of jobs in Korea. I was the assistant nuclear officer of the First Calvary division for a while, and then I had a white officer who told me that no nigger could handle nuclear weapons, McCabe, Captain McCabe. He was from Baltimore. He was considered progressive, and he had no idea, he had no education, no training. And I was sent there because of my work at NASA. And he told me after three or four days that I couldn't do it, and he told me in that vein. And they shipped from there back to, essentially another, doing nothing for a while. Then I was selected by General Twitchell, Hamilton Twitchell, to be on the Inspector General team which was unheard of for a second lieutenant to do that. And I got that because of an answer that he asked a bunch of lieutenants, and I gave him the straight answer. And he had me step out and fall in behind him, and I was put on his team. And I did that for about two months. And then I was sent upfront with a platoon. And I stayed there until I left Korea in May of '62' [1962]. Speaker 1: When you were saying you were sent upfront, are you talking about on the front lines? Speaker 2: I was sent up to what essentially is the front line, yes. There was no war going on. Speaker 1: Now, this was your first time really outside the country, right? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. I had been to Canada, but that's all. Speaker 1: Right, you had been, really, your world had been Washington, D.C. at that point? Speaker 2: Yes, I'd been to Cleveland [Ohio], Chicago [Illinois], Canada and North Carolina, places like that, but yes, New York. Speaker 1: So, but what was this experience like in many ways, and did the army change you or, you know, a lot of people say it was good training, you know, it disciplined me. Some people say it was the worst experience I ever had (unclear). Speaker 2: I guess for me, it was somewhere in between. It was a job. It paid .24 cents an hour, $190.00 a month, and that was it. It was a job that I had to do, you know, and I did it. It was the first time I'd ever slept in a room full of people of different ethnic backgrounds. And it was the first time that I ran into discrimination on the white side, 100 percent. At the end of, just before we reached the end of basic training, we were called in by a sergeant, I think his name was Twitcher (ph.) or Twiggle (ph.) or something like that. And he was beside himself because of 121 lieutenants, the first five were, one, two, three, four, five, ratings, were black. And he said, that just couldn't be. And then he just had to figure out how we were dropped. So we were dropped to lesser scores in the physical training. In other words, we couldn't do push-ups right, but we could pass the test. But when we got to the push-up part,that was the way they weeded us out. So, I, you know, I had enough of the army with that. Story_ID: 77654 Speaker 1: And so you came back and then worked back at NASA or with a, or you went to--? Speaker 2: When I came home from the army, I was first put on the invasion force to Cuba, trained to be on the second wave of the invasion of Cuba, which I subsequently read many articles said we didn't exist and it was never planned. So I guess it didn't. [phone ringing] Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: But let's go back into your time working with NASA and talk, can you talk about the fact that you worked on the Blue Scout missile rocket and what the significance of that was? Speaker 1: Yeah. I'm waiting for Scott. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Oh, I'm good. Speaker 1: Oh, am I to talk? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Oh, I worked on, when I was at NASA at Wallops Island [Virgina], I worked on the Blue Scout missile. The Blue Scout was America's bread and butter solid fuel rocket back in the '60s [1960s]. And to some extent, many of today's rockets are just extensions of the blue, of the Scout. The first job I had working on the Scout was to design the timing arms, and the timing arms measured how long it took the rocket to tail fin, to get up to where it was held. The rocket was held by two arms. And they'd been firing them in the summer, and no one, as winter approached, no one knew how long it took those arms to open. And they were afraid that the tail fins would catch the arms and take the whole gantry with them. So I designed the timing arms, and I got my first inkling of the deficiencies of my Howard [University] education because my boss told me to design the timing arms for the Blue Scout and told me what the project was. I did it and came back proudly and told him it cost like $183.00, and I'd made and wired the micro-switches and everything. And it worked. And he was livid because he had appropriated $50,000 or $40,000 for this and I hadn't used the money. And it was an eye opener, and I just didn't know anything about money and how, when the government appropriates money, you have to use all the money. I mean I had scrounged around and found a timing arm. I'd done the whole thing for, you know, out of pocket, $180.00 or so. Speaker 2: Wasn't there also something developed then, also Doppler velocity? Speaker 1: Oh, I designed the Doppler, a system that measured that when the rockets went up, we put some--it's too complicated to go on. But it was a Doppler velocity system to measure, to try to figure out the speed of rockets as it left, other than the speed that we were reading from other things. And we came up with sky screens and a whole bunch of stuff. I'm sure all this stuff has been thrown aside because it was all analog, and as we went to digital circuitry, it became, it's nothing. It was nothing. Speaker 2: What did you like about engineering though, in that part, you know, of sort of going away and being given a problem and coming up with a solution? Speaker 1: Problem solving, I like problem solving, whether it's in the law or whether it's engineering. Give me the problem, and leave me alone for a few minutes, and I'll have an idea. If I can't solve it today, I'll solve it tonight at 3:00 o'clock in the morning, when it'll come to me. I like problem solving. It's, I don't wanna say it's a challenge, but after a while in engineering, you don't even worry. If you give me the problem, I can figure it out. I know I can. Story_ID: 77655 Speaker 1: Now, when you came, when you returned from the--? Speaker 2: I came back from Korea, I was sent to Camp Pickett and put on the invasion force to Cuba. And then I was discharged from the army in August of 1962. Speaker 1: Then, is that when you ended up in the Naval Air Systems Command? Speaker 2: Yes, I drove a taxi from August or September of 1962 to January 1, 1963. And I went to the Naval Air Systems Command which was then in the munitions building down on Constitution Avenue, and they hired me. Under the Civil Service regulations because of my time in the army, I should have had a grade of, I think it was a GS-11 or 12. The man there, his name was Stratton, and he made it plain, more than plain, that because of my race, I was gonna get a GS-7, and I had better be thankful that I got that. And I took the GS-7 and started work January 1 or 2, 1963 in the Naval Air Systems Command. I had the job of, I was in the radar and special sensor section, and I was given special sensors. Everything other than radar in those days was mine, passive microwave radiometry, low light-level television, infrared, both color ranges, eight to twelve and three to five, UV [ultraviolet] and everything else that was not radar of fourteen engineers I had. Speaker 1: Okay, so what was the significance of the technology then, like the infrared? What was it being used for? Speaker 2: Infrared and low-light level television weren't being used for much of anything then because we really were still holding over from World War II, and everybody was basing everything radar. And the war in Vietnam had started, and the radar simply could not penetrate into the jungle. When I was hired in 19, January 1962, I was given a huge box and literally everything from Russia, the UK and everyone who had done anything in other than the radar spectrum was in that box. And I was told that was my area, to read it, catalog it and become familiar with it. And I did. It was good, it was good in, I'm sorry. Speaker 1: It was good because of what? Speaker 2: It was good because it was new, it was different and it was challenging. It was challenging in the sense of learning new science and trying to apply these techniques and technologies to aircraft and to weapon systems. It was new because, it was, it was just all new. It was completely unproven, untried. No one knew how it was gonna work, and I was fortunate enough to be stuck with it. Speaker 1: But a lot of these technologies, you know, beside the fact that they were analog, a lot of these technologies are technologies that were sort of very much on the cutting edge at the time? Speaker 2: Yes, they were all on the cutting edge. They were all on the cutting edge, lasers, infrared, everything was on the cutting edge. But essentially, what had happened was, we could not fight the war with radar because the radar could not penetrate the weather, and it could not penetrate jungle. So we had to come up with other sensors that could penetrate the weather and possibly penetrate the jungle. Now, these special sensors, as they're called today, smart bombs and things, are greatly oversold. They work largely on contrast ratio. If you are in the desert, it's very easy to take out a target because the tank is sitting on a cement road. So the signature that you get from the cement is so totally different from the signature that you get from the tank, until you know where it is. You can blast it. You put that same tank under three levels of canopy in the jungle, and you can't find him. So we haven't solved the problems. We've made some progress, but not to the, I mean it, it's still contrast ratio. A lot of it is contrast ratio. Story_ID: 77656 Speaker 1: But I was very fortunate. I started in the [U.S.] Navy in 1962 in January. In February 1962, I was offered a job in Tech and Tel, with the Central Intelligence Agency, and I went in and told the people in the Navy I was leaving. The Central Intelligence Agency, Tech and Tel was playing, as I call it, with Soviet weapons, which is something that I had done some of in Korea. That is, in Korea when we had captured Korean weapons, I got a chance, since I was in ordinance, to play with them, that is, take them apart, shoot them, fire them, see how they--so they had this job. And they offered it to me in Tech and Tel. And I was gonna take it and they were gonna promote me to GS-11 in October of that year. I had been at the Navy about six or eight weeks, and the Navy said they could not afford to lose me. Well, I guess this is the first inkling I had that maybe I should be a lawyer. And I said, okay, what are you gonna offer me? And the Navy said, well, we will make you an 11 in October just as the CIA will. We'll make you, we'll promote you from seven to nine now, eleven in October. And I said, so what? They've also told me I'll get a twelve a year after October. What are you gonna do to sweeten it? So the Navy said, you're a seven. In 1963, I was an, in January. I was made a nine in February. I was made an eleven in October, and the next January, I was made a twelve. So I went to seven, nine, eleven, twelve in one year. I wrote a paper on how to use passive microwave radiometry to upgrade the inertia on navigation systems of strategic bombers. The paper was so highly classified until they took it from me, and I was never able or allowed to read it again. But that paper was the basis of my promotion to GS-12, and I understand they implemented some of the things that were in it. And that's how I got promoted and frankly, why I ended I ended up going to law school because at that point I was twenty-five years old. In another year I was a GS-14, or another two years I was a GS-15 or 14, and you could only go to GS-15 in those days. And all I could think of was that I would be twenty-five years old and I would have thirty more years to go one grade in the government. And so I went to law school. Story_ID: 77657 Speaker 1: Now, during this time, are you coming across any other black engineers or, I mean who was sort of helping form your career or advise you or? Speaker 2: Well, I guess I knew a few, the guys who went school with me, Gabe, Bruce Gabriel, who is now deceased, Jim Sims, Richard Thomas, Charlie Thomas, there were other black engineers that I knew, yes. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: I was the first black program manager in the [U.S.] Navy. I, program managers, I moved up from designing reconnaissance systems and weapons systems to becoming a program manager which is sort systems integration, if you will. Speaker 1: And with the experience you were getting, are you saying during the time that you were with the Navy, all that was challenging? I mean that it was,-- Speaker 2: It was all challenging. It wasn't necessarily technical. It was challenging in the sense of learning to deal with people, learning how to handle budgets, how to set budgets and things like that in a government sense, yes. Speaker 1: And is that, during the whole time, did you have people reporting to you cause you said that-- Speaker 2: I had no one reporting to me until I became a program manager. Speaker 1: And you had 14. Is that when you said you had 14 people reporting? Speaker 2: No, I said I was a GS-14. Speaker 1: Okay, fine. Speaker 2: No, I didn't have any, but the people that reported to me reported to me more or less as equals. Once you become a program manager, it's more or less systems integration. I then would go downstairs and talk to people who had particular pieces of equipment in the system. So they didn't really report to me. They worked with me. Speaker 1: Did you feel that you were gonna be sort of limited in terms of your career growth, I mean besides the fact of the GS level? That's all I, I mean, I understand in Washington, there's this whole things about GS. But there was no opportunity at that time for, cause we're talking now about the late, you know, the late '60's [1960s]. Was there any opportunity within corporate America to move over? Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: Not-- Speaker 2: None. There was no where to go with it. Speaker 1: When I got my law degree in '67' [1967], I started law school in '64' [1964]. I did it in three years at night. And when I got my law degree, I went to three companies and tried to get a job in the optics department. And the only one that was honest was Texas Instruments. They simply said it wouldn't make sense for us to hire a black guy since all the colonels and generals in the army are Southerners in the military. The other two companies, Westinghouse and North American Anaheim gave me some egg sucking answer, but the people at Texas Instruments were straight up. Story_ID: 77658 Speaker 1: So, the reason you went to law school, you think that had something to do with your father since he wanted to be a lawyer? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: It had to do with him only in the sense that he paid for me to take the exam and he submitted the application. I wouldn't do either (laughter). Speaker 1: And he did that because he wanted you move on in the world? Speaker 2: He wanted me to move on. And I was working on a Master's degree in engineering, and he said, I'll give you the $15.00 to take the LSAT, and when the results come in, just have them sent here since we have the same name. And I'll fill out the application, and he did I guess. I was admitted to American University's law school, and I was signed up to go there. And what happened was they announced the week that school was to start that they were gonna move their campus from F Street NW to the main campus up on Nebraska Avenue, and I immediately walked over to George Washington [University], and that's why I went to George Washington and not American [University]. Speaker 1: Now, you, but your thinking was that you would like law or it was just a way of getting out? Speaker 2: It was a way of getting out. Speaker 1: I see, okay. Speaker 2: I was a way of getting. I would have gone to anything. I wanted, I wanted something broader than what I was doing in the government. I wanted some more experience. Speaker 1: Now, when did you start getting politically active? Speaker 2: When I was in law school. Speaker 1: And was that just, okay, so you go to George Washington. This is 19-- Speaker 2: Sixty-four [1964]. Speaker 1: Sixty-four [1964], and you, is that, now that experience because legal training is much, it's different from the type of training you've had though it is analytical? Speaker 2: If you say so. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay, you don't find legal training analytical? Speaker 2: I would go to law school three times before I would go back to engineering school for a week. I think law school is one of the most overrated things in America. Speaker 1: You found it a breeze? Speaker 2: I did it in three years at night with honors, and traveled one third of the time. I worked for the government as a program manager, and I had to go to California at least once a week, I mean once a month. Some months I went twice. I did not find law school difficult at all, nor challenging once you learned the terms. I found a lot of stuffed shirts and a lot of people who simply assumed that they were meant to be judges or meant to follow in their grandfather's footsteps to be attorneys. I guess GW met my needs. There were 1,200 people at GW [George Washington Law School], and in those days, they had the one percent rule at George Washington [University], Georgetown [University], American U [University]. There were twelve blacks there, and I think of the twelve, seven or eight finished in the upper quarter of the class, which says something about the quality of the black people that they let him, and it may also say something about the quality of white folks they let in. Speaker 1: And there, what made you decide to get politically active? What was, how did you, what was (unclear) that? Speaker 2: Well, a couple of things. One is I think that it, in law school, they had these, once a week, they would have various people come over and talk on Friday evenings to the students. Some of those people were political. Some of them were from the Supreme Court and places like that. And it became, I won't say amply clear, but fairly clear that out of necessity, you had to have some political affiliation to really move forward in the law, maybe not in engineering, but in management and the law, you had to know somebody. And there was somebody in my class that was, I'd say his father or grandfather was a close friend of Mr. [Richard] Nixon's, and I became involved with him and went on to become a Republican. Speaker 1: And so you did it really, in terms of looking and seeing in terms of what would make you successful? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My father believed in liberalism in the Democratic Party. And when he stumbled, none of them reached out to help him. And the guy who pushed him most was Bobby [Robert] Kennedy. Speaker 1: Out, you mean. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Pushed him out, right? Story_ID: 77659 Speaker 1: Now, were there any classes that you particularly liked in law school? Speaker 2: Contracts, I loved contracts. I went back and got a Master's in contracts. I got an LLM [Master of Laws] in contracts. Speaker 1: And you didn't--what about civil procedure and? Speaker 2: It wasn't hard. I mean the civil procedure was the rules. Once you know the rules, how can you stretch them? How can you connect them? How do you make them work for you? But contracts are fascinating because each side in a contract always thinks that they're getting the best of the other side, and they never know. You never know until you start to factor in the weather, the times, the delays and all the other things. So a contract is like reading something in the future. What you're reading today, you've really got to be thinking way down, like litigating. You've got to be thinking way in front of where everybody is. Civil procedure was all right. I enjoyed civil procedure. I mean I did all right in it, but you know, and we had Constitutional law from Dean [Louis H.] Mayo, who I was told when I took his class that he was a southerner. He went to the Naval academy and was from Alabama. He was one of the best teachers I ever had. I did very well with Dean Mayo. The course that I really liked the most was antitrust. I cannot begin to tell you how much I liked antitrust. I mean it was just fascinating because it was the first time in my education that I'd gotten a chance to look at the history of America and people taking advantage of people, I mean the railroads, the industries, World War I. It was a fascinating course. But other than that, law school was all right. I mean it, a lot of it was just puffery, a lot of it was just puffery. Speaker 1: So did you get involved with any, at that time were they doing moot courts and moot court competitions or any--? Speaker 2: I did a moot court and Judge Beard told me that I should never be a prosecutor because I had been over zealous in prosecuting whatever my role was, and Judge Beard, we won or we prevailed. And when it was over, he told me I should never prosecute. I should never do anything like that. But it was okay. Story_ID: 77660 Speaker 1: And the--you said the friend whose father, say that again, who was--? Speaker 2: A friend whose godfather it turns out was a very big contributor to Mr. [Richard] Nixon. Speaker 1: What was his name? Speaker 2: [William] Bill Casselman, and he's still around here. He's a good friend, and he got me involved. Bill Casselman in '68' [1968] or whenever Mr. Nixon became president. Speaker 1: I think it-- Speaker 2: It was '68' [1968] that Mr. Nixon became president. Speaker 1: Yeah, he got, '68' [1968] he was elected. Speaker 2: Bill Casselman became the head of the General Services Administration or the General Counsel of the General Services Administration. He became the General Counsel of the General Services Administration without ever having taken the bar. And he later became counsel to the president when Gerald Ford was president. He's a prince of a guy, a very nice guy, decent guy, and he got me involved. Speaker 1: Now, who else was involved in the Republican party around that time, that was African American? Speaker 2: Oh, so many of those people are dead. Bob Brown, Elaine-- Speaker 1: He's alive though. Speaker 2: Yeah, he's alive, Bob's alive. Elaine Jenkins and Howard Jenkins. Howard was on the National Labor Relations Board. Oh, there was Mel Burton locally. I can't remember all the people now. There were a lot of people from Ohio, New York, Michigan, places like that, but I don't remember their names. Speaker 1: Did you come across [HM] Art Fletcher? Speaker 2: Sure, I knew Art. Art came in here from Seattle, by way of Kansas, I believe it was. Yeah, I knew Art. Art was involved. He's a good guy. Speaker 1: And was there a philosophy that black Republicans had at that time? Speaker 2: I don't know what you mean by a philosophy Speaker 1: Well, I mean any platform or things that were, you know, within the Republican party in terms of, I mean, was there a subset? Did you have a group that was cohesive at any time? Speaker 2: I think that we were very cohesive because there were so many dragons to slay in America in the Republican party that we were always trying to push the envelope as far as getting civil rights for blacks, as far as getting issues that concerned blacks before the powers to be and stuff like that. And we were simply, in most instances, what do they call it, benign neglect? We were dismissed. The problem was, we didn't have the votes. We didn't have the strength, and we could never turn enough votes or enough financial strength to cause the Republican party to pay attention to us. They would listen. I found Mr. Nixon, for instance, to be incredibly able to listen to issues concerning blacks, and to address them orally. But when it left him and went down to the next level, nothing happened. Story_ID: 77661 Speaker 1: But do you remember the [President Richard] Nixon, when finally the Nixon testimonies, I mean, his, you know, diaries-- Speaker 2: Oh, nothing would surprise me that if you got the diaries of many Americans. I was involved in a case in Alabama where we sued Alabama Light and Power, Amoco and a whole bunch of people for building a chemical plant in Roanoke, Alabama. At that time, a man named [John] Swearingen was the president, I believe of Amoco or one of the large companies. He was also the titular head of the Urban League that year, and in our discovery, we came across a dep, a memorandum from him saying that anytime the number of blacks in any town got to be more than twenty-two percent, Amoco was to take their plant out of the town because with twenty-two percent blacks, it usually meant that the school system was already over fifty percent. And the white people were leaving the town. So whatever Nixon said on the tapes as far as I'm concerned was only reflective of what was going on in the rest of America. Speaker 1: But as a person dealing with him, do you think, would you describe Nixon as a pragmatist? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Besides being, you know, having his racist tendencies, that he was pragmatist? Speaker 2: No more so than any other American. Speaker 1: White American. Speaker 2: White American. Oh, I'm sure we have our, our racism on our side. I'm sure we have racists too, but it's just that our racism doesn't have as much impact because we're throwing stones uphill rather than pushing boulders down. Story_ID: 77662 Speaker 1: So when you came out of law school, you went to work with, did you--? Speaker 2: I went to work for the Federal Aviation Administration [FAA] as a patent attorney. And I did that for a year. And I left the Federal Aviation Administration. I was working on my LLM and went to work for a private company called Technical Media Systems, as vice president and general counsel. And then I-- Speaker 1: What was the nature of what they did? Speaker 2: What? The FAA? Speaker 1: No, Technical Media Systems? Speaker 2: Technical Media Systems wrote training manuals for the military. It was an interesting company because I'm sure it was in advance of what many of the companies do now. It sold software. It wrote programs in software. They had airplanes in those days, and they'd just come around to black boxes that were not repaired. So they wrote the software so that you plugged the box in. If the box said red, they threw it over the side of the ship. If it said, yellow, they might try to fix it. If it said, green, they put it back in the plane. Story_ID: 77663 Speaker 1: At least you established something. I mean I look in Chicago [Illinois] and even the black firms, there's very little legacy building going on there, (unclear) companies, you know. Speaker 2: It's hard because black people have not yet come to the notion that you can leave and leave your name on a firm. I left Leftwich and Douglas in '96 [1996], and there are people who still do not understand that I am not there because my name is on the firm, I should be there. Hogan and Hartson have been dead for thirty, forty, fifty years, but among blacks, you can't do that. If your name is on the door, you have to still be there. It's not so. Speaker 1: That's absolutely right. Story_ID: 77664 Speaker 1: Now, when you, was Technical Media Systems, was that a good ex--cause you were there a year? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: You know, you've had a lot of year stints sort of until you started with your own firm. So, did you learn anything from that or was that just the continuation of government? Speaker 2: No, Technical Media, I learned something. Speaker 1: What did you learn? Speaker 2: I learned how to fire people, how to hire people, how to produce something to a standard, deliverable and do it on time and how to fight with the government to get your money out of 'em and with other entities that you were doing work for to get paid. Speaker 1: Now, how large a company was it? Speaker 2: Technical Media probably had at one time seven [700] or 800 people working for them across the country. But it was always a subcontractor. Technical Media worked for Lockheed or Technical Media worked for LTV, Ling Temco Vought. Technical Media was not a prime contractor in its own right. Speaker 1: Now, were you, had they had a general counsel before? Speaker 2: They had not had a general counsel, and they had not broken their operations up. I was vice president and general counsel of Easter operations, and to them, East was anything past Las Vegas [Nevada]. So I had a lot of country to play with. But they had never, they had just grown. I mean they had been 40 people and suddenly they were 700 people. Speaker 1: But they have an internal legal department? Had they-- Speaker 2: No, they-- Speaker 1: So you were the start of the internal legal department? Speaker 2: Yes, I was the start of the internal legal department. Speaker 1: Okay, well, that's a good, a lot of times it's a different situation. Speaker 2: Oh, no, it was a good experience. It was a good experience. Speaker 1: Okay, and so certain things you farmed out to their outside counsel? Speaker 2: Everything virtually was farmed out. I just got a chance to look at it. I didn't have a staff. They were more interested in me making the operations East of the, literally East of Denver [Colorado] in the end, work, I mean making them profitable and stuff like that. Speaker 1: But why did you leave? Speaker 2: Technical Media Systems. The company was sold. It was sold to Ginge (ph.) Industries which was listed on the American Exchange. And Gordon Ginge, he's an interesting guy, he called me up. And they had a large office in Boston [Massachusetts], maybe sixty, eighty people in it, and I went up to the Boston office and essentially cut it down to about twenty people. And we had 180 people or so here in Springfield, Virginia, and I cut that down to about 80 people. And then one day Gordon showed up at the office on Connecticut and M [Street] and said, I don't really need you anymore. I mean you got everything humming. We're making money. We've cut back on the overhead, and I don't need to pay you whatever I'm paying you. So I worked myself out of a job. It was a great experience. Story_ID: 77665 Speaker 1: But then you went into teaching law? Speaker 2: Well, I didn't, I taught law after I started practicing, I taught law because we weren't making enough money practicing to make ends meet. So my then partner and I both were teaching on the side to try to make ends meet. Speaker 1: And now was it just that I'm gonna, you know, hang my own shingle and do work on my own or was it just that I'm out of a job and this is my training, and I'd better--? Speaker 2: I'm out a job, this is my training, and I'm gonna, I gotta eat. So, I mean no one's gonna hire me. None of the large firms are gonna hire me. I had nothing to appeal to them. Speaker 1: So what was the nature of the practice that you developed there because I mean, the work you had been doing at that point was gonna be much different than the work that you--? Speaker 2: Not really. The first clients that I got were clients that I had known in the Defense Department that came in and hired me because of my security clearance and my knowledge of their work. My first clients were actually people that I negotiated contracts, in one instance, with the National Security Agency for a company. And in many instances, I dealt with the Central Intelligence Agency for companies that did work for them in the optical area because I did know and understand optics. And at this time, optical systems and weapons delivery systems with optics were becoming, let's say more fashionable. So I was able to, I didn't start out with quote "a black practice." I started out with a government contracts practice representing companies that happened to be doing work in the high end of the Defense industry. Speaker 1: And were there other black law firms like yours around the town? What, were there two of you at that point? Speaker 2: It were two of us when we started. Speaker 1: And what was his background? Speaker 2: Jim Hudson was a lawyer. He'd gone to BU [Boston University], I believe it was. And he was more interested in urban areas, things like that, cities and stuff like that. And his first client was [HM] Marion Barry at Youth Pride. So we had this odd mixture in the office of he had Pride and I had these companies from Southern California that were doing business on the other side of the spectrum. But there was never any problem with it. There was no one else that I can think of starting at that time, black firms, and did what we did which was not only to start, but we started downtown. We did not go to U Street. We went downtown to 14th and H and started. Story_ID: 77666 Speaker 1: So who were the other sort of predominant lawyers in town, law firms in town? Speaker 2: Oh, you mean black firms? Oh, there was Belford, Maury Lawson. There was King David. There was Daniels, McDaniels, Burton and Brady, Ken Mundy and Art Reynolds. Oh, there were just a whole bunch of guys. The problem was that we could never get sufficient critical mass to make a difference because all these people were in the best tradition of litigators, solo practitioners who were at best practicing with one other person. And they would never conform or adapt their system to any kind of structured operation. Speaker 1: Was there any organization of black lawyers that you were a part of? Speaker 2: Yes, there was the Washington Bar Association, a very much organized, very structured monthly meetings. Speaker 1: And did that, were you active part of that it? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Not at all? Speaker 2: Not at all. It was another euphemism for the Howard University alumni. I didn't go to Howard, and they made it plain that I wasn't particularly welcome. Speaker 1: Even though you had gone to Howard. Speaker 2: I did not attend Howard [University School of] Law and having gone to some other school, I wasn't good enough. In those days, ninety-five percent of the people present were graduates of Howard Law. Story_ID: 77667 Speaker 1: Now, when, so you're doing this work. This is sort of, you're doing work that's sort of under the radar screen for the rest of the black community in many ways? Speaker 2: I don't know what you mean by that. Speaker 1: Well, I'm just saying that, you know, most people when they, like you say, when they hang their shingle, they're gonna do, you know, they may be doing a little contract or a little litigation, I mean, it wasn't government contracts, is what I'm saying? Speaker 2: No, it wasn't government contracts. I guess I was unusual in that. I really like contracts. I mean I really liked government contracts. And I found that many black companies were doing business with the government under government contracts and had no idea what they were doing because they were going to solo practitioners and single practitioners who were trying to advise them on government contracts with no basis. For example, there was a black man here who owned a janitorial company that had 500 people working for him. He was one of the largest janitorial operations in the city, and he'd never had anybody look at a contract. He was just signing contracts. For example, he had to put up bid bonds. He never had a bond. He put up a cash bond every year. I'm talking about he went to GSA [General Services Administration] and handed them $300,000 in cash. Well, the first thing we did was went to GSA and said, okay, if he hands you $300,000 in cash for a year for a bond, I want 12 percent back every month. So we start, start out there, and then we try to find him a bond and try to work with him on things like that. But, no, I enjoyed the contracts, and-- Speaker 1: So you were actually representing him? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So the janitorial company. Speaker 2: Yes, I never represented the government. Speaker 1: You never represented, okay-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --I see. Okay. Speaker 2: No, I represented people that I believed the government owed and I always believed that the government owes my clients. Speaker 1: And, so then were your clients all black? Speaker 2: No, eighty percent of my clients were white, about eighty percent were white. Speaker 1: So did these clients come because of your relationship with, you know, with the [President Richard] Nixon--? Speaker 2: Oh, I don't think so. I think that most of the people that came to me came because of my knowledge of the special sensors area. I mean I did work for Motorola. I did work for Texas Instruments. I did spot work for a lot of people because they needed someone. They might have had five firms here in Washington [D.C.], but I doubt if they had a lawyer in those firms who understood the internal workings of their particular piece of equipment, how it worked, what the problems were and stuff like that. It was a lot of work then on roll stable, on stabilization. And people would design a camera, put it in an airplane, the camera worked fine driving in a truck, but as soon as you put it in a vibration element, the camera wouldn't work. And there would be all sorts of disputes over whether this is the vibration element that you specified or not. Did you adequately specify to me the vibration element? And my client's position was, you didn't. I designed to be in this plane. This plane doesn't vibrate the same way as the, you know, there were those kinds of things, vibration, stabilization. Speaker 1: So now, with you, were your clients set up on a retainer basis or were people doing retainers then? Speaker 2: No, they paid retainers. Speaker 1: They did? Speaker 2: Yeah, sure, they paid retainers. Speaker 1: And- Story_ID: 77668 Speaker 1: Did you, I mean did you know, because this is your first time having your own law firm, you know, a lot of people talk about just knowing how to run the business of the law. And so, I mean run a law practice as a business, and I'm wondering was that, was there a large learning curve for you and your partner or was it something that you just-- Speaker 2: I'm sure there was a large learning curve, but we were very fortunate in that, I think that the firm never thought of law as a practice. Law is a business. It's a business and once we resolved the business issues, you can into the practice issues. But if you don't have anything to cook, you haven't killed anything in the pantry, then there's nothing to talk about. So we've got to deal with the business side first. Then you can become a creative chef. So it was always a business to us, but there was an awful lot of learning, and a lot of people helped us. Frank Reeves helped us who was a well-known black lawyer here in town. And Frank, at that time, ran the Joint Center for Political Studies, and they happened to be in the same building that we were in. And every evening at 4:30, we would catch the elevator upstairs and sit at Frank's feet, and he would explain to us various things about the federal rules. But again, Frank primarily could talk to us about practice, not about the business aspect. I don't, there were a few people that helped us on the business aspect, Bill Brown, who was from Philadelphia and was a well-known lawyer. He was on the first EEOC [Equal Employment Opportunity Council], once explained to us that as black lawyers, we would be audited to death by the IRS [Internal Revenue Service]. And we thought he was kidding. Little did we know he was right, people like that. Sam Pierce talked to us. Back in the early days when he was a general counsel at Treasury, he would go to lunch with me periodically, and he gave me business sense. Hobart Taylor, who was another black lawyer. These people talked to us and they gave us some sense of what you could expect if you were quote halfway successful in the business. But law to me was a business. It may be a practice for somebody else, but to me, it was a business. Speaker 1: So how many years did it take for you to start, you know, developing some, you know, more consistent revenue stream within your practice cause the first years, as you were saying, you were teaching to help (unclear) (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: By the second or third year, but for sure, by the fourth year we had developed, we had some more lawyers and we developed a revenue stream. Story_ID: 77669 Speaker 1: And now--who was--wasn't there another, [Chester] Davenport? Speaker 2: Yes, he joined us in '72' [1972] or '73' [1973]. Speaker 1: And what was the nature of the clients he brought with him? Speaker 2: Chester did banking work. He had worked for Senator [Alan] Cranston, and he did banking work. He was good. Speaker 1: And were you all Republicans? Speaker 2: No, no, no. Speaker 1: Okay, you-- Speaker 2: I'm the only Republican. Speaker 1: Okay, you were (laughter). Speaker 2: Yes, I'm the only Republican. Speaker 1: Okay (laughter). Speaker 2: You don't have to have more than one person sacrifice their life on that stone. Speaker 1: See, now that's, okay, that's an honest way of saying things. Anyway. Speaker 2: I don't think that I could sit here today and tell you or anybody else that joining the Republican Party is something that I would recommend. I'm not sure that I could tell you joining the other party is anything I could recommend, but I know nothing about it. But in the Republican Party, at best, you're dismissed. It's not a user-friendly group. Speaker 1: But you say that now. You wouldn't have said that back then? Speaker 2: I would have said it back then. I would have always said it. There were people in the Republican Party that were just tremendous, and I'd have to say, in spite of what people say, [President Richard] Nixon was, as far as blacks were concerned, he recognized the potential of the black vote and what it meant and of the Hispanic vote. But the trouble was that once you left Nixon or there was a man named Murray Chotiner. Murray Chotiner was the man who allegedly created Richard Nixon. And I got to know him very well. He's dead now. He was from Pittsburgh, but he's obviously dead now. Lyn Nofziger, Mark Bragg, there were a lot of people like that. The problem is that once you got beyond them, and it got down into the bowels, the Republican Party's theory was real simple, "If I pick up a black vote in Memphis [Tennessee], I'll lose two in Utah. We don't want it." And there's a level of cynicism that goes with all that. The Republican Party never recognized [William Thaddeus] Bill Coleman for the man that he is and was. And he was one of the greatest guys, lawyers, that ever lived in this country, period. Sam Pierce, who Ronald Reagan doesn't know his name when he's calling on him. He's the Secretary of Housing. No, there've been some good people in the Republican Party. They just have not been recognized. The Republican Party is a place where, for white folks, every time you meet 'em, you have to reintroduce yourself. Oh, I can't remember you. And that gets old. And what I think happens is too many black people like me drift away. You just, there just comes a point when you just drift away. Story_ID: 77670 Speaker 1: Now, the work that [HM] Art Fletcher was doing, was that helping your firm grow at the time? Speaker 2: No, I didn't do any business with Art. Speaker 1: No, but even the fact that, you know, with his whole work on affirmative action and things of-- Speaker 2: It had no meaning to me. Speaker 1: It had no meaning to you? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Why would it have any meaning to me? Speaker 1: Well, no, I'm just saying it was both not just, oh, cause you didn't get government contracts. I keep thinking--okay, right. You were dealing with people dealing with the government? Speaker 2: Yeah, and most of the people I dealt with were white. Most of the companies we represented were white. Speaker 1: And they had, they didn't, you didn't experience anything like--once you proved yourself. I mean I-- Speaker 2: The only time I ever experienced discrimination was with a judge here in the District [Washington, D.C.], one of the truly great racists that this city ever put forth, a man named Byron Sorelle (ph.). And John Days and I were trying a case that involved, I had LTV. I think it was Ling, Temco Vought or Republic Aviation, and he had some white guy who worked for them. And right in the middle of the trial, Judge Sorelle stopped and said, "Gentlemen, would you approach the bench? And we walked up to the bench, and he said, "How did you two colored boys get white clients? Other than that, I never experienced it. The companies hired you. They expected you to do something. You did it, and that was that. And you maintained a good relationship with them or you didn't. Story_ID: 77671 Speaker 1: But you recruited them. You're saying they already knew you and then sort of things spread word of mouth. That's all. I'm just trying to figure out how-- Speaker 2: I guess, I guess. I mean I knew a lot of people in the intelligence business, and in that whole area. Speaker 1: And [James L.] Hudson, did his practice pick up after [HM] Marion Barry became mayor? Speaker 2: Yeah, he became bond counsel to the city. We, in spite of what certain firms say, we were the first black firm ever in the Red Book. Speaker 1: And was that, so you had bond counseling, you had this strong sort of government, companies dealing with the government. And then you're saying Davenport did-- Speaker 2: He did banking and real estate work, and we started to invest in various real estate deals here in the town, and we were fortunate enough to be somewhat successful. Speaker 1: Okay, and what kinds of deals were you investing in? Speaker 2: Well, in one instance we bought a bunch of houses from the city, rehabbed them, sold them. In another instance we participated as partners with real estate developers in projects around the city, most notably with Mort Zuckerman who owns Boston Properties, "U.S. News World Report", "Atlantic Monthly" and the "Daily News" and various other developers. Speaker 1: Now, when did the firm really sort of take off then? Speaker 2: I'd say we sort of took off in '75' [1975] or '76' [1976]. We, up until then we'd been beetling along. We had, the practice was fairly general. We had, we were represented cities. We represented Detroit [Michigan], New Orleans [Louisiana], Oakland [California] and Kansas City [Missouri], I believe, and we had the other things that went along with a general practice here in town, real estate, zoning, what have you. In 1976 at the, they had a, after the Republican Convention in Kansas City [Missouri], I was working for Mr. Ford. We came back, and we were awarded the job of General Counsel to the Northeast Railroad Corridor Improvement Project. And that was a $2 billion project, to rebuild the rail lines between, Amtrak's rail lines between Washington and Boston. And we had to fight off a lot of firms. And Mr. [William Thaddeus] Coleman was the Secretary of Transportation, and I'll never forget the day he came in the room. We had joined a team and bid the job as a member of the team with Ralph Parsons and De Leuw Cather, Barton-Aschman and a whole slew of companies. And some of the larger firms in town had complained all the way to the Justice Department about the notion that a firm could become a part of a team. That was unheard of and unethical. But when we won the bid, those same firms no longer complained. They went upstairs to everybody that they could to try to get us thrown out because we didn't have the manpower to do the work, and we didn't have the know-how to do the work and etc., etc. And we went over to the Department of Transportation for a meeting and various people came in the meeting. And Mr. Coleman came in the meeting and recognized me and spoke to me, and that was it. Bill Coleman walked in the room, and he shook hands with the president of Parsons, the chairman of the board and all that. And he walked around the table and put his hand on my shoulder and said, "Hello, Willie, how you doing? Glad to see you on the team". And after that we had billings. We had five years of working the Northeast Railroad Corridor. Speaker 1: Now, did you have to build up the firm really to do that work or was it actually a (unclear)-- Speaker 2: We, it was a natural growth. It wasn't an unnatural growth. It was a natural growth. I mean we had the basis that we needed to do the work, in the people that we had. At the time, we had five or six people. And then we added another, whatever the number was, that made us able to do the work. And we did the work. We did all the work on the Northeast Corridor, and I think to the credit of the firm, I don't remember them ever being, I don't remember any litigation surrounding the Northeast Railroad Corridor project. Story_ID: 77672 Speaker 1: So [HM] Bill Coleman, had he had, where had he been, worked with you before, been able to observe you before? Speaker 2: In the early '70s [1970s] I was appointed to a number of boards by Mr. [Richard]Nixon. And one of those boards was the Redevelopment Land Agency Board that controlled all the land in the District of Columbia at the time downtown and was charged with redeveloping that land. And we had a mighty dispute or fight with some developer. I don't remember who it was, and we interviewed a number of lawyers. And we needed somebody with some weight, and in the end, we hired Bill Coleman who was then a member of Paxson Kulich and Dilworth, a Philadelphia firm, and he, I was on the board and so I got to work with Mr. Coleman for the couple of years it took to straighten this mess out. And I came to know him. Speaker 1: And how would you describe him as a person? Speaker 2: A lawyer. Speaker 1: A lawyer? (chuckle) Speaker 2: He's one of those rare individuals in my world who only wants to be a lawyer. I never wanted or cared about being a lawyer in the sense that Bill Coleman does. And I truly admire his love for the law. He loves it, and he's good at it. We once had a meeting with Bill Coleman and I don't remember what the occasion was, but there was a blizzard in Washington [D.C.]. And we were to meet in the Madison Hotel. And only three people showed up, myself, Bill Coleman and Chester Davenport. And when Coleman got there we were amazed because I had a four-wheel drive truck, and I think I picked Chester up somewhere, but Coleman came in right on time. And the snow was like three feet deep, and he lived over in McLean, and he told us that he had gone out on the road and thumbed a ride and to have seen William T. Coleman thumb a ride, I would have given anything. But he loved the law. He loved being a lawyer, and he was a tremendous lawyer, a tremendous lawyer. I mean I can only say that I spent a day once with Judge Higginbottom, Leon, who is another man who loved the law, loved it. I mean I admire these guys because they were guys who loved what they were doing. I mean it's sort of like Magic Johnson said he would play basketball whether he was paid or not. Bill Coleman would practice law, I'm sure. He was, it was just great to talk to him. Speaker 1: And are there things that you particularly learned from him in your association with him or even-- Speaker 2: I learned from Coleman the need to, if you're gonna be a lawyer, to be a lawyer, to put the time in, to focus and to be a lawyer. And when I practiced law, I tried to do that. But I learned that from him, very much so. Speaker 1: He was really the highest ranking black Republican, right, of that time and era? Speaker 2: I would say he was, yes. Speaker 1: And do you think the Republican Party treated him well? Speaker 2: Oh, I never think they treated a guy like Coleman well. No, whatever job he had, he should have been something else bigger. He's a great guy. He's a brilliant man. His energy is just incredible. Just an incredible human being. He's one of a kind. Story_ID: 77673 Speaker 1: Now, as your firm, so your firm really hits its stride in like 1976, '77' [1977], right? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Now, what year was the Kinsey case? Speaker 2: Oh, we brought Kinsey when we first started. I would say we filed Kinsey around 1970, '71' [1971], Kinsey v. Legg, Mason [& Co.]. Speaker 1: And how did that case come to you? What were the circumstances? Speaker 2: Strangely enough, [Edward] Ed Kinsey I met at the, I met Ed Kinsey through a man who teaches at Howard, named Spencer Boyer. They were roommates together. And Kinsey was looking for a job, and people at the Navy had heard about how Stratton had treated me when I was hired at the Navy, but how well I had worked and how hard I had worked. And a fellow named Dale Stearns (ph.) approached me and asked me--he was a personnel person, and he later went to law school with me, if I knew any other blacks. And Kinsey was looking for a job, and I recommended Kinsey to the Navy Department, and Kinsey was hired as a physicist. And he had some incredible expertise in tracking Russian submarines. And Kinsey became bored with the [U.S.] Navy because Kinsey doesn't fly. And to work in submarines, he had to go to Iceland and to Panama, not Panama, Puerto Rico and other places. And he decided he wanted to do something else. He wanted to become a stockbroker. And he was turned down at these several companies. And he asked me to sue Legg Mason, and we sued Legg Mason in the suit of Kinsey v. Legg Mason, et al. And it was a suit that was a harbinger of integrating the New York and American Stock Exchanges. Speaker 1: So how did you go about that suit? Just what was the process that you took because this is the first time that the stock exchange had ever been--? Speaker 2: It was the first time I'd ever been in a courthouse, a federal courthouse too. I'd never been in a federal court in my life. I drew up the complaint, we drew up the complaint and we filed it. We filed it against New York and American Stock Exchange and against Legg Mason. We knew nothing about how the Stock Exchange worked. That was the most fascinating thing. When people talk about blacks in New York, in 1970 there were no blacks that could explain to us how the Stock Market worked in real world terms. There was a woman who's dead now named Carolyn Lewis who was from Wilmington, North Carolina, who took, Carolyn Boone Lewis, she took the time to meet with us--and she worked at the SEC [U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission], and take us through how the Stock Exchange Worked. She was the only person that we could find who could really explain it other than in some theoretical cookbook, that didn't work, fashion. And on the basis of what Carolyn Lewis told us, we put together a complaint, and we filed it. And we bumped around. We were first with Judge Gazelle, and he was thrown off the case because he told the defendants in the first status conference that he didn't see how they could justify not finding a black and what have you. And the case was then sent to Judge Gash. We tried the case before Judge Gash. He wrote a 27-page opinion without citations that said that if blacks had, first of all blacks don't have any money, and if they had money, they would want white people to invest their money because they wouldn't trust black people to do it. And that was essentially his opinion. We took the opinion up, and we won on every count at the U. S. Court of Appeals. And the case came back, and the lawyer who represented Legg Mason tried to convince the judge to retry the case. And to his credit, Judge Gash said, no, the Court of Appeals had been very clear. And he signed off on it, and that was the end of Kinsey v. Legg Mason. We got a good fee out of it. Kinsey never made a nickel because in the year that Ed Kinsey would have started as a stockbroker, the average stockbroker at Legg Mason made $13,000. Kinsey had gone to work for Baish (ph.) and made $28,000 his first year. And strange enough, that was part of the defense. Legg Mason said we didn't hire Kinsey because he was too bright, and he wouldn't have stayed here. And to some extent, they were right since he left after a year or so at Baish, went to Harvard and got an MBA. He's building, he's a contractor building developer, a real estate developing in West Palm Beach [Florida]. Story_ID: 77674 Speaker 1: But back to, what did you learn about how the stock exchange worked? What did you learn that was critical to making a successful case? Speaker 2: Well, at the time, we didn't understand the concept of registered representative, a stockbroker. And we thought that it was some, that it required some intellect, some brains or something. And we found out as we went through the discovery, that it didn't; that as Judge Gash put it in the trial, anybody could be trained to be a stockbroker in six week, if not six weeks, six months for sure. And that wasn't what we were led to believe. We were led to believe that stockbrokers were well trained, knew something, and they didn't. They were salesmen. They were, in those days, they were hucksters. That's all they were. Legg Mason was a white company coming out of Norfolk [Virginia] that specialized in using retired military people. So they particularly had no use for blacks because they thought that their market was, you know, in the mid-Atlantic states, it was all whites, and they went after retired military. But there weren't any black people that understood. There was Wiley Wisonnott (ph.) who was a broker, and then Tal Roberts later. But there were no black brokers around. There just weren't any. Speaker 1: Now out of that, did you--out of that case, so he didn't really get any money because he already had a job making more. Speaker 2: No, but it opened up the whole process of hiring. It opened up the fact that the test that was given was totally discriminatory. It had nothing to do with the need, with whatever you needed to be a registered representative. The test was just biased from Day One. It was, it ended up being a testing case as well as an employment and promotion case. And we knocked the test out and they had to start using tests that had some bearing on what was going on, what you were gonna use, what you were gonna do in the performance of the job. And that opened the door for more blacks, women and minorities to pass and to get jobs. It was so bad that in the trial there was an Italian fellow, Botchagalupo (ph.) who worked for Legg Mason. And at some point, he was asked whether there were any other Italians. And he said, no, and there won't be, and they won't even have me after tomorrow. And we said, why? He said because they bought my company, but my contract was six months and I'm going tomorrow. There were no blacks. These companies didn't even look at them. They didn't consider them. It was as Judge Gash said, you don't have any money, and if you had money, you'd trust the white person to invest it. Speaker 1: Now, out of that, since you had never brought a case in federal court before, did you, I mean it's sort of unbelievable, but I mean that you had success the first time out. It-- Speaker 2: I had a good client. Story_ID: 77675 Speaker 1: I had a great client. Speaker 2: You had a good client, but you had to be also a very good lawyer too because a lot of things are based on procedure and all those things, and doing homework. But what I'm asking is, were there things that you learned about the federal system that either, you know, that, well, what things did you learn? I'm-- Speaker 1: The federal system is as racist as any other system of the government. The preparation that I did to try to address your question was I took the NEDA [National Economic Development Association] course in 1971 before the trial. I went to NEDA and took the course in Boulder, Colorado and that prepared me for the course. The federal system was as racist as anything that you could have imagined in the middle district of Mississippi. Judge Gash was, who I came to respect and I can't say I admired him, but he made it plain what colored people were expected to do in his court. And he opened the trial, I'll never forget, by, we put, I don't know who it was, our first witness on the witness stand. And the defense counsel got up and said, your Honor, it's always been a custom in this courtroom that the plaintiff be the first one that testifies. And I think you ought to make Mr. Leftwich and the plaintiff in this case adhere to that testimony. Well, the mistake that this moron had made was not assuming that we were prepared. Every witness for my trial is always prepared a month before the trial. So we argued and we performed and we shuffled our feet, and we did all this. And then we put [Edward] Kinsey on the witness stand, and the defense counsel thought that he was gonna lay a glove on Kinsey because he figured we were gonna prepare Kinsey after we put this other witness on. Kinsey took the witness stand and started talking, and the man couldn't say anything. Kinsey was brilliant, and he was well prepared because all of our witnesses--the rule in the firm was everybody was prepared and canned one month before the trial. The night before he was to testify was only the refresh him. And that was the beginning of the downfall of the defense. But it was race. It was just race. There was, at one point defense counsel got up and commented on a woman named Heberling (ph.) who was one of our key witnesses because she had worked for the testing company and knew what they did discriminatory. And lived in Ann Arbor, Michigan, and she came down to testify. And defense counsel got up and started to rant before Judge Gash about this woman being a liberal Jew. And this had to do with the case, I don't know. And when I objected, Gash made it plain to me that I'd better sit down and shut up or he was gonna charge me some money. So when they finished with all that, I asked if I could redirect the woman on a couple of questions, and Judge Gash said if it's gonna clear up ethnicity. I said, it may. And I asked the woman was she Jewish. She said, no. And I said, what is your ethnic background. And she said Northern German. And that just, I mean, but Gash had let this man rant and rave. But I mean the federal system was discriminatory. The courts were discriminatory. They weren't used to black lawyers coming in federal court and standing up and talking to them like you had some sense, like you were educated. G.W. [George Washington University Law School] was no mountain to climb. I graduated with honors in three years at night and got an LLM with honors. So what am I to be upset about having to face or go up against a white boy. No, no. The federal system was not an open and above system. It was not. Speaker 2: Now, when you were finally, you know, the case was won on appeal or reversed? Speaker 1: It was reversed on appeal. Drew Days argued it on appeal. Speaker 2: Now, on appeal then, were you, did you get a lot of notoriety because of that case? And were you then, did other work come because of the case? Speaker 1: I can't tell you that we got a lot of notoriety. I don't remember. I don't remember anything being written about it. I know it was used because people would call us citing it because we got an award of attorney's fees which people considered to be something big in those days. I think-- Speaker 2: How much was that? Speaker 1: I think we got $120,000 or $125,000, something like that. Speaker 2: That was a lot of money back then. Story_ID: 77676 Speaker 1: Now, when was the Love case brought? Speaker 2: Oh, Love started about '70' [1970], but it went on forever. It was, it was, it went on forever, Love v. the Pullman Company. Speaker 1: So these were all very early cases. These were cases that came in-- Speaker 2: Yes, early in the practice, yes. Speaker 1: Early in practice. Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Love was, to see the Pullman Company and what it did to black people was incredible. Every black person that's educated should at some point read a little bit about George Pullman and the Pullman Company. He is epitome of America. It was all about making money. A porter was a piece of equipment and could not leave his train wherever it went, his car. There's a case in 1878 or 1880 in Kansas where a car was cut off and left on a siding in a blizzard and the porters leg froze and they were cut off. And he sued, and Pullman didn't wanna pay. And the Kansas judge made him pay the man some amount of money because of Pullman's rule, that a porter was a piece of equipment and went wherever his car went, and he would have been fired if he had left his car. Speaker 1: Now, what about the Love case? What was the whole, the premise behind that? Speaker 2: First of all, Earl Love was just a figurehead. The case was brought by a man named B. J. Slater. B. J. Slater recognized that he was too old to maintain the case so he made Earl Love the named plaintiff. The case was about Earl Love, who in 1964, when the Civil Rights Act had been passed went to the Colorado Human Relations Commission and said, I think that there, essentially this is what he said, "There's been a law passed in Washington that says, federal law that says, I can't be discriminated against on the railroad anymore, working as a porter, and I want you to do something about it." The Colorado Human Relations Commission laughed him out of the room. They laughed him out of the room and told him that they knew nothing about the law and if so, with all racial epithets. He was a joke. And he then got a lawyer. And the woman tried to file suit, and she filed suit in the U.S. District Court before Judge [Alfred Albert] Arraj who was always proud that he was the only Arab chief judge in America. He was the greatest racist I ever met. And he was appointed to the court by [President Dwight] Eisenhower in the '50's [1950s]. And he was from Trinidad, Colorado. And he was a throw back. Judge Arraj looked at the case and said to Mr. Love and his counsel, you didn't meet the strictures of the law. You didn't file and go through the administrative procedures. The woman said, we couldn't go through the administrative procedures because we were tossed out by the Colorado Human Relations Commission. They wouldn't hear it. So Judge Arraj said, I have no choice but to dismiss you, and he dismissed the case. The case was appealed to the Tenth Circuit. The Tenth Circuit agreed with Judge Arraj. You have to go through these hoops. The fact that the Colorado Human Relations Commission refused to let Earl Love file or submit a letter made no difference. At that point, it went to the United States Supreme Court. The United States Supreme Court held that you can't use the failure of the administrative agency to take the case against the plaintiff, and you have to take the case. So the case was sent back to Arraj. The interesting thing was that when the case went to the Supreme Court, Earl Love sat in the front row and recognized [Byron] Whizzer White, Justice White as a man. Story_ID: 77677 Speaker 1: You were talking about [Earl] Love and so can we go back into the courtroom-- Speaker 2: Certainly, certainly. Speaker 1: --with, what's his name? Speaker 2: Judge Arraj. Speaker 1: Judge Arraj. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): How do you spell it? Speaker 1: A-R-R-A-J. Speaker 2: So you were just talking about how he was, you know, you were talking about the cross examination. Speaker 1: Judge [Alfred Albert] Arraj was under the impression that we had a tail and that this whole thing was a joke. And when the trial started, the porters came in the court. And they were all dignified old men who had ridden the trains from all over the America. And they sat in his courtroom and never said a word. They came in every color of the rainbow, and they were just incredibly dignified as they sat there. And when they told their stories, there was just no way to shake them because they were telling the truth about what happened to them. And it was clear that they did the job that the white people did, the white conductor did. They just never received the pay. I started to object to something, and Billy Lewis told me that black people didn't object in Judge Arraj's courtroom. And I told him to call my partner to come and get me out of jail because I was gonna keep objecting. It turns out Arraj didn't know how to treat black people, but he liked a fight. And we bested the Pullman Company to the point that they never put on a defense. The president of the Pullman Company, I think his name was Rock, took the witness stand. He had an eighth grade education and he had become the president of the Pullman Company of America with an eighth grade education. I had a porter who had graduated from Fort Valley State, I think it was in Mississippi, and had a Master's degree from a school in Chicago [Illinois], and he was a porter. And the insanity of the whole situation, I think, was clear to Judge Arraj when it was juxtaposed like that. And we went on through the trial, and the case went to, we won and the case went to the Tenth Circuit. And we won there. Judge Arraj wrote a seventeen-page opinion excoriating me for the way I had put together the class because he wanted the case to go forward with Earl Love as a single plaintiff. And I intervened with a class of two or 3,000 or 2,200 porter nationwide. And he went on and on in his seventeen-page opinion, and to show you how dishonest as a person or I guess as a judge he was, at the end of the opinion, he gave me everything I asked for. And he gave the men everything I'd asked for, but he spent sixteen and a half pages excoriating me. Speaker 2: And what was the length, from the time--you said that case went on and on. Speaker 1: Oh, God, it went up, it must have taken six, seven years. I think it finally wrapped up in '79' [1979]. It started around '69' [1969] or '70' [1970] and wrapped up in '79' [1979]. Speaker 2: Did you handle that as a pro bono case? I mean not a pro bono, but on a delayed basis? Speaker 1: (Laughter) Pro bono would be more like it, yeah. We were paid at the end by the fee award. We were paid by the fee award which Judge Arraj gave us what we asked for based upon our time sheets, although he didn't think that it was, we were worth that. Story_ID: 77678 Speaker 1: Now, when you started the case, was A. Philip Randolph still alive or was he not? Speaker 2: I think Mr. Randolph was dead. The lead person in the union then was [HM] Ron Dellums' uncle, Mr. C. L. Dellums out of Oakland, California. He was the lead person in the union. Speaker 1: Did he participate? Was he in Washington at that point? Speaker 2: Mr. Dellums? Speaker 1: Yeah, was Mr. Dellums in, cause he was-- Speaker 2: No, he lived in Oakland, California. Speaker 1: Right, but he also came here when, oh, Ron got elected? No, Ron got elected-- Speaker 2: No, Mr. Dellums lived in California. He was Ron's uncle. He lived in Oakland and the union and Mr. Dellums opposed us on every step of the way. They opposed everything we did with the case. Speaker 1: Because he was part of the union, AFL? Speaker 2: Because the union was convinced that this was an upstart thing that would hurt them. So they opposed us, and they never cooperated with us. And we finally were able to work out a deal with them because we threatened to bring and action against them for failure, failure duty of fair representation. And when we agreed to drop that, they agreed to stay out of the way. Speaker 1: Ron Dellums was elected I think in 1970-- Speaker 2: He was a congressman here, but Mr. Dellums lived in Oakland. Speaker 1: Yeah, but he said his uncle came here the same year he came here, but I mean he may have gone back. You know, he was with a local office of the AFL-CIO or had a position. So he came here-- Speaker 2: Oh, I don't know. Speaker 1: --I'm not saying for the whole time. Speaker 2: Mr. Dellums, all of these men were old, and Mr. Dellums was one of the older men, very formal, very dignified man. Speaker 1: Now, what do you think that A. Philip Randolph would have thought of this suit? Speaker 2: I have no way of speculating. These men, this suit, the outcome of this litigation, there was a good feeling. There was a good feeling because we got money put into the checks of these men and into their wives checks. And the money might have been by our standards de minimis, fifty or $100.00 a month. But based upon what they were getting, this was a significant amount of money. They could take it to the Safeway or the Giant Food Store. So there was a good feeling with this case, a very good feeling. We had a difficult time getting the men to even opt in to pick up the money, even when the money--the only way we got men to get the money was when another man in your town started to get the money, and he could show them that he had, because they all thought this was some sort of trick because they had been so conditioned by the Pullman Company never to go against them. But they were wonderful old men, wonderful, wonderful. Speaker 1: Because the Pullman porters now are about a dying breed. Speaker 2: There couldn't be more than ten or fifteen left in the country now. Speaker 1: We interviewed one, but he--it was pretty--he was pretty old. Story_ID: 77679 Speaker 1: Now, what happened with--oh, I wanna ask you about some of the work you did for Ernest Morial, the-- Speaker 2: The mayor, yeah, Dutch. Speaker 1: The mayor, yes. Speaker 2: We did just general work for them. We had one lawyer that was assigned to represent cities. Dutch Morial was a very interesting man because of his brightness. He was quick. He was incredibly quick. And I remember the day he retained us. We met him at the old Wardman Park Hotel. And we were steeped in all the statistics of New Orleans [Louisiana]. And he sat down, and he started to asking us how you joined a case in the federal court and what you did when you filed a rule for joinder and what the outcome was. And we were completely steeped, prepared on how much water was in New Orleans, the length of the sewer pipes, and all he talked about was the joinder of this case and whether it should be joined. And I don't know what the case was, and we talked about that for about a half an hour. And he got up from the table, and he said, okay, you're hired. And we're standing there saying, yes, sir. He said, you're hired. You're my lawyers. He said, I'm satisfied. If you can think your way through that, you can handle the other stuff. But he was incredibly quick. He was one of the quickest people I ever met. He was a bright man. He was good person, a bright man, and we did whatever he did needed done in Washington [D.C.]. Speaker 1: So you were his Washington counsel? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: I see, okay. And that was during what years? Speaker 2: Whenever Mayor Morial was the mayor of-[1978-1986] Speaker 1: Well, he was there for a while. Speaker 2: We did him, and we did Detroit [Michigan] as long as Coleman Young was the mayor and Kansas City [Missouri] and Oakland [California]. Story_ID: 77680 Speaker 1: Now the firm it says, went from 1970 to 1983. And I was wondering what happened in 1983 because there's a two-year period I couldn't account for, from 1983 to '85' [1985]? Speaker 2: We split up. We went our separate ways. No particular animosity. We'd just grown differently, and it was time to move on. And, frankly, I was the one who pulled out, and I left. Speaker 1: And why did you do that? Are you a maverick of your-- Speaker 2: At that time, I didn't think I was, but later things have kind of shown me that maybe I am or I was, I don't know. But it was time to move on. I was tired of the law and didn't realize probably that I was tired of the law. Speaker 1: Well, what about this two-year period that I couldn't, 1983 to '85' [1985]? What were you doing during that time? Speaker 2: I pretty much did nothing. I was retired. I did nothing. And I recharged my batteries and I think that's also important for young people to do periodically. I was a person who went to work at 6:00 in the morning and came home at 10:00 o'clock at night. And I'd done that for twelve or thirteen years or something, and I was tired. I didn't know it. So for two years I took my son to nursery school or whatever and piddle paddled around the house and bought and sold real estate and made a few investments. Then I went back to practice. Speaker 1: Were your partners upset with you? Speaker 2: I don't think so. I think they'd both done, not they both, but I think that all of the people that were partners there have done well in their own right, probably much better than me since we split up. But I don't think so. Speaker 1: So what did each person do at that time? I mean where did [Chester C.] Davenport go and-- Speaker 2: I don't really know. I've never pursued or talked to any of them. Speaker 1: [James L.]Hudson either? Speaker 2: I see him at dinners and things, but I've never felt compelled or interested enough to ask him what he was doing. Nobody's lost any weight and they're all driving big cars so I assume they're doing okay. It's not-- Story_ID: 77681 Speaker 1: So when you decide to come back, did you come back on your own and then Espy joined you, I mean Douglas joined you or--? Speaker 2: I came back on my own. I was approached to do some work for somebody, and I couldn't. I was constantly being approached to do work, and I couldn't do the work, the size of the work as a solo. And I went back and joined Lloyd Moore and Mike Hicks. And we had a firm, and I think it was Leftwich, Douglas and Moore or Leftwich, Moore and Douglas, and then Lloyd left the firm, left the practice in the early '90's [1990s] and it became Leftwich and Douglas. But I was approached by somebody with some work that was lucrative, and I could not do it alone, and I could not do it without a structure. Speaker 1: And can you tell me more about Douglas and Moore? I mean who they were? Speaker 2: Douglas is a-- Speaker 1: First names too. Speaker 2: Fred Douglas is a former U.S. Attorney and is a criminal defense lawyer. I think he went to Fordham [University] and NYU [New York University]. And Lloyd is a, was a utility lawyer. He was one of the best utility lawyers I ever knew. And he ran into some problems, and he's out of the practice. Speaker 1: And when you, what type, what was the client that you got that you couldn't, you know, handle on your own? Speaker 2: It was representing, there were two clients. One was representing deciduous fruit industry of South Africa and the other one was handling the asbestos litigation for the D.C. school system. Speaker 1: Okay, how did the South Africa case come? Speaker 2: I really don't remember. I don't have any idea, but these were the so-called progressives, if you can use that term in South Africa during Apartheid. And they asked, they retained us to help them, if you will. They wanted to sell fruit in America, and America had closed its markets to the fruit industry as well as everything else from South Africa. But it was the deciduous fruit industry. Story_ID: 77682 Speaker 1: Did you do any--at your firm ever or--lobbyists don't necessarily need to be registered? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: They do (unclear). So did you ever do lobbying? Speaker 2: Me personally? Speaker 1: I mean your firm. Speaker 2: The firm did lobbying and still does from what I understand. I don't. We had the airport, and when I came back, I got as a client, the airport in Houston [Texas], as a client. We had to register for that. But I never registered as a lobbyist. Somebody else did. Speaker 1: And so how did this experience, you know, differ from the others? I mean you were rested sort of. You had, had you changed in any way? Speaker 2: I found out that I disliked, that confirmed for me when I came back after two years, that I did not want to be a lawyer, that it was just shear misery from '85' [1985] until I finally quit ten years later, eleven years later. I did not wanna be a lawyer. Law is, in spite of what people say, I did not find it to be intellectually challenging. You can do the law. It can be done. Once we cut out the gamesmanship, it's not that hard, and I didn't find it to be something that I wanted to do the rest of my life. Speaker 1: Now, you came in, at this point, Reagan is in office, right, President Reagan? Speaker 2: I think Mr. [George H.W.] Bush was, yes, Reagan was the president. You're right. [Ronald] Reagan was the president. Speaker 1: Were you getting, were you still active in the Republican Party? Speaker 2: I was then, yeah. I knew Lyn Hofziger well, great guy. Speaker 1: And had you, during those two years, had you kept, you know, been active or--? Speaker 2: I'm sure I was. I don't remember specifically, but I'm sure I was because I remember when Reagan first came to Washington [D.C.], I was at the first reception that was ever held for him when he was running for president. Speaker 1: So you came across, I mean people, the people who were active in the administration, [HM] Jewel Lafontant was active. Speaker 2: I knew her. Speaker 1: And who else was active? Speaker 2: Sam Pierce. I'm not sure who else. I don't-- Speaker 1: Did you believe in Reagan's philosophy, the, you know, I mean his, sorry. I'm sorry, stop that, turn that off. I don't know why I'm laughing. Speaker 2: The look on my face. Speaker 1: Okay, (laughter), no, I was thinking. Okay, but did you believe in his, you know, his, I mean Reagan was much loved by lots of people, the Reagan years, Reaganomics, Star Wars. Speaker 2: I don't much believe in any president or any government. I'm a skeptic. Story_ID: 77683 Speaker 1: Did blacks benefit? Did black Republicans benefit under Reagan (unclear)? Speaker 2: I'm sure that black Republicans-- Speaker 1: Did you? Speaker 2: I have to say that I must have done something right because at some point while Reagan was president, the law firm got up to 85 people. I'm not sure whether it was the goodness of Reagan or just what, but we had eighty-five people. I don't know what they were doing. We issued eighty-five checks every month, so, but I don't get into worship of presidents and which one's a nice guy and what have you. I don't, I believe that we have an obligation to be skeptical about our government. Speaker 1: But when you were up to eighty-fvie, that's a huge black firm. Speaker 2: Unbelievable. Speaker 1: Was there, because I don't know of another black firm that's-- Speaker 2: It didn't last but about a year. Speaker 1: Okay, and what size is the firm now? Speaker 2: My guess is they're probably fifteen, twenty lawyers. That's what they were when I left, eighty-five people is a monster. I mean it's just, the problem is quality control, quality control as far as the work is concerned. When you're a small firm, you've got to be able to produce it quicker, cheaper and a higher quality. And when you get to eighty-five people, quality control becomes a problem. Story_ID: 77684 Speaker 1: Now, what were some of the cases? I know you handled, well, that was different, but you handled the Espy case? Speaker 2: Espy? Speaker 1: Didn't you handle, weren't you asked to put together a mock (unclear)--? Speaker 2: Oh, that was that nonsense with the-- Speaker 1: --of Mike Espy? Speaker 2: Yeah, that was that nonsense that they tried to get me involved in the Espy dispute. Speaker 1: Right. So you didn't get involved? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Oh, I see. Speaker 2: No, I refused to get involved. Speaker 1: Okay, well, that's good. Speaker 2: Mike Espy was good people and the stuff that they were, the government was throwing at him was ridiculous. Speaker 1: That's good. What do you think, what were some of the important cases that happened or clients that you had during this, you know, 11-year period? Speaker 2: I think we did the work for the South Africans. We did a lot of work in utility areas. When I left the firm, we ended up, we had, we were representing the convention center construction. I mean by then it had become, I'm old, and it was routine. It was just routine stuff. There was nothing for me as interesting as Kinsey [v. Legg Mason & Co.] or Love [v. Pullman Company], simply because the young lawyers took 'em. If we had something that interesting, they wanted to do it, and I was in the second chair. Story_ID: 77685 Speaker 1: Now with--when did you have your first health scare? Speaker 2: 1995, January. Speaker 1: Okay, and so you left the firm a year after your first health scare then? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And can you talk about that? Speaker 2: About the health scare? Certainly. I guess the most important thing to say is that, listen to your body and take care of yourself. I went to Johns Hopkins in November of '94' [1994] and had a colonoscopy and they removed two polyps that were benign, so they said. In the spring, the following spring--that was '93' [1993]. In the spring of '94' [1994], I went to the Mayo Clinic to check what happened at Johns Hopkins because I was representing the Houston Airport Authority, and they had a dinner, and I got sick at the dinner. And I wasn't satisfied with the answer when I called the people at Hopkins. So I took all of my charts and went out to Mayo. And I was there for Easter of '94' [1994], and they said I was fine. January 1995, I didn't feel good. I'm a person who works out every day. I don't eat meat. I don't drink. I try to take care of myself. Working out now consists sometimes of just walking for one hour. But the Washington Hospital Center told me there was nothing wrong with me, and I refused to leave the hospital. It was a lot of shouting back and forth, and they said they would have me arrested, and I said, fine, but I wouldn't leave the hospital. A doctor said he would remove my appendix. It would be a three-hour operation. I was on the table eight-plus hours. I had colon cancer, and it had already spread, and I spent a year on chemotherapy. And I tried to go back to the practice, but I couldn't focus. I just couldn't focus. And so I had to give it up. Speaker 1: Can you tell me, during this whole year where you're getting chemo, what are some of the thought, you know, because a lot of times-- Speaker 2: Why me? Why me? I was truly blessed in that the firm allowed me to come back to work, and I tried to work even though I couldn't focus. At first I could work a half an hour and then I built it over a period of time. But I found that I could spend the time, ten, twelve hours there physically, but I could not retain or regain the focus because I constantly was trying to figure out what I had done that would cause me to "catch cancer." And one of the hardest things I had to do during that period was learn to say that I have cancer. The first morning I went back to the hospital to fill out forms, and they asked me what my disease was and stuff like that, and finally a guy, Larry, took me aside and said, Mr. Leftwich, you have cancer. And you've got to be able to say it and you've got to face up to it. And once I came to grips with that I've been all right. I can say it. And I'll go anywhere to help anybody who has cancer, and sometimes help, the biggest help you can give them is talking to them and letting them know that it can be whipped and that they've got to give it a try. Speaker 1: And why do you think you were successful in whipping it? Speaker 2: I think I was successful because of God, and I think I was successful more than anything because of that, and then because my family stood behind me, and just being the stubborn bastard that I am, I refused to quit. Every day, I would try to walk a little further. I walked every day, no matter what, every day, I walked. And when I had the chemo, the first day I would come out of chemo, if I could only walk across the bedroom, the second day I'd walk around the bedroom. And by the third day, I'd be up and down the steps, but I pushed it. And I had good doctors, I think, but more than anything, I think in cancer it's because God blessed you. He picked you out and decided you were gonna stay and somebody else was going home that week. Speaker 1: Did you do a lot of sort of internal soul searching during that time? Speaker 2: You do an enormous amount of internal soul searching, and one of the things that dawns on you is that being a lawyer, you haven't done very much to help anybody, in spite of what you might thing, in spite of having been successful in Kinsey [v. Legg Mason & Co.] and Love [v. Pullman Company] and helping people who are retired and helping young people get into the market or Wall Street. As a lawyer, you really haven't done very much to help people. And it starts to come home, that if you had the check on the tote score at the top of the escalator, you'd find out, maybe, that you'd made a lot of money, worked a lot of hours, abused a lot of people, but you didn't help a lot of people. Story_ID: 77686 Speaker 1: So where did, did the pottery come out of the second scare, your interests? I mean what--? Speaker 2: No, the second scare happened after I'd taken up pottery. The second scare, to explain it, was when I was having my annual checkup for, semi-annual checkup for colon cancer follow up, they discovered that I had lung cancer, and that was December the 19, 1999, and they decided right then, that day, that they had to operate the next day because it was that bad on the MRI or some test. They operated on January 1 of the new millennium or the first Monday of the new millennium and found out that the growths were benign and they were shrinking and had they left them alone, they would be gone. I don't know why but after that, it became very difficult for me to, frankly, to focus or to even fool around with deals, you know, buying and selling real estate or investing in companies. I really liked to try to help people that are sick, particularly people that have cancer. I'm not a member of structured organization. I just go wherever and try to talk to people. And I think that in many instances people talking to me helped me tremendously. They helped me, so many people have been through cancer, so many people. And to be able to just sit down and talk to somebody, you know, it may help them. Speaker 1: When do you think it clicked for you though, that there was, cause there's a point where you could be self defeatist, sort of self defeatist and the, you know, disease can take control? Was there a point where you sort of took control of the disease is what I'm asking? Speaker 2: There was probably a point, first of all, I never had cancer, as my sister said, and I never understood--my sister is a doctor. I never understood that until the second time because the first time, when they operated on me, the doctors were convinced there was nothing wrong with me. So I didn't know until the next day that I had cancer, and "it had been removed". The second time, when they told me I had lung cancer, it was totally different. The impact was incredible. I lost four pounds in one day. I couldn't eat. I simply putting chocolate in my mouth. I was trying to get my will, my affairs in order and things like that. So the first time, I didn't know that I had cancer so I never had the defeatist point. I always, it was taken out. I could beat it. The only, when I realized, I guess, how seriously sick I'd been was, when I went to get a second opinion from a doctor named DeWitty (ph.) who explained to me, he said, sit down and I'll tell you everything we know about cancer. And he didn't say anything for a couple of minutes. And I said, excuse me. He said, oh, no, excuse you. I'm telling you everything we know. We don't know anything about cancer. And I said, what? He said, cancer is like a dandelion root and there was one loose in your stomach somewhere, and we think we got it out. He said, now, we're gonna put weed killer on it and hope to kill the root. Now, if we don't kill the root and we didn't get it all out, then come the middle of the summer, your yard is gonna be full of dandelions and you'll be dead. And that was the clearest explanation I ever got of cancer. I've talked to some brilliant oncologist, but I haven't found them to be communications specialists, but that's where I decided at that point, listening to Dr. DeWitty, I think his name was DeWitty, over at Providence Hospital, that I could beat this thing. And I'm gonna do what they tell me to do, and I'm gonna keep on doing it. Story_ID: 77687 Speaker 1: So how did you find pottery? What, where did that fit in the whole mix? Speaker 2: When I retired, I had no idea of what I was going to do. I went to see my financial advisor, and I said, do I have enough money to live at "x" level if I live for another hundred years. And he said, yes, you do. You have your investments. Well, if the economy goes in the tank, not knowing that it would go into the tank to the tune of this genius we now have running the country, to that level, but be that what it may, he said I could quit. So I sat down and made a list of things that I thought I could do. And one of them was write a book and a few other things, but I also had talked to an old man named Mr. Miller who said that one of the things that you must know how to do is to do something with your hands. And he said, that can always keep you occupied. He said, not look at television, but have something that you can do with your hands, whether it's make a chair or play an instrument or something. I called a carpenter, a guy who owns a woodshop that we know and asked him about learning to turn wood. And he very gruffly said, a cheap SOB like you would go crazy the first time you planed an expensive piece of wood. Take up pottery because if you screw up the clay, you can re-wedge it and use it again. I had no idea what he was talking about. And I went over to a studio and signed up for a course where they had me re-wedging clay for about three weeks, and from there, I just took lessons and tried to learn. And pottery has been very good for me. Speaker 1: Did you know pottery was gonna be good for you the day you walked into that class? I mean after the first-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: So what made you stay with it? Speaker 2: I had to stay with something. I'd changed before. I mean I was an engineer, I was a soldier, I was a patent lawyer, I was a lawyer, and, you know, I mean change doesn't frighten me. I'm not afraid. I mean you gotta keep changing. You gotta keep moving, and here was something that was completely new. Now, once I got into pottery, I found out that it is a multi-faceted craft, not only the different types of clay, the glazes, how you fire them. And it's a never-ending study because in every country in the world, there are potters. The most primitive people make pots even if they don't do anything but throw the mud in the, in a wicker basket or something and set it in the a fire. When the fire burns the straw, well, you have a pot. So it has helped me. It has helped me tremendously. Speaker 1: And what do you, I mean how do you get your sort of creative inspiration? Where does that come from? Speaker 2: Creativity has been very difficult because there's nothing in my training that teaches me to let go. I was trained to listen as a lawyer, and now, I'm trying to go through learning to see and not listen. But I have to see things and translate that. So it's a completely different learning experience. And I'm not sure that I have any creative juices, although I'm trying, and every now and then I will try and I will let go and make something unusual. But to some extent, there doesn't need to be that much creativity to throw forms. And I had become very, very attached to throwing forms, perfect phases, perfect shaped this. Now, I have, to become creative, I have to learn to alter those and I'm finding that difficult. But I'm learning and I'm gonna do it. Story_ID: 77688 Speaker 1: And what does it give back to you, that law didn't give or that engineering didn't give? Speaker 2: I truly liked being an engineer. I truly enjoyed solving the problems and to some extent, I'm happy to see that the weapons systems that I worked on in many instances are still being used. I mean they've been upgraded, and they no longer use tubes. They use diodes and things like that, but the basic ideas are the same. It's the problem solving. It's the ability to work with something, and at the end of the day have something that you can see and touch. It's also the ability to help people in a meaningful one-on-one way, something that of all people, Leon Higgenbotham told me one night, Judge Higgenbotham I had an argument in the court in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], and when it was over I went up, made the mistake of going upstairs to visit him at 2:00 in the afternoon. I think I caught the 3:00 a.m. Metro line out of Philadelphia. But he talked long and hard about the need to try and help people, as a lawyer and whatever else you do, one on one. He felt that if you could help one person, you know, and be successful at that, rather than trying to touch a bunch of people. And I think it's very important, particularly for young black people and other minorities to know that after you finish a career or before you finish a career, if you wanna go out and do something that somebody considers frivolous and you can still feed your family, do it. We have a right to have a few black potters, a few black guys who decided to become musicians or to move to Montana or to Tahiti for that matter. And I think that's important. Speaker 1: And why do you think that's important at this stage in your life? Why? Speaker 2: Because-- Speaker 1: Because you didn't think that before. Speaker 2: No, I didn't think that before, but I think that it's important because one of the things that we do as lawyers, and we do very well, we don't plan for the end. We do very, in other words, I'm being facetious. We do that very well. Every lawyer thinks that he's gonna drop dead of a heart attack walking out of the courthouse. Nobody told him about Parkinson's, cancer and the stroke and all the other things that you can have. So I think it's very important that young people starting out or at some point in their career, sit down and say, I think when I get to be a certain age, I wanna take up sculpturing. Do it because the important thing is to keep busy, to keep active. Golf doesn't do it because of winter. I fly fish. You can't fly fish all year. I mean there are a lot of things. I still try to write. But writing short stories for me is a labor. I can do it, but it's coffee, it's tea. It's candy bars. It's the whole thing. Find something that you can do that can bring you some solace and that you can share with some other people. Pottery does it for me. Story_ID: 77689 Speaker 1: Do you ask on a daily basis why God gave you a second chance? Speaker 2: Every day (coughing). Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Hold on. Speaker 2: You were asking me do I think about every day? Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: I can't say that I think long and hard about it. What I try to do is build on it. I try to do something every day to help somebody. Speaker 1: Do you know what you wanna do? What does Willie Leftwich, what do you feel that you're here, still in this life to do? Speaker 2: I don't have any idea. I have a friend whose wife always says just keeping going. You'll find out. And that's what I try to do. I try to keep going and I try to find out. I've truly been blessed, not only with my health, but by the people that I've met in pottery who've helped me regain or start a new life. I have never been back to the law firm, never. I sold 300 pots last May at the open house. I don't know whether they're any good or not, but the prices are competitive, and I truly wanna help young people learn not to make the mistakes that I made, of being so overly focused on engineering or law or making money. Speaker 1: Do you think, have you thought much about your father and how you were actualizing his, you know, dreams and what he would say to you right now? Speaker 2: My father was a man who, even though he was a disciplinarian, he had a life. He was a carpenter. He could fix cars. He could do electrical work. He was not so single-mindedly caught up in anything as I was in the practice of law. So, I'm not sure that, I'm sure that he would approve of idea that I now have a life, can go to dinner or go fishing or something. But he would never have allowed himself to become so overloaded in that direction. I think I became overloaded from the time I was twelve when I first started to work because I only knew how to work. And I always grew up with work behind me, in front of me, all around me. And even when my father was back at work, I kept on working because by then, I'd reached the teenage years, and I was desirous of having my own money and my independence. And I just overdid it. Speaker 1: Do you think that in the whole work mode and where you are sort of now, a lot of people have trouble, and that's why I'm saying, it seems like your transition, maybe the (unclear), the health scare has been easier, but a lot of times, you know, you take someone who has lung cancer who has been told, but they can't stop smoking cigarettes. Speaker 2: You can stop doing anything. All you have to do is make up your mind and do it. Speaker 1: But in this whole process of hearing yourself and listening and observing, were there things that you said, I don't like this about myself, and did those things scare you or, you know, have they, are there things that you are still working on? Speaker 2: Oh, there are a lot of things I'm still working on. I mean I work on things on a daily basis. My weight, reading the bible more and trying to make sense out of it. I mean there are a million things that I need to do. I need to spend more time with my mother, talking to her and comforting her and just spending time with her. But there are a million things. Story_ID: 77690 Speaker 1: Now, I want, I have some other questions just philosophical questions, but there's one thing I wanna go back to that is not too personal. But I wanna go back to the Anita Hill story. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: And I wanna ask you about how her, you know, what was the process. I'm sorry, Clarence Thomas, Anita Hill. Clarence Thomas, and his appointment and what really happened. And if you could sort of tell your version of the story? Speaker 2: I can tell you as much as I know. I met Anita Hill originally. She was defense counsel in "Anderson v. The Evening Star" which was a case that was filed in the U.S. District Court here in D.C. in the early '80's [1980s]. Anderson was the name plaintiff in a class action that was brought against "The Evening Star Newspaper" alleging racial discrimination, sexual discrimination, the whole panoplies of things. Anderson's still around town. The most notable plaintiff was a man named Kenneth Walker who is a commentator now from South Africa for the National public radio. The "Evening Star" had been brought by Time Warner, and Anita Hill came down here as defense counsel with them. What I know of Clarence Thomas' is, what do you call it, hearings, when he was trying to become a member of the United States Supreme Court, was that at some point myself and a group of, I think they were primarily black, lawyers and business people became a support mechanism for him during that period, encouraging him to continue with his quest to get on the Supreme Court because when the Anita Hill story broke, the Republican Party and many people separated from him. And at some point, as I recall it, he was thinking or considering possibly not going through with it. And there were a group of us who encouraged him to go on with it. Speaker 1: And who was that group? Speaker 2: I'd rather not name them. Speaker 1: That's okay. Did you, and what were your thoughts along that period of time? Did he come to you or did you see what was happening and-- Speaker 2: Clarence Thomas, I had known for some years, and I know this doesn't sound possible to some people, but for me, he was a decent, nice guy. As a matter of fact, I would tell you or anyone else that if you were looking for a guy to be your kid's cub scout (unclear), it would have been Clarence Thomas. I never saw the side of Clarence Thomas and have never seen that side that was on the display at the hearings when he was up for confirmation. That's not the guy I knew. The only thing I can ever remember seeing him do every night--he drove a Corvette because every now and then he smoked a cigar. But other than that, I remember going to his wedding, and I remember they served fruit juice. He was a good guy. He was a good guy. Speaker 1: Now, why did you feel that, so you felt that he was being unjustly attacked? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And was the belief that he should be supported because this was a way of making history? Was it a-- Speaker 2: History had nothing to do with it. I didn't, for me, history had nothing to do with it. For me, it was a case of a guy that I knew as a decent guy being attacked and, you know, and I would have done whatever I could to support him. Speaker 1: So the Clarence Thomas that has had the ruling since he's serving on the bench, have you paid attention to this? Speaker 2: Unfortunately, I have. Speaker 1: And what was your view of that Clarence Thomas or what is your view of that? Speaker 2: The Clarence Thomas that I read his opinions of recently is not, I was wrong. My assessment of the man is I was wrong, at least from my philosophical position. I can't say that I was wrong that he was a good guy or a decent guy because he probably is, but I wasn't looking through the same glass that he was looking through and I'm still not looking through the same glass that he's looking through. Speaker 1: And that leads me to another, and you, I think you even said that really, the administration was gonna back off, you know, that everyone was going to back off, right? But wasn't, didn't you want to have a black person appointed? Speaker 2: Oh, I think we wanted to have a black person appointed, and maybe if it was someone else, I might not have been supportive of them, but the Clarence Thomas that I knew was a good guy. I, as I said, I went to his wedding. He was a nice man. He was a decent man. Story_ID: 77691 Speaker 1: Did you--so your view of, I mean since you had spent really almost forty years, you know, with identifying with the Republican Party, and, you know, do you see that there are, there's a new type of black person who has been identified with the Republican Party? Speaker 2: I don't know what you mean by "new type of person"? Speaker 1: Well, would you have identified with people like Thomas Sole? Do you like--? Speaker 2: I know Sole. I don't particularly like or dislike him. I read him, but, you know. Speaker 1: Do you believe that black people should have no party affiliation now? Speaker 2: No, I believe that black people should belong to all parties, Democratic Party, Communist Party, Republican Party, Socialist Party, whatever. I believe that in order for us to move in this capitalist society, we've got to have people on all the different teams. We may not have the same view, tactically, as to which way to go, but I think that strategically we're all trying to get there. Story_ID: 77692 Speaker 1: And when you look at the black community now, what are your sort of hopes or your disappointments where we are and what your hopes for us are? Speaker 2: I hope, and I guess I wish, that black kids would go to school, get their education and go out and make the most of it. I'm one of those people that does not believe, unfortunately, that integration, as it's been practiced with us, has been that great. We've lost an enormous presence in this country. Black people weren't in jail when I was a kid. Black people may have had a hard time getting a job, but we were not filling up penitentiaries and dealing drugs and things like that. I was fortunate. I may have come along at just the right time in history. But I wanna see kids go to school, get their education, put your feet on my shoulders and spring to the next level. I'm not interested in seeing them in baggy pants, standing on the corner. Get an education. Don't buy into the notion of capitalism and its new need. You need a new Michael Jordan t-shirt, tennis shoes. To heck with that stuff. Save your money. I mean we're in a situation where our people have nothing. We're here. We're consumers. Stop consuming. Start to save your money. Turn off the television and read a book. Do the simple things, back to the blocking and tact and the fundamentals. Hard work never killed nobody. That's what I would like to see happen. I don't really care what your political philosophy is. I don't care who you support. I just wanna see you get educated, black and brown people, and get on their way because I'm afraid that Hispanics are gonna come here and fall into many of the same traps, and maybe worse than we have. We have lost a lot with integration. We've lost role models. Now, our role models are baseball players, football players and other people speaking in three-word sentences. I don't wanna hear those people. I want every kid to hear Mary McCleod Bethune or someone like her when he's six or seven years old. I want every kid to go to school like I did where the teachers care about you, not where the teachers tell you because you're black, you can only be on the track to be a street sweeper. You can do anything. You can be anybody. All the tests said, when I was a kid, that I should be a farmer. That was the best that they could do. And as Ms. Gaines said in the eighth grade I didn't have enough sense to pass the I.Q. test. I must have cheated. I want kids to go to school. To turn off the television. To bust their butt, to work hard. Story_ID: 77693 Speaker 1: The fact of the matter is that, we do, we are living in an integrated society, something that we worked so hard to do. Speaker 2: Oh, yes, yes, yes. It's great. Speaker 1: So what do you see as, do you see anyone out here saying things that makes sense to you? Speaker 2: I hear a lot of people saying bits and pieces of what might make sense. But I don't see anybody sacrificing their personal career for the type of racial leadership that we need. I think that we need someone who's big enough to be concerned, for example, with the schools and solely with the schools. If we could get someone who's big enough just to do that, to talk about getting black and brown people to the PTA [Parent Teacher Association] meeting, and to understand that that's your child and it's not the school system's problem. It's your problem, and that he or she will be your child forever, those kinds of things. We stepped into integration, and we stepped into the consumer economy, and we don't have the bumpers, the buffers of the support mechanism to allow us to fully participate. And what we're sacrificing are the kids. We're sacrificing the kids. We can't have, your wife can't stay home all day and take care of the kids. She has to go to work, and we now live in the city, and grandma doesn't live down the road. And she can't take care of 'em and, you know, that sort of thing. So integration in the sense of providing the competition and the opportunity in theory is great. We don't have the capacity, the depth to take full advantage of it. And we need to back off of the consumer economy. Leave something on the table. And I don't know who is big enough to tell us that. Everything tells us to spend, spend, spend. And we're not saving. We need to go against the flow. There are ethnic groups in this country that go against the flow. And we need to be one of them, and no one castigates them for going against the flow. As a matter of fact, quietly, they're praised, Indians, Asiatics, they're praised for going against the flow. And that's what we need, is someone to stand up and stay, you know, instead of dedicating myself to this or that, I have a voice, and I'm gonna try to convince you as a people that you should save some money. You hear bits and pieces of it with people like Charles Barkley, as crude as it is, says, I'm not a role model. Your daddy ought to be your role model. And that's right. But I, I just fear. I mean I'm afraid for black people. Suppose Martin Luther King [Jr.] came back, [W.E.B.]Dubois, is this what they imagined? Did Marcus Garvey sacrifice his life for this nonsense that we have now? Or Malcolm [X]? I don't think so. I don't think any of us in 1960 could have ever believed that we could have evolved as a people into "x" percent of our young men being in jail and "x"-plus percent being on drugs. I just don't believe it. And we're caught up in the new cars and the new clothes and stuff like that. I mean, and we're selling this capitalism to the rest of the world. Everybody needs this. No. Story_ID: 77694 Speaker 1: That would be my hope, is that somehow we could get these young people to go to school, even people who are older than school age to go back to school. There's a stigma now on the notion that you can go to school at night. I don't know why. When I came along in the '60's [1960s], if you couldn't go to day school, you went to night school. Not now. If I can't go full-time, day to the university down the street, I'm not going. What's so wrong with holding a job and going to night school? "I ain't what I wanna be; I ain't what I'm gonna be, but I ain't what I was." It just takes a little time and a little effort. I don't, I don't, it's frightening. It's truly frightening. The percentage of black lawyers in the major firms is about today what it was in 1968, and yet we're producing black kids and brown kids out of law firms every day, and they don't have the critical mass to go out and start a firm. And in today's era, starting a firm, it means such a tremendous overhead in computers and electronic equipment. You don't get an adding machine and a typewriter anymore. And nothing is breaking this. Nothing is changing this. Nothing is changing. We talk about the number of blacks in the country and yet the statistics, the Census Bureau says it's something like seventy percent of the counties in America are still majority white. We look at Washington, D.C. or Montgomery County. There're twenty-five counties in Maryland. They're three that are black or brown and the other twenty-five are white. I mean there's nothing wrong with capitalism, especially since we've landed here in it, and we've got to make it work for us. And the only way we can make it work, and we can, is with education. You forget, my grandfather was a slave, not my great grandfather. My grand-daddy was born a slave. And hard work, education, it's worked for every other ethnic group, and it has to work for us. We've just got to rein in some of our consumerism and our wants and our give-me's. I don't have a solution. I wish I did. I wish that it was something simpler than--cancer is not as complex as the social problems that beset us. Nothing is. Story_ID: 77695 Speaker 1: We haven't had a black mayor in this country yet that us left a line of succession. Each black mayor runs until his time is up and then he's axed out. And the next guy comes in and takes over, but the black mayor is gone. Speaker 2: How about Atlanta [Georgia] though? Speaker 1: I don't know anything about Atlanta. I mean I, maybe-- Speaker 2: Is there more of a succession there? Speaker 1: There's only been more of a succession from what I understand in the sense that they're black. There's no succession in the sense that they necessarily get along. Nobody anointed the next person. Each person runs on his own, I mean, but here we live in the [Washington] District of Columbia, and I can look you in the face and say that best mayor we had was Walter Washington. He was the first mayor. He was appointed. He was the best mayor the city ever had. Speaker 2: Now, a lot of people would say that [HM] Marion Barry should not be forgotten for the legacy he left? Speaker 1: Close personal friend, great guy, but, you know, you can't hit a home run the first two times at bat and strike out the next two times and expect people to remember only the home runs. Marion was a good mayor, and he steadily went downhill. At some point, you gotta understand that you gotta park the car and get off, but consistently through his tour, Walter Washington was the best mayor this city's ever had. Marion was an incredibly gifted politician in the beginning, but his personal life and excesses ended up pulling him down. He was here a month ago. He comes by and sees us. But no black mayor, no black politician has yet left office and been able to anoint his successor and go on to the next level. Story_ID: 77696 Speaker 1: Do you think we should be so hard on ourselves when it's just been sort of three generations out of slavery? Speaker 2: I don't think we have any choice about being hard on ourselves because they're not gonna give us a break. So I don't think we have any choice. Unfortunately, in America, the white boy is always judged on his potential. He's gonna be great. As Willie Mays says, I'm judged on what I do every day. I don't play because I'm as good as, I'm better than. And that's the same with every other black athlete or entertainer. I don't play because I'm as good as. I'm better than. The white boy can always say, next week, I'm gonna come into my own. You don't have that option. Speaker 1: But don't you think this all has to do with sort of legacy building, building on something, because in many ways I look at the '60s [1960s] and I feel that tremendous ground was lost, you know, from the '60s [1960s] on, that somehow people lost it in what they passed on to their kids and not to say that everyone wants, you know, people want to make things better for their kids, but there was, there wasn't a lot of passing on at that point. And maybe there wasn't passing on before that, but there wasn't a lot of passing on. Speaker 2: I think that what happened was our generation believed that once we'd achieved integration and got on the highway, that it was smooth sailing, that we would be treated with the same dignity and respect that other people were and that we would not have to go through the games of integration or desegregation and affirmative action that we've gone through, that the insanity of this administration and other administrations saying they don't understand affirmative action or they don't understand the, what is it, repatriations or whatever the-- Speaker 1: Reparations. Speaker 2: --reparations is insane when I've been in meetings with white boys in Richmond [Virginia] who said, we made our money in tobacco, cotton and slaves, not necessarily in that order. I mean there are a lot of white folks in this country who made their money in slavery. And they wasn't all protestant WASPs. They were every ethnic group and whatever. They just were white. And I'm not sure that reparations, if put in the hands of individuals, would do much of anything. But I'm sure that reparations if we could get some training or somehow to get our people into the flow of capitalism because we're not. For every guy that's into the, I mean I would do away with intercollegiate athletics. For every black boy that makes the NBA, there're probably three or four who go to college four years, don't get an education and end up as a doorman or working for Hertz or something. You should go to college to get an education. Everything else should be secondary, everything else should be secondary. We are physically Aryans. We were bred to be that. Now, if we can become mentally as strong as we are physically, we would be awesome. We would be awesome. And there's no reason. We have to be hard on ourselves. We have to set standards, just as people set standards for my generation, and expected them. I never, when I went to school, we got the books from the white school. And the first day of school every year, they gave us a big soap eraser, and we sat there and erased all the markings that the white people had put in the books. That didn't stop me from learning. It didn't stop me from learning. And I was one of the most surprised people in the world when I got to GW [George Washington University] and found out white folks is dumb. And when I was in the army, the first time I'd ever been thrown in with white, they weren't, there was no particular brilliance there. White people have lived a selected life in America. It's well oiled, and there's no point in me trying to throw tacks or rocks on their highway. I have to get on my own and do my work. And I can do it. And that's what I think we have to do. It's not hard. It's not impossible. We just have to do it. Story_ID: 77697 Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy, when they say, "Willie Left--" what do you want your legacy to be? Speaker 2: I have no interest in anything once I'm gone. Speaker 1: What do you want society, I mean "legacy" is that you left society better off. Speaker 2: That's all I want, is to think that I did something to help somebody, regardless of race, creed or color. I don't, I don't, beyond that, I have no interest in anything. Once my day is gone here, it's up to the next guy to do better than I did. All I want to do is believe and hope that I helped somebody. Speaker 1: What do you want people to say about Willie Leftwich? Speaker 2: I don't have anything in particular. I would hope that I could be remembered for having helped a few people. But beyond that, it's not important to me. Nothing is important to me on this life. I mean I'm on borrowed time way beyond what I should have been after my sickness, and I've come to realize that. And all I can do is try to help a few people. If I can get one person who looks at this tape to decide that he or she is going to school and make something of themselves, then everything would have been well worth it. If one person, as Leon Higginbotham said, and if that one person helps one more, we're on our way and we've got something going on. But that's all I want. I think the most important job in America is not the president. It's the secretary of education, and we've never had a decent secretary of education in this country. They've had hacks, has-been's and wanna-be's. But if they could get somebody of the statute of the secretary of defense or the secretary of state or treasury to be secretary of education, who could use the bully pulpit to turn around education in this country, that's what we need. That's what we need. We're gonna fight some tremendous economic battles in the years that come, and unfortunately, the minorities in this country are gonna get thrown overboard because we're gonna be replaced with more outsourcing of jobs to India, Brazil, China and whatever. What's a poor man, what's an uneducated man gonna do? I mean "education". If I could be remembered for anything, it would be that I helped one person. I caused one person to wanna go to school and make themselves a better person. I don't care what color they are. White folks helped me. White folks helped me immensely. I can't complain about white folks. It wouldn't do any good. I gotta live my own life. If we could make determinations solely on the basis of color, this would be a wonderful world, but we can't. So we have to work our way through. Story_ID: 77698 Speaker 1: That's a picture of me, Willie Leftwich, in 1972 as chairman of the committee to re-elect the president, for the re-election effort of [President] Richard Nixon. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: That's a picture of my grandmother, Ida Mack Martin Leftwich who was born in Spencer, Virginia, a small post office just West of Martinsville, Virginia. She was related to a large family of Martin's that owned dry good stores and taxi services and what have you in Martinsville. She married grandpa in, I believe it was 1907 or eight [1908] and moved to Bloomfield, West Virginia. I lived with my grandmother for the first six years of my life in Bloomfield. Speaker 2: Great, okay, go ahead. Speaker 1: This is a picture of my mother and father. My father's name was Willie Lorenzo Leftwich. He was born in Bloomfield in December 1915 and my mother, who was born in Orange, Virginia and whose maiden name was Wilkins, in 1919. My mother is still alive and in better than good health, very active in her church work and service organizations. My father died, I think when he was 69 years old.) Speaker 2: Great. Speaker 1: This is a childhood picture of my son, the smaller of the three boys. Curtis Edward Leftwich who is working as a real estate developer in Troy, Michigan now. Brian Leftwich on the left, who's an investment banker in New York City and George Leftwich who's an investment banker here in Washington, D.C. Speaker 2: That's fine. Did you wanna say anything else? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: Do it again. I'm sorry. I hit the button twice and it-- Speaker 1: That's all right. Tell me when to start. Speaker 2: Go ahead. Speaker 1: This is a picture of my immediate family. The woman on the left is my sister-in-law, Mary Leftwich who teaches nursery school at St. Ann's Catholic School on Wisconsin Avenue, my brother, George, who was an All-American basketball player at Villanova in 1964 and teaches at the Sedwell School. My sister is in the center, Dr. Azalea (ph.) Leftwich, who's a medical doctor and graduated from the Women's College of Medicine in Philadelphia. She was the first woman and the first black to ever be head resident of the Washington Hospital Center. This next picture, the next person is myself, Willie Leftwich, and to my immediate right is my wife, Norma, who is the General Counsel of Howard University. The people in the foreground are my nephew, Brian, who is an investment banker in New York, my son, Curtis, who's in training to be a real estate developer in Troy, Michigan, my mother, my father, who's deceased and my nephew, George, who's an investment. Speaker 2: Go ahead. I left it rolling. Speaker 1: This is a picture of my wife, Norma Boles Leftwich, who is a graduate of the University of Pittsburgh and of Georgetown's Law School. At one time, she was the highest ranking black and the highest ranking woman in the Pentagon when she worked for, I think the man's name was Weinberger [Casper Weinberger, secretary of defense under President Reagan]. She subsequently resigned from, by my standards, a perfectly good SES-6 job and went to law school and is now the General Counsel at Howard University. Speaker 2: Okay, go ahead. Speaker 1: This picture was made of me in 1988 on a trip to South Africa with a group of Afro-American business men who at the time, at the time I was representing the Deciduous fruit industry which was by most standards a liberal organization in the Cape area of South Africa. Speaker 2: (Off-camera discussion). Okay, go ahead. Speaker 1: This a picture of the men in my immediate family, my son, Curtis on the left, who's a real estate developer, my nephew, Brian, who is an investment banker in New York, myself, Willie Leftwich, my brother, George and my nephew, George who was also an All-American at Princeton. This picture was made approximately two years ago. Speaker 2: All right, go ahead. Speaker 1: The picture on the left, the picture is one of me fishing in the face of the dam at Hinton, West Virginia in the mid-1980s. I was then and remain an avid fly fisherman, and I've engaged in fly fishing or flown all over the world to fly fish, both fresh water and salt water. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: This picture was made of me in Bloomfield, West Virginia when I was approximately three or four years of age in what was my favorite coat apparently, the Navy coat with Navy buttons on it. Speaker 2: This picture was made when I entered Howard University School of Engineering in September of 1955. This picture was made in Korea in 1962 when I was a member of the First Calvary division and was part of my identification, it was my I.D. picture for my, the thing they give you in identification badge. Speaker 1: Okay, go ahead. Speaker 2: This picture was made in 1955 when I was a student at Cardoza High School, and I was the sports editor of the "Cardoza Newspaper". I don't remember the name of the newspaper, but I was an avid writer for the newspaper, something that helped me greatly later on in life, the ability to compose and write articles that were acceptable to the public. Story_ID: 77699 Speaker 1: I've still got the mic on so if there's anything you want to say to Ms. [Julieanna] Richardson [Founder and Executive Director of The HistoryMakers] or anyone else, it will be on tape. Speaker 2: The only thing I want to say to Ms. Richardson is I think she's doing a tremendous service, not only to black people but to the country. And I'm not sure that the service that she's rendering will be fully appreciated in her lifetime, that this, unfortunately, is the sort of thing that people won't come to realize the depth and breadth of what she's doing until, unfortunately, they need the information or the opportunity to look back. The picture that she's gonna provide to the world is just incredible. She also has thrown herself into this. I'm not sure, "thrown" herself into it. She's also walked into it and is doing it with a level of intensity and commitment that I've never seen before in a project like this and without corporate support. So I, I mean my hat goes off to her, and I hope that everybody sits down and writes her a contribution or sends her a contribution. But I think that the opportunity to tell the next generation what our generation lived through is just unbelievable. I mean I think for me it's one of the most important things I've done in the last five or ten years. Speaker 1: That's great. Thanks. Okay...