 Story_ID: 613850 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Ma'am, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please. Speaker 2: Vernell Audrey Watson Lillie [HistoryMaker Vernell Lillie], and V-E-R-N-E-L-L, A-U-D-R-E-Y, W-A-T-S-O-N for Watson, and the Lillie is spelled L-I-L-L-I-E. Speaker 1: And ma'am what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: May the 11th, 1931, in Hempstead, Texas, cross--between Prairie View [Texas] and Austin [Texas]. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is your occupation? Speaker 2: At this point now I'm a retired professor emerita of Africana studies at the University of Pittsburgh [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]. I'm also the founder and artistic producing director of the Kuntu, K-U-N-T-U, Repertory Theatre [Kuntu Repertory Theatre, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]. Speaker 1: Okay. And what, what is today's date? Speaker 2: August the 15th, 2008. Speaker 1: And where are we are the present time? Speaker 2: We're in the office at the University of Pittsburgh, across from my office at the department of Africana studies. Story_ID: 613851 Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that management compels me to ask of everyone, and they only require a short answer. The first question is, they're kind of a warm up, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: No, not, I suppose, maybe gumbo. Gumbo if it's made right from Louisiana with the right brown roux (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Now do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Purple. Speaker 1: All right. A fav- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Purple and white, I have to put them together. Speaker 1: Okay. A favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Spring. Speaker 1: Okay. A favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Not really. I just like traveling and seeing the world. I suppose if I made a real choice, I would have to take Egypt. Speaker 1: Okay. And do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: (Laughter) The students say that I say, "Did you understand me?" Story_ID: 613852 Speaker 1: So, I'm gonna ask you about your family history now. I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Walter Watson] side, but we'll start with your mother's side first. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us. Speaker 2: Lillie May Benjamin Watson [Lillie Benjamin Watson]. And she was born in Bellville, Texas, which is just five miles [sic.] from Hempstead, Texas. Speaker 1: Okay. Can you spell her name for us? Speaker 2: L-I-L-L-I-E, Benjamin, B-E-N-J-A-M-I-N, and Watson, W-A-T-S-O-N. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I guess I should add May, Lillie May, M-A-Y. Speaker 1: Okay. Now how far back can you trace the ancestors on your mother's side? Speaker 2: I can go all the way back to my great-grandfather, Robert Jackson [ph.], who was a very successful foreman and specialized in cotton, yellow meat watermelon, sorghum. Had a--I'm told by family, had a, owned a cotton gin, and had a great deal of property over some two thousand or three thousand acres that were taken from him, and even his main house, and had two oil wells, and that they, the family always contend that (unclear) took it, and the German bankers in Bellville, illegally, took all the property from him. Speaker 1: Tell me the story. What does the family say about it, I mean, what's the story? Speaker 2: Well, they sold the property very easily to the Polish, to the Mexicans and to the Africans because it was in the Brazos Bottom [Texas] and was near the Brazos River, and the mistake they made in selling it, this was some of the richest black land and with potential for oil wells. The story is told that my grandfather made a loan on the property and the, they used as their record his X, which all of us doubt, because he was a man who took half of his land, a portion of his land, not half, but a portion of his land, and personally built the school because his theory was that the church was for church business and the school ought to be for school business. And the southerners in Bellville, Texas, refused to build a school for the African Americans, blacks as they were called then, or, and he then built a school, educated a huge percentage of his youngsters. I'm not the first college graduate in the family. His daughter, his older daughter, Lillie, was the one who graduated from Prairie View [Prairie View State Normal and Industrial College; Prairie View A&M University, Prairie View, Texas] and was, my mother was named after her and was the teacher in that one room school and so my family still is very angry and upset about the loss of the land and the oil wells are still pumping, so somebody is gaining monies from that. So that's-- Speaker 1: So they alleged he signed a paper with a X? Does the family contend that he could write? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, so they produced a document with an X on it, assuming that, assuming something about him that was not true (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That they could simply win the case. My grandfather, my grandmother [Julie Jackson Williams (ph.)] lost practically all of her money and all of her land fighting for that property. We went through the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], a young man at that point, Attorney Whittaker [ph.], even tried to claim his land back, and so finally we just simply gave up, but that was my mother's side of the family. He had approximately seven children, my mother had three years of college. They only went to the eighth grade in the Bellville area so that all the black kids who wanted an education had to go to Hempstead to complete their education. So my mother then went to Hempstead to the colored high school and then she went to Prairie View for three years. Story_ID: 613853 Speaker 1: Yeah, I just wanted to pause and go, go back a little bit and just try to get some parameters around this story in terms of time. Now you--is there--did you have any dates for your great-grandfather, Robert Jackson [ph.]? Speaker 2: No, I don't. I know that he lived until he was forty-five, which was about the average age for an African American at that point in time. Speaker 1: Okay, but this is your, this is your mother's grandfather (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My mother's grandfather. Speaker 1: Okay. So your mother was born in, did you give me the year? Speaker 2: My mother was born in 1910. Speaker 1: Nineteen ten [1910], so-- Speaker 2: And her mother was born, I think, twenty years before that. Speaker 1: Eighteen eighty [1880] or so, 1890 I guess. Speaker 2: And so Mamacita [Lillie's maternal great-grandmother, Cecilia Jackson (ph.)] and Big Papa were in the 1800s. Speaker 1: Yeah, so we talking about 1870s or something, 1880s when-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So it probably happened during the time of, this taking of land I would imagine it happened during the time of 1890s probably, then, right? Speaker 2: It happened during the time my mother was in high school. Speaker 1: Okay, so this is, okay 19--what, '16 [1916], you said '15 [1915], '16 [1916]. Speaker 2: Nineteen sixteen [1916], it was pretty, no, probably 1917 or '18 [1918]. Speaker 1: Okay, around the time of World War I [WWI]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. That's really a story. I mean we've heard lots of stories like that in one way or another, but that's, that's a really dramatic one. Speaker 2: There's bitterness still (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Okay. So they continued, the family continued to try to fight to reclaim the land until what time? When was the last court case? Speaker 2: I think the last time that I can recall I was in high school [Phillis Wheatley High School, Houston, Texas], so that had to have been, I guess probably 1940 was probably, '40 [1940], about '40 [1940] or '45 [1945]. My sister [Walterdelle Watson] started to pick up part of the battle, but then by 1940, we had just given up. Speaker 1: So it would have been, the case would have been Robert Jackson versus Humble Oil company [Humble Oil and Refining Company; Exxon Company, U.S.A.], or the bank. Speaker 2: Humble Oil, it was probably the bank. Speaker 1: The bank? Speaker 2: The bank is the one who really did the foreclosures. Speaker 1: Okay, but Robert Jackson, that's the key to this. If somebody wanted to research that case, and it's a classic case, okay. So, now I notice also that your mother's name is Lillie [Lillie Benjamin Watson], her grandmother's name is Lillie [sic.], her great-grandmother's name-- Speaker 2: No, no. Her aunt's name was Lillie. Speaker 1: Oh, her aunt's name was Lillie, okay. Speaker 2: My, my mother's mother was Julie Williams [Julie Jackson Williams (ph.)], was Julie, she married Benjamin first and then she married a Williams [ph.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so Robert Jackson, and Robert Jackson was married to, we called her Mamacita, but her name was Cecilia. Story_ID: 613854 Speaker 1: So what does your mother [Lillie Benjamin Watson] say about growing up? Did she, did she talk about what it was like growing up? Speaker 2: She was really, my grandfather was obsessed with education. And he really wanted all of his grandchildren to be educated. He was unable to get one of his daughters to go to college. The others worked and everybody else around my grandfather worked (laughter), including me when I was growing up because we spent the summers in, in, in Bellville [Texas]. Speaker 1: Okay. So was it your mother that went, did your mother go to college, did she? Speaker 2: Yeah, my mother did three years of college. She did two years at Prairie View [Prairie View State Normal and Industrial College; Prairie View A&M University, Prairie View, Texas] and one year at what is now known as Texas Southern [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas], but it was Houston college [Houston Colored Junior College] at that point. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So did she grow up in, did she grow up out where she was born or did she, out in Belleview [sic.] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She, she grew up in Bellville. She grew up in Bellville in what we call the Brazos Bottom [Texas]. By the time I was a child and I suppose they had really just taken all of his property and so he moved from what they, we call the Brazos Bottom to the oil field, but this was still in Bellville. Speaker 1: Okay. Did she, well, did she share any stories growing up with you what it was like? Was the community mostly black that she grew up in or was it just a-- Speaker 2: Oh, it was absolutely all-black in there, but you were also surrounded by the Polish. And then the only one that I can recall was Miss Cecile [ph.], who was Polish, and I can remember when the oil fields would flood when the river, the Brazos River would flood, we would very often go up to Miss Cecile's house, and so there were Mexicans in that neighborhood and there were some black Creek Indians [Native American] in that neighborhood as well, and they all got along very well. There was no hostility between the groups. But generally all the white males had the privilege, the majority of them worked in the oil fields, which them gave a greater income. All of the African Americans probably worked the fields, which means that they were doing cotton, sorghum, watermelons and things along those lines. And the Mexicans sometimes did, I guess, sort of landscaping kind of work and I'm not sure what the Polish were doing there, but I imagine that they were doing the oil fields. And there were maybe about four black men who worked the oil fields-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and doing also the very dangerous jobs so that if it was gonna blast, it was certainly going to capture one of them. Story_ID: 613855 Speaker 1: Now the Brazos River is popularized in Western movies. I saw 'The Searchers' I think last week again for the tenth time and-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: --and Old Mose [Mose Harper] says, "Seven fingers of the Brazos." That is where this Comanche leader was, "Seven fingers Marty, seven fingers." Speaker 2: Well, it did quite a curve. At first it was a quite a long curve. I can remember that the church was probably about fifty yards away from the Brazos River and the last time I was there, the church is completely gone and part of the land that my [maternal] grandfather would have owned no longer exists by the way in which it curved. But it was quite a feat or source, good catfish out of there, the great big turtles we used to catch in there, tarpons, I guess, my grandpa would call them and, and it was a great sort of holiday of a place of relaxation around the river. Speaker 1: Okay. In the old movies we never see black people there (laughter), so this is, this is new for people who get their history from old movies. Speaker 2: Actually, unfortunately, what you see them eating is the red meat [watermelon] and my grandfather's specialty was the yellow meat [watermelon], and they were absolutely delicious. And I guess what I remember most when I'm thinking about that whole area, is, is the land mass and what was constructed there. You know, the houses which really, in many instances with the poorer families, there were always the bedrooms and the kitchen, there was nothing like the living room per se. The public school teachers may have had the house that had the living room and the dining room and then when I think about if you stepped out of the back door, the kitchen was one of the largest places in the house and it was not, it was a long bench, and usually the table was huge and you had a bench on both sides where people could sit, and if you stepped out of the door, you stepped to the right, there was a bucket of water, and you think about everybody drinking out of that same bucket, drinking out of that gourd, and the way in which they cut it, but when you stepped out of there, you stepped to the right and there you had the, what he called his, his hatching hens, and so they had a little step latter and the chickens could go up and they sat there and laid their eggs, and that was to keep the snakes from getting them. And so, and then you stepped from there and you had the, the actual food stuff that you were gonna eat. Because I, you know, as far as I can recall, we didn't buy anything but maybe flour or sugar from the stores. The potatoes were planted. They had the cucumbers, the tomatoes, the greens, the okra, the, you know everything that you wanted, and when you stepped from there, you stepped to where the smokehouse as. And so the great days there in Bellville [Texas] was the coldest day in December was gonna be the hog killing days, and where then you're gonna see that smokehouse getting prepared, and so you could just step outside the door in the summertime and just slice off a piece of meat, a piece of cornbread and that was it. And then you walked about maybe twenty feet further and then it was that huge well, and so my grandfather didn't like the idea, but very often we would take tomatoes when we were on our way to the fields and put the tomatoes and drop it in the bucket and when you come back they would be ice cold. The water was cool. You had no need, it was, it was great living. Story_ID: 613856 Speaker 1: The only thing I hated about it was having slop the hogs and then milk the cows and then that was on a schedule when the railroad train, the Sunset Limited passed by, that was the signal of that and part of the living I enjoyed very much, but everybody went to the fields. Nobody was left in the house unless it was a woman who might have just had a baby. But everybody went to the fields and everybody had a job. I don't ever know, I can't ever imagine how the theory arose about the lazy shuffling African American. I don't, because at age five I was in the fields. And so you watched the babies underneath the wagons, or you did the scraping of the cotton, because the others, the adults and the teenagers were moving really fast because they wanted to do two hundred before twelve [o'clock] and then two hundred after, so four hundred pounds, and that's some moving, and watching. And I don't understand how anybody, anybody living on this earth, could ever consider the fact that black folk were lazy, clowning somebody. I mean you needed to have spent a day watching them go down, or picking up the watermelons, and handling them gingerly so that they're not bruised, so they're not broken. You know, I, when we went out to the fields it was dark, and then when I see people with clowns on--showing the blacks in the raggedy clothes, I don't know what, I, they, I, I just don't understand. I get furious. How can anybody survive in a hundred and one [degree] heat or hundred and five heat and have your body bared, you, I mean your whole body was clothed. My [maternal] grandmother [Julie Jackson Williams (ph.)] would take a pomegranate leaf and wet it down and then put it on me and then everything was covered except your face. And then you were dressed in layers because the heat out there would allow you to perspire and the coolness of that allowed you to be able to stand the heat. Oh, I'm telling you, I don't know where people have gotten their history. There were no ragged clothes out there. People had stuff that covered here, all the way down and the only thing out was the hands, and that was the cotton field part of it. But taking care of the hogs in the evening, which meant that you had to be very careful with them because it's so hot, you got to keep where they are wet and damp so they can rest and roll over in the dirt and that, and so that is a process of taking water out of the well and then pouring it on the ground and keeping that ground moist, and then you're taking, you know, all of the scraps so that you can save them and feed them to the hogs. I, you know, I hear people talk about roaches and jokes about that. There was no trash left because all the trash went into the huge bin that you were going to eventually feed the hogs out of. And then also, you also had a huge gallon, huge thing that you caught water as it came off of the roof so that when they are dry days you had the extra water in order to feed and water your crops and all of those kinds of things. So, that was, that was my mother's [Lillie Benjamin Watson] side of the family. Story_ID: 613857 Speaker 1: My daddy's side of the family lived in Hempstead [Texas] which-- Speaker 2: Now, let me get his full name. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: What's your father's full name? Speaker 1: Walter J., Walter Jennings Watson [Walter Watson]. Speaker 2: Walter Jennings Watson. Okay. And what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 1: September 28th, 19--what, I'm almost forgetting, 1907. Speaker 2: And he was born in Hempstead? Speaker 1: He was born in Hempstead. No, no my dad was born in Keokuk Falls, Oklahoma. Speaker 2: Okay. How do you spell that? Speaker 1: I think it's K-I-L, I'm not sure, Keokuk. I found it like it's spelled Keokuk, but I think its K-I-L-K-U-K [sic.]. I finally found it on the Internet. Speaker 2: Keokuk Falls. Speaker 1: Falls, Oklahoma. It was close to Oklahoma City [Oklahoma]. Speaker 2: Okay. Near OK City. Okay. Speaker 1: And I'm not quite sure because, I'm not sure if the family were Cherokees and Choctaws together, but my father was born there in Oklahoma and the family remained there until he was five. Speaker 2: So how far back can you trace the ancestors on your father's side then? Speaker 1: We can all the way back to grandma--the great-grandmother that we only know of her as a name. We call her Sternum, and Sternu- and I'm not sure of the spelling, S-T-E-R-N-U-M, Sternum or Sterner, or E-R, we're not sure and she was a product of either a Choctaw or Cherokee and a, and the Irish overseer, somebody named Osgood or Oswood [ph.], and so we're not quite sure but we think it's Osgood, O-S-G-O-O-D. Speaker 2: Okay. So she wasn't African at all? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: She was half (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And there's, according to my aunt, because I know I used to become very angry with them because they talked about they were never slaves and I could not imagine that, but then incidentally my aunt was always proud of saying, "This is my Choctaw cheek, this is my Cherokee cheek," and I was standing near her and I said, "You know, your mom's black as an ace of spade, so where's your African?" And she said, "This is my Igbo chin," and so I said, "So Igbo chin, what do you mean?" And so Grandma Ella--and I, Ella Sheridan [Ella Sheridan Watson (ph.)] was a full blood Igbo woman and then her husband [Ferdinand Watson (ph.)] was a black Cherokee, and so that was why they always said they were never slaves. Now there's a roundabout story that goes with my--you know, my father's life was a little bit more complex. Story_ID: 613858 Speaker 1: When we're looking--contrasting the families, my grandfather, for some reason or another, some gentleman from North Carolina brought a series of, a number of women that he gave sort of Jewish names to them, to Hempstead [Texas]. We have no-- Speaker 2: These are-- Speaker 1: My father's [Walter Watson] ancestors. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: We have no reason, we have no, we have no knowledge of why they came and why this minister, I think his name was Patterson [ph.], brought these women to Hempstead. My grandmother, my great-grandmother was called Sinai [ph.], and one of her closest friends that we stayed in touch with, was Miss Swoopa [ph.], and so we had no idea, and we don't know the time, the year, we just know that at some point Grandma Ida, and her name was Ida Davis [ph.], Grandma Ida decided to go back, and nor do I know what her name was when she went back. She later came back to Hempstead and married a Davis. But she left (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But she went back to North Carolina and came back? Speaker 1: She didn't go back to North Carolina. She went back to Oklahoma and went to Keokuk Falls, Oklahoma, and that's where my dad and--was born, and his--his father was Ferdinand Watson [ph.], which we thought was a strange name for an African American in the first place. And she took my Grandmother Ella Anna [Ella Sheridan Watson (ph.)], well Ella Anna was a Sheridan and so they were married. She was fourteen years old when she was married and so they then left Hempstead and we have no, and we don't know why they left Hempstead and went to Keokuk Falls, Oklahoma. We know Grandma Ida originally came out of, sort of Rich Square, North Carolina. We discovered that in 1975. But dad stayed there on the Indian [Native American] reservation until he was five years old and then they came back to Hempstead, and when they came back to Hempstead, which is five miles [sic.] from Bellville [Texas] where my mother [Lillie Benjamin Watson] lived and was born and reared, and then my grandfather accumulated a great deal of property that we still own, a forty-three acre farm. Speaker 2: This is your father's father, Ferdinand. Speaker 1: My father's father. Speaker 2: Ferdinand Watson. Speaker 1: Ferdinand Watson. He bought up, bought a forty-three acre farm. They are four or five blocks that he owned and then there is probably about two blocks or four blocks that--where the family house was built. We're still on that, and then on 5th Avenue, on 5th Street. And then on 4th Street the property that his grandmother, my father's grandmother owned, we still own that, and so the story is, is just the opposite, that my grandfather, and somewhere in some of our records, he worked at a lumberyard and we had a couple of the orders he had written if we had not lost those. My sister [Walterdelle Watson] had part of that property, and we don't know how he became a funeral home man, how he managed to develop the Watson Funeral Home [ph.], but he did, he developed the funeral home after he left working from the lumberyard and then he accumulated all the property, and all of the property we still have. And had no problems. Story_ID: 613859 Speaker 1: Ferdinand Watson [ph.] and Ella Anna Watson [Ella Sheridan Watson (ph.)] had only three children, Alberta C. Malone [Alberta Watson Malone (ph.)], whom they sent to Prairie View [Prairie View State Normal and Industrial College; Prairie View A&M University, Prairie View, Texas], and--at an early age and she was born probably 1800 and she has a, a B.A. degree, a B.S. degree in math, and then got a master's in math, and became a public school teacher. My dad was a middle child. He chose the funeral home business and so he became a licensed mortician and he kept that license up all the way all of his life. And then the youngest sister graduated from Prairie View, but she chose not to teach. She did domestic work for a while and then became a beautician, and, of course, my grandmother, Ella Anna, worked with my father in the funeral home and I wanna make sure--that she was right there, quite a businesswoman, managed, my grandfather died when I was four years old and so that was in 1934, and I'm not sure of what it was at that point in time. But my father somehow or another held onto the property. We didn't develop the property. And then my father stayed in the funeral home business until it was, I guess around World War II [WWII] time, and since he was the only male child left in the family then there was, if they were working and I think, jobs related to the [U.S.] military, then they could be exempt. So my father became the head of the family. And that was a sort of policy. We really came from male dominated structures, like Big Papa was Big Papa, and that's what he was and that's my mother's, that's Robert Jackson [ph.]. Ferdinand Watson was Ferdinand Watson and then he indeed carried the tradition down to my father. I, I often said that I lived in a house that I nicknamed the Dew Drop Inn, and that was even before I went to New Orleans [Louisiana] and discovered there was a club called Dew Drop Inn because my father's role and my mother's role was you take care of everybody in the family. There was only two kids born to Walter Watson and Lillie May Watson [Lillie Benjamin Watson], and that was my sister Walterdelle [Walterdelle Watson], and then I was named Vernell [HistoryMaker Vernell Lillie], and so that was the structure. My father and my mother took care of both sides of the family. I can't think of, it was not until I was graduating from college [Dillard University, New Orleans, Louisiana] that I can remember being in my house without having had some other relatives there. My mother and daddy participated in the education of his younger sister, two children, they stayed with us until they finished high school. My mother helped take care of a couple of, we used to say country cousins, Imogene [ph.] and her sister and all of those stayed with us until they were, either got married or went to college, or left that way. And so that was the structure that we had. Story_ID: 613860 Speaker 1: My mom and dad always worked. My mother [Lillie Benjamin Watson] worked at the department store at very low pay, but she was really sharp enough to train most of the young white girls coming in and she worked at the fashions and she worked at the, Battelstein's [Battelstein's Department Store, Houston, Texas]. I don't think Battelstein's existed any more, but she eventually retired from Battelstein's. My father [Walter Watson] when he gave up the funeral home business, went into Hughes Tool [Hughes Tool Company, Houston, Texas]. And, well, as usual, he was a political animal and so he attempted to, to work and have unions established because the pay was, was really terrible. Like my father made fifty cents an hour at Hughes Tool at one point. Whites were making a totally--Mexicans made a different salary, whites made another salary. My mother was making twenty-five cents an hour. Speaker 2: What happened to the funeral business? I mean, why did he stop (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It just, you couldn't feed a family on it at that point in time. Speaker 2: So there weren't enough people around to, the population wasn't probably big enough to support it. Speaker 1: The population, my dad never gave up the funeral home process. He still kept his license and there is a funeral home now in Houston, Texas that called Lockwood Funeral Home, it came into existence because my dad had such a love for the funeral home business he always kept his mortician license available. And then I was talking with this guy one day and he couldn't, he was never able to pass the test, and I said to him, I said, "My dad has his license, so why don't you ask him, why can't you use his license and then open your funeral home?" And as a result, he did. And so at that funeral home the guy who originally owned it, is dead now, but he built the Watson Chapel of Chimes there as a tribute to my father for allowing him to use his license until he eventually did that. And so my father left the funeral home business, you know, you wanna get your kids educated, and my father was obsessed with that and so you could not, in terms of, my father wasn't a good entrepreneur, let me just put it that way. He buried anybody. Speaker 2: Well, about how old was he when he lost the funeral home? Speaker 1: I guess it was the beginning of World War II [WWII], and so that's in the-- Speaker 2: About 1940, '41 [1941]. Speaker 1: The '40s [1940s] somewhere, along the '40s [1940s]. And he, because he still had to take care of, participate--my oldest aunt who was going back and forth to school, so her son, Amitus [ph.], stayed with us. The younger sister, her two children stayed with us, and so my father was the care keeper, giver, and they were sharing. Now I don't want you to think that they were not contributing in any kind of way. Aunt Ida was working in domestic work, and so, hey, she could sew, so she was making clothes. She was bringing steaks on Thursdays, you know, from the big house, as you would call it, so that they were, everybody contributed, you know. When they killed the hogs, when they made the preserves, that we were going to get our share of those, but it was that kind of family. And that's the kind of families that I know, they're community, and that was, we were not unique, that was happening to African American families, and that's how come I'm always so upset when I hear the stories that young blacks believe and that whites accept that it was a community process and that you had people when I went to Dillard [Dillard University, New Orleans, Louisiana], who were not even related to me, who would send me boxes of the most private kinds of things that you really need when you're at college. Because they were going to contribute to your succeeding in any kind of way, and so that was what the household was like. So Lonnie [ph.], who is really my first cousin, and I think that the, the four children born from that union, or the five, we are unique in a way because our birthdays sort of run in order. I'm May 11, 1931, my sister [Walterdelle Watson] is September 12th, 1928, Lonnie is October 13, 1928 and then Rita Jean [ph.] is February 14th and I've forgotten her year, but we were all very close. In fact, my mother nursed Lonnie as she nursed her own child, so, you know, the kind of families that we had, that I'm just, I'm just amazed that people don't know it. Story_ID: 613861 Speaker 1: Now that's a vivid picture of growing up, I mean of the situation that your parents grew up in, is there a story about how your parents met? Speaker 2: My mother [Lillie Benjamin Watson] and dad [Walter Watson], they're both dead. Mother died in--first, in 1991, and then my father [Walter Watson] died three years later, 1993. Speaker 1: Oh, I was asking, is there a story about how they met. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. I mean his, here is a pretty little rich girl from Bellville [Texas], because my grandfather [sic. maternal great-grandfather], Robert Jackson [ph.], was certainly considered our kind of rich because of the land and of the possession and the kind of dreams that he had for his children. And, of course, my dad was a student at the high school that she came to attend, and so they met and they fell in love and they got married and, and my sister [Walterdelle Watson] was born first and then I was second. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So it was, you know, true love. Story_ID: 613862 Speaker 1: When you look at your parents' personalities and their talents and their dispositions, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: (Laughter) (makes sound) I don't know. My mom [Lillie Benjamin Watson] was unique. She was charming, sweet, she would give you anything in the world and if she thought you wanted it, it was yours. My dad on the other hand was, he would hold his hand, I can remember my mother saying, "You see Walter [Walter Watson], you got it that way, so no money can come out of it, but no money can go in it either." So they were just the opposite. He said, "If Teeny [ph.] had a dime, she would spend eleven cents," and so my dad was the kind of man who felt like he was a one worder, a one liner. You need to think of consequences of your own actions, and he meant that. He was not going to rescue me from any problem. He was not going to loan me any money. Now if my mother thought I needed it, not whether I wanted it, you know when I moved to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], I walked in the Sears and Roebuck [Sears, Roebuck and Co.] and I saw this beautiful chandelier and I said how gorgeous this is, and then I was walking with my mother in the snow in Pittsburgh and this women had this long, long, what do you call it, midi skirts, a (unclear) coats, leather. And I thought how beautiful it was, and then about a month later I said you know what, I don't want that chandelier my ceiling is not high enough for a chandelier, and so, and I said I don't want that coat either because my hips are much too wide and with that slit and as long as that coat is, and as short as I am, I, you know, it's going to look terrible, and I said, I'd better call mother. I said, "Mother, do not buy that coat for me 'cause I don't want it. I'm too short to have a coat that long walking in snow in Pittsburgh." And she said, "Well baby, it's in the layaway." I said, "Mother go get your money back," and then she said, "Well," and I said, "Mother don't send me the chandelier." She said, "Oh, you'll probably have it in a couple of days. I've already paid it. It's already sent to you." So that was my mother. I remember asking my dad, I said--we saw a car we needed when I'd just gotten married and I said, "All we need is four hundred dollars," and I said, "We can pay you back so and so," gave him a date. And he said, "Well, I think there will probably be another one available at the same time, so why don't you wait, that way you don't owe anybody anything on it and besides that, if it's only costing four hundred dollars, it's probably going to break down anyway, so you'll have all those added bills to it." And so they were total opposites in every way it seemed. But my dad was the kind of person who said that you've got two feet, stand up. My mother said, it doesn't matter whether or not you have two feet, you're mine, or you're my neighbors or you're who, and so I'm gonna reach out for you, and so I don't know which one I'm like I think that there is probably the sort of sternness that my father had. I could, I've seen my father loan money to individuals in the neighborhood that never paid him back, but I knew that he was not going to loan the money to me, and I, I suppose, if I think about the gifts that I got, I'm really proud of the gifts that my dad gave me because my sister [Walterdelle Watson], I think, was also, she's dead now, but she was also very strong in terms of, you know, we're responsible for taking care of ourselves, that we understood that education was a crucial kind of thing that my dad was going to pay for and he was not going to pay for the foolishness. We knew that mother was there with the softness and, you know, whatever it was (laughter) that you had that, and now I don't know. I think probably, probably, I'm more like my father. I think I'm a giver, but I think I learned from him a very precious gift, you have to earn the right to have my gifts, and I can, I can shut down in that kind of way. I don't think that I'm going to be foolish because I sort of look at people, I've always looked at young people as if, hey, you could be a member of my family, or you might marry my daughter [Charisse Lillie] or my granddaughter, and so what I'm doing is helping prepare you, because I know what I want here in this world, in this society. And so, I moved very early, probably because of my [maternal] grandfather's process. By the time I was fourteen years old, I was involved very heavily with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. I, you know, I, I had the pleasure of sitting in the courtroom in Texas as Thurgood Marshall argued about (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I don't--I don't wanna-- Story_ID: 613863 Speaker 1: What we normally ask then next is about growing up. Now, do you have an earliest memory of growing up? Speaker 2: An earliest memory month? Speaker 1: No, an earliest memory of growing up, an earliest childhood memory. Speaker 2: I don't know. I remember it all. It was so, I'm sorry, it was just so wonderful, you know, if I could have stopped the sun from coming up some times, I would, because, you know, I can remember, I, I remember both worlds, you know, the Hempstead [Texas] world, which was a town world, as a child of walking to the, the Clear Creek and fishing, and not really fishing but sleeping and watching the others fish and refusing to bait a line, or I can remember the days in Bellville [Texas] where there were less resources there, you know, with the outdoor toilets and, and Hempstead, my [paternal] grandmother [Ella Sheridan Watson (ph.)] when she moved back, you know, she had all the conveniences that everybody would have. I don't know, it's difficult for me because I, at just every piece of it was important to me. Story_ID: 613864 Speaker 1: So, you grew up in Hempstead [Texas] basically, right? Is that, before you moved to (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, we grew up, now I grew up in Houston [Texas]. Speaker 1: Okay, so-- Speaker 2: We moved to Houston when I was probably about three years old. I don't even remember. We went every summer though when my [paternal] grandmother [Ella Sheridan Watson (ph.)] moved back to Hempstead, then we shared half the summers in the Brazos Bottom [Texas] where it was work, work, work, and then Hempstead where it was a little more glamorous, where you could go to the movie and sit upstairs, and if, you know, if the whites filled up upstairs, you had made that long walk for nothing because if they filled up then you couldn't go see the movie. There you had a restaurant that was pretty near Big Boys [Big Boy Restaurants International LLC]. You hear the po' boy sandwiches, that sort of comes out of Texas folklore, and so Big Boy, you could go there. I can remember times working during the war years where they did the, oh, I guess canning goods and all of those things because they started to sort of help with the war efforts. I don't know, I just, there are just so many things that, that I thought were important, you know, going to church and watching to see who's gonna wear which hat. Speaker 1: Now what was the name of your church? Speaker 2: At, I had three of them, because my mother [Lillie Benjamin Watson] was Methodist, so I went to Mount Vernon [Mount Vernon United Methodist Church, Houston, Texas] with her at some point in time. And my dad [Walter Watson] went to Ebenezer Baptist Church [Houston, Texas], so I went there sometimes. Then when I guess reached the age fourteen or fifteen, I made a choice and chose neither of my mom or dad's churches, but chose Payne Chapel A.M.E. Methodist Church [Payne Chapel A.M.E. Church, Houston, Texas], and I don't even remember the minister's name, but I, it was a wonderful church because it was a lot of teenagers there and the reverend, I could remember, had a very handsome son, and then the guy that I later married, his father was our Sunday school teacher, and so he was probably the most attractive--that would--attracted me to the church, Richard Lillie [ph.], who was the superintendent and was everything at Payne's Chapel who ran the Boy Scouts [Boy Scouts of America], who did the Sunday school classes, you know, and so I remember that. I was, you know, by age, by the time I was in the seventh grade, I, I was in the theater company and I've been in theater since then. Speaker 1: Where? Speaker 2: At Wheatley High school [Phillis Wheatley High School, Houston, Texas]. Speaker 1: Wheatley High School, okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was Wheatley junior, senior high school. Speaker 1: Where did you start school? What was the name of your grade school? Speaker 2: Crawford Elementary [Crawford Elementary School, Houston, Texas]. Speaker 1: And what ward did you live in? Speaker 2: Fifth Ward [Houston, Texas]. Speaker 1: Fifth Ward, okay. Speaker 2: And I remember, I, I don't know if I remember it or people keep telling me this, that somehow or another I think you were supposed to have been six before you could go to a school, elementary school, and so the principal stopped me and 'cause somebody had said they thought I was five years old, and so she asked me my age and I told her I was five at home and six at school. And so they teased me about that so much that I, you know, it's locked into my memory (laughter). Story_ID: 613865 Speaker 1: Crawford Elementary School [Houston, Texas]. Do you remember your first day at school? Speaker 2: No, I don't. I just remember the first day the principal called me in, which was about the fourth or fifth day I was at school. Speaker 1: Did they let you stay? Speaker 2: Yes, they let me stay. They thought it was so funny, and they had me repeating it over and over again, and it followed me all the way through. And principals at that point in time had a, had a lot of control and so didn't bother a lot and as long as I was able to keep up with the work because we had gone to a kindergarten that I even eventually sent my children there, that we were able to, to handle the academic rigors. Speaker 1: You started in 1936 then right, at age five? Speaker 2: Yeah, at age five. Speaker 1: Okay. What was your favorite activity in school? Speaker 2: Speaking, and there was a whole lot to do around talking and storytelling, and now that I think about it, I don't think the teachers understood but most of them really almost had an action modality with that whole process of learning and the textual learner is, is the thing that to me is destroying education and particularly for poor kids and when I say poor kids, I'm really talking about poor whites, poor blacks, all kids, poor, because in many instances the textual process cannot happen the same way for poor people because poor people, most of them at that point, and many of them still, are riding the buses so they're leaving home two hours before and then many of the are having to do two or three jobs in order to survive and then they're still coming home late at that process and so it is not that kind of leisure where a mother, my mother [Lillie Benjamin Watson] got up every morning, she washed her clothes. She didn't tolerate us washing her clothes. And she didn't want anybody in her kitchen, so she washed her clothes. All we had to do was hang them out, but she also cooked every morning before she went to work so that when we came home from school and when dad [Walter Watson] came home from work because he was working (unclear), and he got off at two o'clock, and so when you're thinking about that, and then when you're thinking about when she's coming home again and she's got to wash and she's got to ride the bus and she's been standing on her feet as a maid in a store [Battelstein's Department Store, Houston, Texas] all day long, there is not that kind of leisure time to sit there with your kids. My dad was a storyteller and so he was always telling stories and word games and those kind of things, you know. And so part of that action modality was happening for me. It may not have been happening for other kids, but I can see the value of that, you know, you know, like he used to say, "Did you see the Jones boys," he says, "and there're two of them and they are so mean and hateful, they could close up Hempstead [Texas]." Now (background noise), he's talking to you at that point in time because he's trying to make some control of your behavior. Story_ID: 613866 Speaker 1: So we were talking about school. Speaker 2: Yeah, my elementary school, Crawford Elementary. Speaker 1: Crawford Elementary School [Houston, Texas]. Did you have a favorite teacher at Crawford or some favorite teachers? There may have been more than one. Speaker 2: Well, Miss Colgure [ph.], Miss Williams [ph.], it was kind of family process. Speaker 1: Did they live in the neighborhood [Fifth Ward, Houston, Texas]? Speaker 2: They did. And so you could not, I mean you really had no freedom, there was no creativity that you could let go with because they lived in the neighborhood. And I, you know, I think that that's part of, what's interesting is--I was talking about one of the things, it was a action modality of teaching that, that teachers that I had in elementary school on a subconscious level, because they weren't talking in this way about education, understood that you had to come in prepared to teach to a visual learner, a textual learner, or, I guess an emotional learner, someone who's got to be, the heart's got to be in there. But I don't think they were conscious of it, and they also knew that you were gonna be tracked into Wheatley High School [Phillis Wheatley High School, Houston, Texas] and that they would know the teachers from whence you came and so, as a result, there was a unstated alliance with folk that they prepared you and they knew the teachers that you were gonna go to and if the teacher would ask you who was your math teacher, it was going to be a reflection on them, and they took a lot of pride of preparing you for that journey. And I think Miss Colgure was probably the second grade teacher that I probably remember the most, and she always, no matter what happened, there was gonna be, I call it show and tell, but you know, in a real sense, it was just how do I make you feel good about yourself if there are twenty-five of you in here, and so I want all twenty-five of you to remember something great about what happened in here today. And it was just wonderful. It may have been what did you do last summer or whatever it was, but I, I don't think she ever changed from that. And I think I started to borrow that from her, that everybody in that room was very, very important, or Miss Williams when I think of her, in math, and I don't know if I was always that good, I could always count my money, but somehow or another her idea was if you wouldn't do the numbers well, the addition or the subtraction, she spent some time with you so that you would demonstrate what your strong suit was. And this is just looking back in terms of time, of really thinking about what was important about that, and so they knew, they knew your parents. Story_ID: 613867 Speaker 1: The only thing that I need to describe is I think Houston [Texas] was, not unique, but you had separate neighborhoods. You had Fifth Ward [Houston, Texas], Fourth Ward [Houston, Texas], Third Ward [Houston, Texas]. You had most people who came in from Hempstead [Texas] and Austin [Texas] came in through an area that was near the York Street area. And then they moved into Studewood Heights [Houston, Texas] and from Studewood Heights, then they made choices in terms of larger wards. And so this was the whole competitive world. In other words, the line that's going to Wheatley high school [Phillis Wheatley High School, Houston, Texas] is going to eventually compete against the Jack Yates [Jack Yates High School, Houston, Texas] line and the Jack Yates line is gonna also compete against Booker T. Washington [Booker T. Washington High School, Houston, Texas], 'cause you only had three high schools, so you were gonna come together in some kind of way. A guy, and I can't think of his name, who was at Carnegie Mellon [Carnegie Institute of Technology; Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], came into Texas and developed, at the University of Texas [University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas], what he called the Interscholastic League [University Interscholastic League], which meant that drama, debate and these things were going to be counted in the system just as athletics would be counted. It was later on that music was brought in to that process. In fact, I was, I had left, it was around '69 [1969] when they really brought in the bands, but when I was there as a student and by the time I made it to getting to the junior high, that you had the Interscholastic League [ph.], and so you could see kids participating in debate, or in some of the oratory, and you had the Elks [Improved Benevolent and Protective Order of the Elks of the World] oratorical contest. At some point, they were beginning to bring in I Speak for Democracy, blacks were not really allowed to compete in that in the very beginning and I think that I may have been one of the first students in the junior high school. But that elementary school-- Speaker 2: What was this called again, the-- Speaker 1: Well, we called it the Interscholastic League, and so that Interscholastic League included dramatic interp [interpretation], one act plays, debate, oratory, and those kinds of activities, and which now I think still goes on and was just kind of fantastic, but this gave teachers in elementary school a tremendous incentive to prepare their youngsters because it means that you're gonna have to start writing your own speeches, you're gonna have to do some other kinds of things, and then I, I belonged to the same church as the teachers who are teaching in the junior/senior high schools, and when they ask you who was your fourth grade math teacher, then you're gonna call me by name. So as a result of that, I think that there became almost what I call a form system that actually teachers were preparing you to move into the next level of participation. And so it was at this point, you, you're gonna feed into only--now I think you're feeding into probably about twelve high schools in Houston, but at this point as a black youngster, we were feeding into only three schools and we weren't feeding into any junior high schools. Speaker 2: Now these were all-black schools for the most part (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They were all-black schools. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So you're going straight from the elementary into-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --the junior high-- Speaker 2: So-- Speaker 1: --senior high combination. Story_ID: 613868 Speaker 1: You started at Phillis Wheatley, right? I mean you went to Phillis Wheatley High School [Houston, Texas]? Speaker 2: I went to Phillis Wheatley High School. Speaker 1: Tell us about Wheatley High School. It was a special place that we've been, we were talking about from the moment I came in the door, so (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, it was awesome, it was awesome. Speaker 1: Who were some of the students there? Who were some of the teachers and what was some of your experiences, and what did you do for in that era to make an impact? Speaker 2: Well, I guess, Robert T. Holland was my drama teacher and was a man that I stayed with all the time, that I started with him in the seventh grade and high school and speech, and Ashton Olivier was my debate coach. He was also the debate coach for Barbara Jordan. Speaker 1: What's, what's his name, I'm sorry? Speaker 2: Ashton-- Speaker 1: Ashton. Speaker 2: --Olivier, O-L-I-V-U-R [sic.]. Sam Harris was my band teacher and I was also a majorette, and so when you got in junior high, then you can participate in these activities, four years of senior high school and three years of the junior high school, so that's seven years of working with these individuals. Sam Harris has produced the Jazz Crusaders [The Crusaders], Joe Sample, Betty Harper [ph.]. Wheatley High School was the school that produced Arnett Cobbs [sic. Arnett Cobb], the--Illinois Jacquet, the Simon brothers [ph.], the Edwin brothers [ph.], you know, Ernestine Anderson, and so you know, you're in there, and then these guys all drop by and come back and play and that and so my life just took on a pattern of its own which was theater. Accidentally, my first cousin was, was acting there, was in the theater group, but I just happened to drop by one Sunday and the next thing I know I'm Becky Thatcher in 'Tom Sawyer' ['The Adventures of Tom Sawyer,' Mark Twain] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) 'Tom Sawyer.' You did all-black versions of-- Speaker 2: No, no, no, we didn't do black versions. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: There was no black versions. We did the literature just as it was written. When I played Medea, I played Medea, and I played Medea by that--a wonderful, my, my high school drama teacher had translated it. No, we did not do any black versions. We did, and we did very little black literature. There was only one black writer in the textbook as a poet, and that was Gwendolyn Brooks from Chicago [Illinois], and then there was one short story by Booker T. Washington, and what I don't understand is that all of these teachers had done their undergraduate days at all-black schools [HBCUs] and in some of them, had been in school with the likes of a Langston Hughes or with those who had been at Lincoln, and there were never any references, you know. My career as an actress was not built on being a great black theater thing. I thought I was going to Broadway and do Medea on Broadway. And we were doing Shakespeare [William Shakespeare], Chekhov [Anton Chekhov]. We were not reading anything, anything black. The only time we really saw these outstanding remarkable black men and it really has, I've developed a real bitterness (laughter) towards the one great man in history theory that's been awarded to African Americans because we had thousands of outstanding remarkable men, you know, Benjamin Quarles [Benjamin A. Quarles] was my history teacher. You had great writers that, that were surrounding us and we were not seeing them through those eyes. We were, we had such ultimate faith in American democracy that that's the only way I can put it. In some ways, I wonder if African Americans really, had really accepted the fact that their writings were of lessor value and that all they had to do was to train us to come into an integrated world that would not have any of your cultural processes there. You know, when I think about it, I become enraged and that's, I do, I do, I mean how dare somebody deny me Langston Hughes at that point in time. Or dely- deny me Frederick Douglass at that point in time. Story_ID: 613869 Speaker 1: And then when I think about my neighborhood [Fifth Ward, Houston, Texas], there were so many fantastic African American males there, John Elihue Codwell [John E. Codwell, Sr.] was one of the greatest principals that has ever walked this earth. And what a lot of white Americans do not realize, that black Americans in the South could not attend many of the graduate schools to get graduate degrees, so the State of Texas, Arkansas, Mississippi, all of the southern states sent their black teachers off to the likes of Carnegie Tech [Carnegie Institute of Technology], before it was Carnegie Mellon [Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]. My high school drama teacher [Robert T. Holland] was a dissertation away from completing his degree in drama from the University of Iowa [Iowa City, Iowa]. My high school principal, Dr. John Elihue Codwell, got his degree from Michigan [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan]. Tremendous money being spent but thank God, thank God, because it meant that my generation in particular, were taught by the finest, who had gone to the great schools. Gladys Forde, who was at Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] for years, graduated from Carnegie Tech. Gafner [ph.] who just passed away, came out of Carnegie Tech, so that you had quality teachers in every sense of the word. You only had one or two or three who might have worked, daughter or somebody may have worked for some very rich white person that you had to hire, but I'm telling you that if you hired that inadequate person, I can guarantee you that there were Ruth Simmons, that is president of Brown [Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island], or there was Khalid Muhammad [Khalid Abdul Muhammad], or who is now deceased, but, you know, if you really didn't have it together, you weren't going to last very long in that classroom with a Noah Kent [ph.] there, or a Ruth Simmons there, and that they studied, they were good textual learners, but also within that whole context, people understood. See, you had to realize we had only one library available to me in my high school days [at Phillis Wheatley High School], and it was in the Fourth Ward [Houston, Texas], so I, I don't know how to help you understand, but I had to take three buses to get to the library in Fourth Ward and you don't imagine that your parents are going to let you out late at night. And then they close the library at five o'clock and you could not use the library downtown. It was not until my children came alone that the public library was available, but the libraries there were really, really good too. They really cared, and we had, we had a, a tier line of teachers. John Codwell had at the top of his line, the five best English teachers that existed in that school. And they knew exactly where you had come from if you had been teaching English from Miss So and So down there, then you can believe me when they got you up there, and you were not together, they're going down to talk to you and wanna know why is it that this child does not have the kinds of skills. I mean I don't understand how all these myth really got out about African Americans. Now I, I can only talk for Houston [Texas]. Story_ID: 613870 Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: Now, Dr. Cogwell's [sic.] name is spelled C-O-G-W-E-L-L? Speaker 1: Who? Speaker 2: John Eli- Speaker 1: C-A-L-D [sic.]. Speaker 2: Oh, Caldwell [sic. John E. Codwell, Sr.]. Speaker 1: Caldwell. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Us southerners call him (pronunciation) Caldwell (laughter), Caldwell. He was a coach. In fact, that was one of the things that you can find, I think, historically, that principals in high schools and junior high generally were either athletic coaches because somebody had some mixed notion that they could better control and handle them. The only one that I can remember during my day and I can't think of his name, but he was at Booker T. Washington [Booker T. Washington High School, Houston, Texas], and he's the only one who came through the ranks as a scholar, rather than the, the athletic program. Speaker 2: Now the state controlled the schools, right, in terms of appointing personnel and such, right? Speaker 1: No, not really. The city (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The State of Texas, I mean the City of Houston [Texas]. Speaker 1: The City of Houston. Speaker 2: This is the white political structure-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --really controlled the appointments in school? Speaker 1: Yeah, but they chose without a doubt most of the time athletic coaches. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: We were just fortunate in our day to have had some remarkable men and who were very proud of what they were doing. Speaker 2: So the state, the state also had like standards for education and, as you said, the textbooks, the textbook that you had in literature included, what Gwendolyn Brooks and Booker T. Washington and the teachers, even though they knew about other black writers didn't include them. Were they trying to match the state standard you think, or what? Speaker 1: I, you know, that's a question I really need to ask some of them. I never understood because many of them had attended Dillard [Dillard University, New Orleans, Louisiana], Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] or they had had some remarkable teachers there. Many of them had attended Dillard, and in--Dillard was, you had, we profited when I got to Dillard by the Communist process, because as Michigan and others got rid of their white professors, some of them came, like Oakley C. Johnson came from University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan], who was a brilliant instructor. However, he was not any stronger than say, an African American teacher that might have been there as well, like George Martin [ph.], who was absolutely-- Speaker 2: So you're saying some of the white professors who were purged during the Communist scare came to teach down south in the black schools? Speaker 1: Oh yeah, yeah, yeah. And then you have schools like Sarah Lawrence [Sarah Lawrence College, Bronxville, New York] and others who always had sort of a partnership. Tougaloo [Tougaloo College, Tougaloo, Mississippi] has also always profited by a number of the sister schools [Seven Sisters] who came in to teach at various points in time. I can remember a time that the speech teacher that I--and I can't remember her name, from Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois], when she retired she came to work at Dillard so that the quality and, and in black schools, historically you didn't have freedom. You know, you got a lot of freedom if you were in a major white school. You could go and talk to some dean or somebody else and somebody might, you know, crack a whip here and there. George Martin, if he gave you a D, he gave you a D and you better live with it, and that was all there was to it. You didn't have much choice about saying, "Well I don't want to take this course. I think I'll substitute this." You know, it was a rigid kind of formula that you followed, and in following it, there was some discipline, but saying, you know, there's no getting around the course. You can't substitute some fluff course for a Benjamin Quarles [Benjamin A. Quarles] course, and Benjamin Quarles was a fantastic teacher. He was just demanding and inaccessible sometimes, but you know, he wrote that beautiful book on Frederick Douglass ['Frederick Douglass,' Benjamin Quarles]. So you were surrounded by people who cared. Story_ID: 613871 Speaker 1: So you, you got involved in the theater department at, at Phillis Wheatley [Phillis Wheatley High School, Houston, Texas] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Seventh grade. Speaker 1: --in seventh grade. Speaker 2: And I was involved in debate and I was involved in oratory. In fact, in my senior year I think I wrote the winning entry out of the black population, I Speak for Democracy. That's an interesting story. When I went to the Rice Hotel [The Rice, Houston, Texas] to compete against the whites-- Speaker 1: Now, now this is in the, what did you call this competition? It's called-- Speaker 2: It's I Speak for Democracy, and they-- Speaker 1: But the competition you were in with, I mean, you read it for-- Speaker 2: No, I Speak for Democracy is a contest-- Speaker 1: Oh, that's the name of the contest, okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) and that the winner of the contest that that book was nine times out of ten going to be published in one of the English books and so-- Speaker 1: So, I Speak for Democracy is the name of the contest. Speaker 2: Is the name of the contest, I Speak for Democracy. Speaker 1: Is this citywide, statewide--okay. Speaker 2: It was nationwide. Speaker 1: Nationwide, okay. Speaker 2: And so the best one, and so I competed from a black school and when I arrived to compete against the six other white schools (laughter)-- Speaker 1: So you were a finalist? Speaker 2: I was finalist in, from the black schools. Speaker 1: Okay. Now walk us through this now, don't jump too far. Speaker 2: I was the finalist for the black schools. Speaker 1: In Houston [Texas]. Speaker 2: In Houston. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: And so the other-- Speaker 1: Is this a state level? Speaker 2: It's-- Speaker 1: We're at now? Speaker 2: This is citywide. Speaker 1: Citywide, okay. Speaker 2: We're gonna do--citywide. Speaker 1: So, okay, so you were a finalist (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) When I got to the Rice Hotel which was the largest hotel. Now, it's been destroyed, but it would have been equal to the Waldorf Astoria in New York [Waldorf Astoria New York, New York, New York] or something. And when I walked through the door, they said, "What--if you'll wait just a minute, and we'll take you," and so they carried me around to the elevator where the garbage cans were. And so when I walked, I stood there and my high school drama teacher, Robert T. Holland, said, "How do you feel?" I said, "I'm going to go up on this elevator to present a speech, for I Speak for Democracy?" I said, "No." He said, "You're disqualifying yourself." I said, "I certainly am." He said, "Well, I'll go up so that you are not listed as a no show," so he went up. He also went up to see what was going to be that, the city prize, which was a little plastic white radio. And so he came down, he said, "Well, the winner's going to receive a little white radio and then they will go on to the competition," because then I guess you have to do the regional, then the state, then the national. He said, "Are you sure you're all right with this?" I said, "I'm not going to any contest to speak for democracy in a garbage elevator." And so he bought me the little white radio. I've just thrown it away, you know, recently, but it was a little Sears and Roebuck [Sears, Roebuck and Co.] white radio. But those were-- Speaker 1: So he bought you one, and you, you-- Speaker 2: Yeah, he brought me. Speaker 1: You didn't go up, right? Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Didn't make the speech? Speaker 2: That was his way of saying, okay, I can support you, where you are, um-hm. All I can tell you about Wheatley High School, it was the most fabulous place and that if I had my choice, I would want to recreate it all over this country (laughter), and this nation, because I thought it was one of the most fantastic high schools. You had everything. We even had black history courses. Speaker 1: Now who taught black history? Speaker 2: Ashton Olivier, and guess why it was closed down? Because no black kids would take it. They knew their own history, they thought. Speaker 1: Because they were black. Speaker 2: So the city did not take it away, nobody would enroll in it because it was elective. You know you always have American history that has maybe five lines about African Americans, if that, but that course when I went to Wheatley, originally there was a black history course (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now-- Story_ID: 613872 Speaker 1: There's a duality here and I know you described like how people in the community took care of each other. A lot of people we interview talk about that, how wonderful the community was and supportive of each other. There's another side to this too, isn't it? I mean the side that won't even study black history or the side that won't talk about black literature in class or the, I mean, did you when you, on the side that's willing to go up on a garbage elevator to deliver a speech about democracy, I mean, there's a, were you thinking about these contradictions in your community in those days? Speaker 2: I think I've always, I started, I was probably fourteen years old when I started in the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. And might have always been looking very--I suppose because of my [maternal] grandfather and the problems that one had, and incidentally, the other one didn't have a lot of problems because he really didn't look African American at all, and had very strong vocabulary in talking to police officers, and because he was driving probably, he had a 1932 Pierce Arrow [Pierce Arrow Motor Car Company], which was a pretty impressive car to have had, which was his funeral home car. And so, you know, I really grew up seeing two kinds of fighters, my grandfather on my father's side never accepted boundaries for himself. And my [paternal] grandmother, Ella A. [Ella Sheridan Watson (ph.)], who was jet black never sought and never accepted boundaries and would confront you anywhere, anywhere. Now my grandfather, Ferdinand Watson [ph.], probably got by with it 'cause folk didn't know who they were talking to, an extremely verbal, articulate, without any swerves and that, and with the language pattern, and my pattern, incidentally, is almost typical of a Texas pattern. It just depends on where you are. If you are in East Texas, you might be talking through your nose, and if you are in let's say going a little bit further in East Texas and Tyler, Texas, that sometimes that might be a little Alabama sound that you, you have, but there was a very conscious effort on the parts of all of the African Americans that I knew, to really, really speak clearly and distinctly and slang, I never heard a kid use slang in a classroom until I came to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania]. Speaker 1: Now this is the same, you grew up, you know, with the same teachers that Barbara Jordan had who was probably (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right. And she came out sounding with a Boston accent. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And that was before she went to Boston [Massachusetts]. So it-- Speaker 1: That's almost an exaggeration of proper speech in some ways. Speaker 2: (Laughter) You know, so, but it was, it was a double edged sword. In some ways, I think many of our African American teachers at that point in time thought the road to education was through submitting yourself to knowing white culture, European culture, and were not at all conscious of the fact that they had a rich culture of their own and had never been exposed to it. Speaker 1: Now this is a, this parallels what we heard when we interviewed Dr. Carruthers [HistoryMaker Jacob H. Carruthers, Jr.] who you went to high school with and Asa Hilliard [HistoryMaker Asa Hilliard, III], the same. Could you talk about them a little bit? Now you went to high school with them and-- Speaker 2: No, I wasn't really in high school. He was like, my sister [Walterdelle Watson] was three-- Speaker 1: He was the head of the-- Speaker 2: Yeah, he was probably in my sister's class. He was about three years, you know, like I'm, I'm in the junior high part, and he's up there, and so we're looking at them as models. Now Asa was a little bit younger than him as well. So Asa was out of that system and I, and never attended Wheatley High School [Phillis Wheatley High School, Houston, Texas]. You saw him probably going to Crawford [Crawford Elementary School, Houston, Texas] because by the time he was moving into that, that level, he either in Baytown [Texas] or he was in Denver [Colorado]. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: But, Jacob graduated from Wheatley High School and probably it was my, let me see, I graduated in 1948 and so he probably graduated 1944 or '45 [1945], somewhere along those line-- Story_ID: 613873 Speaker 1: You had a chance to, to attend the Sweatt, the Heman Sweatt versus Painter trial [Sweatt v. Painter, 1950], right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Or part of it anyway-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: --when Thurgood Marshall was, now tell us about now, you were trying to tell us about it before, but I wanted to wait until we got to it (laughter). So what-- Speaker 2: Well, I was active with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and I was one of the youngest ones and Sid Hilliard, Mrs. Adair [Christia V. Daniels Adair], who was president of the NAACP. Speaker 1: Sid Hilliard is-- Speaker 2: Sid Hilliard is Asa Hilliard's [HistoryMaker Asa Hilliard, III] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) Asa's uncle, right. Speaker 2: Yeah, his uncle, and he had a ranch, Sid Hilliard ranch. You had a lot of letter carriers there and so they had decided and really it's still stays in my mind, that the Hatch Act [Hatch Act of 1939], because that was one of the constant conversations of saying you can't, telling somebody you can't participate in this because you're a letter carrier, the Hatch Act and you can't, you know, deal with political kinds of things. And I heard guys say, you know, "Hey, I'll dig a ditch, but I'm going to participate in this process." Speaker 1: Oh, so they were threatening black police officers with the Hatch Act, that's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, they weren't threatening, you know that the Hatch Act does not allow you to participate politically, you know, and in terms of a post office worker or something. It certainly would have. It could have meant their jobs. Speaker 1: Well, it, but I think it was meant to keep people from participating overtly in electoral politics, not in a civil rights case, I don't think-- Speaker 2: Electoral politics, whatever it was, whatever they need, they can shape whatever they want to have it go that way, and so we also had a Catholic, a Mr. Broussard [ph.], I can't remember his name, but the church was also threatening him because there was rumors that there was some Communist members a part of the NAACP, and I think, I don't know if I remember her name correctly, but there was somebody named Ruth Brett [ph.], I think who was head of the, the Texas Communist Party [Communist Party of Texas] or something in there, that I heard, that I can still kind of remember the name, but he was being threatened by the Catholic church, that he had to withdraw from the NAACP because if the Communist were participating there that he could not participate as a Catholic. Speaker 1: This is Sweatt, Heman Sweatt? Speaker 2: Not Sweatt, no Sweatt is the, I never really met Sweatt except the one time I saw in the city in that huge classroom with a few books and one teacher, but these are the members of the NAACP who really worked very, very hard. Speaker 1: No, I was asking who was threatened by the Catholic church. Speaker 2: Mr. Broussard, who, who decided--this is the first time in my life I'm seeing people challenge systems where, where I've seen, where I know that they can lose their jobs, they can lose whatever their wealth. They can lose a lot of things. And it's my first time really witnessing as a child of fourteen, fifteen or whatever, individuals who are saying, this cannot be. Heman Marion Sweatt must be allowed to enter and they cannot choose whom they're going to select either. That this is going to be the case and this is, and this is the fight we're going to have, and so you have a Catholic that's saying I'm gonna fight for our rights, our civil rights. You've got three or four guys who are a part of the post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service] who says I'm going to fight for my rights. You go, you had a husband and wife team, Pearl Suel, I can't think of Mr. Suel's first name [Mark Suel]. Story_ID: 613874 Speaker 1: But you know, this was a tremendous impact for me at age fourteen being able to participate [in Sweatt v. Painter, 1950] and then you having Ashton Olivier helping me prepare speeches, and I think the, what's so ironic, that one of the speeches, and I probably got them because as I'm putting my archives together, you know, I'm quoting Voltaire and Rousseau [Jean Jacques Rousseau], and not once am I quoting Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois] or some of the other figures who are prominent in terms of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], you know, and so, and to say to just indicate that if you were in Ashton Olivier's debate class, in the seventh grade or in the tenth grade, you're looking at Voltaire and Rousseau and you're looking at all these other great figures that people have decided, that, you know, African Americans are not really, have the same education and so, and these guys are educating themselves with their own readings and the civic responsibility that was implanted at Wheatley High School [Phillis Wheatley High School, Houston, Texas] was just unbelievable, and the community feeling. So you know the answer. So if I sniggled at somebody who didn't know the answer, Ashton Olivier would ask me, "Did you bother to assist him in studying that piece? Have you contributed?" And, you know, so, you know, that, this, I only know it know, and it really sometimes brings tears to my eyes to understand the power of those individuals that I experienced at Wheatley High School. Story_ID: 613875 Speaker 1: Can you give us a sense of what it was like to watch, to be in court when Thurgood Marshall was trying a case [Sweatt v. Painter, 1950]. I mean, do you have, can you kind of describe what took place (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I can remember the physical something. Grover Sellers was kind of heavy and puffy face and it was sweltering hot and I don't remember which month it was, but it was hot in that courtroom. And Thurgood Marshall, and I think it must be my imagination because he had to have been hot too 'cause he was in a suit, but I swear in my memory and it must be what I want to remember, that he did not seem to have perspired at all. And he would start his speech talking in the kind of level and then he would come down and use a little piece of vernacular something, and it was just the most awesome something, and I'm telling you now, I have never been the same after experiencing him in that courtroom. I knew then and there that my life would forever be molding, changing, creating and understanding that whatever I have, it's my responsibility to give back. It, he was, it seems to me he was six feet tall. It was just, and it was the most flowing kind of process, and the thing that he had was dignity, not poking fun at anybody, but it was the cause that he was dealing with. You know, it was not making whites feel ashamed of themselves, it was presenting a case that this young man [Heman Marion Sweatt] had a right to have an education with the tax dollars, and so, that was another gift that I think, that I hope I acquired from him, because it is so easy to be arrogant and to be insulting, you know. And it was so very clear that somehow or another all he wanted to do was let that group there and the world know that these are human beings who are entitled to a quality education by your own state dollars that you're paying, and it was not a piece in which I need to ridicule you or be sarcastic toward you, and sharp tongued toward you that these are the facts as I see them, and these are the grounds from which I am stating what I am saying. And I hope, I hope, I really hope, but sometimes people will tell me I have a sharp tongue, but I do hope that I respect the personality. I don't have to agree with what you believe, but I need to know that when I am presenting to you that which I want, I don't have to demean you, because you are a product of whatever this society has structured, and you have somehow believed it, and I think that fortunately for me, I saw hardworking black men and women all my life from the time I was five years old and I saw them working, and working, and working, and then I saw them lose things and I still saw them maintain their dignity, and Thurgood Marshall just helped reinforce that. It's a wonderful world. Story_ID: 613876 Speaker 1: Now were you, were you involved in clubs in high school, various clubs and stuff? Speaker 2: Yeah, we had, one of the things that Wheatley [Phillis Wheatley High School, Houston, Texas] really made sure that literally every kid was a part of something, so I was a part of the Sweethearts Club [ph.], and in the Sweethearts Club, we had regular dress up day, we had a regular assembly, we had wonderful white and red outfits that we wore. There were about ten clubs, The Brobombers [ph.] was a male club, the, my sister belonged to a club that was run by Mrs. Smith [ph.]. They were, what were they called, 'cause they were snooty (laughter). And I can't think of the name, but they had, they had about ten clubs that were just all females and they had about eight clubs that were just all males, but as I can recall, the Brobombers stand out. My club, Sweethearts, was not the strongest one. The one that my sister belonged to that I can't think of the name at this point. Speaker 1: The snooty one? Speaker 2: The snooties, the snooty ones, you know, at that. And then I was a drum majorette, and then I became drum major of the drum and bugle corps, and then I was a part of the Wheatley stage practice and so I was also a part of the debate team, I mentioned before. Speaker 1: Now did you run for class officer or anything? Speaker 2: No, there was not much time (laughter). Speaker 1: But it seemed like, the oratorical skills, but, but was that unique in that school, having great oratorical skills, or being involved in oratory (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, oh god yeah, oh yes, yes, yes, yes, yes. Oh yeah, I was just one of a kind. That's what so amazing. If you went through Ashton Olivier, you really came through it and you came through with Voltaire and Rousseau [Jean Jacques Rousseau] as well, then Robert T. Holland put you through these tremendous exercises on a daily basis, and then you had a Mr. Latiner [ph.] that if he didn't hear the, that th- sound, he'd stop and look at you, you know, it was not dem, dere, dose at all, you know. If you walked in and you decided you were going to use that th-, that th- better come through or else. It was a set of really articular, elegant and, oh my goodness, if they saw me dressed this way, people came to Wheatley High School, I went, I taught in heels like this (gesture) every day, no jeans. In fact I never even saw my husband in a pair of jeans until we moved to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] in 19--until 1969. The guys were dressed always in gabardine brown, black. There were no khakis in there. Blacks did not wear khakis. Chicanos in Texas wore khakis. Kids, it was amazing how teachers looked then. The secretary used to come in with white gloves on, and she was extremely proper, you know. "[HistoryMaker] Vernell Lillie, did I hear your voice out there?" And, you know, I wanted to answer her back, "You certainly did, that's how come you called my name," but you know, you knew to lower your voice, that she was not telling you to shut up and hush up. She said, "Vernell Lillie, did I hear your voice," you know. And then I was rambunctious. My sister, Walterdelle [Walterdelle Watson], who was three years older than I am, was very delicate and very proper. And I was noisy and talkative and so I remember Mrs. Smith said to me, "Are you and Walterdelle whole sisters?" And I, 'cause my sister was extremely fair with very long hair. I was shorter, had a little bit more hips and, you know, and so, and I said, "Yes." She said, "The same mother and the same daddy?" And so then because I had wit, I think I somehow said (unclear), and so then I had go sit in the day room for a while, you know. So, you know, Wheatley was a place for discipline, for character, where absolute commitment to civic responsibility and to wear purple and white meant you were somebody special. Speaker 1: Your favorite colors. Speaker 2: That's right. Story_ID: 613877 Speaker 1: Now did you graduate with honors [from Phillis Wheatley High School, Houston, Texas]? Or any particular (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Cum laude. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm, yes. Speaker 1: All right. And when you're on the verge of graduation, did you know exactly what you wanted to be and what you wanted to do? Speaker 2: Yeah. I was quite certain that Broadway was where I wanted to go. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite--favorite actors then and performers that you wanted, that you wanted to be like (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not that I would want there per se. The, you know, list in that way, other than I, I guess I would go with Paul Robeson, (Unclear) McKenna [ph.]. Speaker 1: Were you aware of those, of them in those days? You pretty much aware of Robeson and (Unclear) McKenna? Speaker 2: Well actually Paul Robeson has always been in everybody's life, you know. You know when you think about it, the singing and these are a people, you know, in African American schools they really brought great speakers, like Mary McLeod Bethune, or if they had some great singers, you know, they brought them in. Speaker 1: Did Paul Robeson perform when you were in school? Speaker 2: Paul Robeson was performing. You know he started with the silents, you know. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. I was wondering if he came to Houston [Texas] to talk to your, you when you were at grade school [Crawford Elementary School, Houston, Texas] or high school (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, no. It was just, it's strange but there was an old man, Till [ph.], who was the photographer and was sort of keeping up with some of those things. But even there, you got to remember, my mind set is not on that world, my mind set is looking at, you know, and not even Dorothy Dandridge had emerged at that point in time. You know, you're looking at the movie individuals at that point in time, but you had a lot of models to look at because you have what we call, we used to call, we had an organization called NASA [sic.], the National Association of Southern, the Southern Association, SADSA, SADSA, the Southern Association of Dramatic Arts [sic. Southern Association of Dramatic and Speech Arts; National Association of Dramatic and Speech Arts], so that we got together at Dillard, at Alabama State [Alabama State College for Negroes; Alabama State University, Montgomery, Alabama], at Arkansas State [Arkansas State College; Arkansas State University, Jonesboro, Arkansas], because you had some really powerful, powerful, people in theater, and you really got to keep it locked in your minds that theater, articulation, drama, debate, those are activities that were recurring, occurring in all the black schools, Southern [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee]. There was a white woman named Voorhees [Lillian Welch Voorhees] who was really great in theater there, and there's a young woman, Gladys Forde, from Houston, Texas, who became one of her assistants, so that part of your theater world is an all-white world, and so, you know, as a child and you're growing up, that, you know, you're wanting to do Medea, or you wanting to do Shakespeare [William Shakespeare], or you wanting somehow or another, I made a switch to the Irish writers and then Ibsen [Henrik Ibsen] was one of my favorites. So that you're looking at these characters, you're not at all looking at African American characters. I don't think anybody was walking around wanting to play Frederick Douglass or, you know, probably somebody was wanting to play Lincoln [President Abraham Lincoln] rather than. So that's the cultural mindset that we had and we had writers who were writing. Pawley [Thomas D. Pawley, III], who was at Missouri [sic. Lincoln University, Jefferson City, Missouri] had, had written a large number of plays at that point. And the, you know, it's not really until Woodie King [HistoryMaker Woodie King, Jr.] hit the scene that we began to really to look at some of the contemporary ones, but then, you know, we had ANTA [sic. ANT]. I was about to go, I was almost about to leave teaching and join the American, you know, ANTA. Speaker 1: Negro Theatre [American Negro Theatre]. Speaker 2: Yeah. And they disbanded. I'm so, I am so happy that I was two weeks late submitting my (laughter) letter because I would not have had a job, so even there, they were not doing black works. And then we were proud of, what was the Shakespeare thing that the WPA [Works Progress Administration; Work Projects Administration] did? Speaker 1: 'Othello' [William Shakespeare] or? Speaker 2: Hm? Speaker 1: What did they do 'Othello' or? Speaker 2: No, it's not 'Othello,' it was the, oh I can't think of it, but the guy who wrote 'The Wagon' [ph.], the thing, the play, was doing the works, and so the works and things that Ossie [HistoryMaker Ossie Davis] and the others were doing, you know, we never saw it. Dillard University [New Orleans, Louisiana] never did a black play. Story_ID: 613878 Speaker 1: How did you choose Dillard [Dillard University, New Orleans, Louisiana]? I mean, what made you choose (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Because it was known for its drama department. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And his, he came recruiting, and I was trying to decide, am I going into law, am I going into theater and so he came, I was recruited and at Dillard you had some of the most powerful people in theater, and I'm trying to think of his name, and he had a daughter who finally taught at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]. But you had a guy named Edmund Ross [ph.] who was a great technician. Then there was Pawley [Thomas D. Pawley, III] and Poag [Thomas E. Poag]-- Speaker 1: Pawley? Speaker 2: --and Edmonds. Speaker 1: What does Pawley--? Speaker 2: Pawley is in Lincoln [Lincoln University, Jefferson City, Missouri], is at, was at Lincoln, probably retired from Lincoln. Speaker 1: Is it Paul Lee you're saying? Speaker 2: Pawley. Speaker 1: Paul? Speaker 2: Pawl- P-A-W-L-E-Y, Pawley. And so when I arrived at Dillard, Pawley went to Lincoln, Poag went to Tennessee State [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State College; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee], Edmonds went to Florida A and M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical College for Negroes; Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida] and there was only one woman left running the theater department and they brought her in from Paris [France]. (Laughter) I said oh my god. And so I thought I'd stay at Dillard for one more year, I could give them one year, finish that year, and then I was gonna go where Randolph Edmonds [Sheppard Randolph Edmonds] was at FAM [sic. FAMU]. I guess they were calling it FAMC then at that point in time. But I liked Dillard so much and she was good. And then she made us a promise that it was only four drama majors, even though there was a strong drama department, that she would stay there with us until we graduated, and her name was Frances Perkins White. And, so I stayed, and--but we still were doing, you know, Chekhov [Anton Chekhov]. Story_ID: 613879 Speaker 1: How did your, your mother [Lillie Benjamin Watson] and father [Walter Watson] feel about you going to school to study theater and you know back in the 19--? Speaker 2: They, my father's attitude is always have you thought of the consequences of your own actions, and so secondly he's concerned what are the skills you're gonna have that--when you get through. So then he's looking at, well, if all else fail, all else fail, you can always teach school. Speaker 1: This is 1949, right at Dillard [Dillard University, New Orleans, Louisiana] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was '48 [1948] when I went to Dillard. Speaker 1: Forty-eight [1948] because you're ahead, that's right. Speaker 2: Yeah. And so my father was not at all, had any fears that I would fail. He was much too arrogant, that Watson side of him, he was just not accustomed to a Watson failing, so he was not bothered by that. And he was also certain that I would earn a good living, that my sister [Walterdelle Watson] would earn a good living. My grandmother [Ella Sheridan Watson (ph.)] would say to you, "You're a Watson," and that was, that was kind of bloodstream that you had that, you know, they forgot about that I was part Benjamin, but, you know, you're a Watson, so you're a Watson, that you can do what you wanna do. And that whatever you are going to do, you understand that we're not taking care of you either. And so, and it was not an ugly argument, it's a part of independence, you know, part of my family from both sides, there is a whole thread, particularly the maternal sides, delivering you so that you're able to take care of yourself. Story_ID: 613880 Speaker 1: Now, well tell us about, now, what productions were you in and did you play the lead in most of them or did you, or did you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh my god, don't ask me about that. That was a woman at Dillard [Dillard University, New Orleans, Louisiana] with me named Lorraine Terrell [ph.]. I hope she hears this. Every role I ever wanted at Dillard, she got. The only thing that saved me was that she graduated a year before me, and I wish I could say she was the teacher's pet, but Lorraine Terrell was the most fantastic actress you've ever laid your eyes on. So when I wanted Medea, she got Medea. When I wanted Antigone, she got Antigone, I got the chorus. You know, when I, when I go through the whole years, every role that I wanted, but, you know, it's only four drama majors, so it doesn't matter, you're gonna get a part, and you're gonna get some excellent training. And we had a woman [Frances Perkins White] who, who talked about standards and things that you never do. So she gave me some of the standards, but I think I didn't have to make those choices, you know. When I decided, when I went for auditions, the only three roles that I was ever auditioned for was the maids in 'The Little Foxes' [Lillian Hellman]. The maids in 'A Member of the Wedding' [Carson McCullers] and the maid in another one. Speaker 1: Now these are plays? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The maid, 'Little Foxes.' Speaker 1: Are these productions in New Orleans [Louisiana]? Speaker 2: No, they were things that, you know, you know, around the country where you were, you know, and I think when one woman showed me the bodysuit because at that point, I'd had a wonderful twenty-four inch waistline, you know, and so they were gonna have to add to. Speaker 1: So they had to make you bigger for the role. Speaker 2: Oh yeah. And so then I decided I'd start my own theater company [Kuntu Repertory Theatre], so that was in 1952, and then I decided that I didn't want to teach school either. Story_ID: 613881 Speaker 1: Now, you were, you were at Dillard [Dillard University, New Orleans, Louisiana] from '48 [1948] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was three and a half years. I graduate in three and a half years. Speaker 1: Okay. So what did you do immediately after Dillard? Speaker 2: I came and decided I was gonna find a job and started out (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you come back to, come back to Houston [Texas]? Speaker 2: Went back to Houston-- Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: And did some auditioning and I was not gonna play those maid roles. I thought I was Medea, (laughter) I was Antigone. And so I decided that--we have in Houston a settlement house called Julia, J-U-L-I-A, C. Hester, H-E-S-T-E-R, and they called settlement houses sometimes house, so Julia C. Hester House [Houston, Texas], and she was an old social worker in Houston who gave her home to be a center, and so it was a center as a child that I went to, and they had great social workers, people with degrees from Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York], from AU system [Atlanta University Center; Atlanta University Center Consortium, Atlanta, Georgia] and that, and so I tried to think about what kind of job I'm gonna have. And so I said, oh, I'm gonna apply to Hester House, I want to see if I can't teach, teach dance and theater there, but sitting there, because they would invite all the blacks to sit together in a cubby hole and so if they were interviewing whites, then whites were seen first and then blacks were seen second, but Hester House was a black agency so everybody was there. You didn't have appointments, you just came. And I was sitting there listening and the women were talking about, "I'm a group work specialist," or, "I'm a caseworker, I'm so and so and so." And so I said, okay, so when I went in for my interview, I went on the interview and I told them I was gonna offer them something that they didn't have at Hester House, and I'd like to come to work as a group work specialist in dance and theater. And I miss, I talked myself into that job because when one of the board members came out, he said, "Well, you did all right. We're gonna hire you," and so I went to work at Hester House and I immediately developed a children's theater, drawing upon Jacks and Jills [Jack and Jill of America, Inc.]. Then I developed the Hester House experimental theater. It was so experimental that I was still doing (unclear) works and other things (laughter). Oh, god. And then I did dance (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What else, I mean that laugh means something. Speaker 2: No, I'm just laughing about, you know, all of the things you gonna change in this world and that you look back and you criticize folk for doing, then you come back out and then you repeat the same pattern, so that at Hester House, one of the shows that I produced was 'Antigone' [Sophocles], one of them was 'Medea' [Euripides]. You know again you're producing the same works, 'The Spiral Staircase' [F. Andrew Leslie and Mel Dinelli], you know, you're producing the same works. Story_ID: 613882 Speaker 1: Now, I think it must be said that it was a wonderful experience [at Julia C. Hester House, Houston, Texas], because I also had been playing around, I was sort of interested in role playing and acting out and my advisor, my immediate supervisor, George Sands, says, "You know, you're playing around with the theater for these kids, you know, and there's something called psychodrama." And I said, "Well, I never heard of psychodrama." He said, "Well, a lot of the things that you're doing looks very much like the stuff that J.L. Moreno [Jacob L. Moreno] was doing." He said, "Here in this social work setting, it seems to me that for the kids, rather than rote memory, exploring themselves might be something that you want to do." Speaker 2: So is that what psychodrama is? Speaker 1: Well, yeah. Speaker 2: Self-exploration, huh? Speaker 1: Yeah, playing yourself. And so then I started to, you know, sort of looking at J.L. Moreno and then I said he has stolen a lot of my ideas, except you know, he was born years ago in Vienna [sic. Romania]. I didn't have the terminology and I didn't have that piece of training, but then for the children I did one play. I did an adaptation of 'Heidi' [Johanna Spyri] and so what I'm criticizing Wheatley [Phillis Wheatley High School, Houston, Texas] teachers of our doing. I'm coming out and I'm doing the same thing. And so I did Heidi with the Jack and Jills [Jack and Jill of America, Inc.], and then I decided I'm never gonna do children's theater again unless I do adults doing children's theater, but I'm not gonna do children's theater with children. Speaker 2: What was the problem with the children? Speaker 1: Oh they were wonderful, but it wasn't something I wanted to do. And I had a wonderful girl and she's still alive too. What's her name? Her name is Shelton and she's still doing theater in Canada, and I remember it's Percy Shelton's [ph.] daughter and I can't think of the daughter's name at this moment in time, but I remember her coming to me with a little pad and she said to me, "Miss Vernell [HistoryMaker Vernell Lillie]," which is how they address you in the South, she said, "I trust you're not gonna have us doing something foolish like buying expensive costumes and spending a lot of money in attire and all of those things that we will only use one time?" (Laughter) So Percy Shelton's daughter plied me with a lot of questions that made me think about who I was and what I was doing and then, and I thought about it and I said no, this is not what I want to do. I really want to do adult theater. I don't mind doing children's theater, and they were good, they were very good. I adapted 'Heidi' for them. The young lady later on became a theater major. She was one the first blacks at the Alley Theatre [Houston, Texas] allowed to perform for them, and then as she went to Adelphi [Adelphi University, Garden City, New York] with an M.F.A. and she's been in Canada, still lives in Canada doing some outstanding theater that came out of that group. Speaker 2: Her name is Shelton you said? Speaker 1: It's Percy Shelton---it's, but she has a new, she's married and so I can't think of the name, but Percy's Shelton's daughter. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So I started doing the same thing that-- Speaker 2: So-- Speaker 1: --that my teachers had done. Story_ID: 613883 Speaker 1: Did you start an adult group? Speaker 2: I start--I started simultaneously, I started with the children's group and then I started the adult group. The adult group lasted until I stayed, I guess we started in, I guess I, I started in 1952 and we existed from 1952 to 1956. Speaker 1: Now what was the name of the group? Speaker 2: It was the Hester House-- Speaker 1: Oh, Hester House players? Speaker 2: --experimental theater. And I only left Hester House [Julia C. Hester House, Houston, Texas] because my high school drama teacher was just a dissertation away from getting his Ph.D. so he and Dr. Codwell [John E. Codwell, Sr.] came to me, because Dr. Codwell was the president of the board and was--also hired me at Hester House and so he assured me that if I would come and fill in for Robert while he did his year-- Speaker 1: At Phillis Wheatley. Speaker 2: At Phillis Wheatley High School [Houston, Texas], that my job at Hester House would still be open for me and so I, I took it. I think they tricked me. And I think they, I think they knew better than I did that I would love teaching (laughter). And so I left Hester House, I still continued to work for them in the summers but I moved into Wheatley and then it didn't take me long to realize that Robert T. Holland thought that I really belonged in the classroom, but by that time, I'd picked up skills that I think made me better for the classroom than if I had gone in. See if you're working at a settlement house you have no grades and nothing to threaten kids with, that it is the skill of your program, it's a dynamic- dynamics of your program and it is the way in which you present yourself because they can leave you and go down the hall and play with arts and crafts and so I have kids who stayed with me in Hester House from 1952 until '56 [1956] and then when they came to Wheatley, they came to me again. In fact, Brenda, Dr. Brenda Spriggs [Brenda B. Spriggs], who is a physician, is one that I had from Hester House in '52 [1952] all the way until she graduated from Wheatley High School. And she has a medical degree, graduated 4.00 [grade point average], all the way, Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee], Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee], and now she's just gone back to school and gotten a degree in real estate license. So it's just, you know, and so you, the kids at Hester House eventually ended up at Wheatley anyway and so that's how I, I became a teacher, by accident (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, now-- Story_ID: 613884 Speaker 1: Now what, what year is this when you start teaching? Speaker 2: Fifty-six [1956]. Speaker 1: Nineteen fifty-six [1956]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I stayed at Wheatley, I guess I stayed at Wheatley until I left in '69 [1969]. Speaker 1: Okay. Now when did--along the way did you start become more keenly, did you, well, at what point along the way did you start really drawing from black literature and culture? Speaker 2: I gave an assignment in my class and I can't remember the little guy's name and he's dead now, and he came in, the assignment was Baraka's--Dante's "Inferno" ['The Divine Comedy,' Dante Alighieri]. Speaker 1: About what year is this now? Speaker 2: Oh that's-- Speaker 1: Sixty-one [1961] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) it has to be somewhere around like '64ish [1964] or something, '65ish [1965], and demanding that I do a black play, and so he had, had gone to the library on his own, because I certainly didn't introduce Baraka's [Amiri Baraka] 'The Toilet' to him, and he wanted me to do 'The Toilet.' Speaker 1: Well, that's in, in high school? Speaker 2: I said, "I'm sorry I have two children that I have to help my husband educate, so I cannot produce Baraka's, 'The Toilet.'" Speaker 1: 'The Toilet' is pretty rough. Speaker 2: So he kept harassing me. So then I did 'In White America' [Martin Duberman]. So he came back to me that night, he said, "I think you did a very fine job with it," he said, "but, you know, if you had been black and published this as a play, they would have told you that this is nothing but a collage of historical characters talking and moving through history. So now that you've seen whites on your stage, in 'White America,' why don't you do a black play?" And he said, "By the way, 'In White America' it's not any different from what you've been doing all along. You have been using those political collages and statements with your daughters as they are trying to get people to vote." He said, "So Duberman [Martin Duberman] has not done anything different from what you've been doing for the last ten years, dramatic collages and that's not a play. There's no structure in the traditional process that you taught me as a play, so why don't you do a play?" So I, that weekend after the play closed, I think I must have read twenty-five plays and the last one I picked up was guess what, 'Day of Absence' [Douglas Turner Ward] and 'Happy Ending' [Douglas Turner Ward], so that was my absolutely first black play that I produced. Speaker 1: Now this is in, this is at Phillis Wheatley? Speaker 2: This is at Phillis Wheatley High School [Houston, Texas], 'Day of Absence,' and that's the photograph that you see out there by my desk. That guy, Andrew, Michael Andrews [ph.], is still acting in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] and he was awesome. Speaker 1: And this is a play by [HistoryMaker] Douglas Turner Ward. Speaker 2: Douglas Turner Ward, and I have never since turned back...