 Story_ID: 620862 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers, our videographer is Matthew Hickey, observing is Catherine Jolley [ph.]. Ma'am could you please state your full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: Barbara Jean Lee, L-E-E [HistoryMaker Barbara Lee]. Speaker 1: All right and what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: July 16, 1946, El Paso, Texas. Speaker 1: And ma'am what is your occupation and title? Speaker 2: Member of [U.S.] Congress. Speaker 1: Okay, for the, member of Congress for? Speaker 2: Oh, for the 13th Congressional District of California, which includes Oakland and Berkeley [California]. Speaker 1: All right and what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is November the 6th, 2013? November the 5th, I-- Speaker 1: (Laughter). That's it. Speaker 2: It's the 5th, okay November the 5th, 2013, okay, (laughter). Speaker 1: All right and where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're at the Federal Building [Ronald V. Dellums Federal Building and U.S. Courthouse], 1301 Clay Street, Oakland, California. Story_ID: 620863 Speaker 1: Okay, now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions that we ask as sort of a warm up and they only require a short answer. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: The first one is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And what is it? Speaker 2: Orange. Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Summer. Speaker 1: Okay, favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Grenada. Speaker 1: And, the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: No. Story_ID: 620864 Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your family history. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask you about your mother's side of the family and your father's side, but separately and then we'll put 'em together. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So, first of all can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: Mildred Parish Massey, that's M-I-L-D-R-E-D, P-A-R-I-S-H, M-A-S-S-E-Y. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Six, six, twenty-four [June 6, 1924], El Paso, Texas. Speaker 1: Okay, and what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family? How far back can you trace them and what were they doing historically? Speaker 2: Well my mother's mother, her name was Willie Parish [Willie Pointer Parish], she died very early in her early sixties, she had, was actually born in Hempstead, Texas, and her mother Charlotte Watt- Watts [Charlotte Watts (ph.)] was a hundred years old when she died. I remember her very well. Her family history is very interesting. She evidently had worked for as many, in many black families for, worked for a white household as a domestic worker, first in Louisiana, and then in Texas and she was raped repeatedly by the head of the household who was Irish. And so, my grandmother was half Irish and my mother of course has green eyes, and she's a very beautiful woman, she's eighty-nine years old, but that side of the family from my grandmother's side, you know has that history that so many African Americans don't really want to talk about which is a real dark side, I think in our history, but, that's my grandmother's side. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so she, so as far back as you can trace against your mother's side is to Louisiana and then? Speaker 2: To my-- Speaker 1: To your great-grand- ? Speaker 2: --great-grandmother in, in Louisiana. But we also, and I've done some research on this, her family on her mother's side actually, no actually on her Grandma Wilson [ph.], on her mother's side, yeah, somehow came through Spain into Jamaica and then somehow ended up in the South of the United States. Actually the family that owns the Jamaican Gleaner, is it the Gleamer, Gleaner newspaper? Speaker 1: The Gleaner, yeah right. Speaker 2: Somehow we've traced some connection to Jamaica and that family. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: I haven't fully explored that, but we kind of got there. Speaker 1: That's interesting that Louisiana history does encompass Spain, France and, you know? Speaker 2: Um-hm, and I think her maiden name, are--well her father's name was Cordoba-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: C-O-R-D-O-B-A, and we traced it, actually to some small village in Spain. Prior to that they think that he migrated there or part of the family migrated there from Israel, but we're not sure. Speaker 1: Um-hm, that-- Speaker 2: And took the name of the village in Spain. Speaker 1: Um-hm, yeah this was a lot of Jewish ex- expatriates were in Spain around the time of Columbus [Christopher Columbus] and that sort of thing. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: They switched to Catholicism to-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --avoid persecution and, yeah. Speaker 2: Um-hm, very interesting. Speaker 1: So it's, you know, the Spanish Inquisition was about that, trying to fi- undercover the Jews who were hiding as Christians-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --in Spain. Speaker 2: Okay, and then somehow they ended up in Jamaica-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --after that. Story_ID: 620865 Speaker 1: All right, so then you have done some, some, some research or, or had some interesting discussions about it, that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, I've done some genealogical-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --research with some friends from the Mormon church, and learned how to go in and look at historical records and birth certificates and death certificates on various databases. So, you know, putting all this together, which I'm still trying to do, it's really very interesting. Speaker 1: Now, now I know in your book, there's a reference or to a DNA analysis you had done too? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And what did that show? Speaker 2: Okay, now that of course is on my mother's [Mildred Parish Massey] side, with women, the DNA test traces the matrilineal side, I guess that's what it's called. And that traced all the way, my DNA traced on my mother's side to Sierra Leone, the Temne and Mende tribe in Sierra Leone, that general area, then it was, what? Gambia, Benin, Sierra Leone, that part of West Africa, is where some of my mother's an- I guess where my mother's ancestors on the African side traced to. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right. Now tha- that's interesting too so, so you know quite a bit, you know, more than most people. Speaker 2: Really? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: This is so-- Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: I've just scratched-- Speaker 1: You do. Speaker 2: --the surface. I really wanna do this one day, the entire-- Speaker 1: There's so many-- Speaker 2: --genealogy and study. Speaker 1: So many can only go back to their grandparents, believe it or not. Speaker 2: Oh. Story_ID: 620866 Speaker 1: Okay, so your mother [Mildred Parish Massey] grew up in? Speaker 2: El Paso, Texas. Speaker 1: El Paso, Tex- Texas. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And, so and what did her parents do for a living? Speaker 2: My mother's father, his name was William Calhoun Parish [William Parish], and he came from Galveston [Texas], he was the first African American letter carrier in El Paso, Texas and he spoke fluent Spanish, and he was a graduate from, I believe then it was Tillotson College, Austin Tillotson or College, or Huston Tillotson [Tillotson College; Huston Tillotson University, Austin, Texas]. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: I'm not-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --sure. Speaker 1: Huston Tillotson--okay. Speaker 2: In the day in, way back and I think the name has changed, but he, he got his degree and then moved his family to, well moved to El Paso, and got married. Speaker 1: Okay. All right, now tha- that's a, that's really a big deal in those days. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Having government jobs, as a letter carrier. Speaker 2: Yeah, and I've seen pictures of him carrying mail on horseback and he lived until he was eighty-nine years old and told us many, many stories, of course he was retired by the time I was born, but he was a very proud, very smart African American man who was in a 33rd Degree Mason, a deacon at the church, and I can remember every day, he would get up and put a tie and shirt on, even if he was gonna work in the garden, which he loved to do with the roses and all the plants and he still dressed, (laughter) everyday. Speaker 1: Right, that's a generational, you know. So, was this the gran- is this the grandfather you called Papa? Speaker 2: Um-m, that's Papa. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: All right. So that, and so, what did your mother say about growing up in El Paso? What was it like? Speaker 2: Well my mother had two sisters [Juanita Parish Franklin and Lois Parish Murell] and my grandfather and my grandmother [Willie Pointer Parish] who was a homemaker, they really were very protective, my grandfather, and grand- of my mother and her two si- sisters. They had to catch a taxi to school, you know, they couldn't date, they were very strict, my grandparents with my mother. And so she's the baby of the family and of course was very sa- was and is still very spoiled, which is great, 'cause we love spoiling her at eighty-nine. But she grew up in, in a household that we, they owned their own house, had rental property next door, and so my grandfather made sure that, with his income from the postal service [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service], that he really took care of their family and invested in what he could invest in to have income. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And sent them all to college. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, El Pa- Paso is right on the Rio Grande right? Speaker 2: Um-hm, it's on the border of Juarez, Mexi- Mexico, Mexico [Ciudad Juarez, Mexico], yeah. So I grew up, that was on the back--black population still is only about 2 percent. My stepfather, both were in the, both stepfathers [Garvin Tutt and Bill Massey] were in the [U.S.] military at Fort Bliss, Texas and it just happened that my mother decided rather than travel, we would stay in El Paso, and so we went to the same school. But we grew up in a family that where we, in a neighborhood, were there were many Latino families because El Paso, again, you had a very small African American population and the majority of the black population actually were military families, probably still are and stationed at Fort Bliss. Speaker 1: Yeah, all the people we call Mexicans or, or Mexican Americans or, were already there when whites moved in there in the first place to found the state right? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: They were living on both sides of the river anyway. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: So, so the culture--they've been there a long time. Speaker 2: Long time and my mother spoke Spanish and I did and others in my family, my sisters [Mildred Massey Whitfield and Beverly Massey Hardy] but, when we left El Paso, we kind of lost our Spanish speaking. Story_ID: 620867 Speaker 1: So your mother [Mildred Parish Massey] went to Southern University [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] right? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And, I know there's an interesting story about the AKAs [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority] there. Can, can you tell us that story? Speaker 2: Yeah, my mother still is very militant, and she wanted to join the sorority, the AKAs, and one of the requirements then was that you had to see your veins, in your wrist. Speaker 1: Now this is an African American sorority, well known-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --to most people, Alpha Kappa, (unclear) right? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, it's a great sorority and she really wanted to be part of it, but she is very fair and so she could pass that requirement but her best friend was dark brown skinned and she wanted to join and they wouldn't let her join. So my mother in, in protesting that refused to join and called and had Mary McLeod Bethune come down to help sort all that out. Speaker 1: Who-- Speaker 2: And to this day, she has not joined a, a sorority because of that. Speaker 1: So Mar- Mary McLeod Bethune, the famous Mary McLeod Bethune, founded Bethune Cookman College [Bethune Cookman University, Daytona Beach, Florida]? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: She was dark? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And, but she was a member of AKA? Speaker 2: No, she was just, it was because of the movement that she was leading, her activism-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --and that's why, I'm not sure if she's a member of the sorority or not, but it was her trying to fight for the rights of women in Africa--well African American women, that my mother knew her and knew who she was and asked her to come down to try to help change some of those, those policies. Speaker 1: Yeah, I think the book states that she threatened to close a chapter down if they didn't change their policy. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Which it, which it made me think she was an AKA too-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --you know? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But-- Speaker 2: No I don't, I don't really know. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I don't really know, but like I said, my mother is always, you know, I remember her telling me this story. She tells this story, so that's why she's not a member of any sorority because that left her very not happy (laughter). Speaker 1: Well, I know the AKAs denied they ever had such a policy but it's popularly believed they did and this is a first historical example I've heard of that, that kind of policy in action. Speaker 2: But you've heard that they've had that policy, yeah? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, they always say this. Now there are official stories that they never did. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And maybe they didn't have everywhere, I don't know. Speaker 2: Well you know, so many things were happening in the day, way back, you know in the early days of, of our liberated status in America that, you know, do--some of those stories, we don't wanna tell, they were so shameful that, you know? But I understand that. Speaker 1: All right but, but your mother was a--she wasn't one to just let this go past without doing something about it? Speaker 2: No way, no way (laughter), unh-uh. Story_ID: 620868 Speaker 1: What did she major in at Southern [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana]? Speaker 2: She majored in business administration, yeah and actually when she went back to El Paso [Texas], this was many years later, she was one of the, I think the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] led the movement to desegregate the University of Texas, it was, then it was called, El Paso, I don't know, it's the University of Texas at El Paso now [Texas Western College of the University of Texas; University of Texas at El Paso, El Paso, Texas]. And she was one of the four or five [sic.] students that were identified to go in and desegregate UTEP. I guess that must have been in the '50s [1950s]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: All right. Okay so, so did she open a business or did she use it-- Speaker 2: No, what happened was she continued to work for the federal government, she worked at the base [Fort Bliss, Texas] and then she worked in the private sector when we moved to California, but also at the VA Hospital in Sylmar, California [San Fernando Veterans Administration Hospital], she worked there. And then fast forward to when she retired from social security in Oakland [California] in the late '80s [1980s], I actually started a company Lee Associates, well it was the W.C. Parish corporation, that was my grandfather's name, dba, doing business as Lee Associates. And so my mother [Mildred Parish Massey] and my sister actually ran the company for eleven years and so she was able to use her business administration background and she did a phenomenal job, we had up to four hundred employees, she was in her seventies running this company. Story_ID: 620869 Speaker 1: Now let me go to your father's side of the family, and then, and then we'll talk about them together. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for me? Speaker 2: Now we're talking about my biological father? Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: James Henderson Lewis [James Lewis]. Speaker 1: Okay, James Henderson? Speaker 2: Lewis. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And did you know his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: He was born in Nansemond County, somewhere around Portsmouth, Virginia and I'm not sure of his date of birth but around the same, I think he and my mother were around the same age, 1924. Speaker 1: Okay, now what can you tell us about his side of the family? How, how far back can you trace that side? Speaker 2: I haven't gone too far back but I remember meeting his father, Walter Lewis, they owed a lot of property out in the country in, right out of Portsmouth, in Nansemond County, and I remember meeting several of my grandfather's brothers. They were all very smart, proud, well educated men. I don't know much past, on the Lewis side, my grandfather he, but, but he had five brothers and I believe two sisters. Speaker 1: Okay, so they, were they involved in agriculture, I mean the fa- farming and that sort of thing? Speaker 2: My grandfather was involved in farming, one of his brothers was a minister in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], another one was in Warrenton, Virginia, and I met him, I think he was an educator and I don't recall what the other two brothers' profession had been. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so your father he was, well was he drafted or did he-- Speaker 2: No you know what? He was actually a welder for the Navy shipyard [Norfolk Naval Shipyard, Portsmouth, Virginia]. I think the drafting that's my stepfather. Speaker 1: Oh okay. Speaker 2: And so I've made some corrections. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But he worked in the Navy shipyard down in Portsmouth, Virginia, Portsmouth and Norfolk [Virginia]. Speaker 1: Now, now did, did you know him very well, or at all? Speaker 2: I didn't know him at all. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He and my mother [Mildred Parish Massey] split up when I was probably about maybe a year, year and a half, and my mother said he came to visit us once and that I did meet him when I was probably about five or six years old, but I have no recollection of that. My, my mother remarried [to Garvin Tutt] and my stepfather legally adopted us and so that's who I really thought was my biological father until I was about fourteen years old. Speaker 1: Now, now how did your biological parents meet? I mean where did they meet? Speaker 2: They met, my mother was actually in Virginia where my Aunt Juanita [Lee's maternal aunt, Juanita Parish Franklin] was living with her husband Albert Franklin. Albert my uncle was working again for the federal government, I believe at one of the naval installations there. So my mother went down there and got a job a Norfolk State University [Norfolk Branch, Virginia State College; Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia]. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: And she was the secretary to the president at Norfolk State and so it was during that time that she met my dad. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, and they got married in Virginia. Speaker 1: All right, okay, but it--I get it didn't last long was that--? Speaker 2: It didn't last long no, but she had two girls who were biologically Lewises. Speaker 1: Okay, so they were married at least a couple of years? Speaker 2: A couple of years, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, but it was stormy. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know, a lot of challenges. Speaker 1: So, so she comes back to Texas afterwards? Speaker 2: Yeah, she came back to El Paso. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And actually I was born in El Paso, and also my two sisters [Mildred Massey Whitfield and Beverly Massey Hardy], she had two more girls later. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, so she met him, she met him during the war I guess, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, it must have been during the war, I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous) During World War II [WWII]? Speaker 2: --was born in '46 [1946], and they got married like in '45 [1945]. Forty-four [1944] or '45 [1945], yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, towards the end of the war or just after, yeah. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Story_ID: 620870 Speaker 1: So your mother [Mildred Parish Massey], I mean comes back to El Paso [Texas] and, now then I guess she meets your stepfather right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, by then she came back and I guess she was pregnant but she got a divorce and later she met my st- Garvin Tutt who was a lieutenant at the, at Fort Bliss [Texas]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then she had one child by him, so she had two by Lewis [Lee's biological father, James Lewis], one by Garvin Tutt and all three of us are great, are sisters and we grew up together and he took care of us, he was, he was our father. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right. Okay, so, all right so, well what, what can you tell us about Garvin Tutt? Speaker 2: Well he was a very, proud to be in the [U.S.] military, proud to be a military officer, he loved his country he was in World War II [WWII], in Korea [Korean War], and he loved his daughters and he took care of us, he and my mother, he went to Japan and my mother did not go so they ended up splitting up after a period of time, but he was well educated from Joplin, Missouri, and, you know, he played cards, he lik- he liked to do all kinds of sports. But he was really a very smart man, because when he retired he became the vice president for Crocker Bank [Crocker Anglo National Bank; Crocker Citizens National Bank] in San Francisco [California], and headed up their communications and computer division, I mean he was a high tech person way back in the '50s [1950s] and '60s [1960s], I mean way before technology became, you know, the current, you know, mode of communication, I mean, he was a techie way back when. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah so he, he ran actually the technol- the communication center at the Presidio of San Francisco [San Francisco, California] where he retired from, he was a lieutenant colonel by then. When he retired then he went to Crocker Bank, the former Crocker Bank, he was VP for the telecommunications department. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so for an African American man in that day, you know, he had to work really hard and do, he had to be really smart to-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --to break through those barriers. Speaker 1: Yeah, it wasn't because of affirmative action in those days. Speaker 2: Oh no. Speaker 1: They didn't have it then. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: Oh no, oh no. Speaker 1: --so he had to really-- Speaker 2: He had to really-- Speaker 1: --know something-- Speaker 2: Yeah, he fought hard too for that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And people respected him. I remember he commanded a lot of respect. Speaker 1: Okay now this, even though Garvin Tutt, he remained actively as a father-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --for the rest of your life right? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Even though-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --your, then they split up too? Speaker 2: They split up, yeah my mother got remarried and, and to Bill Massey. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And he was also a father, so I've had some great fathers (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: My [maternal] grandfather [William Parish], you know and my stepfathers, yeah. Story_ID: 620871 Speaker 1: And your [maternal] grandfather [William Parish] plays a tremendous role right? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, oh yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Papa, yeah, I mean he's the reason that he, he--one day he got up and just said, "We're moving to California." My mother [Mildred Parish Massey] said, "Okay." He bought the house in Southern Cali- he wanted us to move to California to go to public schools. He thought the schools were much better in California 'cause I went to Catholic school in El Paso [Texas]. They were segrega- the schools were segregated when we started school so they decided I should not go to a segregated school, not that the segregated school wasn't a good school, 'cause that's where my mother went, but it was the notion of segregation. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So the Catholic schools were the only schools that were integrated so, then my grandfather after I got out of the eighth grade [at St. Joseph's School, El Paso, Texas], said it's time now to go to public schools, let's go to California. Story_ID: 620872 Speaker 1: We always ask this question, considering all of these influences-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and, you know, the biological as well as the, as the new parents along the way-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and a [maternal] grandfather [William Parish] too, when you think of, of all the personalities and, and senses of humor and how people walk, talk and look-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and everything else, who, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: My mother [Mildred Parish Massey] (laughter). Everybody says we walk the same, we talk the same, yeah, I think it's my mother. Even though she has green eyes and I have brown eyes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: All right. Okay and so, your mother doesn't take a lot of stuff does she? Speaker 2: Nothing. Story_ID: 620873 Speaker 1: Tell us about your brothers and sisters and what they're doing now? Speaker 2: Well my baby sister [Beverly Massey Hardy], she loves me to call her my baby sister even though she's just five ye- and she's probably sixty-two now, she is retired and she lives in McKinney, Texas and she's the grandmother of one, two, three, five boys, little boys. She's dying for a granddaughter and so her oldest daughter is pregnant and so her whole life right now is about praying for a granddaughter (laughter). When she comes to California quite a bit to see my mother [Mildred Parish Massey] and she's having a good time and doing some of the things she wants to do, as a retiree. And she worked in Arizona, her husband was an air traffic controller, he was actually one of the managers of the Phoenix tower [Phoenix Sky Harbor International Airport, Phoenix, Arizona], so they spent quite a bit of their time, when they were working, in Arizona. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And my sister, my middle sister, Mildred [Mildred Massey Whitfield] she lives in Las Vegas [Nevada], she loves to have fun, she's at the casinos on the weekend, she plays in tournaments, you know the penny and nickel tournaments and she has multiple sclerosis. And it's very interesting, she was diagnosed in the mid-'70s [1970s], and she's sixty-six, she's doing really well, she travels a lot, she has a little scooter and she is a person who has not let MS or any of her health issues get her down. She's still a very vibrant active woman who is enjoying life and doing the things she loves doing. Speaker 1: Okay, so that's, that's two. Speaker 2: Two sisters-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: All right, so-- Speaker 2: And there's me. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I'm the oldest. Speaker 1: All right so, so did you all grow up to--well your, your father had like a family too right? That, that was a kind of extended? Speaker 2: Yeah we-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Well we all grew up together with my [maternal] grandfather [William Parish]-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --in one household until I left and got married. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: So-- Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: --we were all very close. Story_ID: 620874 Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: Earliest childhood memory, yes I do, it's probably, and I've seen a picture, so I don't know if this comes from my memory or a picture, I have two. One is I'm kind of stubborn, you know, and I refused to eat my oatmeal for breakfast or Malt O Meal or something, and I probably was about eighteen months, and I loved going with my mother [Mildred Parish Massey] shopping and because I wouldn't eat my breakfast, they wouldn't let me go with my mother and they were trying to get me to eat and I just refused. And I had on a pink chenille bathrobe and I have just went out and sat on the back porch and looked at our dog Pudgy [ph.] and just sat there mad as can be 'cause they wouldn't let me go with my mother and I wasn't gonna eat that Malt O Meal. Then secondly I can remember my [maternal] grandmother [Willie Pointer Parish] who I loved dearly because she took care of us while my mother worked. My mother always has worked, sometimes three jobs. And she had really long straight hair and she used to let me sit in her lap and brush her hair. I mean this is like when I was two and three years old, 'cause she died when I was about five, and so I remembered that about my grandmother. And so, I think those would probably be the two earliest memories and the day she died, I can remember that, my grandfather [William Parish] standing looking out the window waiting on the hearse or the doctor, one of them to get there, so I remember that. Story_ID: 620875 Speaker 1: Okay, so you spent your early life in El Paso [Texas]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay, and can you describe where you lived and what was it like-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --in El Paso? Speaker 2: Well it seemed like a big house but now when I go back it's a small house but we lived at 3304, before the street was name was changed it was Albert Gordo [ph.], now it's East Yandell Drive and it was a house that my [maternal] grandfather [William Parish] owned, that he, he and my grandmother [Willie Pointer Parish] bought, two big palm trees in the front yard and we had rose bushes, a beautiful garden, can you imagine in the middle of the desert, El Paso, not the prettiest place in the world. But we had lots of flowers in the yard and a big front porch with a swing on it and I remember sitting in the swing a lot and playing on the front porch and watching the boys walk by 'cause we couldn't, you know, my mother [Mildred Parish Massey] they were very strict so we just had to wave at some of the guys. But the house was, one, two, three bedrooms, and a big basement and a formal dining room and a kitchen and a fe- a screened in back porch. And the backyard we had steps that went down to the yard and a big mulberry tree, 'cause I used to make mulberry pies. I can remember playing a lot in the backyard and planting food, I loved gardening. And so, I used to take beans and plant and watch 'em grow, watermelon seeds, I would dry out and plant the watermelon and the watermelons would grow between a chain link fence so we used to always have fights with the next door neighbors who, my best friend Carlottia Scott [Carlottia Washington Scott], 'cause half the watermelon would grow on that side of the chain link and half would grow on this side and it was my seed so, and so we had a huge watermelons and tomatoes so I, I had a good time in the garden in our yard. And then there was a garage in the back and an alley, and I think, yeah I think I remember seeing my grandfather taking chickens and wringing their necks and having you know, chicken-- Speaker 1: (Unclear) chickens (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) fried chicken. Speaker 1: --in the yard and-- Speaker 2: Chickens, yeah. Speaker 1: --did he have any hogs or anything? Speaker 2: Oh no. I don't think he would let us eat pork, I mean my grandfather he would go to the butcher to buy meat, he would not buy meat at the grocery store, I mean he was that particular about what we ate. And so it was, you know, and of course I loved chitlins and he would not let chitlins come into the house, so we'd have to sneak and buy 'em at the church dinner and eat 'em there, you know. So my grandfather was really picky about food, which was good 'cause, you know, we learned a lot about nutrition early on because of how he was and, and what we did at the house to try to teach us how to grow fruit and vegetables. Story_ID: 620876 Speaker 1: Now was he [Lee's maternal grandfather, William Parish] originally from El Paso [Texas] too? Speaker 2: No, he was originally from Galveston [Texas], I think-- Speaker 1: Oh that's right. Speaker 2: --Corpus Christi [Texas] or Galveston. Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah he was either born in in Galveston, moved to Corpus Christi or born in Corpus Christi, moved to Galveston, I always get it mixed up. Speaker 1: And he went to college at Huston Tillotson [Tillotson College; Huston Tillotson University]? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: In, in Austin [Texas]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In Austin. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah. And I think my mother [Mildred Parish Massey] told me he came to El Paso 'cause he like the weather better in El Paso, he liked that dry desert weather which I love, my mother loves, 'cause I think he had, like my mother has lung issues, COPD [chronic obstructive pulmonary disease], and he had bron- bronchitis and a lot of young, lung issues also. And so, I think it was the weather that brought him to El Paso. Story_ID: 620877 Speaker 1: So what was it--did the neighborhood have a particular name or a side of town (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) Not really. Speaker 1: West side, east side or-- Speaker 2: I don't think so, we were near Five Points [El Paso, Texas]-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --you know, 'cause my [maternal] grandfather [William Parish] would walk to Five Points to go to Price's ice cream, he loved ice cream, so he'd walk down there and buy and buy a pint of peach ice cream and he'd eat, stuff for us, ice cream for us, but he'd eat the whole pint of peach ice cream, he loved that, and that was at Five Points, so that was walking distance. And so, I don't know if the neighborhood really had a name but it was close to Five Points. Speaker 1: So the, most Five Points are, you know, commercial areas like-- Speaker 2: Yeah it was commercial. Speaker 1: --Denver [Colorado], or a (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah-- Speaker 1: --if you go to Five Points that's where all the, a lot of stores. Speaker 2: --yeah, Yeah, I think there was a Sears [Sears, Roebuck and Co.] down there. Yeah there was a strip, yeah-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --that's it. Speaker 1: So, so that was, was that the most for having a kind of commercial strip in that area-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --you know? Speaker 2: Um-hm, until the malls began, but that was where, that was, yeah, that was, that wasn't really down town, but it was five, it was like a mini down town. Speaker 1: A pre downtown? Speaker 2: Yeah-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah. Yeah so that's, so that's the kind of neighborhood it was in, close, you could see the mountains, you know, El Paso [Texas] has huge mountains, so we could see the mountains right there although we weren't that close to the mountains, but they're so big you could see 'em. And, yeah I, I don't know if there was name of the neighborhood or not, I'm gonna have to check. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Well was there, was there like a, just a pocket of African Americans or we- were, were African Americans more or less scattered-- Speaker 2: Scattered (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) around? Speaker 2: --around, but in this neighborhood, like probably within three or four square blocks, most of the non-military African American, there were only a few African American families who were there, like my grandfather and Carlottia's [Carlottia Washington Scott] father, Mr. Washington, next door, the Mangraham [ph.] family on the corner. So we had sort of like the old time family that were ma- not necessarily military living in that area, but there were a lot of Latino families. I mean, my best friend in the neighborhood, in addition to Carlottia was Carol [Carol Strohmeyer Wallace] and Linda Strohmeyer [Linda Strohmeyer Burns] and they were Latinas and they lived right in back of us on East Wyoming Street [Wyoming Avenue]. So the neighborhood was, was kind of mixed black and Latino and so it was a very interesting, they would lot of, still, you know, a lot of little black churches, in the neighborhood. The thing about that neighborhood though is, and that's why I, I really believe my sister [Mildred Massey Whitfield] has MS [multiple sclerosis] and so many of my friends died before they were fifty, is we were right where those smelters, those smoke stacks in El Paso, and it's been written about a lot, NPR [National Public Radio] has done stories about El Paso, with those smoke stacks and everyone in that neighborhood got sick and everyone, all of my friends, most of them are dead and its-- Speaker 1: What, what was being processed that created, the smoke (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, I don't know, some ta- something was toxic and the smoke just, you just, you had to breathe in all that garbage, that smoke. Speaker 1: Did it have anything to do with oil or--? Speaker 2: You know? I don't really know. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I've gotta go back and, and study that a little bit, but the older I get and the mo- and the m- and I got very involved in the environmental movement, you know, early on and understood the public health issues around toxic dump sites and, and smoke stacks and all and in my neighborhood in El Paso, you know, that's what was happening. And they're just now shutting them down. I think they finally shut 'em down, but these smoke stacks and we called them smelters, they were there and a lot of people developed all kinds of diseases in my neighborhood and died from th- those diseases. Now whether they were lung related or not? Someone else MS, someone else, what did she die of? Some, all these strange diseases that, you know, I don't remember what they all were but cancer, a lot of cancer deaths early, of people I grew up with. Story_ID: 620878 Speaker 1: You mentioned church, well, well, was church a big part of growing up? Speaker 2: A big part of my life? Oh my god, I went to church every day 'cause I was in Catholic school, so I went to Mass every single day. And then on the weekends I would go to a Visitors Chapel A.M.E. Church [El Paso, Texas] with my grandfather [William Parish] and then my mother [Mildred Parish Massey] belonged to-- Speaker 1: It's called Visitors Church? Speaker 2: Visitors Chapel, V-I-S-I-T-O-R-S. Speaker 1: That's interesting, do you know the origin of that name, Visitors Chapel? Speaker 2: I sure don't. Speaker 1: It, it makes you think that it was like built as a temporary place-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --for visitors to come-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --through the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal], you know, I don't know. Speaker 2: Yeah, it's still there, Visitors Chapel A.M.E. Church. And then, Myrtle Avenue Methodist Church [El Paso, Texas] is where my mother attended, so on the weekends we were running between Visitors Chapel and Myrtle Avenue Methodist, and Tom Thumb weddings and Easter pageants and Christmas pageants and, you name it. And then during the week church at ja- St. Joseph's [St. Joseph's Church, El Paso, Texas] so, my whole life was going to church (laughter). Speaker 1: Um-hm. Now did you, I mean wha- what was the, was the teaching in all the churches, you know, in sync, you know? I'm trying--I mean, did you feel any--did, that there's a difference between one, one or the other, I mean? Speaker 2: yeah, it was a big difference between the Catholic church and the Protestant churches, you know, the A.M.E. and the Methodist church but it didn't bother me, I mean I, you know, I knew I was in Catholic school [St. Joseph's School, El Paso, Texas] too. And I became a Catholic when I was ten, but my mother didn't want us to get baptized Catholic 'til we knew what we were doing. And because I studied the, the Bible and catechism more at school, then I really became a devout Catholic and wanted to do that, not now though, but then I did, and, and both of my kids [Tony Lee and Craig Lee] are baptized in Catholic church. But the A.M.E. and the Methodist church, you know, I mean I, I like both religious ceremonies, I like the songs and the choirs and the, and the Sundays, I went to Sunday school, so there was not really a conflict, it was just different but I could reconcile, I still can reconcile. Story_ID: 620879 Speaker 1: I read that a little fur- further along in high school [San Fernando High School, San Fernando, California], you were really into music. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Did that interest manifest itself when you were younger? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I took music lessons I guess I started when I was three or four, I still have the piano that I started my music lessons on. So I studied music in grammar school [St. Joseph's School, El Paso, Texas], private lessons, Mrs. Nixon [Drusilla Tandy Nixon], who was the wife of Dr. Nixon [Lawrence Aaron Nixon] who was one of Dr. Nixon who is one of the early civil rights pioneers. He was the Nixon family he was a dentist, and he, people, he was phenomenal, a member of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and desegregated lot of, you know, public facilities. So his wife was my music teacher, Dr., Mrs. Nixon and she came to the house every Saturday and I had to practice during the week and she brought daughter Annie [Drusilla Ann Nixon] who had Downs syndrome [Down syndrome] and so every week Ms. Nixon and Annie would come to my house and I'd have to practice, well I'd take my lessons. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So piano was your primary-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --instrument? Speaker 2: Um-hm, and then I learned organ when I was in high school. Speaker 1: Okay, did-- Speaker 2: The piano-- Speaker 1: --you play in church too? Speaker 2: Sometimes. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I wasn't the pianist in church but yeah, oh yeah, but I played recitals that's what it was, it was like oh god, I have another recital to play and they want you to play for the Sunday for this, you know, but I was the pianist in church but I did play at church. Speaker 1: Was she teaching you classics and--? Speaker 2: Mainly classical, yeah-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --yeah, although I could play church music too but basically classical. Speaker 1: Okay, now what did you really like to do growing up? Speaker 2: Well I'd just read and study and write. I loved to write, I wrote in my diary, I've gotta find that diary. Every day, for years, every day I'd write in my diary, every night. And I, I liked, I liked sports. I mean I was in, in the drill tea- even in El Paso [Texas] I was on the drill team and, you know, all kind of sporting activities, I really loved sports and physical activity. But I like to read and I liked to write and, and organize (laughter). Speaker 1: Well--- Speaker 2: I'm so organized, (laughter). Speaker 1: --when you were, now that's, that's interesting 'cause-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --I mean, so, so what kind of an organizational life did you have as a, as a kid growing up in--? Speaker 2: Oh god, in the neighborhood we organized our neighborhood club and so we always had little fundraisers, the girls, you know, we had dances we had parties, we raised money, I don't know what we raised money for but we'd always have something to raise money for. And we'd have club meetings, I, my mother [Mildred Parish Massey] was an Eastern Star [Order of the Eastern Star], so we became Eastern Stars, so I had to go to Eastern Star meetings, you know, organized dinners and all that stuff, you know, church stuff. And at school, I'm trying to think, what did I? I was a part of some journalism club or some writing club or something like that, you know, but it was always some organized activities. And sometimes I kind of led the way to try to organize stuff too. Speaker 1: Wha- ? Speaker 2: Like in the neighborhood with the club, I think it was my idea that we all come together and have a girls' thing. Speaker 1: So this is intergenerational regar- 'cause your mother, your mother brings Mary McLeod Bethune to Southern [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana]? Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: And that, you know, I think Mar- Mary McLeod Bethune at that time was involved in that, the National Council of Negro-- Speaker 2: Negro Women. Speaker 1: --Women [National Council of Negro Women]. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: Yeah, the only, I guess it is, you know, I probably saw my mother doing this, or heard about it and it just kind, was part of it. Speaker 1: What? Were there meetings at, at your house growing up? Speaker 2: Um-hm, we have, we'd rotate where we'd have our meetings. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Sometime it would seem like we did outside on the fence, we had a rock fence on the corner, it seems like sometimes we'd congregate on the fence and have club meetings, so we had club meetings all over the place. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and we had a calypso dance once I remember and we had all kinds of things, talent shows, (laughter) yeah, so it was a lot of fun. Speaker 1: Yeah, it sounds like you were never bored. Speaker 2: Oh god no. Never, never bored, never bored. I, I was really very introverted though believe it or not, even organizing stuff, I think I liked most when I was writing, or practicing the piano, not around a bunch of people, just let me do my thing. I think I enjoyed that more than anything. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: So when, you know, ballet, my mother had us in everything, ballet, sewing lessons, I was a really good seamstress, I sewed a lot as a child, mind you, as a child, Girl Scouts, hay rides, you know, everything Girl Scouts do, what else, softball team. And of course in high school, cheerleader, but this is grammar school. I mean it was like every day it was something my mother had us do, and she made sure we stayed busy, out of trouble. Story_ID: 620880 Speaker 1: Now the move to California occurs when you're how old? Speaker 2: Thirteen, yeah, I'd just gotten out of the eighth grade, graduated from the eighth grade [at St. Joseph's School, El Paso, Texas]. Speaker 1: Okay, and this your [maternal] grandfather's [William Parish] idea? Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah my grandfather's idea, he just told my mother [Mildred Parish Massey] one day, that was what was gone happen, that's what was gonna happen, that's what happened. She was-- Speaker 1: So it was-- Speaker 2: --fine with it. Speaker 1: --it was like that he could just say we, we're going and everybody go? Speaker 2: Are you kidding? (Laughter) Papa ruled the house (laughter), yeah, I mean even when my mother was like, she used to smoke unfortunately, but she smoked and my grandfather never knew it, and I can remember being with my mother and she'd go out to the garage and I'd have to be on the lookout. When Papa came, she'd throw that cig- (laughter), I mean this is like when she was fifty years old (laughter), yeah, oh yeah, no. Speaker 1: Oh he was a--so he said we're moving and just--? Speaker 2: And we moved, whatever he said we did all the time. Speaker 1: Well, was there any trepidation about moving or, or regret about moving that people had or did they see California as a big--? Speaker 2: I think everyone but me. I wanted to stay in El Paso [Texas], 'cause I had, had a crush on a (unclear) boy by then (laughter). Speaker 1: Well they were-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah. Speaker 1: --they were trying to keep you away from him? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Could be, that may have been his reason really. But yeah, I did not wanna leave El Paso. I did not wanna leave my friends although I knew where we were moving, because my aunt and uncle, every summer we'd go visit her in Pacoima, California, that's the Pacoima, San Fernando Valley. So I knew exactly where we were going, didn't have any friends there though so I, oh god, I did not wanna leave El Paso. Speaker 1: Okay-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --so-- Speaker 2: And I wrote about that in my diary. The night we left I was moaning and groaning about it, but I remember writing, I think I wrote this in my book that I swore that with this move, I was gonna dedicate my sight, my life to doing what I could to change things because of all the segregation and all the stuff we experienced in El Paso as a child. So I was sort of, that was sort of like my waking up to social injustice, to injustice and inequities and, you know, and said okay now, it was this bad, you knowing what all we had gone through there, even though it wasn't as bad as out bound, I mean we had--segregation was alive and real in El Paso, it was terrible. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: And I saw-- Speaker 1: Were there signs and that sort of thing then? Speaker 2: Yeah, colored only. Speaker 1: Colored-- Speaker 2: Oh-- Speaker 1: --only? Speaker 2: Yeah, oh yeah, all kinds of terrible signs and we couldn't, like going on the train, you know, the colored car, you know, I can remember my dad [Lee's adoptive father, Garvin Tutt] being, we were trying to go eat at a restaurant and my dad is wa- has his uniform on and, "I'm sorry but we don't serve--," and they'd use the N word, and here my father's in the [U.S.] military with his three little girls and his wife, you know, it's horrible stuff. So, I, I reflected on all of that as we were leaving El Paso, and said, you know, you gotta do something about this and when you get to California. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And as you grow up. What? I didn't know. Speaker 1: So this is 1960, or? Speaker 2: Um-hm, 1960. Story_ID: 620881 Speaker 1: California is, of course there's no signs in California right, in, well like that? Speaker 2: Oh California was horrible. No really, it, the segregation out here was it was de facto in a lot of ways. I wanted to be a cheerleader at my high school and the way they selected 'em, they had criteria and I assume you had to have blonde hair and blue eyes and white, but I couldn't for whatever reason, no black girl could, felt confident enough or assured, assured enough that they could pass the test to be a cheerleader. So, I got very upset about that, went to the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and they got the school to change their rules where students could then tryout in front of the student body and then the vote, students would vote on who they wanted to be their cheerleaders, so that was my first election. I actually tried out in front of the student body and I won. And so I was the first black cheerleader that El Pa- at San Fernando High [San Fernando High School, San Fernando, California], but that just kind of shows you how the segregation and the discrimination worked in California. There was housing, you know, in California, I think the fair housing law didn't pass, the Byron fair housing act didn't pass until, shoot, '64 [sic. California Fair Housing Act of 1963], when I graduated from high school, I think that was when it was, I mean in the '60s [1960s]. So it was horrible, it was bad in California and, and you know it was varied, I didn't see any coloreds only signs, but the segregation was alive, it was real and it was very deep. Speaker 1: Okay, so this is in the San Fernando Valley [California]? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Wha- wha- what was the name of the town that you lived in? Speaker 2: Pacoima [California], although it-- Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, Pacoima and San Fernando, we lived at 11920 Chadron Avenue, San Fernando, California, but it was like right next to Pacoima. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: And it was a large, mainly black community, now it's largely Latino, and I think there's some of the old timers still there who are African Americans, but for the most part it's a Latino community now. Speaker 1: Okay, now did you--in 1960, were you aware of politics? I know that was a big election the Kennedy [John Fitzgerald Kennedy] and Nixon [Richard Milhous Nixon] election which was, which was-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --national news and-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: --I, I don't know-- Speaker 2: That was in the '60s [1960s]. Speaker 1: --if you were, you know? Speaker 2: I was aware, but not really, it was like okay, you know, who's gonna win, fine, good, you know? I hope a Democrat wins but it wasn't nothing, nothing else, you-- Speaker 1: Wha- what-- Speaker 2: --know? Speaker 1: Wha- was, what was your [maternal] grandfather [William Parish] and your, your family Democrats for the most part? Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, actually my grandfather like many African Americans had been Republican because of, you know, it was the party of Lincoln [President Abraham Lincoln], by then he was a Democrat, I'm sure. But he, they oh yeah, they all would talk about elections and, you know, as being part of NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], I mean that was the core civil rights organization that they were affiliated with, we talked a lot about it all the time and knew that Kennedy had to win for black people, you know, and we knew the Democrats had to, to continue with our fight for, you know, justice and equality, but in terms of being kind of in tune with the election and all the politics of the election and the debates, ah no. Story_ID: 620882 Speaker 1: So you're voted in as a cheerleader now, now is-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --this like later on in high school [San Fernando High School, San Fernando, California] or the beginning? Speaker 2: This was probably, let's see, when I was a, maybe sophomore? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Maybe tenth and eleventh grade I was a cheerleader or eleventh and twelfth, maybe tenth and eleventh, no, no, tenth grade was the first year, it's probably eleventh and twelfth. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: well up to this point then, even in El Paso [Texas], I'm gonna nas- ask you about that, but to this point, who would you consider to be your mentors or, you know, supporters as adults, I mean the people that you looked up too? Speaker 2: Well it's still my mother [Mildred Parish Massey] and my grandfather [William Parish] really. Oh yeah, and then I was working, now I started work study when I was in high school and there were two men who have since died who were really influential in my life, and they both were in the leadership. The, actually the presidents and the leader of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], one was John Mance, he was the manager of the Pacoima Lutheran Credit Union [Pacoima Lutheran Memorial Credit Union], but also very key in the NAACP, who helped me on the cheerleading, you know, strategy. And I worked for him at the credit union, I think I made a dollar an hour, every day after school I'd go to the credit union and work and at least three or four hours a day, then I'd go home and study or go back cheerleading, so I had a busy life as a teenager. And then Carl McCraven, he was the president of the board of the Pacoima Lutheran Credit Union and so both of those men, boy they took me under their wings and they taught me so much. John Man-- Speaker 1: John Man is M-A- ? Speaker 2: Mance, M-A-N-C-E. Speaker 1: Mance, M-A-N-C-E? Speaker 2: Yeah he was my first boss, you know? And he followed me, I mean he became a supporter when I ran for office and so did Carl and, Carl just recently died and John died a few years ago. Speaker 1: Now were you a member of NAACP Youth [NAACP Youth Council], or did they have a--? Speaker 2: I don't remember that, I don't think I was. Speaker 1: They were so active, you know, being all over the country-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --I don't know if every-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --if that chapter had one, but-- Speaker 2: I don't remember being a member Speaker 1: --Ron Walters [HistoryMaker Ronald Walters] was a member-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --of the NAACP Youth in Wichita [Kansas]-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and other people, you know, in Cleveland [Ohio] and, around the country that I've interviewed who were a part of the NAACP. Speaker 2: You know? I don't, I don't rem- maybe I signed up, I mean I was so involved, at the, through John Mance and Carl McCraven, but I don't remember going to meetings of the NAACP Youth at all, I was too busy working and being a cheerleader and trying to study and juggle all kinds of stuff, personally (laughter) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. All right. Story_ID: 620883 Speaker 1: Now, you in high school were honored by the Rotary club [Rotary International]-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and the Bank of America [Bank of America Corporation]-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --with two musical achievement awards-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --for the-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I got off into my music big time in high school [San Fernando High School, San Fernando, California]. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: And thought I was gonna go on and go to music school and I got married [to Lee's ex-husband, Carl Lee], but I did, I played actually the piano at my graduation, and I played for the school choir. And so I, I really became a fairly accomplished musician in high school. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. All right so, now you, you got pregnant in high school right? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah-- Speaker 1: And was kind--in those days they really-- Speaker 2: Oh my god-- Speaker 1: It was a big deal? Speaker 2: It's a real big deal (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: God it was horrible. Speaker 1: Was there anything set up, any support mechanisms for young girls in those days? Speaker 2: Absolutely nothing except my family and his family, you know, but other than that, it was nothing and nothing about sex education. That's one of the areas I'm really committed to I work for in terms of legislation and finance comprehensive sex ed. 'Cause you know, coming out of Catholic school, and all that, me coming from a family that's very, you know, as, as most families said, didn't talk much about sex education, you know, young people then just didn't know, and I was one of 'em. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So yeah, I, I got pregnant. Speaker 1: So now I was rea- reading that you were informed by Catholic doctrine around sex education in terms of, what they just abstain or either no contraceptives and--? Speaker 2: No nothing (laughter), which is still the way it is, no nothing, I mean it's like procreation and, and you know, you gotta be married and that's it. So I preg- when I got pregnant, I got married. Speaker 1: Okay-- Speaker 2: You know? Speaker 1: --so there was no resistance on his part to that then? Speaker 2: No, that was what you do. Speaker 1: All right. Okay, so but you were able to still graduate and everything? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: No problem? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, oh yeah. It got a little difficult 'cause I had a miscarriage and, you know, and it was at that point that my mother [Mildred Parish Massey] really thought that I should have my marriage annulled, but because again, of my devout belief in Catholicism, look I was married, regardless I'm not gonna get a divorce. Well get it annulled or a divorce, so I didn't--I stayed married. Speaker 1: Okay so, did you really think it was gonna work? Or did you, you were just, just hoping it was gonna work? Speaker 2: At sixteen? I have no clue, I hoped it was gonna work but, you know, (laughter) then it was, I went to Europe, I went to Great Britain-- Speaker 1: So that, he was in the [U.S.] Army? Speaker 2: He was, he joined the [U.S.] Air Force after we got-- Speaker 1: Joined the-- Speaker 2: --married. Speaker 1: --Air Force? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah. And so, naturally I wa- yeah I was in love, and wanted it to work. I graduated from high school, again nobody knew that I had gotten married because I, we kept it a secret. I didn't want anyone to know anything about that. And then I went on to England, mo- people thought I was going there to get married when really I had gotten married but I got remarried in the Catholic church when I was in England, showing what a devout Catholic I was and then I had my first son [Tony Lee] in, in London [England], in bottle o pool [ph.] cognac and we lived a good life and that was when I had traveled to Europe to the continent quite a bit and began to learn more about the world and about Africa and about our brothers and sisters in the Caribbean and that's when I began to really be very aware of the fact that I wasn't a minority but I was in the majority population of the world, people of color. And that's how I began to really develop my consciousness about being an African descendant. Story_ID: 620884 Speaker 1: So you credit travel with, like kind of opening your eyes to politics. Speaker 2: Oh absolutely, to everything and to the connection between foreign policy and domestic policy, international affairs and, and the fact that I was a part of a global family, not only in America or a member of my family but I was a part of the world. Speaker 1: Are the--their any particular people that played a role in that, that you met along the way? Speaker 2: Not abroad, just everybody, I mean, you know, my former husband [Carl Lee] was in the [U.S.] military, so we met a lot of military families, African American and white who, we became close friends. But I think it was more just going to nightclubs, you know? Jazz clubs and going to concerts and visiting museums and going to classes and meeting people from Africa in the streets and, you know, it was more just the relationships and meeting people and talking to people and learning about the world that kind of influenced me, but no one in particular. Story_ID: 620885 Speaker 1: So you graduated from high school [San Fernando High School, San Fernando, California] in? What, what year was it? Speaker 2: Sixty-four [1964]. Speaker 1: Sixty-four [1964]? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay and, okay so when you're in, you're in Europe in? Speaker 2: The okay, okay I have graduated from high school in six, in probably June, I went to Virginia to visit and to get to know the Lewis side of my family, my grandmother [Maude Howell Lewis] and my step grandfather, but she took me out to the country just to visit Walter Lewis my grandfather okay? So it was during that time I went after high school, I went to Virginia for about a week to get to know my Lewis side of the family, then I went to England-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --probably in August, probably the end of July, first part of August to, to London [England]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: 'Cause your husband's [Lee's ex-husband, Carl Lee] already over? Speaker 2: He's already there, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I remember I bought a pink, it looked like a St. John suit, (laughter), the way I dr- I had a big pink hat on, a pink knit suit and high heel shoes and that's how I traveled all the way to Europe (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay so-- Speaker 2: Oh god. Speaker 1: --this is in '64 [1964], and we were talking about the, the range of people you were meeting-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --there. These are--so the black pe- people you would meet in Europe and England were, could be from the Caribbean, Africa, you know? Speaker 2: They were from everywhere in the world, that was the thing, yeah. And I actually met the aunt of one of the girls the--who were so tragically killed in Birmingham, Alabama [at the 16th Street Baptist Church], McNair, was it Denise McNair? One of the four little girls, her aunt was married to a military sergeant I think. And so we got to be friends there, yeah, so I learned a little bit about Alabama through her but the, wha- what did we used to say? People who were living just, who had migrated to England, very few Africans at that point, and very few Caribbean residents but they were beginning with the immigration, the migration from the Caribbean, Africa to England was beginning. So that's how I began to meet a lot of the people as we say on the economy, people living on the economy, you know? So it was really quite remarkable. Story_ID: 620886 Speaker 1: Yeah well a lot was going on in your life in high school in 1963, but, that, that was the year the March on Washington, the-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --Birmingham bombing [16th Street Baptist Church, Birmingham, Alabama], the assassination of-- Speaker 2: All of that. Speaker 1: --John F. Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy]-- Speaker 2: It was a lot. Speaker 1: --Medgar Evers, all that-- Speaker 2: All that was going on and that was six, was that '63 [1963]? Speaker 1: Sixty-three [1963]. Speaker 2: Yeah, so I was in school, yeah dealing with the stuff in California, but watching all this take--and the Cuban Missile Crisis, what was that, sixty--? Speaker 1: Sixty-two [1962], yeah. Speaker 2: Sixty-two [1962], I remember, oh my god, the whole thing about the bomb shelters getting prepared for a, a nuclear attack. And I can remember us stopping, I was in junior high in '62 [1962], I think, let's see yeah, I, I was in, at San Fernando Junior High [San Fernando Junior High School, San Fernando, California] in '61 [1961], and '62 [1962]. I don't know eighth grade, ninth? Well maybe I was in high school [San Fernando High School, San Fernando, California] by then 'cause I remember at lunchtime, all of us stopped and listened to some announcements about bomb shelters and what to do in case of a nuclear attack, so--yeah, it was a lot going on. Speaker 1: Um-hm, this is. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And when you, when you're in England, I guess a lot of, of the people that you meet are from countries, these African Carib- Caribbean countries that are just achieving-- Speaker 2: Independence. Speaker 1: --independence. Speaker 2: --independence, that's right. So I learned a lot. I'm, in here I'm watching what's taking place in America, Malcom X, I mean I'm getting angrier and angrier and angrier, you know? And I'm living on a military base, you know, close to a military installation, but, you know, I was okay. I actually was working at the chapel at Upper Heyford Air Force base [Royal Air Force Station Upper Heyford, England], so, you know, I'm, I'm living in that life, the military, as a military wife, but yet I'm seeing what's taking place in America and, and in Africa--and that was a big conflict, it was like, I don't know about this, you know, you need to be doing something. Speaker 1: Now did you get a different perspective on what was, what Americans were doing, you know, in terms of policy around the world from, you know, being in another country? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Yeah I did. But it wasn't clear, it wasn't exactly, I didn't quite understand it. It was more of saying, you know America's really gotta change, you know, this is the civil rights, I need to be there, I need to be active in that, you know? But I didn't quite make the connection to the colonization of Africa, and the neocolonization of Africa. I knew that we had our hands in it and that Great Britain was, you know, one of the biggest colonizers and France, 'cause I would, I talked to people from these countries. But I really didn't kind of get that U.S. connection at all. It was more of the domestic--you know, I was getting angrier and angrier at the [U.S.] military. I was getting angrier and angrier at the white people, you know, on the base, I didn't wanna be bothered with, you know what I mean. I was, I was becoming more militant as I'm watching what's taking place in the United States. And, being with people from Africa and the Caribbean it was really a kind of a reprieve. It was kind of like, you know, it was more of an intellectual thing, learning more about the world. Speaker 1: Was the base like, more, more or less a carryover from race relations in the United, in the United States on the continent of the United States? Speaker 2: Say it again? Was the the ba- ? Speaker 1: Wa- was the relationships between blacks and whites on the base basically the same as they were--? Speaker 2: No, I think they were a little bit better. I didn't feel like I felt in California or El Paso [Texas], you know, I mean I think the military, even though there was a lot of racism in the military, sort of kind of defused a lot of that, you know, you went to the, OCO [Overseas Contingency Operations], or the, one of the clubs, whatever the enlisted officers went to, then there was the Douglas House in London [England] where military personnel could go which was like a little private club for military personnel and families. And, you know, so everything was sort of nice, you know, so you knew the tension was there but, but you socialized with a lot of people you, you--it wasn't like you know the barriers weren't there, but you, you felt it but it, not like you did in America. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. All right so-- Speaker 2: 'Cause I had, I had white friends, you know? But I, we would talk about stuff that was, it was the first time I started talking to wh- to white people about what was taking place in America. Story_ID: 620887 Speaker 1: Okay, '64 [1964], was a Democrat Na- National Convention and Republican Convention? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: I think it was like Freedom Summer-- Speaker 2: Was that-- Speaker 1: --down south? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And do you follow all of that when you were--? Speaker 2: Not really. I really didn't follow it much 'cause I was too much into going, leaving America and going to England. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: I was really focused more on that. Speaker 1: Ali [Cassius Clay; Muhammad Ali] knocked out Sonny Liston, I think-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: --at that time, I think, but any rate. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So, so how long were you in, in England? Speaker 2: Until '66 [1966]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Tony [Tony Lee], my so- my oldest son was born September 28, 1966, no 1965 and he was six weeks when he came home, so I guess October, so it was about a year and a half. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: But during those two years, let me tell you, I, I almost went to every country in Europe. Every summer we would, both summers, the first and second, we took, we had a little Fiat and we'd take that, drive that car to Dover, England, put it on the ferry, get on that boat and go to Calais, France, get the car off, and we'd drive for about four weeks everywhere in Europe. And I did that two summers and really it was great. One summer, the first which was supposed to be our honeymoon, my ex-husband's mother came and my aunt came who is now ninety-three, so they were with us at our honeymoon, during our honeymoon-- Speaker 1: They're ninety-three? Speaker 2: She's ninety-three now, yeah, Auntie Lois [Lee's maternal aunt, Lois Parish Murell]. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Of course they were probably in their forties then, and they both tagged along and they got, (laughter), it was quite a trip (laughter). We went everywhere. We went to France. We went to Austria, Germany, Spain, you know, of course I went to Louviers, France. I did all the Rome [Italy] catacombs, you know, I did all the religious stuff too, the Catholic thing in Italy and yes. So, both years we, so I got to really understand and learn a lot about Europe and the countries and the food and the people, by traveling for an extended period of time each year and met a lot of Africans in France, especially in Paris. Story_ID: 620888 Speaker 1: So you come back in 1966, and well what, what did you do when you got back? I mean he was, your husband was stationed in Sa- near San Francisco [California]? Speaker 2: No he got out of the [U.S.] military. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: Moved back to Southern California to San Fernando. We stayed with his mother and father for a while, and then got our own apartment. He, he was working and went back to school because he wanted to get a degree in computer science. And so, he went back to school and I started working for the welfare department [Glendale Welfare Council] in Glendale, California. It's--my title was welfare assistant. And I think I processed claims, welfare claims, so I worked there and then got pregnant again and had Craig [Craig Lee], my second son in '66 [1966], November 2nd, 1966, so that was a busy time, you know, juggling everything. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Working, having another baby, taking care of Tony [Tony Lee], and Carl [Lee's ex-husband, Carl Lee] going to school so, we had all kinds of stuff happening. Story_ID: 620889 Speaker 1: So you're living in San Fernando [California] during this period of time? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: All right so, so wha- now when did you move to San Francisco [California] area? Speaker 2: Okay, my dad [Lee's adoptive father, Garvin Tutt], as I mentioned earlier, was the head of the IT [information technology] department for the Presidio [Presidio of San Francisco, San Francisco, California]. When the Presidio was opened, it was a military installation and he hired my ex-husband [Carl Lee], he asked him if he wanted to come up and work for him and--because it was a computer, the computer big main frame operations that, you know, my ex-husband had been training for and learning and working on. So my dad act- we moved to San Francisco because my father hired my ex-husband as a civilian employee of the Presidio and that's how we got up here. And so I lived on the Presidio with my dad and my stepmother prob- we lived there probably three or four months and then moved into our apartment in San Francisco. Speaker 1: Okay. All right, so-- Speaker 2: And then to San Jose [California] after about a year, 'cause my former husband then got a job with IBM [International Business Machines Corporation]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay so that's when we bought our first house, we moved to San Jose, probably in '68 [1968]. Speaker 1: Okay, did you like san, San Jose? Speaker 2: No way, we were, it was like living out in the boonies, now it's like the middle of San Jose, right off of Blossom Hill Road, I mean, there were very few African Americans in San Jose. And I was working in San Francisco, by then I was working for the State of California as a statistical clerk, that was the title, and so I was commuting and, I mean we bought a house like four blocks from IBM, but I had to get up at 4:30 every morning and drive down to the train station, get on the train and catch the train to work in San Francisco. And during the week my former mother-in-law, God bless her soul, she was so good to us, she would take care of the kids [Tony Lee and Craig Lee] and so on Friday we'd drive down to Atwater [California], pick 'em up, bring 'em back to San Jose, and then take 'em back on Sunday, so it was quite a grueling time, you know? We both were working, the kids, weren't, you know, it was, it was quite interesting. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: (Laughter) It was busy. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's a lot of-- Speaker 2: It was a lot. Story_ID: 620890 Speaker 1: Things with you and your husband [Carl Lee] deteriorated at a certain point right? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I think, who knows, we got married too young I always say, sixteen, you know. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then the work and, you know, the lifestyle, you know, it, I don't even know what caused the divorce but it was, we were just getting married too, too young. Speaker 1: Okay so, so you, you all broke up in what '69 [1969]? Speaker 2: Sixty--yeah, well when, yeah it probably was '69 [1969], but I think, when I realized my life had to change was when Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was shot, I caught the train back, I'll never forget this from Sac- from San Francisco [California], got in my car in the parking lot which was a red Cutlass [Oldsmobile Cutlass] with a white vinyl top, sat in that car, turned the radio on, and there it was, Dr. King, had been shot. I sat in that car for a long time and thought about this a long time. I think that was the beginning, probably the beginning of my wanting to get out of stopping to work, wanting to go back to school, needed a little bit more so I could fight for, you know, get more involved in the Civil Rights Movement. And that of course, was not good for my marriage, you know, 'cause we never even talked about it, but I kind of sensed that's what I had to do and so things just started, you know, unraveling, but it, I think that was a major turning point, Dr. King's death. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So did you, did you get involved in any political activity after Dr. King got, passed? Speaker 2: Oh yes, with the Black Panther Party. I mean I became a very active member of, not the, I wasn't a, a card carrying member of the party, I was just a community worker but I did everything. I--Bobby Seale is still a very close friend of mine, Huey [Huey P. Newton] was a good friend of mine, I worked on the survival rallies, bagged groceries, I attended PE classes at St. Augustine's Church [St. Augustine's Episcopal Church, Oakland, California], where Bobby Seale taught political education, I helped Huey Newton, did the research on his book, I actually helped form the community learning center which was the Panther school [Oakland Community School, Oakland, California], I worked to get them involved in voter registration, and when Shirley Chisholm ran for president, 'cause I was her Northern California, person-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --I coordinated her campaign, invited her out to Huey Newton's penthouse and we had a fundraiser for Shirley Chisholm and got the Panthers really involved early on in a lot of the electoral politics. I mean they were ready to do it, but it was Shirley Chisholm's campaign really that, that catapulted them into working in elect- electro pol- politics. I was Bobby Seale's fundraising director, fundraising coordinator when he ran for mayor of Oakland [California]. So, that was my civil rights work, it was with the Black Panther Party and they really, I think to this day, I mean they were the ones that started free breakfast programs for children [Free Breakfast for School Children Program], the community clinics, George Jackson Free Medical Clinic [George Jackson People's Free Medical Research Health Clinic, Berkeley, California] they paved the way for the whole notion of community clinics. So, they haven't gotten the kind of credit that they needed 'cause the COINTELPRO [Counterintelligence Program] and the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] and J. Edgar Hoover, which I got caught up in that, you know, because I was a target, I'd read my files from the FBI and it's horrid, it's scary what they were doing to me and so, that was kind of my first step into the movement. Speaker 1: So just for me, we kind of fast forwarded through a lot of activity-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: --You know from the beginning, but like when, when did you first encounter the Black Panther Party? I believe they were formed in '66 [1966]? Speaker 2: Yeah, it was later, it was probably about '71 [1971]. Speaker 1: Okay, so you got out around '71 [1971]? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: This is after your, your split with your husband [Carl Lee]? Speaker 2: Yeah, oh yeah. Speaker 1: Not-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: All right, I just wanted-- Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah, no this is way after. Story_ID: 620891 Speaker 1: Is this while you were at Mills College [Oakland, California] or? Speaker 2: While I was in Mills, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Now, right-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So, let, let me ask you this? Now when you graduated from high school [San Fernando High School, San Fernando, California], I know you were on another track getting married and all that, but, but what were your aspirations in terms of college? Did you see yourself finishing college? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, oh yeah, I had to finish college, I mean my [maternal] grandfather [William Parish] wouldn't have had, (laughter), I mean if it wasn't for no other reason to satisfy him, I had to go to college. Speaker 1: Yeah, this-- Speaker 2: But I had stops, you know, I had bumps in the road. Speaker 1: --this would make you the third generation of college. Speaker 2: Yeah-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --I guess so, huh? Speaker 1: Which is a sig- significant in black households, you know? That-- Speaker 2: I don't even think about it, but you know, you're right, you're right, third generation, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, so-- Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause my grandfather just wouldn't have any option. Speaker 1: So that was an expectation? Speaker 2: Yeah. I mean it's like, I, I, to this second I haven't even thought about not going to college 'cause that was not even part of the drill with us. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: And actually my grandfather, he wouldn't--he'd see us not doing anything, maybe wondering why should we get a book and read, "You got to go to college, get a book and read." You know, or looking at, looking in the mirror, even to this day, I, you know, "Stop looking in that mirror. It's not what's outside that counts, it's what's inside that counts," you know, "you gotta learn something." You know, I mean, it's like, that's how I grew up. Story_ID: 620892 Speaker 1: You and your ex-husband [Carl Lee] break up in-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --what '68 [1968], or '69 [1969]? Speaker 2: Yeah, it's probably about '68 [1968], '69 [1969]. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Somewhere around-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --there, and-- Speaker 1: And then-- Speaker 2: --maybe, maybe sixty--maybe '69 [1969]. Speaker 1: And you're still working for the State of California right? Speaker 2: By then? Yeah, I was, I was. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But then-- Speaker 1: So how, how--I just wanna, I'm, I'm trying to get at-- Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: --how did you find out about Mills College [Oakland, California] and how was that connection made? Speaker 2: You really don't wanna know, (laughter). No, I ended up, it's horrible, in a, a terrible relationship, this guy was a batterer, he was terrible, okay? Speaker 1: This is somebody other than your ex-husband? Speaker 2: Yeah, it wasn't my ex, oh yeah, it wasn't him. And I started dating him and he was so possessive of me, he didn't want me to, I mean he was horrible, a lot of women go through this. And really, I wanted to go to college so bad and he wouldn't let me go to college and finally I found Mills, and said look, this is an all-women's college, I'm gonna try to get in here and that's the only way, you know, under his, you know, terrible, terrible abusive behavior, it's kind of like I ended up going to Mills 'cause I couldn't go to any other college 'cause there were men. So I found Mills, and I'm glad I found Mills 'cause that was the college that I needed to be at for the type of curriculum, the support--I was a returning student, had two little kids [Tony Lee and Craig Lee] and Mills was really a great place for me to be. Speaker 1: Now, now hadn't you started school already someplace else? Speaker 2: Yeah, I started in England, the University of Maryland [College Park, Maryland] had an extension there Oxford School of Technology [ph.] so I took courses when I was in England and then when I lived in San Jose [California], I took courses there at, I think it was San Jose City College [San Jose, California]. So I had been taking classes all along, probably up to, I maybe had one or two semesters, maybe two semesters, but never full time until I went to Mills. Story_ID: 620893 Speaker 1: Now tell us something about Mills now. Speaker 2: Well, Mills is a small college. We had maybe out of one thousand students there may have been seventy-five to one hundred African American students then. I was president of Black Student Union. Speaker 1: Is this in the Bay Area [San Francisco Bay Area, California]? Speaker 2: In the Bay Area. It's in Oakland, California. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: Right in the middle of Oakland. Very hard school academically, very tough, it's but, and so they had a lot of extra tutorials and had extra, you know, classes on the side that would help you get through, like statistics, I think I took that twice, you know, 'cause I wanted to get more than a C in it. So, Mills really is a school that wants its students to succeed and it's a women's college and it really prides itself on empowering women. And so I was able to get very active in Mills also, I mean, like I said I organized the BSU, organized the first gospel choir at Mills, got Mills College more involved in the community 'cause I couldn't believe, here we had this very, it's a very wealthy college in the middle of Oakland, and there was no connection between Mills College and the community. So, I got them involved with the Black Panther Party in a lot ways, got a little budget and with the BSU, we were able to work with the breakfast programs [Free Breakfast for School Children Program], you know, at Mills College so, you know, I was able to be very creative in how I did my work at Mills, my field work. And that's where I met Shirley Chisholm, Mills allowed for, well a couple of things about Mills, you had to perform academically to do anything, but they also gave you the chance to do fieldwork in, in your classes. So I had one class, I don't think I've had but one class in government, in government where part of our work was not only the study of political science, but the application, so the requirement was to work in a political campaign and that was in '72 [1972]. And so one of the things about Mills again that was really, and it's very important still, they allowed students and require students to work in the field so part of the cl- class requirements is working one of these campaigns, so it was Shirley Chis- well it was Muskie [Edmund Muskie], McGovern [George McGovern], and Humphrey [Hubert Humphrey], and so I told my teacher-- Speaker 1: This around '73 [1973], sometime (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Seventy-two [1972]. Speaker 1: Seventy-two [1972]? Okay Speaker 2: Seventy-two [1972]. Uh-huh. Story_ID: 620894 Speaker 1: I told Dr. Mullen [ph.], my professor, I'm gone flunk the class 'cause I refused to work for any of these white guys, you know, because I was very conscious then after being with the Black Panther Party and I knew that these three men weren't really who I could support even though I liked McGovern [George McGovern], but ahh, it was something about 'em that wasn't for real and for me, you had to be for real. So, at the same time I'm the president of the Black Student Union taking this class that I'm about to flunk, I invite Shirley Chisholm out to speak to the students as the first African American woman elected to [U.S.] Congress. So she came out at the Black Student Union's rec- invitation and she spoke and lo and behold, she talked about her campaign, she was running for president, well, you know, the press was not gonna let us know much about Shirley Chisholm. So after her speech, I went up to her and I said, you know, I really like you, I didn't know you were running for president, I have this class I'm about to flunk, but maybe I'll con- reconsider it and she took me to task 'cause she could see my big Afro and my jeans and she knew I was pretty militant and she says, "My dear," she says, "first thing you've gotta do is register to vote if you really want a change. You've gotta get into the system and you've gotta, you can't just be on the outside pushing, you've gotta be on the inside." (Makes sound), I don't wanna do that, I'm, you know, I'm a revolutionary (laughter), I mean I remember that moment. And so she took me to task, you know, and, and she still to the day she died called me her little girl, you know, 'cause she said I was her little girl, "Oh Barbara [HistoryMaker Barbara Lee], I'm so sorry for calling you, I still call you my little girl," this is when she was helping me win my elections. So she took me to task, so I said, "Okay, okay," so I said, "What do I do to work in your campaign?" She said, "Well you have to--I don't have a lot of national money, it's a non-traditional campaign. I'm leaving it up to my local people to organize it. They believe in me and what I'm standing for, and what I stand for." I mean this woman spoke fluent Spanish, she earn- she was against the Vietnam War, she talked about poverty, she talked about the rights of immigrants, I mean it was like, she was just right where I was, you know, daycare, early childhood education, education, all the issues she talked about. So I went back and told my professor, "Now that I know Shirley Chisholm's running, I'll reconsider my fieldwork and work in the campaign and so I can get my grade for the most part." Well, she told me, I asked her who, how to do this, and she said, "Oh well you're gonna have to find it out." This was part of my research, lo and behold, fast forward there was no campaign, so I went to a friend who was the president of Laney College [Oakland, California] student body, Sandre Swanson and Sandy Gaines [Sandra Gaines] who was student body president, Wilson Riles, Jr. who was a student and myself, we organized the Shirley Chisholm Northern California campaign out of my class at Mills and Shirley got 9, 10 percent of the vote in Alameda County [California] and went on to Miami [1972 Democratic National Convention, Miami, Florida] as her delegate. And so, that was kind of Mills College [Oakland, California]. The, the second part about Mills is that they had a January term where students could go to a foreign country as part of their curriculum and study like in Spain and Japan and China, J term is what it was called. And so Mills, so J term you're doing something, you know, field, well you're doing something other than being on cam- in class. And so I found out that Mills never had a J term class in Africa, so you know that offended me like you would not believe, so I went to the BSU, so I got the BSU to support an effort that I was gonna mount with the administration to, to make them have a credentialed J term course in Africa and that took a lot 'cause the administration was like, oh my god, president Wert [Robert J. Wert], I'll never get it. They freaked out because here you've got all these black students now demanding Africa, (laughter), we did it though. And then, once they agreed to do it, I think it was a course in English the--they credentialed it through the English department, they thought they were gonna trick us and say okay now we've got it, but you guys no we can't fund it. And you know most of us were on financial aid, scholarships, so it was hard to get black students to have the--hav- you know, be able to pay for their trip and I did the research and decided Ghana was the country the University of Legon [University of Ghana at Legon, Accra, Ghana], so Ghana was where were gonna do it, so you know what I did? I figured out how to raise money and raised money from the community to send seventeen students to Africa from Mills College during January of, that may have been January of '73 [1973], and, guess what? I couldn't go because I didn't, I raised just enough money for those students to go and not enough for me, plus I had these two little kids [Tony Lee and Craig Lee] and I was on welfare and, you know, I had to juggle a whole lot in my life so, they went to Ghana without me. I never got to Africa until 1980, for the first time. Speaker 2: Gee whiz, Lee [HistoryMaker Barbara Lee]. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Story_ID: 620895 Speaker 1: How did you raise enough money to send seventeen students to--? Speaker 2: (Laughter) I went to the Panthers [Black Panther Party], I went to churches, I don't know how I did it, I guess my organizing skills, you know? And, and it was interesting because, you know, and some of the students I think got their parents to kick in, not a lot though, but I remember there was one student who wanted to go and we were short her money and the trip wasn't anymore then, it was like seven or eight hundred dollars, right? We were sh- and the university provide the place and all, the dorms, but, and the curric- the academic setting, and the classes. But one student, Candy [ph.], she really wanted to go and she was all upset and everything and I, I and I was trying to figure out, what do I do? What do I do? How do I get her to go? I said, oh I know, we're gone get the president [Robert J. Wert] to pay for her, 'cause the Mills [Mills College, Oakland, California] hadn't kicked in, the administration said no, no, no, we're not gonna do that, we can't do that, we can't do that, we can't, we told you we'd do the class now, we, we've given you enough, we told you, you had to raise your own money. So I organized a sit-in at the president's home (laughter), office so he had black students sitting in his office for a while and finally, he got up off the money (laughter) for this one student (laughter), so we sent, I think it was seventeen students. Speaker 1: That's-- Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: --that's quite a story. Speaker 2: And they had quite a time, they learned a lot, Maudelle Shirek and Cleo Overstreet, two women, phenomenal African American women, Maudelle had been there during independence in Ghana, she became vice mayor of the City of Berkeley [California], she's a legend here in Berkeley, she's a legend here in Berkeley, just died in the last year, she was 104 when she died here, 103 about to turn 104. So she went with the students and Cleo Overstreet, so they were like the chaperones and the people who kind of guided the students through Ghana and then we had the professors at the University of Legon [University of Ghana at Legon] in Accra [Ghana] do the academic piece. And I didn't go, 'cause I couldn't handle it. Story_ID: 620896 Speaker 1: Okay, so your last year at Mills [Mills College, Oakland, California] is 1973 right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And you're the president of the Black Student Union? Speaker 2: Um-hm, yep. Speaker 1: And you're working with this, this Ghanaian pro- project that just took place right? Speaker 2: Yeah, that was-- Speaker 1: It was taking place? Speaker 2: --that year I think, maybe that was the year before-- Speaker 1: Year-- Speaker 2: --in January. Speaker 1: --before? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: It is? Speaker 2: That may have been seventy--well now, oh no, no, that may have been '72 [1972]. Yeah, I don't think it was that same year, it may have been a year later. Speaker 1: Okay. But-- Speaker 2: I think-- Speaker 1: --I have a note here that you worked with, during this period of time you worked with the Catholic Sisters of Loretto [Loretto Community] or? Speaker 2: No, that was when I was in-- Speaker 1: Sis- should-- Speaker 2: No, that was grammar school [St. Joseph's School, El Paso, Texas]. Speaker 1: Grammar school? Speaker 2: Yeah, Sister Loretta [ph.] taught me in grammar school. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Yeah, they, they were the order of nuns that were the teachers at my school. Speaker 1: Okay, so, I'm not gonna check these notes anymore but-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) Shirley Chisholm-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --is true? Ron, Ron Dellums [HistoryMaker Ronald Dellums]? Speaker 2: Yeah, that's when I met Ron. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I met Ron actually-- Speaker 1: Did (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) around the Shirley Chisholm campaign. I may have met Shirley first then Ron, but I got really involved in his, his campaign and then-- Speaker 1: Now did he, did he, was he running for the first time then? Speaker 2: Early '70s [1970s], yeah, he ran for the first time aroun- I wasn't involved in his first campaign though, but I met him during that time. Speaker 1: Okay-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --so he's already in [U.S.] Congress? Speaker 2: Yeah, he was already in Congress. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Probably in his first term. Speaker 1: Gloria Steinem, did she, did you meet her? Speaker 2: Not during that time. Speaker 1: Okay, not-- Speaker 2: Unh-uh. Speaker 1: Okay but Bobby Seale and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, Bobby Seale, Elaine Brown, Huey Newton [Huey P. Newton]. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: And during that time, you know, the early members of the Black Caucasus [Congressional Black Caucus] I met also but-- Speaker 1: That was just being formed around then right? Speaker 2: Yeah-- Speaker 1: Good. Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: I wasn't working for Ron but, you know, being around him, you know, a couple of 'em came out and I met him. Speaker 1: Okay. All right so you're, you're one of the community volunteers with the Black Panther Party? Speaker 2: Yeah, they called us community memb- community members yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah 'cause I know they were, they wouldn't let people, new members-- Speaker 2: Community worker. Speaker 1: --in there-- Speaker 2: Community worker, yeah. Speaker 1: --after a certain period, a period of time, there was a requirement for membership that most people didn't meet or-- Speaker 2: Yeah-- Speaker 1: --so they, they tried to restrict it-- Speaker 2: --yeah, yeah, so I was a community worker. I never even tried to join 'cause I thought I could help, 'cause I, I was really good at raising money for 'em through the foundations and not being a party member helped. Speaker 1: So foundations would support the Black Panther Party? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: The party's efforts? Speaker 2: Let me tell you, one foundation paid me to organize a school, they paid me a five hundred dollar a month stipend through the youth project 'cause they were so committed to seeing a community learning center and so my, my, the Panthers didn't pay me, but I got during my, that was like my summer job, five hundred a month from the youth project to organize their school, yeah, the Panthers were getting money from, for the school, from foundations, see I went back I think maybe. But they had a lot of contributors too, that was during the time I met Bert, Bert Schneider and some of the film- I met, oh god, some of the major entertainers who were contributing money to the Black Panther, Warren Beatty, I met him during that time, yeah, who else did I meet? I met, I met some really phenomenal people during that time who were contributing to the party. Story_ID: 620897 Speaker 1: I think that of all the organizations that come out of the black community, the Black Panthers [Black Panther Party] are probably the most misunderstood. And that there are many, just a whole bunch of stories that may be true or not true about Black Panthers and-- Speaker 2: Yeah. That's very true, that's why in my book I tried to take a little part of my autobiography and write about what I knew about the Black Panthers. And the other side of what the public knows, the majority of that was fostered by the United States government, J. Edgar Hoover, COINTELPRO [Counterintelligence Program]. So the Panthers still haven't, their history still hasn't been written properly I don't think. Speaker 1: Okay, when looking back on it after seeing your own FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] file, and looking back on what was going on, you said that some of the things that they had on file about you were horrendous and scary things? Speaker 2: Yeah, they were horrible, like it was one guy who I went out with who was actually an FBI agent, they had identified the type of person they thought I would like and I, I went out with him a few times, yeah. And when I saw my file, it was all redacted but the, the scene was there and his name wasn't there, but I knew exactly who it was. It's horrible what they did, I, I just, that's why this NSA [National Security Agency] spying and wiring taping and eavesdropping and, whew! It, it's very terrifying because I've been there and I know and you talk about the McCarthy era [Joseph McCarthy], Maudelle [Maudelle Shirek] and you know I don't remember the McCarthy era except people talking about it, but I mean, I experienced COINTELPRO in a big way. Speaker 1: So this-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --I mean it's amazing to me that so much money was even spent on some of the petty, you know, activity, I mean they were spying on everybody, every, I, there's a, I know there's a story, a famous story of the Panther US conflict [The Organization Us]. Speaker 2: Yeah, oh yeah Ron Karenga [HistoryMaker Maulana Karenga] and oh my god. Speaker 1: You and all of them fueled by COINTELPRO? Speaker 2: COINTELPRO. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: People got killed-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --died, and at the hands of the United States government. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, two black organizations at each other's throats basically because of the FBI. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I know one provocateur tried to turn the party against me saying I was an FBI agent because I went to Miami [1972 Democratic National Convention, Miami, Florida] as a Shirley Chisholm delegate and I was becoming part of the petty bourgeois. And so they had rank and file comrades attacking me saying I was the FBI, 'cause look at all of a sudd- I mean but this was the informant by the FBI and I had to actually go directly to Huey [Huey P. Newton] about that. Speaker 1: So to-- Speaker 2: And he had to back 'em off. Speaker 1: --to the extent that the Panthers were able to do anything positive is probably says-- Speaker 2: About their strength and commitment and tenacity and the leadership, you know? It really does, it, it was, you know, that story has to be told; it has to be told. Story_ID: 620898 Speaker 1: You graduated from Mills College [Oakland, California] in sev-'73 [1973]. Now did you graduate with any special honors or anything or, or--? Speaker 2: When I graduated from Mills, I don't think so, did I get? I don't think I did, I was, I'm trying, I remember the graduation, but I don't, I don't believe I graduated with any special, I mean I had a 3.0, you know, I was part of the, you know? Okay graduates who got a decent GPA [grade point average], but I don't think I had any special--I won a couple of scholarships, you know, to the University of California at Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California], and that was part of, well that was kind of, yeah part of what I got, you know, hon- one of the honors was a scholarship. Speaker 1: Now, were there any particular mentors at Mills College or, or teachers that helped you? Speaker 2: Yeah (pause), Dr. Block. She was my psychology teacher. Speaker 1: That's B-L-O-C- ? Speaker 2: B-L-O-C-K. Speaker 1: C-K. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And Dr. Pope [ph.], she was my English teacher, and Dr. Herman Blake [HistoryMaker J. Herman Blake], Herman was also, also did the, he wrote Huey Newton's biography ['Revolutionary Suicide,' Huey P. Newton and J. Herman Blake] and he taught and he, actually UC Santa Cruz [University of California, Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, California], he founded Oakes College [Santa Cruz, California] and UC Santa Cruz and was just honored and I was able to go down and be with him and he taught at Mills and he was phenomenal. Herman Blake, he wrote Huey's biography and I did the research for Herman Blake for Huey Newton's book and yeah, he made a major impact on me, yeah and he was probably, he and, there was another African American poet, I don't remember his name, Ike [ph.], I think that was his first name, I'll have to get his last name, but he was in the English department. Very tall good looking brother who was very smart, English teacher, yeah. Speaker 1: So your major was? Speaker 2: I majored in psychology. Speaker 1: Psychology, okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah I majored in psychology. Speaker 1: All right. So you, you take the scholarship to go to the University of California at Berkeley? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Right? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Right so-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --so start there in '75 [1975]? Speaker 2: Seventy--? Let's see-- Speaker 1: No, no-- Speaker 2: --'74 [1974]-- Speaker 1: --before, I'm sorry. Speaker 2: --September of '74 [1974] Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And you got the, your degree--? Speaker 2: No, September of '73 [1973]-- Speaker 1: Three [1973]. Speaker 2: --I started. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause I graduated. Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was a two year program. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I got my M.S.W. in, in June of '75 [1975]. Story_ID: 620899 Speaker 1: All right. So UC Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California], what was going on at UC Berkeley then? Was it still a activist--? Speaker 2: It was still activist, yeah and, one I was gonna make it an activist because I got up there and didn't like a lot of what I saw taking place. And so, the School of Social Welfare was really a very rigorous school, I mean and I would, I went into the psychoanalytic track, so I had a lot of psychoanalytic psychology and psychiatry, I had to study. But in the meantime, you know, you're required, which is really one of the pluses of, of Berkeley and School of Social Welfare, you have to work in the field setting and so they placed me at the Berkeley psychiatric outpatient center, mental health services [Berkeley Community Mental Health Services Psychiatric Outpatient Clinic, Berkeley, California] one year and at the Hig- in Highland Hospital [Oakland, California], psychiatric inpatient another year. And lo and behold, what I found of course wa- I didn't like in terms of how they were providing the services for African Americans, it just didn't seem right, the, the treatment modality. And so, I went to my professor and I said I, you know, and he gave us a paper to do, he said, "Well, okay, what are you gonna do your paper on?" I said, well, was it a thesis? It may have been, but no I did this first year, he said, "Why don't you--," 'cause it was community mental health was the track that the clinical, you know, the curriculum was in. So the paper I wrote was looking at community mental health, identifying the resources and the treatment approaches in the Bay Area [San Francisco Bay Area, California], in the East Bay, and analyzing them and then proposing an alternative. So out of my work in the Berkeley psychiatric outpatient services and at the Highland Hospital, I wanted to do it on mental health treatment of African Americans in the Bay Area or in Oakland [California], the Ea- well the East Bay, Berkeley, Oakland. So I did it. I looked at what was existing wha- what I was doing and all and proposing alternatives. So I took that paper and talked to my friend Deborah Johnson who's another student, I said, "You know what?" I said, "I can't stand doing this and just leaving it here in this class for this professor to grade." I said "I wanna do this. I wanna set up a mental health center," and she looked at me, "Really?" I said, "Yeah." I said, she said "I'll help you." So, I found a community projects office at Berkeley, at Cal, headed by Carrie Kaplan [ph.], and they had never really funded any, what they did was fund com- students to set up community projects, like you get fifteen hundred, two thousand dollars. And I don't think he had ever done anything with a black student before and so I said, "Well I'm gonna go in there and see if I can turn this into a proposal and get some seed money 'cause I want this to be a clinic. I wanna really do this in the community." And I had a big fight with them over there, finally they said, okay, okay, okay, so they funded my paper which I had turned into a proposal to set up a community mental health center called CHANGE Incorporated and that was Community Health Alliance for Neighborhood Growth and Education [CHANGE, Inc., Berkeley, California]. And that was based on the paper that I did in this class 'cause I thought I had, I think I got an A on the paper, I said well why am I doing this paper if I can't do anything with it. And so that started this whole process of me learning how to raise money and writing proposals and lo and behold, boy I got really, really active, fi- once I finally got that two grand out of the university, then I went to the San Francisco Foundation [San Francisco, California], I went to the City of Berkeley [California], before you knew I had a hundred and fifty thousand dollars (laughter). And so I was able to start my own mental health center as a student and that's what I did and I knew I didn't know enough to run it, so I brought in some of the top psychiatrists around, Walter Shervington, who's since died, Wendell Lipscomb who died, oh god, Tom Hilliard [Thomas O. Hilliard], psychologist, I brought in all the--Ida Hilliard, a good friend, she's a psychiatrist, all these great black mental health experts. And so, they formed the core of this mental health service, so no one could ever attack me for not having the experts, and they all helped us formulate the treatment approach and really became the nucleus of my center and it was an unbelievable center. People still remember it. Story_ID: 620900 Speaker 1: Now, now did you have any act- interaction in those days with Price Cobbs [HistoryMaker Dr. Price Cobbs] and-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and William Grier [William H. Grier]? Speaker 2: That's right yeah, yeah. They were over at Pacific Psychotherapy [Pacific Psychotherapy Associates]. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Um-hm, on Sacramento Street [San Francisco, California], yep a lot of interaction with them. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: The authors of 'Black Rage.' Speaker 2: 'Black Rage.' Speaker 1: Everybody was reading that during the-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --seventies [1970s]. Speaker 2: I was too-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --and that was part of my rage, is looking at how psychiatric services and mental health services were being presented to the black community which didn't work, I mean I ended, you know, and my model was based on yeah you gotta provide the counseling and psychoanalysis and psychotherapy 'cause if people are depressed and if they're a psychotic or schizophrenic or, you know, they need help, I mean they really do. But that doesn't mean that they don't need a job, you know, it's kind of like the social and economic issues that underline a lot of the mental health problems in the African American community need to be dealt with. And so my clinic, while it provided the services we had, what I called advocates, psychiatric advocates who would really go out and if you needed a job, or needed daycare, if you needed a home, you know, would help people in their real needs, their reality stuff, and so those people would work in a team setting with the clinical people to try to help a person really regroup and it worked. And then we had a community component where we tried to do what we call primary prevention and that was on a community level, have workshops and forums about mental health issues so people would really begin to understand mental health, and so people would know if the early signs of depression, early signs of anger, early signs of whatever, stress, you know, come to the clinic quick so we can kind of sort it through and the, you know? So we did a whole community mental health component of my clinic, so it was great and it survived 'til Ronald Reagan [Ronald Wilson Reagan] cut out the funding, OEO [Office of Economic Opportunity], I think, but I went on to D.C. [Washington, D.C.] and hired a whole staff and board to keep it going. Story_ID: 620901 Speaker 1: What was you thinking in those days? I mean I, I, I think it, it seems to make perfect sense when you look ba- back on it, I mean even today that, you know, black people with all the stress that they're under from lack of employment or under employment-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and racism in the com- in the community, I mean, you know, the violence that comes through, you know, vice activities that people are into-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --in order to make a living. You know, that, I mean were you thinking that mental health is a, was a key, you know, is a key, an element in, you know, healing the community? Speaker 2: Oh definitely, I, I'd always say we need massive psychotherapy, our community because of the stresses and race. I mean I, I went through, you know, domestic violence is rampant, you know? Abuse, unemployment, you know, all of the consequences of racism, you know, really are still with us, unemployment, you know, the, the pressures that build on the family, acting out, you know, kids going to school hungry, you know, behavior problems, I mean, mental health's a big, big issue, we need to really address in a, in a way that we have never addressed it before. So, that was my thinking then, you know? And, and the white approach, you know, the strictly psychoanalytic psychotherapy approach didn't address those underlying issues of racism and stress and lack of opportunity and, you know, all the, the stuff that we're still seeing. And we're seeing now, still many, many people in the black community, you know, under this kind of stress which you've seen mental health issues being the result of it. Speaker 1: You're saying that we, we're really suffering from similar issues that other people said we, we got racism stacked on top of it? Speaker 2: On top of it, yeah and, and often times it's the cause of it, you know? But what we still have to look within, I, I really believe and here's where some African American professionals don't agree, but I, I think that we have to look within also as we're sorting through all the, the societal and economic issues, you still have all the stuff left inside of you that you have to deal with, you know, the anger, I mean, you know, I was angry everyday 'cause I was on welfare, you know, and I wanted to get off and, you know? So I understand how anger plays out and we have that anger that we need to deal with. Story_ID: 620902 Speaker 1: Now during this time period when you were in college, your, your sons [Tony Lee and Craig Lee] were, were they taken care by your in- your in-laws or--? Speaker 2: Sometimes they were in Texas, with my in-laws, sometimes they were with me, I think they went to school in Coldsrings, Texas, I think for maybe a year or two years, two years maybe during that six year period I was in school. So I, I never could have survived if it hadn't been for my ex-mother-in-law Peggy [Peggy Lee] and her husband Lee [Carl Lee], 'cause they really, when I was going through all this stuff, they took those kids and kept 'em in school, they lived on a farm and my kids love animals to this day, taught 'em how to grow food, how to farm and made 'em go to school. They got, got good grades and then they came back to me when I was able to finally regroup and they turned out great. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, now you've got CHANGE Incor- Incorporated [CHANGE, Inc., Berkeley, California] going-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --while you're, as you're graduating from, with your master's degree? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So you're working on a thesis while CHANGE is going on (laughter)? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: I was working, that's my field placement, I went (unclear), I said look, I want, this is my field placement, so I wanna get credit, you know, in addition to these classes I'm taking, you guys require us to do field so I wanna do field in my own clinic. So, what could they say? Speaker 1: Okay, so this is, all this is going on and, at one point, I, you joined the Dellums [HistoryMaker Ronald Dellums] staff right? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Ron, Ron-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --Dellums' congressional staff? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Was this during the same period of time? Speaker 2: Same period. I went back between grad- undergrad [Mills College, Oakland, California] and grad school [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California]. No, wait a minute, no, no, first year of grad school, second year of grad school, again I wanted to be, you know, it's kind of like all these things these white kids were doing, you know, we couldn't do, and I said, I'm determined you guys are gonna integrate this, you know. So Cal in the Capital was a program that young people on campus [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California] could apply for and go work at the, at a Cap- at the Capitol [U.S. Capitol] in Washington [D.C.] or in Sacramento [California State Capitol, Sacramento, California], so I talked to Ron and talked to Don Hopkins [Donald R. Hopkins] his district director, I said I really wanna work for Ron and they said, well sure we've love to have you, but it's really competitive and if you can get in Cal in the Capitol program they'll send you and pay you a dollar an hour or something to do it. So I had to apply and it was a rigorous process, I mean they took you through all these interviews this writing, I mean it was like, as a student, it's like oh my god, how am I gonna do this? I had to think about what I was gonna do with the kids, 'cause they were with me that year and I had to say how? What am I gonna do in Washington, I've got a little Volkswagen, I got a house here, I had owned a house during that time and a little Volkswagen, said how am I gonna manage all this? So I called the kid's grandmother, once I got in, they said they'd keep the kids for the summer. So I locked the house down, kept my car here and went on to D.C. and worked as a Cal in the Capitol, I may have been in one of the first black Cal- I don't know this for a fact, but I may have been one of the first black Cal in the Capitol student interns ever and that was in 1973. Speaker 1: It's Cal in--? Speaker 2: In the Capitol (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) in the Capitol? Speaker 2: And that program is still going, Cal in the Capitol. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 620903 Speaker 1: Now around '75 [1975], Huey Newton [Huey P. Newton] and Bobby Seale had, had a falling out? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And there's a lot been, I'm if I, if I remember correctly, there's a lot written about Huey Newton that suggested that he was mentally unstable or something was wrong, I mean I don't know what. Do you have an impression of-- Speaker 2: Yeah-- Speaker 1: --that? Speaker 2: --you know what, it wa- that day--I read this in the newspaper 'cause by then I was on Ron's [HistoryMaker Ronald Dellums] staff in '75 [1975], in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] working and I read this, I couldn't believe it, I couldn't believe it, I couldn't believe it. I don't think that they, they had, had a parting of the ways, I don't think Huey was mentally unstable, I think there was so much stress that was taking place with the Panthers with regard to the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] and all the stuff they doing to Huey that he ended up, you know, getting off into stuff, you know? I know he was very, my mother [Mildred Parish Massey] loved him. He was very respectful, but he had, you know, issues he was dealing with but I think he was crazy or mentally unstable but, you know, he had a lot of, he was in jail for a while, you know, the police, you know, charges, you know, all the allegations about him beating up his, his body guard or somebody and-- Speaker 1: Right, his (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, yeah it was, I mean, so it was always something going on in his life. You know, fortunately I didn't see that and didn't know that I, I know enough people who know and recognize that there were a lot of issues but he was not mentally unstable at all, you know? And I, I can, you know, he was a very smart man, he got his Ph.D. down at UC Santa Cruz [University of California, Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, California], you know and had a lot of, lot of rough stuff take place in his life. But he led the Black Panther Party, I think in a way that nobody else could have. Speaker 1: Did you come into contact with Eldridge Cleaver much? Speaker 2: No, you know what? The first time I met Eldridge was when he was in the hospital. He was ill and I met him right, a couple of years before he died here in Oakland [California] in the hospital. Yeah, and we sat down and we talked. He knew of me and I knew, of course, of him but I had never really met him or was involved with him (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And it was Kathleen Cleaver, Bobby Seale? Speaker 2: Yeah, and I've met Kathleen. Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I did know her as well. I knew Elaine [Elaine Brown], and know her very well. Speaker 1: They've all written books. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Memoirs about that time. Speaker 2: Yeah-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, David Hilliard, Ericka Huggins, well Big Man [Elbert Howard], Herman [HistoryMaker J. Herman Blake], you know, every now and then I'd I hear from some of them and there's, you know, I'd attend the reunions and it's really great, most party members really have gone on and made something outta their lives but they're still involved at some level of struggle to help change this country. Speaker 1: Did you ever meet [HistoryMaker] Bobby Rush back during those days when he was a Panther? Speaker 2: In passing, I never really, now he's one of my partners, but I, I met Bobby and worked with him but I didn't know him, like I knew he was in Chicago [Illinois], like I knew Huey and, and Bobby Seale. Speaker 1: Oh-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But we've, we love talking to each other-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --on the floor at [U.S.] Congress about the day (laughter). Story_ID: 620904 Speaker 1: What was life like in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] and wha- what was Ron Dellums [HistoryMaker Ronald Dellums] working on and what was your role in, you know, on, on Ron Dellums' staff? Speaker 2: Well I was hired as his administrative assistant/chief of staff, so I actually managed his office, and I ended up actually in addition to my administrative responsibilities taking on foreign policy and international relations, for him. I worked a lot on Cuba issues trying to develop strategies to end the embargo against Cuba, which he was fully supportive of. I mean he was the lead on it, but I did the staff work on that, on Grenada, you know a lot of the work around, really his being the liaison between the, his district and D.C., case work, grants, contracts, helping constituents weed through the bureaucracy when they needed help in Washington. I was kind of the point person to do that. I also, worked on some legislation, not a lot but I, I think this was the first amendment Ron ever had passed, I, I wrote and worked the politics of it and that was section 30 of the Airport Development Act [Airport and Airway Development Act], and that was the, I think it's still the code where, in, in the code where airports, all airport projects and employees had to be part of an affirmative action plan which opened up the door for minority vendors and minority contractors at the airport. And I wrote that and it was the Republican secretary of transportation, Bill Coleman [HistoryMaker William T. Coleman, Jr.], who was the secretary of transportation, and you know [HistoryMaker] Elaine Jones, who was a Republican, I, I don't know what Elaine was, all I know is she was this really bright African American lawyer, worked with Bill Coleman and she and I conspired on how we would get this amendment passed to the transportation bill...