 Story_ID: 91233 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewing today for The HistoryMakers. Our Videographer is Scott Stearns. Ma'am, could you please state your name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: Okay. My name is Dorothy, R is the middle initial, Leavell. Spell Leavell; L-E-A-V-E-L-L. Speaker 1: And ma'am, what is your date of birth and place of birth. Speaker 2: Okay. October 23rd, 1944 in Pine Bluff, Arkansas. Speaker 1: Okay, and can you give us today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is April 1st, 2003, April Fool's Day. Speaker 1: [01:01:16:15] NO AUDIO [01:01:23:19] Speaker 2: Chicago Crusader at 6429 South Martin Luther King Drive, Chicago. Speaker 1: And ma'am, what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm Editor and Publisher of the Chicago Crusader and Chairman of the Board of Amalgamated Publishers, Inc. Story_ID: 91234 Speaker 1: All right. Now before we get into depth, there are five lightweight "People" Magazine-ish type questions that I'm compelled to ask you. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: And the first one is--and they just require a short answer. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: The first one is what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: My goodness, I shouldn't have done that. What is my favorite food? I don't really have a favorite, believe it or not. Now you say these were gone be easy questions. Speaker 1: These are the short ones. Speaker 2: What is my favorite food? Wow, probably a good steak, okay, all right. Speaker 1: Now do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Yes, blue. Speaker 1: All right. And ma'am, what, what is your favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Summer. Speaker 1: Okay. Now do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Not really a favorite. I guess, well if I would say I had a favorite, maybe St. Martin would be one of those. Speaker 1: Okay. And last question is what is your favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: My favorite phrase or saying. I have no idea. God bless the child that's got his own may be one of them. I really, I, I have a lot of phrases that I like, but since you've asked me about 'em, probably can't think of 'em. God bless the child. But my favorite Bible verse may be do unto others as you would have them to do unto you. Now that is a very serious one for me and would not necessarily be a phrase, but something that is very important to me. And the other one is one of the Beatitudes is the other one, blessed and pure is the pure in heart for they shall see God. But phrase, I guess I really don't have a favorite. Speaker 1: That's three good ones. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. Story_ID: 91235 Speaker 1: Now, now for the depth. Speaker 2: Okay, and now we get to the important questions. Speaker 1: Now how, how far can you trace your family back? I mean what's the farthest back you can trace your family? Speaker 2: Well to my great-grandfather on my father's side, which would have been in the, I guess mid-1800's. His name was Thomas Gonder, and-- Speaker 1: How do you spell Gonder? Speaker 2: G-O-N-D-E-R. And my grandfather was one of I guess about five or six kids. And his name was also Thomas. And then of course my father was Blane Gonder, B-L-A-N-E Gonder. And my father was born in 1895. I was I guess born to parents in late, in their latter years for having children. And I can trace that far back, and I can also--on my mother's side, I know that I can again go to my great-grandparents and I--they were the Holloways, the family name was the Holloways. And the, the grandmother, great-grandmother was an Indian. Her name was Susie. And then of course come on down to, to my grandparents, who were really entrepreneurs. My grandfather whose name is Andrew Topps, was a grocery store owner in Pine Buff, Arkansas. And my grandmother was a seamstress in addition to domestic work that she did. She did ironing, washing and ironing for the white families in the community. But she was really a--from what I can understand, a very accomplished seamstress. And of course my mother [Sallie Topps Gonder], who was her oldest child and, and all of her children were very well dressed. She was so crafty from what I can understand, that they wore dresses with parasols to match. So that--now I don't know a lot about my grandparents, what they did. They were fairly young when they died and my father raised his brothers and sisters. But I would imagine they probably were farmers or, or something to that effect. But--know a little bit more about what my grandparents did on my mother's side. Speaker 1: Okay, now are there any stories that are passed down through either side about life back in those days? Were, were your ancestors free blacks or were they slaves, or do you know? Speaker 2: Well I believe that my parents came from North Carolina to Arkansas. That I didn't quite understand when I went to North Carolina because I thought it was so beautiful there. But it seems as though that they must have been brought--my great-grandparents must have been brought there as slaves to North Carolina. And for--they had a desire after they were freed to, to--for a better life, and they migrated to Arkansas. And I do recall that my mother and her sisters and all seemed to have felt that in the earlier years that they, they were pretty comfortable with their father owning the store and mother being a seamstress. Then my grandfather got--was ill for a considerable amount of time and that meant that everybody had to work. And most of the time it ended up doing menial tasks as we see them today, as washing and ironing and cleaning for others. So that's what I know of my grandparents and great-grandparents. But they all settled in Arkansas and lived all of their days there. Speaker 1: Now these are the parents on your mother's side? Speaker 2: And father. Speaker 1: And your father. They, they're all from North Carolina? Speaker 2: My--on my mother's side, I'm sorry. Speaker 1: Your mother's side. Speaker 2: Yes. Now on my father's side, they--I think they came from Alabama or someplace like that and they settled in, in Monticello, Arkansas. And it was after my father became a young adult that he moved to Pine Bluff. But they came from a place called Drew County, which was where Monticello, Arkansas is located. And, and my father was a--worked for the railroad, the Cotton Belt Railroad. Story_ID: 91236 Speaker 1: Now that--let me ask you can, can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us, and then his--you already gave us the year, but give it to us again just so we can slate. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And then I wanna know something about him. Speaker 2: Okay. His name was spelled B-L-A-N-E, and sometimes they spelled it B-L-A-N-D, Gonder. He did not have a middle name to my knowledge. And he was born January the 14th, 1895. Speaker 1: So they called him both Bland and Blane? Speaker 2: Yes, yes they did. My father was a very, very fair complected man, from what I can understand when he was young, with red hair. So many people called him Red. He worked for, as I said, the railroad, the Cotton Belt. Having worked there as a laborer. Those--during those times it was not the easiest job to get one of the positions as, as a porter or all and travel on the railroad. Even though that we did have some. But his job was working around the--as they call it, the shops. And that was around the railroad yard and various and sundry jobs as I understood it. But it had provided a decent living for my father, and of course he had bought his own home. He and my mother [Sallie Topps Gonder] had gotten married. My mother was I think about fifteen years old when they got married. His mother and father had passed early and I think he was looking for a wife to help him take care of his brothers and sisters. Story_ID: 91237 Speaker 1: Is there a story about how they met? Speaker 2: Yeah, well I tell you what was really funny about the whole situation is that indeed I think my father [Blaine Gonder] did think that you know perhaps if he had a wife, she could help him raise his brothers and sisters. And as it turned out, my mom [Sallie Topps Gonder] used to always have us laughing that my dad would come home from work expecting dinner, and she and his sisters would have been playing dolls all day. So I think that, that did not go over big and perhaps what he thought he was getting was a wife, but he indeed at some point must have figured he got a playmate for his sisters. They were married for more than fifteen years before they had their first child. Speaker 1: Now, now she was fifteen when they got married. Approximately how old was he? Speaker 2: He was seven years older than her. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So he was twenty-two. And another funny story about it was that they were engaged to get married and I assume--I don't know exactly what the date was that they got married, but I, I think it was around September, in the Fall of the year that they got married. But my mom and dad had--well my mom had gone to church with her parents and my dad came to the church. I don't know if he attended the service or not. And he was in a wagon. And he asked permission of my grandparents if he might drive my mother home in the wagon. And so the--my grandparents consented and said yes, but take her straight home. Do not deviate. Needless to say, they did not do as they were told and they dropped several other kids off, or anyway they didn't go straight home. And of course on the eve of my mom getting married, well not necessarily just the eve, but very close to their wedding date, my mother got a, a whipping because she did not do what her parents had told her to do and that was to go straight home. So she used to often laugh about that. That here she was getting ready to get married and she got a whipping very close to that wedding. Speaker 1: That's funny [unclear]. Speaker 2: Yeah. So--but they got married and, and had one daughter, Alma, who only lived to be about nine months old. And she died from spinal meningitis. Speaker 1: You said that they were, they were married fifteen years. Speaker 2: Fifteen years before they had their first child. And then it was--certainly that was pre-birth control days, to be sure. And she had her second child ten years later. And then I came along two years later. When I was born-- Speaker 1: So that's like twenty-seven years after they got-- Speaker 2: Yes, yes. My mom was forty when my brother was born and forty-two when I was born. Which in those days was kind of unusual for a woman to have children so late in life. Speaker 1: It was actually older in those days too. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Because people didn't live as long. Speaker 2: Yes, yes, exactly. And of course I tell--the joke they tell me, my dad had red hair. Because when I was born, he didn't have any hair, he was bald already. Story_ID: 91238 Speaker 1: But he [Blaine Gonder, father] was a hardworking man. My mother [Sallie Topps Gonder] did domestic work, but you would not have found any more modern parents and really had a great desire for their children to have a better life. So we, we went to school. Neither one of them went very far in school. I think my mom to about third grade. My dad to sixth grade. So they didn't go very far in school, but they had a great love for, for education and they tried to provide us with, with the greatest that they could; my brother and I. Speaker 2: Now, now what was your mother's name and can you, can, can, can you spell her name for us? Speaker 1: Sure, yes. Speaker 2: And give us her birth date. Speaker 1: Her name was Sallie, S-A-L-L-I-E. Sallie Geneva Topps Gonder. And that Topps is spelled T-O-P-P-S. Sallie, S-A-L-L-I-E. She was born June 23rd, 1902. And lived to be ninety-two years old. So we were very pleased. As a matter of fact, another story that was told is that when she had us, my brother and I, that she probably would not live to see us to adulthood. And that--certainly she defied all the odds there. She not only lived to see her children to adulthood, she lived to see her grandchildren to, to adulthood. My father lived to--I believe he was seven--well he was seventy-six when he died, but my mother lived to be ninety-two. So--especially my mom had a really long life, yes. (Unclear). Speaker 2: Now, now what was your mother like in terms of her temperament and so forth? Speaker 1: She had a--she was a very fiery little lady. She was only about four eleven [4'11"]. I understand that she was pretty quick and she would fight. As a matter of fact, another one of the funny stories is that I had a great-aunt that used to tell me about how beautiful my mother was and so cute and petite. And that with her mother being a seamstress, she was always very well dressed. And she would see my mom; they would be going in town on, on the weekends, on Saturday, and my mom would be dressed very, very well with a parasol and she'd go downtown. But usually when she came back, her dress was torn from the waist and her parasol was torn up. Some kind of way she seemed to have found trouble when she went downtown and had been in a fight. So her clothes had been torn off. But now that's one side. But the side that I knew of my mother was that she was a very, very caring, a very loving person. One who was known to be a peacemaker in the family. And greatly, greatly loved by and not only her own children, but most of the family members and indeed my own children's friends. They call her Grandma. And so she was a--she really was a, a strict disciplinarian as far as we were concerned as children, but again, she was really very modern in her thoughts and in things that she did even though she had lived during a time when we didn't have all of the modern conveniences that she certainly did live to enjoy in her later years, but in her earlier years in life, the wagons and all that we did not know about, she had come through that. And she was very modern. She, she was an easy person to talk to. She certainly had a way about her that you would feel better if you were troubled by something; she always had something that seemingly would make you feel better. And her grandchildren all thought, each one thought that they were her favorite. She had a way about her that with each one they had their little special things. It may be a saying or, or a secret, or, or a sound or something. But they had all of those special moments together that were really I'm sure that they still even remember, even though she's been gone for a while. Story_ID: 91239 Speaker 1: Okay. Now I want you to sort of reflect back and give us a sense of what some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up were. Speaker 2: Well I tell you, it was a great childhood for me. Even though I lived in a semi-rural conditions with my mother [Sallie Topps Gonder] and father [Blaine Gonder] and my brother, life was good. We didn't--we had a small family and my parents were, were older and so we had really a nice life. We didn't--we weren't hungry. We had, we had a nice house to live in and we had a car and even though my dad didn't have the most modern car, but we had a car. And I always dressed well. My mom always bought us really nice clothes. I went to--I, I lived in a small community where you knew everybody. We went to the church where we knew everybody. We--during the week we went to a, a little small school and-- Speaker 1: What was the name of it? Speaker 2: It was called Main Street School. Not very creative in name, to say the least, but it was called Main Street School. It went to the sixth grade. And I started there in first grade, there was no kindergarten. And the teachers and the parents and the church was right across the street from the school. So it was very close. It was-- Speaker 1: What was the name of the church? Speaker 2: Yes, it was Saint Bethel Baptist Church. And the minister and the principal of the school, they were, you know they were friends. They were neighbors. Because the principal lived on the grounds of the school and the pastor lived on the grounds, the parsonage was a part of the church. And I--during those earlier years, I was queen of the school more than once. I, I, I was--did very well academically. Summers were easy and hot and just full of fun, children played until it was dark outside and, and then they came in for baths to go to bed. It was a wonderful life. We had plenty to eat. We had a nice, clean house to live in. The sounds were crickets at night. Now that I got a little tired of, of hearing by the time I got to be about 18, about 17 when I dreamed of leaving the country, so to speak, to go to Chicago cause I had visited here. But childhood was a wonderful childhood. I can remember my mom washing the clothes in the backyard in a big, black pot. I can remember having a garden with all kinds of wonderful vegetables to eat. I can remember eating a ripe tomato with salt and pepper which was so delicious. So many wonderful, wonderful memories of life and no rushing. Just wonderful, quiet and fun when you were with your friends. Just a great life, a great life. Unlike the hustle and bustle that we have now. It was just really a, a great way to live. Story_ID: 91240 Speaker 1: Now Pine Bluff [Arkansas] is--how big a town is, is, is Pine Bluff? Speaker 2: It's not a real large place. I believe it was probably the second largest city in Arkansas during the days that I was growing up. I don't remember the dimensions. I think maybe we might have had maybe 70,000 people, 80,000. It was a small town, so to speak. But--and the public transportation, that was not--it didn't really extend to where we lived because we lived in as I said, semi-rural, or maybe it was just all rural, I call it semi-rural. But many of the very affluent families in Pine Bluff lived also in that area. But you know separate and apart from where we were. But a few blocks away. Story_ID: 91241 Speaker 1: And so Pine Bluff [Arkansas] is not a real big place, but we had a college in our town that educated many, many of people all across the state. They would come to Pine Bluff, it was a state school. Speaker 2: Now this was a black, black college? Speaker 1: It was a--it was. It's a state school. It started out I think as a agricultural and normal school. And when I was growing up, it was called AM and N College [Arkansas Agricultural, Mechanical and Normal College, currently the University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff, Pine Bluff, Arkansas]. And it had a black president and all of the students were black. That of course changed around 1963 or so when the schools began to be integrated. But it was a--we passed by the white high school to go to the black school in, in the town. We had--in the earlier years I guess, the college at one time was also a high school. And then in later years when I was growing up, they had two, three, three high schools. In the very beginning, I guess 1957 when I went to Merrill High school. They also had a Townsend Park High School and they had a Coleman High School that serviced different areas. Merrill High School was the biggest of all of the high schools and in I guess around 1959 or so, they split Merrill High School into two high schools and created one called Southeast High School. Story_ID: 91242 Speaker 1: And, but Merrill High School [Pine Bluff, Arkansas] was the one--the place to be. The school that you, you would want to go to. They had really some of the greatest teachers. They would push--they pushed the students to their greatest ability to, to do well. We had a principal that was short and sort of stout in stature, but he, he really--once he walked down the hall, there was complete silence. He loved his children, he loved education, and he fought in that segregated school system for us to have the best materials to use to learn with the best books. We had great equipment in our physics lab and all of that. And the teachers, they were just so dedicated. They spent many hours during school hours and after school hours working with all of us. So it too was a great experience, one which I believe children perhaps will never know in this day and age how dedicated those teachers were to all of us. Story_ID: 91243 Speaker 1: So tell me about school, now. What school did you go to and how did you like school? Speaker 2: Okay, I went to Main Street [Elementary] School, elementary school and I was always a very good student. I liked school and I liked the teachers, they were always very, very nice and I went there from first grade to sixth grade. There I was queen and all kinds of things, all involved in all of the activities at the school. And then I went to Merrill High School [Pine Bluff, Arkansas] for seventh grade through 12th grade. There again, the teachers and the principals and all were just very, very supportive. They even had during my day, accelerated classes. I used to compete say for instance when I was in tenth grade, I competed with 12th grade students and 11th grade students. We had the very best equipment. We had a foreign language lab, I took French and Spanish there in high school. Physics and chemistry and, and all of the sciences, trigonometry and math and it was just really a, a full curriculum, and the dedication of the teachers is what really made it for us. They came up and with the idea of the accelerated classes and so now in addition to my regular classes, they rotated the times of day that we would come out of our regular classes and attend the accelerated classes in science and math and foreign languages. Story_ID: 91244 Speaker 1: And often--one of the funny things that happened to me when I was in high school [Merrill High School, Pine Bluff, Arkansas], I think it was my senior year. I had never really been in any trouble at school, but I guess I was feeling my growing pains and felt like I would take advantage of having a little bit more free time during those last weeks of school and decided I would go downtown and get my hair done instead of going to a class that I was supposed to go to. And I got caught. The principal--I don't know, it seems as though that principal knew everything. You, you thought your parents would know about things you had done away from home before you got home, well the principal was the other part of our family that knew everything you were doing too. And I went and got my hair done and came back to school and as soon as I walked in the school, who was there but the principal? And the principal said right away Gonder, where have you been? Said well I went downtown. I didn't lie; I went down to get my hair done. He said on school time? I said yes. Why did you go on school time? Well I have so many things that I'm doing; so many activities, we've got prom coming up and we've got the graduation and we've got this going on and I just didn't have any other time. So I just said boy I know I'm gonna get some needed rest. Perhaps I'll get suspended for a day or so. Well my punishment was not to be suspended, and he did not suspend me. He said and don't you ever do it again. That was as much as I got in that incident. Speaker 2: So you left at that-- Speaker 1: No, it wasn't a lot of school, and I graduated as valedictorian of the, of the class. So-- Speaker 2: Is this 1962? Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty-two. So I guess some people sort of felt like the better students perhaps got a little more leeway to do the-- Speaker 2: So that's-- Speaker 1: Could be. In this case it certainly did work. But I was looking forward to perhaps having some leisure time to do some things and it didn't quite work that way. But again, his dedication and the dedication of those teachers just meant everything to me and my whole life. Story_ID: 91245 Speaker 1: What was his name and what were some of the teachers? This is his--this is for historical purposes, you know, so this name (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Right. His name was M. D. Jordan. He used the initials. I think it was Massus [ph.] was his first name, D. Jordan. And some of the teachers that really influenced my life was Mrs. Margaret Clark. I think she's Dr. Margaret Clark now. She teaches--she's retired from the University of Arkansas in Fayetteville [Arkansas]. She was the foreign language teacher and she, she taught Spanish and French. She spoke both fluently, and she was from New York. I often wondered how on earth did you leave New York and get to Pine Bluff, Arkansas? I still converse with her even to this day. She keeps in touch with me and I keep in touch with her. When she's in the city, we have an opportunity to talk. She taught in the high school until they integrated the schools, and that's when she went to the college level. But many of the very fine teachers we had, another one was Mrs. Kirby, and I'm trying to remember Mrs. Kirby's first name. But Mrs. Kirby was our math teacher and what a math whiz she was. And she often came to the city after I had graduated and she talked about her disappointment in how integration had kept her from molding the lives of so many of the young black kids in, in Pine Bluff. They relegated her when they integrated the schools to remedial math when she was teaching trigonometry and you know the very highest of math classes in our high school. Once the schools were integrated, she was teaching remedial math. And it kept her from, from interacting and, and really what she did so well when I was growing up and that was to inspire us to learn as much as we possibly could. And then we had a Mrs. McPherson. Mrs. McPherson taught civics and American government. We had Mrs. Bennett. Mrs. Bennett, and I'll try to remember some of these names. Ella McPherson was her--Mrs. McPherson's name. And then her sister's name was--wow that one's escaping me. But I remember Mrs. Bennett, her last name was Bennett. And she taught English. But probably my favorite class was that foreign language class, and probably my favorite teacher was Mrs. Clark because Mrs. Clark not only taught the foreign language, she taught us everything. You know she really challenged us to think. She really inspired us to, to greater heights. And when we left Merrill High School [Pine Bluff, Arkansas], there wasn't a student I am certain that did not feel that they could conquer the world. That is what that school, that Merrill High School did for me and so many other peers. That they really could aspire to be anything, and if they worked hard, they could, they could achieve. Story_ID: 91246 Speaker 1: Now how do you spell Merrill High School [Pine Bluff, Arkansas]? Speaker 2: M-E-R-R-I-L-L is how you spell that. Speaker 1: And do you know who it was named for? Speaker 2: It was named for a white--I guess he was a philanthropist and I, I don't remember all of the details, but I do know that he gave the land and I think the money to build the school. And it really has had some outstanding students. One of the things that I remember as I--when I became an adult and moved to Chicago and they had integrated the schools. Mr. Jordan came to Chicago and he spent some time with me. And he was very, very sad. And he told me how things had changed so drastically. He was now in the--in administration at the public schools. And--but--and he even wrote me a letter and, and, and, and said they can take buildings away from me and they can take us away from the children, but those that we had an influence on their life, we still have those to, to look back on; the doctors and the lawyers and the engineers and the various and sundry professionals. And needless to say though, he was no prouder of those than he was those that was a janitor because it was Mr. Jordan's philosophy that we heard every day. That whatever we did, do the very best that we could. And so even if it was not one of the professionals, if you were a good janitor, if you were a good as they call them, maintenance engineer. Or if whatever your profession, if you just would do it the very best. That there could be no more asked of you. And so that was really one of the most important and influential things in my life that--and certainly never, never ever quit; always try; always try. Don't give up. So I guess that's what's kept me here at the [Chicago] Crusader all these years. Story_ID: 91247 Speaker 1: Now what you said is, is you know we, we hear quite a bit in stories about that era when there were segregated schools, that teachers, you know went out of their way and the teachers were high quality. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And they really cared and went out of their way, you know. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And they--when integration came, some of them were freed up to take other jobs. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And then they got involved in the regular school system, they faced a different kind of racism within the system. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: And were relegated to positions where they couldn't have the same influence. Speaker 2: Right, yes. Speaker 1: Do you--and during that time period when you were in school, was the time period that, that pe--people in Arkansas was a focal point. This fight to desegregate the schools. Speaker 2: Yes, we were forty-two miles away from Little Rock [Arkansas] in 1957 when the integration of the schools where really hard fought. And I remember it as if it was yesterday. I was in Merrill High School [Pine Bluff, Arkansas] that year and frankly even though I was forty-two miles away, I was arrested from the influence. From the influence of--well Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] had certainly been a great influence in so many of our lives and certainly he, he--his voice and his message and his picture was beamed to Pine Bluff, Arkansas, as it was all over the world. And he said that we were as good as anybody. And one day we--I, I believe it was a teacher's institute or a teacher's meeting. And so the classes were dismissed earlier, early that day. And some of my friends and I were gonna go downtown shopping before we went home. And so we had left our books at school and we were gonna--as a matter of fact, gonna come back by school and pick them up on the way home. So we had left our books there and we proceeded to walk to the downtown from our high school. And we encountered some young Caucasian girls that lived close by in the, in the neighborhood. And they decided we were not gonna walk on the sidewalk. Speaker 1: Now you called them white in those days, right? Speaker 2: Yep. Yeah we did, we did, we called them white girls. And so they were not gonna let us walk on the sidewalk and we were determined we were gonna walk on the sidewalk. Speaker 1: Now was it the custom in Pine Bluff [Arkansas] to get off the sidewalk when you saw white people come or something? Speaker 2: Occasionally you would to avoid conflict, yes. I, I think that we went out of our way to avoid conflict. And we were often taunted and you know, and the whole bit, and we would just try to ignore it and that kind of thing. But with things happening the way they were in Little Rock and all over the country, we were influenced to, to stand our ground that day. And so they all joined hands. It must have been four or five of them. And they joined hands and we joined hands. And we met-- Speaker 1: So it was a showdown. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Coming from opposite sides. Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes. Speaker 1: On the sidewalk. Speaker 2: Yes, and as soon as we met up and we clashed, we got scared. And we decided we're not goin' downtown, we're gonna go back to school and get our books and go home. So when we were--we went back to the school and we go tour books-- Speaker 1: Was there actually, actually a fight? Speaker 2: There was, there was some hitting, there was some pushing. No one got hurt and it wasn't any prolonged fisticuffs. But I'm sure it was a slap or two that were exchanged. Speaker 1: Okay, so it wasn't just one side getting' slapped. Speaker 2: No, no it wasn't. Story_ID: 91248 Speaker 1: And so we went back to the school [Merrill High School, Pine Bluff, Arkansas] and we got our books and we were on our way to the bus stop to, to go home. And the police had been called, and the police met us. And right away the white girls said there they are, there they are, pointing in to us. And we were not given an opportunity to say anything. They just put us in the police cars and continued to talk to the, to the white girls. And so our principal's wife taught elementary school on the other side of town. She happened to be coming home in her car and saw us in the police car. And right away she went to the school and told her husband. And they took us to jail; they never locked us up because our principal was there at jail. I mean almost as soon as we were there, he, he had come to see what the problem was. And they never put us in a cell, but they did say they did make a record of it and that we would have to go to court. And our, our attorney, and I'm tryin' to--what was his name? It was--he--that's a shame. I'll think of his name. But he was a very famous lawyer for the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. He was involved in the, the integration of the Little Rock schools. I almost said his name. He at one time was the dean of Howard University Law School, Brandon, his name was Wiley Brandon, Attorney Wiley Brandon. And he was our attorney. And we never went to court. But it was an incident that I shall never forget and I shall also always remember that I was telling the policeman Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] says that we're as good as anybody and you should treat us like ladies. You should not, you know, be pushing us around and the whole bit because Dr. King told us we are as good as anybody. So that was our main thing. It had really made a great influence on us and that day we decided that we were going to stand up, and we did stand up. And got us--landed us in jail for the first time. My father was livid with me. And I could not understand why he could not appreciate the fact that we had stood up for our rights. And--but as I got older, I did understand that my father had lived during a time that was much different from--in 1957. He had seen people hung; he had seen people dragged from their homes and beaten. Indeed his brother not by whites, but his brother was taken from his home and killed and burned up in a forest. Speaker 2: But not by white people? Speaker 1: Not by a white. Speaker 2: Black people? Speaker 1: Black people did it. And was greed, money. He had not a lot of money, but I guess in those days, if you had any means of some gold pieces and that kind of thing, and perhaps he was bragging about what he had. Speaker 2: So it was a robbery. Speaker 1: Yes, they, they kidnapped him and took him to the forest and killed him and then set the forest on fire. So there are--I do have copies of the, the, the date of the newspaper article and all about this, so may be of some interest. Story_ID: 91249 Speaker 1: But, yeah. Speaker 2: Now did you have--did, did you know any of the people in Little Rock that were going through the--Central High School [Little Rock, Arkansas]? Speaker 1: As a matter of fact I did, but not real well, you know. Often our school would go to Little Rock for the National Honor Society meetings and that kind of thing and I was in the National Honor Society, so many of the students I had met on those occasions. But I didn't know them well. But I was glued to the television just like everybody else in the country every day, seeing the taunts and the, the, the things that they were going through, the students. Other students spitting on them and all of that. And we were just riveted to the TV every day, yes. Speaker 2: How, how did people feel about Governor Orval Faubus? Speaker 1: We hated Governor Faubus. Let me tell you an experience that I had the, the year we graduated. We had a senior trip. And we were gonna go to Winthrop Rockefeller's farm. It was in-- Speaker 2: Now he's one of the famous Rockefellers who became the governor of Arkansas. Speaker 1: Yes, yes of Arkansas, absolutely. And the Rockefellers were known to be very liberal and very nice people from what we could understand. And so when we were talking about where we're gonna go for a senior trip, we didn't have a lot of options. But one of the things--and what we decided was we wanted to go to Winthrop Rockefeller's farm. You would go there and picnic and you know just spend the day. And so that's what we did. And but on the way to his farm, we stopped in Little Rock [Arkansas] and we went to the state capitol. And I have to admit that we were just so angry with Governor [Orval] Faubus, he was the governor, that we kind of emptied the ashtrays a little bit, you know the one that had the sand in it, we kind of emptied that on a few little desks and different things in the capitol to show our unhappiness with our Governor Faubus. But then we went on to Mr. Rockefeller's farm. And that day of all days our senior trip, it rained. So there went our picnic. So we thought--but we allowed us to use the boat house on the farm where they, you know I'm sure entertained many times. They had boats that were docked there. They had a kitchen, they had tables and all, you know that you could eat on. And they allowed us, these little black students from, from Pine Bluff, Arkansas, to use the boat house since it rained that day. So it certainly did seem to bear out that they were very liberal and very wonderful people, the Rockefellers. Story_ID: 91250 Speaker 1: We had often heard stories that [unclear] I'd like to share this little story with you; that there was a, a gentleman, a black gentleman that worked for Mr. [Winthrop] Rockefeller. Probably just doing menial jobs and that kind of thing. But Mr. Rockefeller gave him a check, quite sizeable check for those times as I understood it, and he went to the bank to get his check cashed. And when he went into the bank and he went up to the window while the pe--the cashier was quite cordial. Right away she went into the back room to place a call to Mr. Rockefeller to make him aware of the fact that there was this black man and I don't think she called him a black man at that time, there was a black man there in the bank with a check and wanted to know had he stolen it. And so Mr. Rockefeller said well would you describe the gentleman to me? What does he look like? So she described him and she--he said to the cashier according to the story, if you don't cash that check and be quick about it, I will take all of my money out of your bank. So she went right back right away and cashed his check and he went on his way. But that is a story I think that might have gone around in that community quite, quite a few times. That, that said that that was the kind of family the Rockefellers were, that they were very liberal, very caring. I personally know when our senior trip could have been a real disappointment, they made it possible for us to have an enjoyable afternoon and rather than to have--to just postpone the whole thing and go back home. So those were the--it was some wonderful time and things that we did have happen to us. Story_ID: 91251 Speaker 1: And then there were other times that were not so good. I had high aspirations to be a student at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois]. And it required that you had to take the, the entrance exams, the ACT and all of that. But it--now that you had to go to the white high school to take the test. And there were white students taking it also. They used to separate us by chairs and all of that. But the tension in those rooms, how anybody did well on an exam, is a mystery to me because of the tension that was there. Speaker 2: That's one of the few integrated moments I guess. Speaker 1: Right. But as soon as the test was over, you had to run like the dickens to get away from there because they threw things at you. The white students would throw toilet paper, they would throw rocks, they would throw all kinds of objects at us. So we had to--we really had to get out of that area very fast after we had completed the test. But we knew this would be the result and so certainly that had an effect on us too while we were there taking that test, knowing how we were gonna have to make a fast get away afterwards. And so I'm sure that many of us were affected you know in our testing, scores and all of that, by the atmosphere. Then what else was required is that you had to be interviewed by an alumnus. Now I found out in later years that there were black alumnus in Pine Bluff [Arkansas]. We had a Dr.--now I think of his name--that was a former student at the University of Chicago that could have interviewed me. They sent me to Little Rock [Arkansas] to be interviewed by a white woman who her first words to me was you know you're not going to be able--you're not gonna make it into the school. And so I said well why would you say such a thing? Well you know, the--just the very, very exceptional gets into the University of Chicago and you coming from Pine Bluff and your, you know--and all, going to Merrill High School, no way are you gonna make it. Well that was even before she even had an opportunity to talk to me. So she had already told me that she was not gonna give me a recommendation. But that was the kinds of things that we had to encounter. And often they were not pleasant kinds of things to happen to you, but certainly many of us, and I know I did, I grew strength from, from adverse conditions like that. It made me even more determined to do things. I didn't get to the University of Chicago, but certainly it, it did not damper my aspirations to do well in life. And of course how well you do is how you feel about it, in my estimation, and certainly what my life's vocation became has been very fulfilling for me, even though it is not the largest newspaper in the city or even in the state, or any of that. It certainly does give me a great deal of pleasure, what I do. Story_ID: 89980 Speaker 1: I was asking you about the Masonic presence in Pine Bluff. It was a strong mason--black Masonic presence in Arkansas (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: Yeah, now my father [Blaine Gonder] was not a mason, he was not a mason. But all of the professionals in our community, their offices were in the Masonic temple building. The dentist, the doctors, the lawyers. They were all housed in that Masonic temple, which was right off of Main Street. It--Main Street of course being the, the business center, so to speak. All of the department stores, the five and ten cent store, all of that was on Main Street. And the Masonic temple, the entrance of it I believe was on State Street, which was the next street over. But if I'm not mistaken, that Masonic temple building, the upstairs part of it, while you entered on State Street, you could look right down on Main Street from the upstairs part of it. I remember it as a child I went to the dentist in that building and it certainly was a, a place where you--if you wanted to find the professionals, the black professionals, you went to the Masonic temple. Story_ID: 89981 Speaker 1: And it certainly brings back a lot of memories. And right across from that on State Street was the train station. And when I grew up, there was a black waiting room and a white waiting room for the train. But as a child, I guess again I was very fortunate that my father [Blaine Gonder] worked for the railroad, though it was only in a laborer's category. It provided us with free passes to, to go on vacations in the summer. So my father never went, but my mother [Sallie Topps Gonder] and my brother and I, we went to Detroit and we came to Chicago and St. Louis and all those kinds of places where we had relatives during the summer. So every summer we went somewhere. And in later years even on a pass, I went all the way to Los Angeles. So I was very fortunate, more fortunate than many of the young people in my community, that I did have an opportunity to go beyond the city limits of Pine Bluff [Arkansas] when I was a child. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 89982 Speaker 1: Now, now you're right out of high school [Merrill High School, Pine Bluff, Arkansas] and you're getting ready to gra-graduate, hadn't graduated, you've taken the test to get into the University of Chicago and got a bad review by this woman. Speaker 2: Yes, and, and the letter of rejection from the, from the University [of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And but I'm determined I'm leaving Pine Bluff [Arkansas] and I'm coming to Chicago. And the, the amazing thing I, I remember when I first came to Chicago, I had just never seen so many lights. And I was just amazed because summertime in Pine Bluff, Arkansas as a kid growing up, you could not see your hand in front of your face at night. All you could hear was the crickets and you could see was just pitch black every night. And so I can remember as a kid dreaming, having read books and, and all of that and going to the movies and all, I would just dream of, of going to some faraway place and that life would be different than the, the pitch black and the crickets all night long that you would hear. And so I was determined that's what I was going to do. And even though I had been rejected from the University of Chicago, I, I must have graduated one Saturday and the next Saturday I was on the train heading for Chicago. Speaker 1: Now did you have relatives here? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: People you could stay with. Speaker 2: Yes. I had an aunt who lived in Lake Meadows [Apartments, Chicago, Illinois]. And, and so when I came to Chicago, I stayed with her until I started living with a lady who had a rooming house on 45th and King Drive. And at that time it was South Parkway. And it was 4532 South Parkway on the third floor. And I lived with this lady and worked at the "Crusader" and went to Roosevelt University [Chicago, Illinois]. Story_ID: 89983 Speaker 1: And that--I had come in 1961 prior to graduating in 1962 and had worked at the "Crusader" during the summer. I came back that December for two weeks for Christmas vacation and I worked at the "Crusader". Speaker 2: Now how did you make that hookup at the "[Chicago] Crusader"? Speaker 1: Let me just say now this is really funny. That my aunt and the lady who owned this rooming house that I later stayed in, were friends. And they used to, they used to try to get one upmanship on each other. And the lady that owned the rooming house, she had raised several children that were in the care of Catholic Charities. She was Catholic, she went to Corpus Christie Church. And so she raising these young people for whatever reason that they were not with their own family. And my aunt only had one son who by the time I came to Chicago, was an adult. And so I would come and spend the summer with her. Well they got to bragging about how smart this foster child who was a male that lived with the lady that had the rooming house and my aunt started bragging about how smart her niece was. So it was really a bet I guess or a dare, that if I was so smart, why didn't I come and meet a young lady that was rooming with this lady that worked at the "Crusader" Newspaper? And why wouldn't I come and see if I could get a job there? So now my aunt, not to be outdone, yes, I'll get her right there. And so I went to this lady's house and actually spent the night because the "Crusader" was sponsoring a, a sneak preview with the Chicago Theater on "A Raisin in the Sun". And the young lady who worked for the "Crusader" said why don't you come and go to the premier with me tonight, and then tomorrow morning I'll take you to the office and you can meet the publisher? So I said okay, fine. So I spent the night and we went to the premier. But when the premier was over, we got a ride with the publisher. I didn't know he was the publisher. And so we got in the car and so right away he wanted to know who was I and I told him who I was and where are you from, and I told him that I'm from Pine Bluff, Arkansas. And of course right away I started talking too much. And told him that I was gonna go with Kay, that was the young lady's name, the next day to see if I could get a job with her where she was working. And she's trying to really give me a signal that he was the man I had to see. And so he wanted to know well how old was I. And I think at that time I, I, I don't think I was quite fifteen. But-- Speaker 2: You, you were out of high school already? Speaker 1: No I wasn't. This was my--the, the year before. And so when I told him that I was, I was certainly not sixteen. And when I told him how old I was, he nearly wrecked up the car. He said what? And I said yes and tomorrow I'm going to go down and I'm going to interview for a job with Kay. So she told me when we got out of the car, that that was who I had to interview with the next day. So sure enough, I, I was embarrassed. I couldn't figure out a way not to go. My aunt had sent me there and I--and she wanted to prove this lady that I was as smart as, as she had said I was. And so I went with her the next day to the "Crusader". It was at 4237 South Indiana on the third floor, that's where it was located. And I went. Lucky for me, some of the girls had kind of boycotted Mr. Leavell and had not come to work that day. And he needed my help. He say "young lady, can you answer the phone?" "Oh, yes sir". And, and frankly I guess I was kind of impressive because I was able to answer the phone. I caught on very quickly and so he hired me. I was making thirty-five dollars a week and I worked that summer, but not answering the phone. I was trained to do bookkeeping. And I did bookkeeping all summer while I was there under the supervision of, of Mr. Anderson was his name. And they had a--it was a black accounting firm. And they were impressed with how well I had done the work under that supervision. And when I finished that summer, Mr. Leavell gave me a hundred dollar bonus. I was making 35 dollars a week and I got a hundred dollar bonus at the end of the, of the summer. So that's how I started at the "Crusader". So-- Speaker 2: So when you moved back, you knew you had a job waiting for you. Speaker 1: I was hopeful that I would. As a matter of fact, I like the--working there so much, that I--that Christmas when I had two weeks out from school, I came back to Chicago and I worked at the "Crusader". And then of course I finished the year and graduated. And then of course came to Chicago to stay, forty-two years ago. Story_ID: 89984 Speaker 1: Okay so, so you went to Roosevelt University [Chicago, Illinois] while you worked at the "[Chicago] Crusader". Speaker 2: Yes I did. Unfortunately, family--I got married to the boss. That's, don't let me leave that out. And then-- Speaker 1: (Unclear) He really liked your, your-- Speaker 2: I did, I really did. I guess I was being kind of belligerent and, and really gonna show my dad [Blaine Gonder] that, that--he wanted me to come back home and I didn't wanna go back home. And it ended up that some kind of way Mr. [Balm] Leavell and I did become romantically in--involved. And pretty soon a family. We got married and a family was on the way. So that kind of--that cut my school off. And unfortunately Mr. Leavell only lived until 1968 and I had the full responsibility of the newspaper switch again with two small children. So that kind of put off education, a long way off. And then I guess the rest is history, so to speak. So I never got a degree, even though I had such a wonderful beginning with being valedictorian of the class and all of that. I was--it was pretty easy for me to catch on, but as fate would have it, I became a widow at twenty-four and so I had the responsibility of trying to keep the businesses going and to raise two minor children. Speaker 1: Now by that time I guess what, you had been with the paper about five, six years? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes. Yes I, I had been with the paper--well counting when I worked before I graduated from high school, I had been here seven years, had been with the newspaper seven years at that time; the same age as the Gary paper at that particular time in 1968 when he passed away. Story_ID: 89985 Speaker 1: Well this is probably a good time to talk about the history of this paper [Chicago Crusader] (unclear). Tell us about Mr. Leavell, Mr. Balm Leavell, right? B-A-L-M. Speaker 2: Balm L. Leavell, yeah, B-A-L-M, Junior. Speaker 1: Now is there a story about his name, Balm? Speaker 2: Well he was a junior, so he got it from his father, but I would imagine you know we know what we know of Balm is someone soothing and usually we think of it as being a, a salve or something that would be applied to, to-- Speaker 1: [Unclear] Balm in Gilead. Speaker 2: Yes, and then we know it in the play Balm in Gilead. And I don't know where the name actually came from, except for the fact that he inherited it from his father. But they came from Kentucky, they were from Kentucky. Speaker 1: What part of Kentucky, do you know? Speaker 2: They were from Hopkinsville, Kentucky. His father, Mr. Leavell's father, junior. His father was from Hopkinsville, but he was raised in Louisville, Kentucky. And he went to Fisk University. He was part of the Fisk Jubilee Singers back in the '30's [1930's], and he got married while he was in college to his first wife. And they moved to Chicago, to Ida B. Wells project. Speaker 1: Which was a big deal in those days. Speaker 2: Yes it was, yes it was, yes it was. And of course Ida B. Wells, who is a famous newspaper publisher, for whom the project was named. I don't know if that had a great influence on him, but certainly that is where the "Crusader" was born, was in Ida B. Wells project. And right out of Mr. Leavell's apartment with his first wife, 1940. Speaker 1: Now he had a partner named Jefferson, right? Speaker 2: Joseph H. Jefferson. Frankly, the way the "Crusader" started, was that it was an organization of men, I guess they were young men, who were interested in, in getting better jobs and, and, and rights for, for black men in the city. When, as I understand it, when they came together, and they were very prominent men, including William L. Dawson that went on to become Congressman. William Harvey who was Second Ward Alderman, Fred Wall who at one time published the, the "Chicago Courier". And so many others in the community, construction worker and entrepreneur that came out of that group. I mean they were outstanding young men. Reverend Earl Sardon was one of those members. Well they were working together to, to get better jobs. Black men could not even drive the trucks to deliver milk or, or the bread to the grocery stores. And there were no black telephone operators and so times were--and, and the jobs and the housing, the whole bit, were very segregated here in Chicago. And they formed a group called the "Negro Labor Relations League". Out of that league came the "Crusader". They often were not able to get news of, of things that they were doing in the other newspapers in the city, so they felt they needed to start their own. First it started out as a, as a newsletter. And then it grew into the newspaper. Speaker 1: Now did they, did they feel then that the "[Chicago] Defender" was catering to an older crowd or something? Speaker 2: Well I think they really felt that the, the "Defender" was a little bit more conservative and, and as far as what they were doing. They were actually taking--they were the forerunner of the sit-ins and the picketing and all that Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] did in later years. They were the forerunner to that; they were doing that and perhaps I think the, the "Defender" was a little bit more conservative at that particular time. Although they had been very militant in, in getting blacks to come north. They had been very militant in getting the rights of blacks during--in the armed services and all. But I think that perhaps they may have been a little bit more militant than they--suited the "Defender's" style at that time. Story_ID: 89986 Speaker 1: But they-- Speaker 2: They were the Negro Labor Relations League. Speaker 1: League, yes. Speaker 2: Were they associated with the Pullman Porters by any chance? Speaker 1: No more than some of their members were Pullman Porters. They were not necessarily connected with the Pullman Porters. But many of the people who were principals in the organizations were Pullman Porters; some of them were waiters and at the, you know, the hotels downtown and the whole bit. But they-- Speaker 2: I'm just saying because it's founded around the same time that I think that--well I don't know if A. Philip Randolph was still here or not, but-- Speaker 1: I'm not certain, 1940, yeah I'm not certain if he was still here or not. But they, they were really militant. They were also very supportive of, of our congressman from New York. Speaker 2: Adam, Adam-- Speaker 1: Adam Clayton Powell. They provided means for him to speak when he came here in later years. They were very, very militant. They--they also out of that, they started a--and probably had the very first black beer distributorship. They were not able to sustain it. Joseph Jefferson was the one who actually ran the beer distributorship. But it was he and Balm [Leavell] who started up what they called the "New Crusader" after they had started the "Chicago Crusader". And there had been some disagreement among the members. There was a Everett Hill who was, who started out as editor and publisher of that, of the, of the first publication. And then Joe Jefferson and Balm started up the "New Crusader". Since that time, we've gone back to the "Chicago Crusader" for the city identification for our publication. But es--especially since Mr. Hill passed on many, many years ago. And, and it has--Mr. Leavell and Mr. Jefferson both have passed on now too. But-- Speaker 2: (Unclear) new now is kind of-- Speaker 1: So now we're back to "Chicago Crusader". But they were--I mean talk about militant. The Agar Meat Company, they just would not let up off of them for better working conditions for the people that worked for Agar. The ham, they made hams and other kinds of meat. And they worked very hard on getting jobs. And as a, as a result, today people don't even know. I mean they think of these jobs now as being menial jobs and many people not really aspire for them or we don't see many of our people even working in the hotels any more as they had in, in those earlier years. But they fought for better conditions and as a result, many people educated their families and their children and, and all and had a good life for their families as a result of the work that the Negro Labor Relations League did. Speaker 2: Now, now were they--did they generate all their own financing? Speaker 1: Yes they did. As a matter of fact, they had to, they had to have fundraisers and, and the whole--they sought donations and, and the whole bit to, to carry on their work. None of them were rich men and they even--I think they paid some type of dues too, to, to carry on the, the work of the league. Story_ID: 89987 Speaker 1: Okay. Now were there--was there any pressure on them by the Democratic Machine here or by the Republican Party to become partisan? Speaker 2: Well Speaker 1: (unclear) Or advertising-- Speaker 2: Well certainly they went through a lot of things. As a matter of fact, Mr. [Joseph] Jefferson started out as a Republican and I think Mr. [Balm] Leavell was a Democratic all the while, as did William L. Dawson. William L. Dawson was a Republican at first. And then they all--I think most of them became Democrats. But there was a great deal of pressure. There was also a great deal of pressure put on by the Negro Labor Relations League that the policy, the playing of policy which was a big thing in, in the--in our south--on the south side and in the black community, that there would be a black person that controlled that policy. Although it was illegal at that time, they, you know there was an element that, that controlled the policy and it was big money to--and had made several, probably millionaires, people playing the policy. Now we call it lottery. But they were very instrumental in trying to get some control of the lottery in our community, have that controlled by black people. So they worked very hard, not only in, you know the regular jobs, but also in those things that became very lucrative. And today we, we don't think about it at all, being what it is, and that's gambling, okay. But they worked at a number of things. They just--they were threatened. Sometimes they were beaten. They, you know, worked under very adverse conditions. Speaker 1: Who threatened them (unclear)? Speaker 2: Well most of the time it was the, the big companies and all that they would try to open up and get better working conditions for--it would be some people connected with those companies most of the time. And then sometime it, it was the labor unions that fought tooth and nail to keep blacks out of the labor unions. So they, they were very, very brave in those days to be doing the kinds of things that they did. Speaker 1: Very brave. Speaker 2: Now were they affiliated with any of the major civil rights organizations? I'm, I'm thinking I guess of CORE [Congress of Racial Equality] maybe. Speaker 1: No, no, no, no. They were a forerunner to all of those. Speaker 2: So they weren't, you know-- Speaker 1: No, by the time those, those organizations came on the scene, I guess they basically had to sort of scattered in, in many directions and did not have the organized group known as the Negro Labor Relations League as it had been. Although Reverend Sardon and some of the others sought to continue it well into the '60's [1960's]. The " [Chicago] Crusader" at that time was then a black newspaper, a business, and was not necessarily connected to the Negro Labor Relations League. And so you found others who had been involved in it, Congressman Dawson was in Washington and Alderman Harvey was in City Hall. So so many of them branched out and went into, you know, professions that again, still had an influence on, on the lives of black people but from a different perspective. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 89988 Speaker 1: Now you became the, the head of this ["Chicago Crusader"] paper in-- Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-eight [1968]. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's the year that--was that the year that Dr.-- Speaker 2: King got killed. Yes and he got killed. Speaker 1: Killed the same year. Speaker 2: April. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: April of-- Speaker 1: That's been sort of a, a very intense time to become a-- Speaker 2: Yes. Well yes it was. In addition to the fact that--well I think he might have come in '67 [1967], Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.], and, and, and with some very intense times, had you know, had occurred. Because he, he spoke to a very large crowd at Soldier Field, and then he went to Gage Park and, and they threw rocks and hit him and all of that. And, and there had been so much controversy about him even coming here. Even some of our black leaders were against him coming. They felt that it would just intensify the tensions in the city. So many of them were against him coming. But the "Crusader" was supportive. And I can remember Mr. [Balm] Leavell going to Soldier Field and, and participating in all of the activities and all, and of course covering the information from the, from the, the marches and all. Story_ID: 90466 Speaker 1: We were talking about '68 [1968] and what a, a critical year that was for you and the paper. Speaker 2: It was a critical, critical year for all black Americans I believe, really. Because in April of 1968, April 4th, Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was killed. Speaker 1: Even after he was here, you know-- Speaker 2: Yes, yes, that was--I believe he was here in 1967, actually marching. And then this was April of 1968 that he was killed in Memphis. And then June of that year Robert Kennedy who was running for president, was killed in Los Angeles. In 1968 August was the Democratic National Convention that was held here in the City of Chicago, where rioting broke out. It was just really a devastating-- Speaker 1: [Unclear]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Out of control. Speaker 2: Right. But we also had had rioting after Dr. King's death. There was rioting on 63rd Street, on the west side. You name it, people were fighting and very frustrated from, from his death. And then October of that same year, 1968, Mr. [Balm] Leavell died. I was twenty-four years old. I, I guess two days after my birthday, October 25th, 1968, Mr. Leavell died. And we had two very small children. We had a two year old and a three year old, who would soon be four in, in December of that year. And I found myself with two newspapers. The Gary paper was seven years old, and the Chicago paper was twenty-eight years old. So I--frankly I, I didn't know if I was gonna carry on the paper. And certainly there was a great deal of opposition to me carrying it on or even being associated with anything having to do with Mr. Leavell because of his children by a previous marriage. It was a very stormy time in my life, a very confusing time to be a widow at twenty-four, two newspapers and two small children. But Joseph Jefferson, who was still living, was very supportive of me and he did give me his full backing and support to carry on the publication. So here I go at twenty-four years old, having worked at the "[Chicago] Crusader", but certainly in a supportive role. I was not the leader of the, of, of the publication. I was not editor and publisher. I'd served as office manager and also continued to be a bookkeeper. But certainly to be thrust into that role at such a young age, it was indeed exciting and frightening, all at the same time. But I was convinced that the need for the black press was so important that all of that training and all I received at Merrill High School [Pine Bluff, Arkansas], of doing your very best and never to quit, kicked in. And I worked to try to keep the publications going. So it--and it has lead to many other things in, in my life. From 1968 until many other adventures in my career. Having--being president of all of the black newspapers in the country for four years, leading a delegation in a faraway land such as Nigeria, and even my most recent accomplishments of Chairman of Amalgamated Publishers, which is a national advertising rep firm for black newspapers across the country. So it has been an interesting journey, and one which I have had many, many long days and here we are, now the "Crusader" is sixty-three years old in Chicago. This is our 42nd year in Gary. And this is my 42nd year at the newspaper. Story_ID: 90467 Speaker 1: Okay now I wanna backtrack a little and talk about some of the, the I guess milestones along the way. And just in terms of Chicago issues, 19, 1969 that Fred Hampton and Mark Clark and some others were, were murdered on the West Side. How did--now what did--how did the "Crusader"--how'd you view all that and what stances did you all take? Speaker 2: Well number one, we were outraged that, that these young people [Fred Hampton and Mark Clark] had been killed in the fashion that they were. And we have always I guess--our motto has always been militant voice of the people. So certainly to have such an occurrence, such a devastating blow to these young people and our community. The, the, the inside spying that was taking place, the involvement of our police in this particular instance of, of their deaths. The way it was carried out; we were outraged and we certainly gave it full coverage in our own publications. And to this day, I believe that many of the people who have been part of militant operations still rely on the "[Chicago] Crusader" in many instances to, to carry the news that perhaps someone else would not carry. Just this past week we did a, a really in depth kind of story about the corruption in, in the south suburbs, in the south suburban community. And we didn't win a lot of friends from the leadership in that community, but certainly we I believe continued to fulfill our mission to, to report the news and to report it in a fair way, but yet not shunning issues that may not necessarily be a popular thing to report on. So we don't, we don't shy away from it. Maybe a month or so ago, we did a special, as a matter of fact, it was during Black History Month, on Fred Hampton, Jr., who was--who never knew his father because his father was killed when he I believe was just a baby. Speaker 1: Yeah, he was still in the womb. Speaker 2: Yeah, he was still in the womb. Now that's what I was trying to remember. Yeah, he was yet unborn. And we just recently interviewed him and did a in depth story on, on him. We were very supportive of, of Aaron Patterson, who was one of those just released from prison that was on death row. We had to--taken a personal part in trying to get him free even before the governor pardoned him. So down through the years starting with the riots and, and, and with the death of Fred Hampton, we have always been a newspaper that would stand up for the rights of whomever it was, popular or unpopular; that is what our position has been. Story_ID: 90468 Speaker 1: Now another case that, that came up in the '70's [1970's], I believe in the early '70's [1970's] was the case of Dr. Herbert Odom. We talked about that before we started the interview. Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes as a matter of fact, I--it certainly was the turning point for, for black politics. Dr. Odom, a well-respected doctor in our community, in Englewood as a matter of fact, was beaten by the police. And never have I seen the ire of Congressman then at that time was Congressman Ralph Metcalfe. I think that he was livid. He was enraged. He was outraged that such a, an outstanding and upstanding citizen as Dr. Odom would have found himself the victim of a beating by the Police Department. And he--I'm certain that that is the beginning of a movement to have a black mayor in this town. We didn't get one that year, but certainly to see a man who had been a 100 percent Democratic organization man such as, as Ralph Metcalfe to really declare virtually war on those who were responsible for Dr. Odom being treated so terribly, frankly I think gave courage to a lot more people to take a stance and to, to reassess our position in, in, in politics in this town and to try to better the conditions for blacks. It was a new era of accomplishment that seemed to, to come from that particular incident. Now it wasn't like blacks had not been beaten before. Yes they had been beaten. During the McCarthy era, even Mr. [Balm] Leavell had been accused of being a Communist. People were being spied on, they were being beaten, many had been killed. But it seemed to have been the catalyst that really started a new era in this town when Dr. Odom unfortunately suffered at the hands of those who were supposed to be--to protect and, and serve. It certainly did spark a, a new beginning in Chicago as far as politics were concerned, and new won rights for blacks. Speaker 1: Now that--so, so you--so it was a turnaround with Ralph Metcalfe. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: At this point and then, then I think like--I guess I have this sequence right. Mayor, Mayor [Richard J.] Daley actually dies in 1976 or seven [1977]? It was six or seven, I'm not sure. '76 [1976] I believe. Speaker 2: I'm not sure what year it was, either, but I think they had the, they had the bicentennial in 1976. And I think he was living then. So perhaps it was a year or so after that. Story_ID: 90469 Speaker 1: But--which brings up an important part too in the history of the "[Chicago] Crusader", is that Mr. [Balm] Leavell had commissioned Bernard Goss. Bernard Goss was the former husband of Dr. Margaret Burroughs [HM] to paint famous black Americans. Now this is long before so many of the companies now in, in later years would, would embark upon cultural kinds of things such as doing paintings. We've heard of Paul Collins and so many of the others have been involved with Anheuser Busch and their commemoration of the African kings and queens and so many other companies, Miller and all that have done quite a few cultural things in regards to African Americans, especially during Black History Month. But Mr. Leavell certainly has the foresight and to, to do this and this was back in the late '50's [1950's] and the early '60's [1960's]. And Bernard Goss did all of these famous portraits that are now housed at the, the DuSable Museum. And Margaret Burroughs worked with Mr. Leavell to put on an exposition. Used to be at the old Coliseum at 11th and Wabash back again in the late '50's [1950's] and the early '60's [1960's] where you would have businesses that would have their company's wares on display, but in addition to that, there was the cultural part of it that dealt with the paintings and the history of these famous black Americans. And then there would be great choirs that would perform and other kinds of musical performances and all during several days at the Coliseum. Well those paintings numbered something like 110 or so when I be--when I was, was suddenly thrust in the position of publisher in 1968. And I felt that it was just a shame that nobody was seeing them because we had not had an exposition since probably 1961 or two [1962]. So I felt that the best thing to do would be to give them to the DuSable Museum where people might be able to see them. So in 1976 when they had the bicentennial, those paintings were a part of that bicentennial and they were hung in the Daley Center down on Washington between Wabash and, and I guess that's-- Speaker 2: Randolph-- Speaker 1: And Clark or whatever that is down there. And so it was a part of that. So the "Crusader" has been a part of many significant historical facts, and certainly that would be one of the highlights that we were a part of that bicentennial celebration of the United States. And of course the one here in Chicago. So we have had that for a long time--association. And, and not only covering the news, but also being a part of the cultural awareness and information to our community. We want to provide them with that, not only through the paper but in doing other things too. Story_ID: 90470 Speaker 1: Okay. Now yeah talk a little bit about, about [Mayor] Harold Washington, his campaign. Speaker 2: Sure. Well you know I think before we get into Harold, maybe we need to talk about the time that I can remember, and I think that the "Crusader" was deeply involved in that too, was the, the election where we removed a state's attorney. And that--Edward Hanrahan. I can remember as if it were yesterday, how quiet things were in our community. But because of the death of Fred Hampton and all of those young people that they raided that apartment that early in the morning. And that the people were just determined. No more would we have this man in office. And I saw it was so quietly and so well as if everybody had--was tuned to the same channel, yet there was very little talk about it. It wasn't a lot of loud shouting. But you--all you could hear was the feet going to the polls voting him out, voting Edward Hanrahan out. And that to me again was a very significant part of black politics in this town. But the next big highlight had to be when Harold Washington was elected mayor. Story_ID: 90471 Speaker 1: Harold Washington brought something not only during the campaign, but after the campaign was over, something that you just could not measure the pride and love and excitement that he had brought to our community. Well we had known Harold Washington when he was in state government and all of that. Yet we really did not know how exciting, how smart, how unusual this man was until he became mayor. It looked as though he was a totally different person. Yet we knew that he was smart. We didn't know how smart he was, how he could have galvanized this whole community to come and to participate in getting him into that office. Black newspapers for the first time that I can remember, gave space in their publications to him to get his message out. People who had never contributed to a campaign, did contribute to his campaign. Yet he still had a lot less in resources than some of the other candidates. But when it came to the charisma that he projected in both debate and whenever he spoke, it was just really spellbinding. And I, I think we shall never, ever see or it will be a long time away that we will ever see the kind of charisma and knowledge and interest that his campaign provided to our community. Speaker 2: Now I, I've heard from people I know that the "[Chicago] Defender" actually hedged on endorsing Harold Washington. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: And they had to--they had several visits from delegations of black people who were over there to-- Speaker 1: Persuade them. Speaker 2: Persuade them to--now how, how did the "[Chicago] Crusader" stand on that? Speaker 1: Well it was never a doubt in our mind who we were gonna support. Again I tell you we haven't always taken the most popular positions, but certainly we felt that his candidacy was one that was quite credible. You know often we may not have endorsed or supported a black candidate, but it didn't have to do with the fact that it wasn't our desire to have a black in that position. We frankly didn't feel that they had a chance. We felt very good about the candidacy of Harold Washington early on. We were excited and caught up just as so many others citizens. And so our only consideration ever was to, to endorse Harold Washington. And again I said we gave him free space in our newspaper. We had never, ever done that before. And we, we wanted to help in whatever way we could to, to make this happen. So we, we were very supportive. Nobody had to--no delegation had to come here. Speaker 2: To persuade you. Speaker 1: No, not at all, not at all. We were caught up. Story_ID: 90472 Speaker 1: So now, now tell me about the NNPA [National Newspaper Publishers Association] and you were president of the NNPA. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: That's the--stands for the-- Speaker 2: National Newspaper Publishers Association. It's the trade organization for all of the black newspapers across the country. Speaker 1: Is it, is it true that national always means black (unclear)? Speaker 2: I don't think so. But you know what? Speaker 1: --political association. Speaker 2: Yeah. Well you know what? It actually--NNPA, that's the, the acronym for, for the organization. Frankly, the N actually start--used to be negro newspaper publishers. Speaker 1: Yeah, I've heard. A friend of mine said that a lot of these organizations, the N really stands for negro. Speaker 2: Yes. So is that what you had reference to? Okay, it could be, because that's what NN-- Speaker 1: National Medical Association, you know. Speaker 2: Yes, it used to be negro. Used to be Negro Newspaper Publishers Association. And of course when it was not fashionable to be negro anymore, it became national. I was the second female ever to be, to be president of that organization. From 1995 to 1999, two terms, two, two year terms I served as president of that organization. Even though we as publishers, always telling other people how they should conduct themselves, it seems as though we don't listen to us, to our own advice because women certainly I'm sure must have been many, many other women qualified to be president of that organization, but it did not happen until 1987 for the very first time. And then it was almost--it was twelve years later before you had another female. And so--and right now we don't have a female that's in there as president. But I served for those four years. It was really a very hard job. One though, that I got a great deal of satisfaction from, having the opportunity to, to serve as president of all the black newspapers. When I became president, our organization was very low key. We didn't hear a lot about it and many of the presidents, you would not ever remember their name, except for John H. Sengstacke who founded the organization in 1940 and served as president for at least five, five times. But I became president in, in Oklahoma City in 1995. It was right after the bombing of the, of the Murrah Building. And we, we traveled to Oklahoma City and we held our convention there and that's where I was elected. They gave me a tough time, to say the least. Often people feel that women are pushovers. And I'm afraid I'm always proving, or trying to prove that I'm not a pushover. We gained not only I believe a great deal of national recognition, but also international. We participated--we were often called on for our opinion on national issues. We always sought to respond to, to the issues of the day. We elevated I believe the, the stature of the black press during those four years where for many, many years to do--debate is, is the black press still needed, is the black press dead? Quite like the debate is God dead. If they weren't talking about is God dead, they were wondering whether or not the black press was dead. Certainly I traveled extensively across this country and to Africa to let people know that indeed the black press was not dead. We have been greatly enriched by the experience, personally, and I had the opportunity to, to serve with many other national leaders in a black leadership forum. And we tried to make sure that the black press was on the cutting edge and at those places where we should be when it came to the opinion of our being disseminated of black people. Story_ID: 89996 Speaker 1: Okay, now ma'am could you--I wanted to ask you about the, the good and the bad of the NPA, NNPA [National Newspaper Publishers Association]. One, one thing that many people noticed was the high profile of the NNPA during your presence. There's even a--there's a big kind of a--like one of those batman pow things on the side of the article, NNPA. (Unclear). So you knew it was coming--the NPA and the, the positions were, you know, the hard hitting, the cut issues, you know for the black community. Speaker 2: We didn't shy away. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: We really didn't. And one of those highlights of the things that I think our membership appreciated that we did, and that was domestic, was the--we instituted the Newsmaker of the Year Award. Similar to what "Time" Magazine does with Man of the Year. Our very first recipient could have been construed and was by the Jewish community, as being a bad thing, and that was honoring Minister [Louis] Farrakhan [HM]. Now we did not honor Minister Farrakhan for his views on various and sundry things. We honored him for him--for the Million Man March and all of the people that he brought to Washington, DC that talked about things that any community should want to have, and that is responsibility of men for their families and for themselves to aspire for, for, for, for greater things. Not just monetary, but for those kinds of things that, that our culture has been known for over the years, and that is responsibility for our families, loving of our, of our children, providing good education. All of the good, cultural aspects of our people. He wanted to bring to the forefront and make black men responsible for it. I agreed with him and I believe as a result, our newspapers agreed with that. And they felt that certainly he was the Newsmaker of the Year for 1995 when he held that Million Man March. So we honored him. Then of course there were other things that we did that just as they didn't agree with us honoring Minister Farrakhan, they didn't agree with us going to Nigeria. Speaker 1: Now on that score, though-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: A lot of black people didn't-- Speaker 2: Yes, you're absolutely right, absolutely they were. Speaker 1: Especially the, Africanist and the Pan Africanist had been following events in Africa. Speaker 2: Sure, absolutely. And frankly, I'm just sorry that many of them did not contact me as to why we had chosen to take the position that we did. But frankly our position was that we wanted to be--say a liaison to keep the United States and Nigeria talking. If you recall early in 1995, it had--I guess during that year, "60 Minutes" had done a special on Nigeria and about the kinds of unsavory kind of characters and, and the kind of schemes and all that would be perpetrated in Nigeria. Speaker 1: Yeah, the president then, Sani Abacha. Speaker 2: Abacha-- Speaker 1: Was the military strongman. Speaker 2: Yes he was. There had been a big controversy about the election where Moshood Abiola was believed to--going to win, or was going to win. And, and then a judge--panel of judges nullified the, the election. And I don't know if some people understand or realize that Abiola had gone to Sani Abacha and asked him to take over the position because they were afraid that the country was going to go into a civil war. A civil war that many of them had remembered from some years before, how devastating it had been to the country. Speaker 1: Yeah, the Biafran War back in the late sixties [1960s], early seventies [1970s], right. Speaker 2: Yes, yes. And so they--he went to Sani Abacha who was a general in, in, in the army there, and asked him would he take over the position to bring about stability. However,-- Speaker 1: You mean when--this is the ascendency of Sani Abacha. Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Now it was I believe Mr. Abiola's belief that once he restored calm to the country, then he would turn the presidency over to him. That did not occur. But-- Speaker 1: Not even after elections. Speaker 2: No, that did not occur. Story_ID: 89997 Speaker 1: So I mean you know, I guess those in wanna stay in and those out wanna get in. But at any rate, there had been--it was just some--it was an issue that was tearing up the country. Most people in Nigeria believe that [Moshood] Abiola won the election. Our position was not who won the election, but what concerned us and grieved us that, that this rich country, even though it had been, been raped and plundered and whatever over the years by many dictators and all who came into power, almost every regime that had been there had stolen the country just--I mean the resources were just really stolen. That's what they were. Speaker 2: Only saved one that's in the regime under Nnamdi Azikiwe and they--there was a move to bring Azikiwe back [unclear] old man. He was the only honest political personality. Speaker 1: Yes, absolutely. Almost every dictator they had had there, they had stolen millions and maybe even billions of dollars from, from the country. And so Mr. [William "Bill"] Clinton at that time was President and, and it was his administration who said that we're not gonna talk to them. We're gonna pull our ambassador from there. We're not gonna have anything else to do with that. Speaker 2: I, I think it was after the, the hanging of Nobel Prize winning (simultaneous) (unclear)-- Speaker 1: Ken Saro-Wiwa, yes, absolutely. And believe me, we [National Newspaper Publishers Association] had gone over before Ken Saro-Wiwa was hung and we felt that Sani Abacha had really committed a very dastardly deed in, in hanging this, this man. And frankly we felt betrayed because what our position had been, they came to us and said we need your help. We need to portray Nigeria in the correct light. "60 Minutes" has done a tremendous amount of damage to us and we want to get our own story out. Not unlike blacks with the very first black newspaper that was published, where we found out that we needed to plead our own cause. So we told them we couldn't do anything to help them because we didn't know. And so it was from that vantage point that they suggested and we agreed, that we need to come and see the country and see for ourselves. There's no way that we could find out everything that was right or wrong with Nigeria in a week. And that's exactly how long we were there in 1995. Subsequently, I must have made six or seven other trips to Nigeria. Not leading a delegation myself, but with others. It was no way even in all of those times, that I could tell what was right and what was wrong. But I certainly felt within myself that this was a black country. We were black people. We were the black press. If there was anyone who should act to try to bring the sides together to try to find out the truth, why not us? Why shouldn't we be in that kind of a role? And that was our position. We were not saying Sani Abacha was right. We were not saying that the United States was wrong. We were just saying we cannot have the diplomatic pipeline disconnected. We needed to still be able to talk. They didn't do it with China or any of these other countries that have done--had all of these human rights violations that we all know about. Nobody is saying we're not gonna talk to China anymore. And when you'd ask the United States government why are you doing this to Nigeria, why not China? What about some of the--the main thing with China was they had nuclear capabilities and Nigeria did not. So they did not feel as threatened by Nigeria as they did with China. But again you say isn't human rights violations human rights violations whether it's in China or whether it's in Nigeria, or if it's in the United States? And nobody, nobody would take a forthright position in that regard, even though they knew what the truth was. Story_ID: 89998 Speaker 1: So it wasn't that--and yes we [National Newspaper Publishers Association] were accused of being bamboozled. We were accused of having--taking some kind of payoff or something. Well if we got a payoff, it was for us to go there and to look for the one week. We didn't have the funds to, to pay our own way to go. So they did pay our way to come. But that is as far as the--anything that they gave us, that was it. We did not receive frankly when I heard all of the stories, when Sani Abacha died and all of the people in his administration, how much money that they had reportedly taken and all of that. Then I, I sort of felt like gee whiz, how much--just a small amount of that money certainly could have improved the lot of our own association and if we had gotten it. We did not--the, the most received was to, to take the trip there and they paid the expenses for us to come. But that's not unlike many other places that journalists have gone. Speaker 2: Yeah. I, I think that maybe there was some exaggeration. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Amongst the critics who felt that you all were being swayed by Nigerian government [unclear]. I've, I've read that [unclear]. Speaker 1: Now I tell you one thing that they did do is that they produced a freestanding insert that we carried in our paper and they paid for that. But that again would not make any of us rich, to say the least. I mean you know we get inserts from Walmart. We get inserts from, from many, many other companies right here in the United States. It is not something that they pay a certain price per thousand and that's it. So nobody had any sweetheart deal that they received large sums of money. Speaker 2: Really a sensitive issue. Speaker 1: Yes it is. Speaker 2: Got--I remember reading that during that period of time, [President William "Bill"] Clinton was burned in effigy in Nigeria and so was Nelson Mandela, which is surprising to me. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Then Carol Mosley Braun [HM] goes over and gets in bigger trouble than NNPA [National Newspaper Publishers Association]. Speaker 1: Yes. Well we didn't really have any trouble, except for the fact-- Speaker 2: Most people don't even read--(unclear). I hate to say it. Speaker 1: You know, except for the fact for those who, who criticized us. We didn't really have any, any major problem. But I, I tell you, I don't feel bad about it and I tell you why. Because we were black people who were speaking on behalf of our black brothers and sisters. And that to me, if that kept the communications going, and frankly as it ended up with a, a new administration there, I doubt very seriously if those human rights violations have ceased under a, an approved government that is now running the country. I think that those critics really need to--and I understand the sensitivity of it, but I really wish that they had spoken to me as to why went and what we had hoped to accomplish. We were hopeful that we would see democracy work in that country, but it--no democracy that we have in the United States, even though this democracy in the United States is not that great; I mean it's not perfect. But let me say this. Speaker 2: The last thing they should (unclear). Speaker 1: Absolutely. But the thing about it is in, in Nigeria with their biggest problem is all of the tribes that they have and the tribal differences that causes big problems about finding a suitable democracy for Nigeria. But our whole purpose was to bring about a better life for the people in Nigeria who the majority of the people are very, very poor. Story_ID: 89999 Speaker 1: Okay. Now tell me, is it--now that, that raises another question I guess. When, when the National Black Press here in the U.S. does face a challenge on how to cover international news, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Because of lack of budget and the ability to keep up with what's going on. I mean who do you trust for information about these things? Speaker 2: Right. Now that, that, that is a big question, a bigger question than getting the resources to do, who's gonna really give you the, the, the correct information from that part of the country? And frankly, I have gone to Nigeria and been a part of a group that was monitoring and observing the, the elections. And I have gotten back to, to Amsterdam and what they're saying on CNN [Cable News Network] is nothing that I experienced or I saw there. So it's a problem wherever you're getting the news from often in African countries, is from a perspective that certainly, having been personally involved and the reports that have been given, they have been totally wrong. I witnessed that myself. So when are we ever getting the right news? When are we ever getting the correct news? When are we ever getting that news that's with integrity? So I guess you know, often figuring out who's write and who's wrong is really depends on who you listen to. And, and, and unfortunately, who do you take--who can you trust with that news to, to get it back to you for you to report to, to this country? But we're gonna have to solve that. I don't think that the present administration of NNPA [National Newspaper Publishing Association] has done anything internationally in the last four years, but I think that we're gonna have to do that because more and more people in the United States want to know that a black--they want to know about their native land; they want to know about the people. They want to know about conditions. They want to know about their earlier years. So you know and they're saying well it's in--and, and to make that connection. So we're gonna have to find a means with the, the NNPA now has a website. There are more computers and all of that. That's gonna make it easier. But we've gonna--but, but we've got to, we've got to be very, very, very, very diligent in, in making sure that we get the best information that we can and get it back to our, our readers here. Story_ID: 90000 Speaker 1: I've got a question here. I want you to just talk for a minute about some of the writers, columnists and photographers you've had with the "[Chicago] Crusader". Maybe just talk about some of your-- Speaker 2: Well one of the ones I'd really like to talk about that goes back some years. His name was Dan Burley. Dan Burley in my estimation, probably was one of the greatest newspapermen in the whole world. And Dan was a multi-talented man. He worked for many black newspapers, but he also worked for the "Crusader" just prior to him starting up his own publication. He had worked for the, the "New York Age" in New York. He worked for the Chicago "Defender". So many different publications. But what I really--and, and he also had been a very strong confidant and writer for Elijah Muhammad. And Dan Burley was a true newspaperman. He could write in dialect. He could write news stories. And had he been born at a different time, he probably would have worked one--been one of the first people to work for the mainstream press. I don't know if he would have accepted the challenge, but certainly he would have been sought after. Speaker 1: How do you spell his name? Speaker 2: Dan was his first name, D-A-N, Burley, B-U-R-L-E-Y. Dan Burley not only was a newspaperman, but he was a talented, talented pianist. He played ragtime music I believe and he sang and, and he was just really a very talented man. Very smart man. And he--I, when I first came to the "Crusader", he was working at the "Crusader". And I had the privilege to, to spend some time and to read his, his writings and so much. And it is our hope within a year or so, that perhaps we will have an opportunity to, to print many of the, the stories and columns that Dan Burley wrote. So that is one of them that I wanted to talk about and I'm just trying to remember all of the people that have come this way that I have had the opportunity to meet and to, to, to spend time with and, and many of them have contributed to our paper. One was--I don't know, I'm trying to remember the photographer's name. He was just so well known, that he had been around and he was just very, very talented. I, I think they may even have a lot of his work at the DuSable Museum, and his name is just escaping me at this moment. But we've had so many talented people. One of the first blacks to work on CBS Morning News, Channel Two here in the city, name was Ted Coleman. He also was one of the first blacks that ever served as an assistant or--in the press office of the mayor of the City of Chicago, his name was Ted Coleman. Ted had a wide career in working for the black press before he did the--all of those other things. He used to work for the, again for a newspaper in New York. He--the "Pittsburgh Courier". He also wrote for the "Crusader". Story_ID: 90001 Speaker 1: And it's just so many of them that I mean it's just--I can't remember all of the names. If I had an opportunity, I'm sure I could go back and just pull out some of those columns. We used to have a William Henry Huff who used to do book reviews, he was an attorney. But he too was a journalist and he did book reviews in our newspaper. We had a Reverend Bernice Harifoot [ph.] who used to do a column and who certainly was the, the anchor for our church news in our newspaper. We had a guy named Crusader Brown. I believe he took on the name of Crusader, that had been a columnist for many, many years. So I mean I could just read them all out. We have had relationship with people like Cleo Johnson and who has a modeling agency, who used to put on our Miss Crusader Contest that we had back in the early '60's [1960's] and the late '50's [1950's]. So we have had just I mean a who's who of people who have come through these doors. Many I don't even know their names, it was before I came to the "Crusader". But certainly in the time that I have been here, we have had just a large number of people. Theodore Charlestone who was one of the founding members of the Negro Musicians Association, served as our managing editor for many, many years here, who is now since passed on. He was known--I mean at Symphony Hall and at the Lyric Opera, he was a fixture. And many, many years the "Crusader" along--only with the "Defender" did any coverage and gave any information for the finer types of music. And when I mean the fine arts type of music as opposed to the contemporary. Although we also do contemporary. We are one of the few newspapers in this city that now have movie reviews. Ann Blair has been with us for almost thirty years. So I mean I could just name so many people who have come through this way who have made contributions over the years. Al Cato is a very fine photographer. He now works for the County Hospital. But he has been one that has contributed to our newspapers. We remember early on when we came to the city, Brent Jones who has worked for the Park District and Chicago State University and so many others. We've had a lot of freelance folk that were not necessarily full time employees. And then we've had people who have written who use a pseudonym, who are--who would use that, that pen name as opposed to using their own, that have made contributions to our newspapers. And we had a Halley Hardin. Halley back in--from in the '30's [1930's] and I guess late '20's [1920's], early '30's [1930's], he was probably one of the most gift sportsmen you ever wanted to find. He was baseball, multi-talented, played many sports. Halley was amazing sports writer for us for many, many years. So I mean I could call the roll, but I probably would need to have had some time to get all of the names of all of these people. Speaker 2: That's a good start. Speaker 1: Yeah, but we have been very privileged to have had an opportunity to meet many people who have made just really outstanding contributions, not only to our newspaper, but also to Chicago as a, as a community. Story_ID: 90002 Speaker 1: Now is it--there's been a lot written about the black press being in trouble all over the country. We've, we've heard about the "Defender", all the rumors about it closing or being bought up by bigger papers. You know you just saw BET [Black Entertainment Television] you know just buy a bigger-- Speaker 2: Let me tell you. I, I--listen, I, I cannot tell you how disturbed I would be if there was no black press. I cannot tell you how important the black press is to our community, even today. The same reason that it began in 1827 by Samuel Cornish and John Russwurm, those same reasons we need it now. I believe that the black press holds the key to the liberation of black people. We have made a lot of advances. We have made other steps backward. I believe the, the--those principles and those ideals and those kind of things that really have made our people great, many of them we've lost because our kids do not understand the sacrifices and the all that so many of our ancestors made so that we could be at the point we are at this juncture. And so I really feel that while they read it and maybe perfunctory, in school about the accomplishments of black people, I think that perhaps we have failed to really get the message over to our young people so that they will indeed reflect the advances and the, the hopes and aspirations of so many who died so that they would have the right to vote, have the right to go to school, to, to, to make the, the kind of advancements for, for their families and all, as any other race of people. And I think that our kids have lost that. We've been so busy making sure they didn't have to repeat what we repeated, that they don't understand often the kind of sacrifices and the kinds of efforts that they need to make. Now there are a lot of exceptions. We see a lot of our young people who are now millionaires. We--and many of them in entertainment and sports. We have seen some of our greatest thinkers. I mean we have some--the most multi-talented people in, in--among our race. Yet we are still not free. We are in, in, in the Supreme Court debating whether or not--and afraid that we will lose affirmative action so that we can have a level playing field. Yet people are saying do we need the black press? Do we need this? Do we really--are they really what we need? If they know what I know, they would invest in the black press because when it comes down to communications, the largest number of ownership of any segment of our communication, is the black newspapers. We own just a few radio stations. Most of them black oriented. People are making money off of black people hand over fist. Speaker 1: Yeah, I know. Speaker 2: They're making money. We own very little in, in television. Thank God for attorney Gary down in, in the south, down in Florida. He started up a TV station. We lost BET long before it became--got in the white hands; we had lost that. It was not really an advocate for blacks. And in many of the things that it did, it was all about making money. Well I think we can make money and we can provide for our people the freedom to, to go to school, the freedom to work, to own anywhere. So I think that we've got to, we've got to rethink this. Story_ID: 90003 Speaker 1: But tell me in terms of the struggle with the, the--keep the press alive and other things you've talked about, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community? Speaker 2: Well number one, I really would hope that some of the trans--some of the things that really have made us great as black people who'd be recall that we could instill some of that into the younger generation coming up. I'm not trying to make them into the old fashioned, or to replay history, so to speak. But there were so many things that we had as a people that our young people have missed. They have not had the same kind of struggle that many of us had in our earlier life and perhaps because of that, our young people don't understand the importance of education as I really feel that they should. Many of our young people don't understand the value of working for, for their advancement. Often they think that things should be given to them or it should be an easy way out. Those kinds of things I think that I got my first taste of was in Main Street School and of course reinforced at Merrill High School, and having lived in Pine Bluff, Arkansas. But I think that many of our kids perhaps don't know about them or they have taken it for granted, that those things that Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.], A. Philip Randolph, and we can just go down the--Mary McLeod Bethune. We could just go down the line of so many great black Americans--what the sacrifices that they made, the kinds of contributions that they have left as a legacy for us to protect and to carry on. And our black institutions, our black church, our black press, our black institutions, our black schools. I think that we need to rethink, we need to, we need to reinforce, we need to participate more with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and other organizations that have provided the kind of information, the kind of fight, the kind of legal information and, and legal fights that we've had over, over the years. We need to strengthen them. We cannot afford to discard not one, least of all the black press. The black press has an opportunity to provide for our freedom. We have tried politics, just politics. We have tried business, just business. We have tried all singular kinds of things. We need to bring all of our resources together to make our people the kind of people and for them to have the kind of life that they should have. So I am calling on many of our people who have had businesses, have found an opportunity to sell them and make big money for themselves and for their family. But I'm concerned about the greater community of black people. How can we make life good for as many of them as possible? I think that we need to rethink just getting the money for the hour and reinvest that money back into these institutions so that we can provide a better life for our young people coming along. So I have been speaking and I had an opportunity to speak at an AME [African Methodist Episcopalian] about a month ago, and I received a standing ovation. And I think there are many people, once they hear the message of how important it is for us to have our own means of communication, that there are people willing to join with us to spend 20 dollars or 40 dollars a year to subscribe to our papers because we could indeed provide many jobs in the black press for our young people who are just idle because of the unemployment rate. So I'm just hopeful that we as a people will come together. Let us put our brains together, the best minds in our community, and see how we can't find a well-rounded plan to make sure that our young people get to be older people. Too many of our young people are dying in the streets today. So we really need to work together to, to see if we can save some of our children. That's about it. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 90004 Speaker 1: Now do you have a, a--is there--what are you the most proud of, I guess that you've done, you know with "[Chicago] Crusader" or in life? Speaker 2: Well I guess we have never missed an issue. Our newspaper isn't all that we want it to be. It doesn't have as many pages as we want it to have. We are not able to disseminate as much news as we could possibly get into our own community so that we can educate people. We can enlighten people. We can inspire people. We have not been able to accomplish that. But I tell you the greatest thing that has really ever happened to me, is the fact that I have not given up and I've never missed an issue. We have been very privileged over the last forty-two years for this to be our only job, our only vocation. And that is to work at the "[Chicago] Crusader" newspaper. So I guess if there's anything at all that I'm proud of and I think that Mr. Jordan who was my principal and Mrs. Clark and so many others, is the fact that I've done all the very best job I could with the very limited resources, that I have not given up. Story_ID: 90005 Speaker 1: Do you see that basically as your legacy? Speaker 2: I do. I really do. I hope though before I leave this earth, that I will have the opportunity to feel that I have been able to give more information. I hope to find the answer to the circulation and the advertising problems that keeps the black press from being even greater. So I hope before I leave here I will have found a solution to those problems. I'm working on something now, I've got a plan. And I would hope that I'll be able to see that plan materialize before I leave. Then perhaps my legacy will leave--will be different. It'll be that I, I saw the problems and I helped to solve them for the black press, so-- Speaker 1: Okay. What, what, what is the circulation of the "[Chicago] Crusader" right now? Speaker 2: We have a circulation of 70,000 and it's just not nearly the amount that it ought to be with-- Speaker 1: [Unclear]. Speaker 2: Yes. We have a million some odd black people in this city and certainly we should, we should at least be doing I would think at least twenty-five percent of that, if not more. And I really feel that while many of us have felt threatened, not only the black press, but the mainstream press, by new technology, by television and so much other. I think that the black press is going to be here for a very, very long time because when we hear about someone, a black man being dragged behind a truck in Texas in this day and time. When we hear all of the atrocities that still happen in our country and indeed in our, even in our own city, then we know that there's a need for the black press. There is always gonna be a need for people to have a means to communicate. And no matter how well meaning and I'll paraphrase that from John Russwurm and Samuel Cornish. No matter how well meaning our friends our, we need to be able to tell our own story. That hasn't changed. Speaker 1: Plead our own cause. Speaker 2: Yes indeed, absolutely. Story_ID: 90006 Speaker 1: Now this is a slightly different question than the legacy one. But how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Well I hope they don't remember how bad I was, how terrible and how hard I was to work with. Well how would I like to be remembered? As a person that cared, cared about people and loved the Black Press. I think I really would. Cared about the wellbeing of black people and loving the black press, that's how I'd like to be remembered. Speaker 1: Thank you ma'am. Speaker 2: Okay. Alright. Story_ID: 90007 Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE: First photo [unclear] black and white. Speaker 2: Okay, that's Dozier Allen who's former Calumet Township Trustee in Gary, Indiana presenting me with the Publisher of the Year Award from the trustee's office. Okay. Speaker 1: [OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION] Speaker 2: That's in the, the main person in this photo is Winnie Mandela, who came to the United States two years ago and during that time, many other women in Chicago was also honored as having--exemplified the courage and tenacity of a Winnie Mandela. So I was one of the awardees on that particular picture, along with Hermene Hartman from "N'Digo". And I'm not quite sure who the other honorees were on the other side. Speaker 1: It looks like Cora Cutler there, I don't know. Speaker 2: I don't know. But I was one of the awardees. Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE: All right, next. Speaker 2: That's a young Dorothy Leavell and her husband Balm L. Leavell who was the publisher and founder of the "Crusader" newspapers along with our two children, Janiece, who is on his left and my son Antonio. They were probably two and three, or younger at that particular time. OFF CAMERA VOICE: Very good, next. Speaker 1: That's Dorothy Leavell at a, a neighbor's birthday party. Nothing real significant about that one. Hattie Collins and Dorothy Leavell. Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE: Okay, next. Speaker 1: That one significant or [unclear]. Speaker 2: I don't think so. I don't even remember who's baby that is. That's at that same party. There's my daughter. Speaker 1: Oblate Sisters of Providence. A black order of nuns from Baltimore, Maryland, who were teachers and all at Holy Name of Mary School and I remember that parish here in Chicago. It's a black parish founded by blacks for blacks. And the lady in the striped dress is--was instrumental in having after the school was built, having the Oblate Sisters, her name was Mrs. Morton, and having them to come to man the school. She was the one instrumental. She had been raised by the Oblate Sisters in an orphanage in Kansas City I believe it was. Speaker 2: [OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION] Speaker 1: That's Dorothy Leavell and Jane Byrne. In the background is Johnny Sengstacke. That was at the 19, 1980 convention of the National Newspaper Publishers Association. And that was the head table. I was on the head table and Jane Byrne was one of our guests. She's a former mayor. Speaker 2: This one important? Speaker 1: That happens to be just one of those gala affairs with many people from Pine Bluff, Arkansas on that, on that photo. The--right next to me was a young lady, her father was the pastor of the church, that St. Bethel Church in Pine Bluff. But most of the people on here are friends of mine from Pine Bluff, Arkansas. Speaker 2: Okay. That was at another NNPA convention. That's John Sengstacke, Garth Reeves, myself, my present hu--husband and Fred Sengstacke. And that was at another NNPA convention. Not sure if it was the 19--it may have still been that 1980 convention. Speaker 1: I don't know what that one is. That's Bobby Sengstacke and looks like a, a promotional party of some sort that I attended, along--with these are mostly local people. Not really that significant. Speaker 2: That is a convention again of NNPA. Cecil Partee who's a former-- Speaker 1: On this end? Speaker 2: Yes, from the--okay that's--Ibn Shariff from left, left to right. Ibn Shariff who was a publisher of the "Tri-City Journal" who's passed on now. William Garth, the publisher of the "Citizen" newspaper, Commissioner Jerry Butler, singer and politician, myself and Cecil Partee, who at one time had been city Treasurer I think and state's attorney, and a state senator, the whole bit. Okay. Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE: What year? Speaker 2: That looks like that might have been late '70's [1970's], early '80's [1980's]. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay I know what that is. In 1983 the Gary "Crusader" newspaper served as host for the National Newspaper Publishers in Gary, Indiana. And on the left is Alma White whose home we were being hosted by her on a Saturday afternoon gathering. And that was State Senator Carolyn Mosley who was a great supporter of the Crusader, and that was me and I'm not sure who the other lady is. Okay, but that was in Gary Indiana. Speaker 2: This is just a--I think it might have been a birthday party at a local place in Indiana. Some were my staffers and friends from the Chicago as well as the Gary paper. So in the background was Dr. Avery Douglas, who was really instrumental in developing the Gary Airport in 19--in the early years. Speaker 1: Which one is he? Speaker 2: Right there, that's Dr. Avery M. Douglas, yes. And that's Alberta and Eddie Leak from leak Funeral Home. She used to work for me on the far right. Speaker 1: Okay. That's--I served as president of the Holy Name of Mary School Board for about ten years I guess. And this is a social gathering in my home. That's me from the left, that's Rudy Watson, who was a member of the board, Mrs. Morton, a member of the board, and the priest is Father Anthony Veda, he was pastor of the church. Speaker 2: Birthday party for me. I believe was held at the Herman Roberts place down the street. And those are just two of the ladies that was in attendance, having a great time. Speaker 1: Year? Speaker 2: 19, maybe 1980. Speaker 1: Okay, this is 1989. And that was in New Orleans, Louisiana, where I was presented with the Publisher of the Year by a representative of the Ford Motor Company. It was a key to a 1989 Cougar as--that was the prize for Publisher of the Year. Speaker 2: This is the christening of my first born, Antonio Leavell, born in 1964. On the left--it's upside down really, but on the left side is Dr. Jay Jackson who was pastor of Olivet Baptist Church, just barely can see my aunt Selma Magum and can barely see me with the glasses in the middle and Antonio's father, Balm L. Leavell, Jr. So that would have been probably early 1965 because he was born December of 1964. Speaker 1: My goodness. Can you pick that other and--I think it had the year on the back of that, on the back of it. Speaker 2: Okay you're age 14. Speaker 1: It didn't say what year? Speaker 2: February '59 [1959]. Speaker 1: Okay, February 1959 I was age 14. So that's basically it about that. In Pine Bluff, Arkansas. Story_ID: 90008 Speaker 1: Okay, wow what year was that? That is me and I think I was about 25 years old at that point. I think that was around 1969. Speaker 2: Okay. The only one I remember is Jacoby Dickens. Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE: I thought you'd just say unidentified-- Speaker 2: Unidentified gentleman on the left, myself, Jacoby Dickens who is now--and I think he was then, probably [unclear] about the United Fund. I think he was chairing the United Fund. But he's president of, of Seaway Bank. And the other identified-- Speaker 1: [OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION] Speaker 2: Late '70's [1970's]? Speaker 1: Seventies '70's [1970's] I think. Speaker 2: Okay, this is Dorothy Leavell and former Secretary of the Agriculture-- Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE: Mike Espy? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. And Mike Espy, yes. And that would have been 19-- Speaker 1: Probably during the Clinton-- Speaker 2: Yes, it was during the, the Clinton administration, so that might have-- Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE: First or second term? Speaker 2: First term. Okay, okay first term. Speaker 1: They went after him after that. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. That's Dorothy Leavell and Gus Savage, Congressman Gus Savage and that was again in the '70's [1970's]. Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE: Do you remember the occasion? Speaker 2: What was he--he wasn't congressman yet then, right? Speaker 1: I don't know. It says to Dorothy a long time friend. No number, no date or nothing on the back. It seems like to me that was when we were meeting. He might have still been publisher of the "Citizen" newspaper at that time. Speaker 2: Yeah, there's something on the back; let me see. No, there's no date. Speaker 1: No date? He might have still been publisher of the "Citizen" newspaper at that time, and that would have been in the early '70's [1970's]. Speaker 2: That's myself in my Gary office with Congressman Adam Benjamin. He's now deceased. And that would have been-- Speaker 1: He's an Indiana Congressman? Speaker 2: Yes, he was a Indiana Congressman from Gary. So that would have been seventy--19, probably 1976. That's would that would have been, 1976. I remember because we moved into our remodeled office at that time. Speaker 1: Okay, this is Dorothy Leavell and Wilma Broomfield. Wilma Broomfield is Ms. Gary Crusader and this was on the occasion of our I believe 15th anniversary of the newspaper, which would have made it '76 [1976], 1976, I believe so. Speaker 2: Okay. Left to right is Dorothy Leavell, John Smith my husband, and very dear friend Lena Carol. This was at the convention I believe in, in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. The National Newspaper Publishers Association. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. This is the NNPA convention, 1983 in Gary, Indiana. Dorothy Leavell, Mayor Richard Gordon Hatcher, Ira Jean Harris, the publisher of the "Info" newspaper, and Chris Bennett, publisher of the "Seattle Medium" newspaper, and at that particular convention, Chris Bennett was elected president and I was elected treasurer. Speaker 2: This is again the 15th anniversary--no, this is the grand opening of our office in 1976. We had bought this building Gary and remodeled it and that's my mother, Sally Gonder, that's my niece that I raised as my own child, that's Sharon Gonder and that's myself sitting at the desk. That's Joseph Jefferson in the back. That's my son Antonio Leavell and my daughter Janiece. And that was the--we had like an open house and all for the opening of the office. Speaker 1: Okay left to right is Janiece Leavell my daughter when she graduated with a degree in political science at Northern Illinois University, 1988. Speaker 2: Okay. This is Dorothy Leavell when she graduated from Merrill High School, 1962. Dorothy Gonder. That's who that is. Speaker 1: Okay. That's John Smith and Dorothy Leavell. That's my husband, and we were at--attending a convention in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. Speaker 2: Okay. Jesus. This is--we were attending a social affair at the Chicago--what did I say the name of that hotel was? Speaker 1: [OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION] Speaker 2: That's our family, Dorothy Leavell, Antonio Leavell and Balm L. Leavell, Jr. when we were three, before my daughter was born. So that would have had to have been '65 [1965]. Speaker 1: What year was that? Look on the back of that one before you put it up. You might have the year. Okay. Summer time in Pine Bluff. Probably, I was probably seven or eight years old there. So that would probably make it in the early '50's [1950's], yeah. Early '50's [1950's] and, and, and a friend that was visiting from out of town. I don't even remember her name. That's a shame. Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE: Which one is you, on the left? Speaker 1: Yeah, that's me on the left. Yeah I got a--quite a suntan. Speaker 2: We got enough tape for a couple more? OFF CAMERA VOICE: [Unclear]. Speaker 1: Okay that's Mr. and Mrs. Pinkard, myself, I was single, Dorothy Gonder and Balm Leavell, Cecil Partee and not real sure of the other couple on the end. So that would have been-- Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE: Spell it please. Speaker 1: P-I-N-K-A-R-D. Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE: Okay. Speaker 1: Okay and I was real young there. I was about, I guess I was about 17 or 18 years old, 18. Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE: All right, what about this one? Speaker 1: That's when I was president of the National Newspaper Publishers in Phoenix, Arizona, 1999, January. And that's Minister Farrakhan and Mrs. Farrakhan. Speaker 2: That's one, two, four generations of--demonstrated on this picture. Left is Dorothy Leavell, lady in front is my mother Sally Gonder, my daughter Janiece, my niece that I raised as my daughter, Sharon and her daughter Kirsten. That had to be--Kirsten is now 13, so she was not--probably only about a year old. So that would make it, when-- Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE: [Unclear]. Speaker 2: Okay. Kirsten, that would have been-- Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE: [Unclear]. Speaker 2: Okay, 1990. Story_ID: 90009 Speaker 1: This is in Abuja, Nigeria, the capital city. The delegation of nineteen journalists and civil rights activists. I lead delegation in October, September and October, 1995. That other--Sani Abacha was the president of Nigeria at that time. Speaker 2: We had an opportunity to meet with Mrs. Abacha during that same visit in Abuja. Mrs. Abacha is on the left and I am on the right in this photo. Speaker 1: [OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION] Speaker 2: That's the one in 1991, our 51st anniversary, okay. Kind of self explanatory I guess. The 51st anniversary of the "Chicago Crusader", December 1991. We had a cocktail reception at--on that 51st, a big one. Speaker 1: The big anniversary celebration was the 60th year. Senator Emil Jones [HM] was our anniversary chairman. This is the 60th anniversary of the "Chicago Crusader" and we celebrated by producing more than 100 page newspaper. Senator Emil Jones was the anniversary chairman, and we had a dinner at the Hyatt Regency McCormick Place in celebration. Speaker 2: What, what year is this? Speaker 1: Nine--2000, the year 2000, June 2000...