 Story_ID: 624401 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm the interviewer today with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: It's Calvin Wayne Lowe. It's C-A-L-V-I-N, W-A-Y-N-E, L-O-W-E. Speaker 1: And Sir is there a story behind your name? Speaker 2: Not that I know of. (Laughs) Speaker 1: Okay. All right, and what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: I was born on February 9, 1955, in a little town called Roanoke Rapids, North Carolina. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, is Roanoke Rapids near the coast? Speaker 2: Close, but not, not--it's not on the coast. It's actually right on the Interstate 95. Interstate 95 runs through the town actually, so that gives you some idea how far inland it is. Speaker 1: Okay, alright, and, sir, what is your occupation and title? Speaker 2: Well, at this point I am Dean of the School of Science at Hampton University [Hampton, Virginia]. Speaker 1: Okay and what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is February 26th, 2013. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We are in my office at the university [Hampton University]. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 624402 Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions that we ask as kind of a warm up, and they-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and they'll only require a short answer. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: The first one is, do you favorite food? Speaker 2: (Laughs) Uh, favorite food. That's probably fish, I guess. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: My favorite color is probably blue. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Blue yeah. Speaker 1: Favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Favorite time of the year is fall, I think. Speaker 1: Okay. Favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: I haven't had one of those in a long time. (Laughs) I don't have a favorite place. No. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite phrase or a saying? Speaker 2: No, maybe as we talk it'll come out, but I can't think of a favorite one at this point. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Story_ID: 624403 Speaker 1: Okay, well, I'm going to ask about your family history. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side separately, and then we will put them together. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us. Speaker 2: It's Gertrude Brown, G-E-R-T-R-U-D-E, and Brown, B-R-O-W-N. Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Oh, gee, I'll have to look up those numbers again. I think the date is--well, December 24, that part I know, and the year is around 1920. Speaker 1: 1920? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, alright, and where was she born? Speaker 2: She was born in Roanoke Rapids [North Carolina] also. Speaker 1: Okay. Now what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family? I mean how far back can you trace that side first of all? Speaker 2: Well, not very far actually. I don't think any of the kids have done a genealogy or tried to do one at this point. We've got sort of, some oral histories, but really not further back than grandparents. Speaker 1: Grandparents? Speaker 2: Grandparents, [nods yes]. Speaker 1: Okay, and what were their names? Speaker 2: My grandfather's name was Tom, Thomas Brown, and my grandmother's name was Verlie, V-E-R-L-I-E, Hockaday Brown. Speaker 1: Hockaday? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And how do you spell that? H-- Speaker 2: H-O-C-K-A-D-A-Y. Speaker 1: Okay. All right, now were they born in Roanoke Rapids too or did they live there too-- Speaker 2: Uh, yes. I think so. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In that area. Speaker 1: So, as far as you know--I mean, is the family history on your mother's side anywhere else other than in Roanoke Rapids? I mean is it-- Speaker 2: Not that, not (simultaneous) Speaker 1: --about as far back as you-- Speaker 2: It's, that's about as far back as I know. Speaker 1: And as to destination, now we all know, you know that African Americans participated--we were enslaved. Speaker 2: Sure. [Nods] Speaker 1: And we were all a part of that struggle. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Are there any stories of that on this side of the family that are passed down? Speaker 2: No, not really. I don't think either of my grandparents were ever slaves. I'm sure their parents were, but I don't have a good idea of our history going back beyond the lives of my grandparents. Speaker 1: So, were your grandparents--did they--what kind of work did they do? Speaker 2: Well, my grandmother was, you know, a housewife. My grandfather, I guess from my earliest remembrance, was still pretty old, was pretty old, but I think, you know, that he had done some farming and sort of the kind of things that I guessed black men did mostly in that time. Speaker 1: Okay. So farming work, laborer-- Speaker 2: Yes. Yes. Speaker 1: Working on some projects. Speaker 2: Yep, [Nods] yep. Speaker 1: Okay, alright, now, did they own their own land down there? Speaker 2: Yes they did. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My grandfather had probably 100 acres maybe. Speaker 1: Okay. [Pause] Okay, a hundred acres is a decent parcel of land. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So are there any stories in the family about how he acquired a hundred acres? Speaker 2: No, I've seen kind of documents where he bought the property, he and, I think, one of his brothers together and then subdivided it, does some logging off of the land and, of course, some farming off the land. Speaker 1: I'm thinking if your mother is born in 1920, your grandfather, what did he, he could have, you know, maybe he acquired the land or whatever around the turn of the century or something or after or I don't know. (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: Yeah, around the turn of the century maybe. Yeah. Speaker 1: I don't know how old he was when she was born, you know, so I don't-- Speaker 2: Yeah that, and again, I don't have a good sense of those dates. Speaker 1: Yeah, proportions and (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 624404 Speaker 1: So are there any stories about, passed down in the family about life in Roanoke Rapids [North Carolina]? Speaker 2: (Laughs) Speaker 1: For your immediate relatives or for the black community back in those days? Speaker 2: Well, you know, Roanoke Rapids is a pretty rural town. It has grown up some in the intervening years, of course. It's got a Big K-Mart now and all that (laughs) and that sort of thing. The stories were kind of typical. I think my mother [Gertrude Brown] actually went to one of the--what are they called? Rosenberg schools? Speaker 1: Hum. Speaker 2: I think Rosenberg. This is the-- Speaker 1: Rosenwald, yeah. Speaker 2: Rosenwald--[Nods]--Rosenwald schools. Speaker 1: Rosenwald. Yes, Julius Rosenwald. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Yeah, right. Speaker 2: Yes. So that was a, there was such a school in my hometown and my mother actually attended that school. She went up to like the sixth grade or something there. Speaker 1: I think that Julius Rosenwald funded, one time funded schools in rural black communities-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --all over the country and... Speaker 2: Yes, that's right. Speaker 1: And, Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --and the training of teachers too. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: There are so many places that didn't even have a school or anything-- Speaker 2: That's right--[Nods]--That's right. Speaker 1: So she went to the sixth grade. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, was it possible for her to go any further where she lived, or did they only go to the sixth? Because I've heard--[simultaneous] Speaker 2: I think that--[simultaneous] Speaker 1: --a lot of schools only go--[simultaneous] Speaker 2: Yeah, I think, it only went to sixth and, you know, so she was in part of that on up through sixth grade, and then, I guess, kind of went into the general life of what black folks did during those times of mostly farming and not really sharecropping but, you know, farming. Speaker 1: Yeah, sharecropping implies you don't own your land. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: But it could still be tough even if you did own your own land. Speaker 2: Well, that's right. Farming was--well it still is, I guess, a really tough occupation to make a living in as a family. Speaker 1: Now, was she the first person in her family to, you know, learn to read or write? Speaker 2: No, no. Actually my grandfather [Thomas Brown] could read and write and my grandmother [Verlie Hockaday Brown] could also. So that kind of was general level of education of the family even--at least back to the grandparents. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so all of them, aunts and uncles, you know, could read and write. Speaker 1: Okay. I'm asking 'cause it's like a point break there at some point where people couldn't at one point--[simultaneous] Speaker 2: Sure, uh-huh. Speaker 1: You know, they learned early--late in the Nineteenth Century and then early in the Twentieth Century if they couldn't get a school. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: --get a little school. So, okay, so what did your mother say about growing up? Did she have any stories? Speaker 2: Not so much. You know, she passed away a few years back, but the--you know, she talked a little, some about attending school and the kinds of things that she learned in school. She was--she liked poetry, especially kind of the American poets and so she could still recite some of the, you know, Longfellow poems and so forth. You know, she did that from time to time. Speaker 1: Okay. Now did she know any Dunbar [Paul Lawrence Dunbar; African American poet and novelist] poems? Speaker 2: She knew some Dunbar poems. Yes, and did some of those too. Speaker 1: [Henry Wadsworth] Longfellow, Dunbar. Okay. Okay, now did your mother talk about an aspiration in her youth that she wanted to achieve? You know, that-- Speaker 2: Well, I think she sort of wanted to maybe be a teacher. She didn't ever get a chance to do that, but, you know, throughout all of her life she was an avid reader and kind of stayed current with events. And even up to her death she was, you know, very versed in what was going on in the world and, you know, just engaged. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Now I'm gonna--oh, do you know the name of her school by any chance? Speaker 2: The London School--the London School. Speaker 1: The London School. Okay. Is it named for somebody or-- Speaker 2: I don't know. I think that there are actually remnants of the building still in my hometown. At least, I remember seeing it about fifteen years ago. I don't know if it's still there or not, but there were remnants of the building still there. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Story_ID: 624405 Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna go on to your father's side of the family. Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Okay. His name was Walter, W-A-L-T-E-R, Rodgers, R-O-D-G-E-R-S, Lowe, L-O-W-E. Speaker 1: What's the middle name again? Speaker 2: Rodgers. Speaker 1: Oh Rodgers. Okay and what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: He was, I think he was also born in Roanoke Rapids [North Carolina] and he was--around 1913 I think. He was a little older than my mother [Gertrude Brown], born in January. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: 1913, all right. Now, what can you tell us about your father's side of the family? Speaker 2: Well, I know less about my father's side than I do about my mother's side. My grandfather on that side actually I never knew. From the stories I heard, I think he was--kind of worked in logging. As a matter of fact, I think he actually died in a logging accident somewhere in Virginia. I learned that. That is I wouldn't--I don't know if that's a fact or--[laughs]--folklore, but I learned of that some years ago. Speaker 1: From one of your relatives tell the story? Speaker 2: Yes, it was one of my relatives, yeah. Speaker 1: Did they have any details? Speaker 2: No, no, not really, only that he had died in some sort of logging accident that happened. They said somewhere near Emporia in Virginia. So, other than that I don't really have any details. My grandmother on my father's side, I--well she was quite elderly when we were, when I was young. I say "we" all the time because I have a twin brother [Walter Lowe]. So (laughs), we were--we were, you know, quite young and I guess she died when we were really quite young too. I don't exactly remember the date that it happened, but we were pretty young. And so I don't know very much about my father's side of the family. Speaker 1: Now your grandparents were probably, I'm thinking, born in the 1870s. Probably, if your dad was born in 1913-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --from 1880s to 1870s, you know, that's a pretty good guess. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's, I think that would probably be a good guess. So kind of right after the, I guess, the end of the Civil War would be the timeframe for their births. Speaker 1: Well maybe ten to fifteen years after. Yeah, but that's, that's-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So they were up there around, you know--I know my father was born in 1918-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: He's gone now. He'd been ninety-five years old if he was still alive. So, that's-- Speaker 2: Okay, okay--[simultaneous] Speaker 1: That's--so your grandparents--gee! They go up-- Speaker 2: Yeah, they go-- Speaker 1: Yeah, they were pretty old. Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And you are younger than I am, you know--much younger than I am. So-- Speaker 2: [Laughs] I don't feel like it. [Simultaneous laughter] Speaker 1: But that's, yeah, so your mother, your grandmother was kind of up there when you were coming along. She was-- Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, yeah. I mean I remember her as a very elderly lady, not really mobile and, you know. So-- Speaker 1: Do you know how old she was when she passed? Speaker 2: No, I think I'd have to look that one up. I don't know off-hand. Speaker 1: Okay. So did she have any stories that she talked about or passed down? Speaker 2: You know, I don't remember very much even conversations with her. Probably my older siblings, my sisters, would have a much more vivid memory of her than I do. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 624406 Speaker 1: Now your father [Walter Rodgers Lowe], now what did he say--did he say anything about growing up or tell any stories about going to school or-- Speaker 2: Now, my father sort of didn't really get very much formal schooling. He, I think he maybe have gone through second or the third grade--something like that. My father was a tinkerer of various things. He sort of built a lot of, lot of just useful little tools around the house there, and everything from kind of table saws to he worked on, you know, the cylinders holding the gasoline engines and, I guess I would kind of refer to him as this shade tree engineer. He was always tinkering with stuff and building stuff, and maybe, maybe where we got our interest in science. Speaker 1: Hum, okay. Speaker 2: Or engineering kind of things. Speaker 1: Okay. So, he liked to make things and build things and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. He made a lot of different kinds of things and-- Speaker 1: What's the most impressive thing he made that you can think of? Speaker 2: [Laughs] He made lots of things that kept lots of noise. [Laughs] You know, we used to of course heat our house with wood which many people did in rural things. I remember he built this saw for kind of cutting up logs into heater sized pieces and it was--I mean this thing was the size, as I think back about it, it was enormously dangerous. [Laughs] It was basically a gasoline engine powered table saw [laughs] because he never let us near it, [Laughs] and he would use it to, you know, to cut the trees into splitting sized chucks. [Laughs] Speaker 1: A gasoline powered table saw! Really? Speaker 2: Yeah, it was--[Laughs]--It was pretty dangerous. Speaker 1: So he came up with all of this by himself? He took parts of other things and-- Speaker 2: Sure, yeah, yeah he did. Speaker 1: --and created the--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Yeah, with things he'd find (unclear). I remember he had--you know, growing up we had this sort of shed that he kept a lot of his things in, and little garden tractors and stuff. It was an enormously exciting place to, you know to my brother [Walter Lowe] and me. We spent many hours under there looking at the various things he had. And some of these things were--I mean tools like the drill presses, for instance, kind of mechanical hand tools he would use for drilling holes into wood and that sort of thing. And then there were like odds and ends kinds of things. There was one thing I remember being very interested in. It was a device for shelling corn. So, you know, it had a crank on it and you'd put the corn cob into the, the corn ear into top and it, you had various teeth that spun around and pulled the corn off. This was for dried corn. That was pretty impressive. [Laughs] Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Story_ID: 624407 Speaker 1: Now, did your father's [Walter Rodgers Lowe] people own their land too or did they rent? Speaker 2: I don't have a real good, a real clear sense of that. The sense I do have is that they did not own the, their own land. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, how did your father earn his living basically? Speaker 2: My father was a construction worker. He was--he did cement, cement finisher. So, he did that all of his life that I knew him. I think in the early, early days, before we were born, he, I think he worked at one of the paper mill, or one of the mills in town, but then got into, you know, doing construction and finishing cement. And, I actually got a chance to work with him for a couple of years just before I went off to college. We actually--well I worked with him at the time they were building the Philip Morris tobacco plant in Richmond [Virginia]. So that's your, as you are on [interstate] 95 and if you're driving south on 95, it's a big Philip Morris plant on your right just as you pass through Richmond. So we worked on that. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 624408 Speaker 1: Now, is there a story about how your parents [Gertrude Brown and Walter Rodgers Lowe] met? Speaker 2: Not that I know of. My, again, my sisters may have heard that story. Maybe by the time we came along, my brother and I came along, we were--because my oldest sister is about fifteen years older than I am. So there is a little gap between the youngest girl--I have three older sisters-- between the youngest girl and us. So maybe by the time we came along they were tired of telling those stories. [Laughs] So I don't remember hearing very much about them. Speaker 1: Well, can you name your brothers and sisters from the oldest and put yourself in the-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: --line up for us. Speaker 2: My oldest sister is Frances Moody, and the next one is Evelyn Stevens, and then Verba Jones, V-E-R-B-A Jones, and then my brother Walter Lowe and then I come, the youngest of the group by five minutes-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Calvin Lowe. Yeah. Speaker 1: So you and Walter are twins-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Are you identical twins or? Speaker 2: We get more identical as we get older, [laughs] but we are not identical. No. Speaker 1: Okay. So one of you is taller, shorter, or something or -- Speaker 2: Yeah, I think I am a little taller and bigger and he's a little smaller, but as I said, as we've gotten older we've become more identical. [Laughs] Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Story_ID: 624409 Speaker 1: So your parents [Gertrude Brown and Walter Rodgers Lowe] both lived in Roanoke Rapids [North Carolina]? Speaker 2: Un-huh. Speaker 1: Right, and so did they, did your--now I take it that both of them were like on the outskirts of Roanoke Rapids or-- Speaker 2: Well, yes the rural area. It wasn't in the city proper I guess. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: So I don't really know how they met or-- Speaker 1: Did they go to the same church? Speaker 2: Actually, I don't think so. I don't think so initially. I know that my father sort of worked at, you know, different jobs when we was growing up and I mentioned that at one point he was working at one of the mills in the town. Before that I think he did farming, you know, and that sort of thing. So I'm not sure how they actually found each other. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. But your mother is seven years younger than your father. Speaker 2: [Nods] Speaker 1: Did your father serve in the war? Speaker 2: No, he was not in the war. Yeah, yeah, not in the war. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. So, when you think about your parents' personalities, their dispositions, their sense of humor, their habits-- Speaker 2: Mm-hm. Speaker 1: --hobbies, just how they walked, talked, looked-- Speaker 2: Mm-hm. Speaker 1: --who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: My father's side, definitely. Yeah, yeah, thinking about my uncles and so forth. In terms of the way I look, I take after my father's side. Disposition is probably closer to my mother, but in terms of, you know, physical characteristics probably my father for sure. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Story_ID: 624410 Speaker 1: So when you were growing up did you grow up in a rural community [Roanoke Rapids, North Carolina] in or did you-- Speaker 2: [Nods] Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, very rural. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Not very rural, but rural. I mean it's, you know, kind of two lane highway, out in front of the house, but it was paved. [Laughs] You could see your neighbors, but not necessarily make out details. [Laughs] So, it was a, it was a very nice, nice way to grow up for kids, especially for boys, I guess, roaming around through the woods and we had friends, you know, that were a few, maybe a mile or so away. And so, you know, we all kind of play ball together and kept each other entertained. [Laughs] Speaker 1: Okay, was it a black community or a lot of different kinds of people live around you? Speaker 2: Well, you know, in those days there were only two kinds of people really, [Laughs] especially in small rural towns. So, it was sort of mixed, but they were--so if you were to drive down the road that runs by my house, you know, you'd would pass through communities that were, or areas that were mostly black families living in, and then also white families living in, and then you'd find another area with mostly black families lived. So, it was mixed, but not together. Speaker 1: Okay. So did black people tend to live proximity to each other in an area? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, they did, but they really lived in multiple areas, I guess, and those areas were sort of separated. As I say, sort of people would mix together, but segregated at the same time. Speaker 1: Okay. Now was there a name for your part of-- Speaker 2: Well, the road that I lived on was called the Loop Road, and it was called a "loop" because it started and ended on, you know, an intersection with the single major highway. And so, I think it was County Road 1430 something. [Laughs] I've forgotten those numbers, but everybody called it the "Loop Road, and now I think it is called the Sam Powers Dairy Road now. It's, the name of it 'cause there was a big dairy farm on the road. Speaker 1: Okay. I was gonna to say it's the kind of road that everybody knows what it's called, but it doesn't, it's not on the sign. So if you ask for directions, you'd-- Speaker 2: That's right. If you say just go up to the Loop Road, and [laughs]--they'll know what you're talking about. [Laughs] Speaker 1: Alright. So, okay, so now--now how much older than you is your oldest sister? Speaker 2: About fifteen years. Speaker 1: Fifteen--okay. That gives me a sense of, you know--okay, all right. So she was born around 1940, I guess then, right? Speaker 2: Right, in there, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Story_ID: 624411 Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: Ohhh. Earliest, well, not a specific memory. I mean I sort of remember sort of, you know, growing up and running around in the yard and playing with my brother [Walter Lowe]. He was my major playmate, [laughs] you know. I remember having kind of, you know, roaming through the woods. And I remember us having big gardens and, you know, the two of us playing in the gardens and that sort of thing. But, I don't really have a real clear, specific memory that I could say, ah that's was the earliest thing that I remember. Story_ID: 624412 Speaker 1: Yeah, I was saying off camera that I, I wanted to ask you if you had a dog growing up. Speaker 2: Yes, we had, had dogs. I had, well; we had sort of the family's dog, a family dog. The earliest pet I can remember is sort of the family dog and I would tell you the name, but I tend to use the name in my, some of my passwords. So I won't, I won't say. (Laughs) Speaker 1: Oh, okay, alright, alright, alright. Speaker 2: (laughs) Speaker 1: What kind of dog was it? Speaker 2: A dog. (Laughs) Speaker 1: [unclear] Speaker 2: You know, in the country you have lots of different kinds of dogs, (laughs) and so this was not a pure breed or anything. It was kind of; I guess it was close to, close to maybe a collie or something or, you know-- Speaker 1: Well, okay. Speaker 2: --but it was a mixed breed. Speaker 1: It was a mutt, but had long hair and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, longish, longish hair and small statue, but, you know, it was a, that was the earliest family pet. Now, I remember some dogs after that. There were different versions of hounds, I guess, and, of course, because we lived in a rural area, we had raised pigs and--and so, I think we were beyond the chicken stage by the time we came along. (Laughs) So at some point we had chickens, but that was mainly during my sisters', sisters' era and during our era we really didn't have chickens. We had some cows and, and [unclear] beef cows and, and pigs pretty much. Speaker 1: Now, is this was in the same place? Speaker 2: Yes, [unclear] the same place that--well, I only remember that that one place that we lived. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay, alright. So, so I imagine boy you had some acreage there to have like cows roaming around? Speaker 2: Yeah, it had a couple of acres-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: A couple of acres. Yeah. Story_ID: 624413 Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up [in Roanoke Rapids, North Carolina]? Speaker 2: Oh! Well, I remember sort of, well as I told you before, we heated, heated the house with wood. So I can remember in the fall, just before sort of winter, coming home from school and, and gathering kindling to start fires and stuff in the morning. And so I remember the smell of that, of that kind of, of wood and of the soil, you know; just, just in the, in the spring when we were, you know, plowing for the gardens and stuff, just remembering the, the smell of soil and, and fresh plowed fields, but not big fields, but garden, garden-sized fields. Of course, I guess, when I was young they seemed like they were huge fields, (laughs) but I remember, you know, the smell of grass. We use to cut, cut the grass and the, you know, trees and stuff when they're kind of starting to bud out and bloom. It seems like I remember those, those sounds and then the smells. Speaker 1: Alright, okay. Story_ID: 624414 Speaker 1: What was the name of your first school? Speaker 2: First school was Chaloner, Chaloner High School, I guess or school, it was K through 12 [kindergarten through twelfth grade]. Speaker 1: Okay. How do you spell, C-H-A-- Speaker 2: C-H-O-- Speaker 1: "O"? Speaker 2: L may be L-E-N-D-R-A. That doesn't sound, that doesn't quite right, (laughs), but it was in Roanoke Rapids. It is still, still there. It's a, I think, a middle school now--I think. So it was one of the schools that sort of survived, the name of school actually survived the, the desegregation stuff in the '60s (1960s). Speaker 1: Okay. So, so C-H-O-L-L-E-N-D-R-A. Speaker 2: One, one "L" I think. Speaker 1: One? Okay. Like Cholendra or-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --what did they call it? Speaker 2: Cholendra. [Chaloner] Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. So, okay they went K through twelve? Speaker 2: Well, one, one through twelve. It was-- Speaker 1: One through twelve. Okay, alright. So was it close by? Speaker 2: No, no. We rode the bus from where I lived to, to the school. I remember during the times, the times the schools were being desegregated there was lots of talk about and, and talking and, I guess, gnashing of teeth over, over bussing. And for us it was the question of being bussed one way or the other, (laughs) you know, we've been riding, riding the bus our whole, whole lives, so. So we use to take the bus to school and as [unclear] say we kind of overlapped in school with my--is that right? Well I guess we kind of started school the year after my youngest sister [Verba Jones] graduated. So we didn't really overlap in school, but if we had, you know, we would have all been in the same school. We would have been in the elementary part of the school and my sister would have been in high school. Story_ID: 624415 Speaker 1: So your sister [Verba Jones] was out of high school before you-- Speaker 2: My youngest sister was, I think, out of high school. I think she graduated-- Speaker 1: The year before you all [Lowe and his twin brother, Walter Lowe] started? Speaker 2: Yeah, the year before we started. Speaker 1: Okay, so basically you grew up with your, with your brother? Speaker 2: Right. [Nods] Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Basically you and your brother and your--Now, did your sister go on in school, or did anybody else have a chance to go college, or did they go? Speaker 2: Well, you know, my, my middle sister did a few years at, at NCC [now North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I guess it was called North Carolina College, NCC during that, during those days. So she did about two years there and then of course later she, she went back and got a degree, got her degree and became an elementary school teacher down in Florida. Speaker 1: Now was during there, was she there during the sit-in movement? Speaker 2: Uhh. Speaker 1: 1960s-'61[1961]? Speaker 2: Yeah, I guess she would've, she would've been there during, during that, during that time. Yeah, yeah because we started, started school in 1960 I guess, in first grade. So she would have been there during, during that time I believe, and, of course, I guess during the sit-in, the one that everyone knows about is sort of at [North Carolina] A and T [Agricultural and Technical University, Greensboro, North Carolina]-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --further down the, down the road there. Speaker 1: Right, right, okay--that's right. Speaker 2: [Nods] Speaker 1: So she's at Central-- Speaker 2: [Nods] She's at Central. Speaker 1: Rather than North Carolina A and T [unclear]-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Now did, did she have any stories about civil right movement at all, did she? Speaker 2: No, not, not really. I mean sort of the, the, the civil rights part that, that my family mostly interacted with, as far as I can remember, was sort of when we, my brother and I went off to a desegregated school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And it's after a period of time when you had the option to go "the white school" before there was forced desegregation. So one of the, one of the-- Speaker 1: Now this is much later though. This is in the seventies [1970s], right [unclear]? Speaker 2: No, this would, this would have been early '60s [1960s]. Well, I'm sorry; it would have been in the sort of, sort of mid-sixties because I, I was in the segregated school up until, like fifth grade--through fifth grade. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So if I started in sixth, see that would have been about '65 [1965], '66 [1966]-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --and so one of the responses that North Carolina had to sort of desegregate, to not participate in forced desegregation of schools--to sort of to give people a choice to say well if you wanted to go to another school, then you have the choice to go to this. And so my parents [Gertrude Brown and Walter Rodgers Lowe] sent my brother and me to this--we went to the white school, which was an interesting experience. Story_ID: 624416 Speaker 1: But as a little kid and, and I guess at uh-- Speaker 2: At Chaloner [School, Roanoke Rapids, North Carolina]. Speaker 1: Chaloner, yeah. How did you--what were you interested in as a little kid-- Speaker 2: Uh, pretty much-- Speaker 1: --or what was your personality like as a little kid? Speaker 2: Well I've always had an introverted personality if you, if you compare my brother [Walter Lowe] and me. You know, he's an extrovert, I'm the introvert, (laughs) but I've always been sort of interested in everything. (Laughs) You know, there is some interest in science, interested in--I remember particularly liking social studies, geography and, and learning about faraway places and how folks lived in Brazil and, you know, so forth. I do remember those, those lessons and, and textbooks and so forth from growing up. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now did, was there any particular teacher in the early part of grade school that stuck out as important in your early-- Speaker 2: Early part of grade school, I mean I think--well, I, I remember having, you know, teachers that I certainly, you know, liked and enjoyed, but they were essentially like my parents. I mean they were, you know, they were far removed from, from me knowing about them other than just teachers. I mean, I had, I had no--I guess now kids know a lot more about their teachers and then back in those days where a teacher was basically another parent and you were, you were very removed from knowing about the mother and, you know, those couple of hours you spent with them in the classroom. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So and it's hard for me to think back and separate sort of liking the teacher from liking the subject, you know. So I mean I think I liked teachers because I liked what I was learning at the time or what was kind of going on in the classroom. Speaker 1: What were your favorite subjects at the time? Speaker 2: Well, as I say, it kind of was social studies and, and reading. Speaker 1: Alright. Speaker 2: Those were the, my favorite subjects. I did okay in math, wasn't one of my favorite things to do but, you know, I think I did pretty, pretty well in it compared to other students. Speaker 1: Did you collect anything as a kid? Speaker 2: No, no I didn't really have any collections of anything. You know, growing up in the, the rural area, you know, there is so much to do and see and play with outside, and between Daddy's [Walter Rodgers Lowe] shed with all of its interesting things under it and, and just sort of, you know, in the woods running around and seeing nature was--I didn't really feel the need to make collections of things, you know. They were all there. Speaker 1: Okay. So, so I take it that the staff at Chaloner was, was black too, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, um hm. Speaker 1: Principal, everybody. Speaker 2: Principal, all the teachers, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Story_ID: 624417 Speaker 1: Do you remember your first exposure to science at, in school or out of school to tell the truth? Speaker 2: Well out of school, you know, and because my father [Walter Rodgers Lowe] sort of tinkered with a lot of things it was kind of this constant exposure to, to how things worked. So I don't know if you could call it a science or engineering or, or technology or whatever of the day. So, I always had sort of a feel for how the mechanical things worked or were supposed to work and what they did and, and--so, in school, I mean reading about, oh I don't know, various kinds of physical science and astronomy, that sort of thing was, was sort of interesting. While I wouldn't say that it, I wouldn't say that the in school experience with science was necessarily the thing that, that got me wanting to do science. Speaker 1: Now did you encounter like science on television like on I know, Walt Disney use to have like science segments and 'Watch Mr. Wizard' come on every now and then-- Speaker 2: (laughs) There was [simultaneous] Speaker 1: National Geographic, different things-- Speaker 2: Yeah, there was some television. I think one of the--well this was much later, but the University of North Carolina used to do these, these television courses called 'Sunrise Semester', and I remember watching some of those--chemistry and, and courses in math and that kind of stuff. But that was much later when I was almost in high school by that time. [Simultaneous] [unclear] Speaker 1: I remember that show, 'Sunrise Semester'--right. Speaker 2: Okay, that's right. Okay, yeah I don't remember if it was actually a University of North Carolina exclusive thing or whether it was part of a syndicated, you know, public television--[Simultaneous] Speaker 1: It was syndicated. They had something and I don't know about the other schools, but I know the University of Michigan had a-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --television course type thing too in the morning. Speaker 2: Um hmm, okay, okay. Speaker 1: They'd come on after the 'Johnny Carson Show' and they--and in other cities. I know it played-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --all over the Midwest and maybe in other places. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I think one of the universities in New York had something too-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --that came on either early in the morning or late at night. Speaker 2: Yeah, this one came on early in the morning. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: It was I guess the, the early days of online college education. (Laughs) Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Um hmm. Speaker 1: So, that's interesting: 'Sunrise Semester'. I haven't heard that name in a long time. Speaker 2: (laughs) Speaker 1: Yeah, it's true. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. So, did--now did you have a television at home growing up? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. [Simultaneous] Speaker 1: I guess you probably did. [unclear] Speaker 2: We had television, black and white, and the antenna on top of the house. A little, I mean one of the fascinating devices was the, the control that, that you used to change the direction of the antenna, but I don't know if you probably ever, ever saw those things or not but those mechanical thing where you turn the, you turn the, the dial, and it would kind of, you know, click--[simultaneous] Speaker 1: Rotate [unclear]-- Speaker 2: --around and it rotates the, the antenna up on top of the house, (laughs) fascinating device. (Laughs) Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Did you have a lot of, did you have access to magazines and newspapers in the household? Speaker 2: Uhh-- Speaker 1: You said your mother [Gertrude Brown] liked to read and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I had access to a fair, fair amount of, you know, encyclopedias and bible story books and, and magazines and that sort of thing. Not, not a large amount but, but I think a fair amount relative to what rural black families had during, during that time. Speaker 1: Okay. You mentioned bible stories books which reminds me of the church. Now was church a big part of growing up? Speaker 2: Not, not, not really. Church was, was [sigh], oh I don't know probably a uh, you know, the, the, for I mean the basic holidays, you know, Easter and Christmas and homecoming and children's' day and so I remember that, those days sort of. I think our church was--you know, as a matter of fact I think it still is. It's sort of a circuit church so it only had--you only had church on like two, two Sundays out of the month and I think that it is still that way actually. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, when you were--I guess in about the fifth grade I guess it's around that time that people start actually take, taking a science course in school. I think when it was when I was in grade school. Speaker 2: Um hm. Speaker 1: I don't know about you. Is that about right, about fifth or sixth grade? Speaker 2: I think, I think that's, that's about right. I mean-- Speaker 1: We actually had a course called science-- Speaker 2: Um hm. Speaker 1: --or general science or whatever. Speaker 2: That's right, we had a general science course and, and I mean it's mostly a little bit of astronomy, a little bit of geology and, you know, or earth science as they called it. Not much, not much chemistry, not much physics, not much--so just kind of general or a general science course let's just say. Story_ID: 624418 Speaker 1: You say you made the move to integrate a new school when you're in the fifth grade, right? Speaker 2: It started sixth grade. Speaker 1: Sixth grade, okay, alright. So, so sixth grade, this is, so you're about--it's about 1961 I guess? Speaker 2: No, that would've, that would've been-- Speaker 1: No, no, oh yeah. I'm sorry-- Speaker 2: About sixty-- Speaker 1: '66 (1966), right. Speaker 2: '66(1966); yeah, somewhere around there. Speaker 1: That's what--I was off five years [both laughing] Speaker 2: Yeah. (Laughs) Speaker 1: '66 (1966). Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So 1966. Now what was the name of your school, of the new school? Speaker 2: It was William R. Davie [School]. Speaker 1: And were you and your brother [Walter Lowe] the first wave of black students to come into that school? Speaker 2: I think we were sort of the, the second wave; it was like the second year of that Freedom of Choice thing I think. Speaker 1: Okay. Now how did that work out? I know this is a place that, North Carolina was a place that was used to segregation so and here you come. You're integrating a white school-- Speaker 2: Um hmm. Speaker 1: --or rather than the other way around. So you're going into a-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --majority environment where the majority are white, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. It was, you know, lots of troubles during that time, although I think that the only school system that really had lots of racial violence was the, the Mecklenburg school system up near Charlotte [North Carolina]. I think it is sort; they had, you know, (laughs) big city levels, level levels of challenges. You know, we had the kind of typical problems of, of, you know; harassment by, by gangs of or groups of, of white students and that sort of went on, you know, kind of throughout those couple of years that we were in this sort of Freedom of Choice mode. And then all of that sort of changed when the violence kind of--you know maybe I shouldn't call it violence, it was, it was, I mean it is not violence by today's standards by any means. You know, it's the-- Speaker 1: Well, what happened? Did, did somebody actually do anything to you when you-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah! There were, there were fights and (laughs) as a matter of fact I remember telling, telling folks about, I call it applied civil rights, (laughs) no, applied civil integration; (laughs) because there is the theory of how it should work and then there is the, you know, the real story of how it, how it worked. And so, you know, I remember the, the few black students that were at the white schools at this time, you know, sort of being subjected to daily harassment at lunch and harassment on the playground and, and sometimes you'd get groups of, of white kids who would, who would challenge you to a fight. (Laughs) And, you know, so you'd wind up having these fights with a group of people, and so we all kind of, you know, developed strategies for dealing with that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I had (laughs) and I probably shouldn't talk about this, (laughs) but so my, my uh coping mechanism was to sort of make a friend in the, in the group. And the way I did that was whenever I was in a fight; I'd made sure that the, the same guy got beat-up. (Laughs) So I'd choose, I'd choose a person in the group that I wanted to be my friend and, and whenever that group showed up to fight, I made sure that I beat that guy up. (Laughs) You know I eventually lost the fight but, but this one person also lost the fight and so at some point, when that group showed up to fight me, you know, he'd say, he'd suggest that they go fight somebody else. (Laughs) So it, I mean, it didn't, it didn't do anything for the, the group of black folks in general (laughs) because they were still, you know, fighting folks but as an individual it (laughs) it seemed to work okay. Speaker 1: It lessened the pressure on you that-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Now did they--so how many black students came over there in proportion to the white students population? What would you guess? Speaker 2: I would guess maybe five or six to one, seven to one maybe. (Simultaneous) Speaker 1: So was there a whole busload of black students that integrated the-- Speaker 2: I'd say more like a hand full. I mean the schools were small. I mean I think even, even after we integrated and in my graduating class from high school we only had maybe 200 or 300 students. So-- Speaker 1: To graduate or-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --or period? Speaker 2: In the graduating class. Speaker 1: In the graduating class (unclear)? Speaker 2: Yeah, and this is after the, you know, integration that you'd put together, like three, three or four different high schools. Speaker 1: Um, okay. Speaker 2: So the schools were, were small and so we're really just talking about, you know, a handful of black students, a couple of handfuls of black students I guess. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. So did they, the administration, the school process the integration cooperatively or did they or were they trying to discourage the students from the, the black students, from coming? Speaker 2: Well, I think, you know, the whole Freedom of Choice thing was a way to discourage this because they would trying to sort of, I think and again, this is a sixth grader's view, you know, remembrance of the world some, you know, a lot of years later. But I, I think the whole Freedom of Choice thing was a way to sort of stem the tide and this was before, you know, they got the court ordered integration of the schools. And so this, you know, so the, you know, as we went off to these schools this was a very uncomfortable, you know, place to be and time to be. You were in a stranger in a strange land kind of, kind of situation. Speaker 1: Now did the administration or the teachers--what I was really asking is did they try to welcome you or did they try to make things hard for you? Speaker 2: No, I, I think they were [sigh] I think they were sort of ambivalent maybe about it. I don't remember any teachers trying specifically to make things harder for, for the black students, but I don't remember any, anybody sort of going out of their way to, to make it easier either. That means, you know, you still, you still at least from my experience, you couldn't, couldn't get into a fight in the classroom and this kind of stuff or if there was a teacher around and something started, they would stop it and, you know. So they kind of got treated the way that teachers treated students. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 624419 Speaker 1: That's better than a lot of stories we've heard that like ten years earlier, or you know, in parts of Virginia and North Carolina it was a lot worse. Speaker 2: Um hmm. Speaker 1: I know in Virginia it was certainly worse, but--so okay, you stayed at, at [William R.] Davie School [Roanoke Rapids, North Carolina] through the balance of your-- Speaker 2: Well, I was there for, you know, until the schools sort of, there was, there was a court ordered integration and then there were kind of two black high schools and two white high schools that sort of came together to form a single high school that was called North--Northwest High School. Speaker 1: Okay. This was North Northwest High School? Speaker 2: Northwest High School, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, North Northwest High School? Speaker 2: No-no, Northwest High School. Speaker 1: Northwest, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. [Laughs] Speaker 1: Yeah, Northwest High School. Um hmm. Speaker 2: Okay. It's a combination of four schools you say, huh? Speaker 1: Yeah, I think it was four schools if I remember right. And so at that time, you know, you've got sort of the formation of what I call the "white flight" academies, so these were the whites that left these school systems and set up their academies. So if you look at a lot of the, a lot of the private nonsectarian schools in the, in the South now, they were a product of that era of, of escaping from the integrated schools. Speaker 2: Right, that happened in a lot of the cities and the Christian schools started and then other academies and [unclear]. Speaker 1: Um hmm. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You know it's funny now people don't remember that and, and so when you talk to folks in a lot of cities and, and they'll say "Oh yes, this academy is one of the top places to go and, you know, it's a private school." And they don't remember that or know that these things were created as an escape from, from integrated, integrated school system. You know you've got some of them probably still carry some of that, some of that baggage too. Speaker 2: Okay. Now you started high school in '68 (1968), right? Speaker 1: Yeah, I think that's, that's about right. Speaker 2: So how were your grades going into high school? Did you have good grades or bad grades or-- Speaker 1: I had great grades. Speaker 2: They were great? Speaker 1: Yeah, I always had good grades. You know, it came from, from having a general interest in learning and, and also parents [Gertrude Brown and Walter Rodgers Lowe] that said okay, you've gotta, you've gotta learn. That's why I can still remember my Mom saying, "Okay boy, if your teacher teaches it, you learn it." (Laughs) Story_ID: 624420 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, now how'd your [twin] brother [Walter Lowe] do [in high school]? Is he doing the same, were you both good students? Speaker 2: Yeah, both good students and so, so we were, we were very coupled. So we, we sort of did follow each other and did, you know the same subjects and some things he excelled at better than I did and others I excelled at better than he did, so we tracked. (Laughs) (Simultaneous) Speaker 1: Did you consider yourself lucky to have a brother, you know, the same age? You know, a lot of people when they conceive of a brother, they can see somebody that's an actual peer, you know-- Speaker 2: Um hm. Speaker 1: --and then a later on they get a little brother that's too little to play with or--[laughs] Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But you actually have a brother your same age, you know? Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean, I, I think now in retrospect, I, I'll say I was lucky. You know, I am lucky. At the time it just was the natural order of things, you know. I didn't really consider it, but surely it, it was good to--you have instant, you know, playmate. Yeah, when you're young, I guess that twins kind of go through a, you know, first you're buddies, then you're adversaries, and then as you go through the separation stage where you're making your own identity independent of, of your twin, and then after you get through that stage you kind of, you know, become friends again. [Laughs] Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So all of that I guess, but in this, you know, new environment and stuff it seems like it would have been, you know, beneficial to have a-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --a twin brother. Speaker 2: I mean, you know, you have a definitely readymade confidant and, and buddy and so forth. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 624421 Speaker 1: So Northwest High School [Roanoke Rapids, North Carolina] now, now what did you, what, what kind of science did you take at Northwest? Speaker 2: I took chemistry, biology. I think I took physical science. I think it was the, the first course that they taught. I took a course in physics. It was sort of a, a, you know, pretty low level kind of, I mean they really didn't have somebody that do physics, to teach it. So I think the biology teacher also taught physics and she did a good job kind of introducing the subject, but you really couldn't see, see the inner workings of the subject. You know, you just kind of got the tour. Speaker 1: Okay. Now what about math and how high did they let--did you take calculus in high school? Speaker 2: (Laughs) No. (Laughs) I didn't take calculus in high school, it wasn't offered. I actually didn't take trig [trigonometry] in high school either, that wasn't offered. I got through the two courses in algebra, courses in geometry. That, that was as far as I, you got to go in math in, in high school when I was there. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now were there any special teachers, you know, or mentors at, at Northwest? Speaker 2: Nah. I think, you know, my science teacher, Mrs. Clark, you know, was a uh, an excellent teacher. She taught, taught the biology course and, and as much chemistry or physics as was, as was available. You know, she was a, I think a very good teacher, very um--I guess looking back, I mean I think she was, she was inquisitive. She had the scientific, you know, interest in, in things that that got conveyed the students to even, even though we didn't always, you know, didn't get to see the, the real depth of, especially the chemistry or physics subject; but we got to see that in biology; more, more depth. That was her field, her, her major in college. So that, that teacher I remember. Also I remember, actually her, her husband taught um--what do they call it? Um, I guess its social studies or civics--no, not civics. I forgot what they called it, but anyway it was sort of, sort of world civilization kind of history course. You know, you kind of learned about different civilizations and-- Speaker 1: Like world history. Speaker 2: Yeah, world history. He was very good at that, and I remember as we were preparing for final exams once he, he challenged the class to, to ask him a question from the, from the book that he didn't know. And so he gave, you know, we could, could open our book and you could go through it and ask whatever question and he knew it all. (Laughs) So I, I remember that af--that afternoon. It was very interesting experience there. Also I had a, I guess, in, in ninth grade I guess, had a really good English, English teacher. She taught sort of English literature I guess and so she talked about the, you know, the into Shakespeare and, you know, some plays. She was well versed in all that stuff and, and as we were learning some, I guess it was maybe English literature--it was not the right name of the subject; but, you know, she talked about some of the ancient Greek plays and she would, she would perform a little bit of it and talk about how, how they would perform on stage, and that was a really, really interesting, interesting subject. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Good teacher. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay, so, were you involved in sports in high school at all? Speaker 2: Played football in high school. I guess I played two years. Speaker 1: And what did you play? What, what position? Speaker 2: Offensive guard. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay, so you, you played for two years? Speaker 2: Yeah, it was some college AV team one year and then played varsity one year. Actually I left high school one year early, so after my junior year I left and went to [North Carolina] A & T [Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina]. Speaker 1: And went to where? Speaker 2: Went to A & T. Speaker 1: A & T, okay. Speaker 2: To college. Speaker 1: Alright. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. So how, how did that take place? Speaker 2: Well, there, there were, we were required to have, you know, a certain number of credits courses or credit hours something in high school to graduate and if you took sort of a full load, you know, a full load (laughs), six, six classes, by the time you got to the end of your sophomore year, you were sort of like promoted to be a senior because you could in principle graduate from high school. The only thing that kept you from doing that is that you were required to take four years of English and so if you; if the summer after your sophomore year you went to summer school and you took English, which--basically junior year English, then in what would have been your junior year, you could actually graduate from, from high school. And so that's what I did. Yeah, so-- Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 624422 Speaker 1: So you actually graduated from high school and then, then went to North Carolina A & T [Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina]? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. So you had been a young student there and now did you graduate with honors from Northwest? Were there kind of honors attached to--(simultanoeus) Speaker 2: I think so. (Laughs) Yeah, I graduated, yeah. I mean, I was somewhere in the class, somewhere near, near the top of the class. I wasn't, wasn't, you know, first or second or third in the class, but I was somewhere in the top. I think it was seven or eight percent or something. Speaker 1: High enough to get out earl--a year early, you know, I guess. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: You had enough credits to get out. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, did you have any, I mean did you con--So, when you started A and T now, alright so you're going to do all four years at A and T? Speaker 2: Um hmm. Speaker 1: Who, who was your counselor, I mean not, not who but what kind of counseling did, did you get in high school about college or did you get any? Speaker 2: Well, I got, got a little, not, not a great deal. I mean I knew I wanted to, to major in physics at A and T. Speaker 1: It was 1972, right? Speaker 2: Uhh, yes, 1972. Speaker 1: Well one thing, oh, I'm sorry, I'm sorry. I neglected to ask you now when you started school in 1968, Dr. [Martin Luther] King was assassinated. Do, do you have any memories of that, of what was going on in school then? Speaker 2: Ah, just that it was--I remember actually the [President John F.] Kennedy assassination I remember. It was third grade or something when that happened and I remember that it was, you know, very ah, everybody was very upset. Also I was in a segregated school then and everybody was, you know, really like the world had come to an end and, you know, not ah, sort of don't know where to go to next kind of thing when Kennedy was assassinated. And I can remember at, you know, at the integrated school in '68 (1968) when King was assassinated, it was the same sort of feeling but mainly among the, among the blacks. I don't, didn't get a sense of how the whites really felt about, about that. It was clear that they weren't, they weren't as upset, world coming to an end as, as the blacks were but, but for most part, at least the faculty and the administrators seemed to try to be a little bit sensitive to the way everybody was feeling. I mean, that just made good, good administrative sense, right? You don't want the place to come apart. So, as far as their, their personal feelings, I don't have a sense of that. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Story_ID: 624423 Speaker 1: So 1972, North Carolina A and T [Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina] you said that you didn't have much counseling [in high school], so how, how did you choose A and T as a school? Speaker 2: Well, I remember applying to, you know, a couple of schools. I applied to UNC [the University of North Carolina] in Chapel Hill [North Carolina] and I was admitted there I think, much more expensive than going to A and T. I applied to A and T. I think those are the only two I remember actually and, and ah, actually there were quite a few black students from my high school that went to A and T that year--ah, quite a few. So, so it was kind of the place to go, you know. We all, we all kind of gravitated in that direction. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, so how did you like it? Had you ever been to the campus before? Speaker 2: Nope, (laughs) I had never seen the place before. (Laughs) It was--(unclear) interesting (unclear), that first year was sort of strange. You know, stranger in a stranger land again. You know, I enjoyed the courses, I enjoyed the, the work and I, you know, remember minor department chairman and, and then I declared. I knew what I wanted to do, so I declared a major. You know, that first freshman semester I can remember being in the department talking to, to the faculty and, and sort of learning the lay of the land, if you will. You know, the way around. So it was kind of-- Speaker 1: So, this is physics, right? You majored in-- Speaker 2: Yeah--(simultanoeus). Speaker 1: physics-- Speaker 2: Yeah, in physics. Speaker 1: and who, who was the department chair? Speaker 2: His name was Jason Gilchrist, Dr. Gilchrist. He was a Howard [University, Washington, District of Columbia] graduate. Speaker 1: Okay, okay and so, how did, who in the department I guess like was I guess was your primary, you know-- Speaker 2: Well, really he was the, he was the kind of primary person that I, that I talked to or, or knew of and there was a person who was not on the faculty but sort of a lab technician. What was his name? Honestly, I can't remember. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Kraft. Speaker 1: That's alright. Speaker 2: Kraft, it was something like Kraft. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Anyway, you know, he took care of the labs and as I became the second semester student, a sophomore and so forth, I remember working with him sometimes to setup labs and that, that sort of thing. Speaker 1: Now did, did you have a lot of time to do research when you were an undergrad student? Speaker 2: Nah, nah, nah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know, A and T was you know, primarily a teaching place. I don't think any of the faculty ever really engaged in, in research; at least not in physics. Speaker 1: So you couldn't get a job as a research assistant to one of the faculty members because they really weren't doing it? Speaker 2: Right, right. That's a relatively new, new invention at HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities]. (Laughs) Speaker 1: Now did they have a decently equipped physics lab for those days do you think? Speaker 2: I think, I think so. Speaker 1: They would need the spectrometer and what I don't know-- Speaker 2: Yeah. They had some kind of student spectrometers that, that you'd find, little prism instruments and plus the, the springs, masses and pulleys and strings and (laughs) incline planes and all, all that kind of stuff. So I think it was a reasonably well-equipped introductory laboratory for, in physics. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Some of the advanced labs were not as well equipped but, you know, not bad. Story_ID: 624424 Speaker 1: Now what was it about physics that attracted you? Speaker 2: Well, sort of the idea that you really looking--trying to understand the fundamental things about, about science. Biological systems seem too complicated to think about in some sense. Speaker 1: Um hmm. Speaker 2: I never had the desire to be a doctor or anything like that. So the idea that, that you are really looking at, at the fundamental, fundamental properties of, of the nature. So I guess the simplicity of, well you know physics is not, not simple but the idea that you're looking at, that you were trying to get down to, to the core of how things work and, and how, how it fits together. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So did you focus on any particular aspect of physics--now you graduated I guess what they call solid state physics, I mean is that what you focused on or-- Speaker 2: Well, as an undergrad it was just sort of general, you know, I mean, you don't really have an area and I was interested in plasma physics when I graduated and that's kind of what I wanted to do. It was kind of controlled fusion and all that. It was, you know, very interesting stuff to me, concepts but it was more of a general, general interest background in, in physics. Speaker 1: Okay. So plasma physics more than anything else-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --but, so uh, let's see; so did you take part in any extra-curricular activities at North Carolina A and T? Speaker 2: No, no I didn't. I didn't I mean I didn't do sports and didn't do the fraternity stuff that was; I wasn't much of a joiner. (Laughs) Speaker 1: Okay. You said you're introverted but were you a part of any organizations on campus? Did they have a black student organization or-- Speaker 2: Um. Speaker 1: Or, I don't know. Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean, when all the students are black you probably don't have a black student organization, (laughs) but I mean I was in the Society of Physics Students was the kind of thing. But, you know, all my life I've never been a joiner of, of stuff so I didn't join, you know, like the general science honor societies or I didn't do the fraternity thing and, you know, it's just, just never been driven to be a part of the group. Story_ID: 624425 Speaker 1: In terms of grad [graduate] school how did you chart your course for grad school? Speaker 2: Actually I kind of wound up at, at MIT's [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts]--I remember one of the people who had graduated from [North Carolina] A and T [Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina], of course, was Ron [Ronald] McNair [physicist; astronaut] and Ron, you know, came back to, to A and T recruiting students and, and got me to apply and so I kind of wound up at, at MIT there like that. Speaker 1: Okay. So, now this is not a light thing to consider in going to Massachusetts Institute of Technology. It's a big, big deal for most people. Speaker 2: Um hmm. Speaker 1: So, so it was, you know, so you were I would guess a very good student, a very good prospect for (unclear) to recommend that you apply to MIT. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. I guess, I mean I had good grades at A and T and I did want to go and do a Ph.D. in science, in physics. You know I kind of I mean I do know how good the plasma physics program at A and T was but, but you know, mean I considered other schools and, and you know, MIT was I guess the best of the schools I got into. [Laughs] Speaker 1: Alright. Okay now, MIT I know has, they have something called Black Student Union-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --has a fine reputation of trying to deal with the interests and needs of black students on campus-- Speaker 2: Um hmm. Speaker 1: --in terms of studying together and sharing information and doing; you know, did you, did you get involved in that when you came on campus? Speaker 2: Yeah, to some extent. One of the, probably the biggest part I got involved in; you know, the BSU had a, had a tutorial program that, you know, first I participated in as a, as a recipient of tutoring as I tried to make this transition from A and T to, to MIT. It was a pretty, pretty tough transition. So, you know, I certainly went around to BSU Tepee, as they called it, to get some tutoring and then later on, you know, I was a tutor. And you kind of get thrown into that pretty, pretty quickly at, at the Tepee. It's--because you have all kinds of students showing up and asking each other questions about things. And so, you know, you would have an undergrad showing up, you know, show up asking questions about calculus and if you were a graduate student, you know, you'd help out and that sort of thing. Speaker 1: So I take it you had calculus at A and T? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: So when you started at MIT did you feel like you were; once you got started, did you feel that you were ready to, you were-- Speaker 2: No, I was drowning. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I felt like I was drowning. It was, you know, things happened much, much faster. There were much deeper level of things, you know, the courses, the things that were required of you were just the order and magnitude more than what I'd seen at, at A and T. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I was drowning--(simultanoeus) Speaker 1: I've been told, yeah, a lot of MIT students, these are the top, you know, I guess mathematicians and--I mean some of them in the country as kids and they, some of them took calculus in grade school. Speaker 2: (Laughs) Speaker 1: --and are really (unclear) Speaker 2: Yeah. No, it was really a hard, hard, hard transition and, you know, I mean I'm still surprised that I, that I (laughs) I survived it. Speaker 1: What was the toughest thing about it, uh MIT? Speaker 2: Well, what do they tell the freshmen there about drinking from the fire hose cause things come at you so fast. I mean just trying to figure out how to, how to, to learn at the pace that you are required to learn and do things at the pace that you are required to do things and then try to couple that with, you know, matching these sort of holes in your background, the holes in, in the way you've been taught, you know, trying to overcome those things to, to kind of match up with the, what the institute required of you is really, really tough. Speaker 1: Hmm. So that's, that's the analogy: drinking from the fire hose? Speaker 2: Yeah, drinking from the fire hydrant. (simultanoeus) Speaker 1: Now, all this, you know-- Speaker 2: Yeah. (Laughs) Speaker 1: is coming at you and you gotta-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: consume it-- Speaker 2: Yeah, we just, you know, it's almost impossible to, to drink from, you can imagine turning the fire hydrant on and trying to get a drink of water from it, (laughs) you know. And so you have the rate that stuff is coming at you at that rate and you just have to find a way to, to survive, you know. So while this was going on I think I was also becoming less interested in physics. You know, less interested in, in uh, well (sigh) I mean I was still interested in science and still interested in kind of the, the culture of doing science if you will; discoveries and so forth, but less, less interested in physics. Story_ID: 624426 Speaker 1: At the time when you started MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] did you, do you have any physicists heroes or physicists role models in mind that you want to emulate or be like or-- Speaker 2: No, no, not really. I mean I, I enjoyed the, the subject. I liked the subject, you know, again the idea of sort of really understanding how, how nature, you know, at least a model of how nature really works and, and the idea that you, that you simplify and seek order and, you know, I enjoyed that part of the, of the learning and discovery and so forth and sort of the beauty of sci--of nature of if you will. But I didn't, I didn't really have any, any, you know, scientific heroes out there or anybody I said I want to be like that person or, you know-- Speaker 1: Don't know why like the general public sees [Albert] Einstein, you know, the big physicist, he's a--(simultanoeus) Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --he's a rocket scientist--(simultanoeus) Speaker 2: That would certainly, you know, (unclear) a name, name I knew (laughs) and I knew about his, his specialty of relativity and sort of, you know, what, what he did and knew of history and so forth, some of his history. But I can't say that that I, you know, wanted to be like Einstein or, or any of that. That wasn't, that wasn't part of our makeup and again, I kind of, now I kind of look back on that and think it's sort of related to not being a joiner (laughs) of things, you know; not even a joiner of one (laughs) of one. So, so you know I didn't have any, any scientific heroes that, that I wanted to be like. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now, but, so why did you start losing interest in physics? Can you, is there a reason for (unclear)? Speaker 2: (Sigh) That's a good question. Well, I don't, don't know really. I mean, you know, phy--it was hard, but everything was hard, (laughs) and everybody was doing hard things; so it wasn't, that wasn't it. But I noticed I started to, to like more of the sort of I guess the thing around helping people do science, which I got more interested in sort of teaching, more interested in, in that piece of, of science as opposed to, you know, let's go win a Nobel Prize or discover this thing or discover that thing. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 624427 Speaker 1: Now, now on our outline we have a note about Mildred S. Dresselhaus. Speaker 2: Yeah! Speaker 1: Now is she-- Speaker 2: Really? Speaker 1: Yeah. Is she a mentor of yours? Speaker 2: Oh absolutely! Speaker 1: She says your brother [Walter Lowe] went to Stanford [University, Palo Alto, California], right-- Speaker 2: Yeah, um hm. Speaker 1: --when you, you were going to MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: It seems like pretty smart couple of brothers, you know-- Speaker 2: (Laughs) Speaker 1: --one goes to Stanford and one goes to MIT for grad school. Speaker 2: Well we were, we were coupled as I had mentioned earlier, we were coming up through school and I had mentioned that I had gone to, I had left high school after, basically after my junior year. He elected not to do that actually, so we wound up at A and T separated by a year and so (laughs) I remember when he was uh--you know, he's a much, much better scientist than I am. And I remember when he was looking at graduate schools. You know we talked about, about MIT and while I was really having a hard time there, I would say, "Don't come to MIT." (Laughs) you know (laughs) and so he was kind of weighing MIT and Stanford and, and you know, wound up at Stanford. (Laughs) Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So well tell us about Mildred Dresselhaus. Who, who was she and what did she do? Speaker 2: Oh, well Milly is a, first of, great, great, great scientists. I mean she, she's done so much work in, in basically carbon-based science. So, everything from graphite to graphite intercalation compounds and I was there to--carbon (unclear) nanotubes and, you know just a tremendous, tremendous scientist, and I remember she had a huge research group, lots and lots of students; a little United Nations of a research group at MIT. And it was a place where you could sort of feel comfortable and fit in and she, you know she had a lot of concern about all of us, all of the students. It's really amazing that when you go to a science conference now and, you know, Milly would have her--she called it "Milly's Group Meeting." So all of the people who were at the conference would get together with her and have, you know, have dinner one night. And so you could go to like a family-styled restaurant, you could fill the plates up. (Laughs) Speaker 1: What was her official, you know, I guess title at the school? Speaker 2: Oh, she was Professor; she was a professor in electrical, electrical engineering [Professor of Physics and Electrical Engineering]. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 624428 Speaker 1: Now this is 1976 when you're at, when you're at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts]-- Speaker 2: Right, first year. [Simultaneous] Speaker 1: --and, alright, first year there. And so, so you actually stayed in the physics department even though you were starting to lose interest in physics you said, but you stayed in the department, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. I mean kind of, kind of stick to it once you start something. Yes I, I stayed. I mean I considered leaving after I guess after I did a master's degree in the plasma physics actually and I considered leaving after that and I actually considered leaving before that, (Laughter) many times. (Laughter) Speaker 1: What was your [unclear]--but you, okay. What, what, what kept you there; I mean if you considered leaving? What would-- Speaker 2: Well, you know, I mean I have always been sort of, you know, the personality of okay, you know, tenacious about things and when I start down a path, I like, like to finish it. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: And so I didn't, even though it was a very hard place to be and, and I wasn't, you know, all that interested in the stuff anymore, not like, not like before, you know. I liked it as an undergrad. You know, I still felt that this was the, that this was the path I was on and I needed to, to finish it. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, now we mentioned Mildred S. Dresselhaus when we were talking about her and how what a good mentor she was, but were there discouraging individuals at MIT? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Sure, (Laughter) but, well again, it's hard to separate the individuals from, from the place. I mean MIT is a really, really tough to be and especially when the, when, you know, you're struggling trying to, trying to find a way to survive there, you know. Speaker 1: Is it, is it hard to overcome, you were; the preparation you received would--were there indications again that it wasn't, you know, filled with the same; you weren't as prepared as some of the other students that were there, right? Speaker 2: Well, yeah, nah, nah, nah. Speaker 1: So, so is it hard to overcome like, like the first impression somebody has of you in a setting like MIT? Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: Did they see you as slow or, or or not as prepared-- Speaker 2: [Nods yes] Speaker 1: --then you kind of stayed that way in their mind or what? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Yeah, you, you stay that way and I'm not sure you ever over, overcome that, you know. You just, you just have to at some point you decide that that's not the defining moment of your life and not the, you know, you don't need that that level of affirmation to be successful and to do the things that, that you want to do. Most of my life has not been, I mean have I ever done physics? I mean physics is not; to have a degree in it, I still like it, I still like to teach it, I still like to read it, I still like to mess around in the lab and, you know, do stuff and I still have ideas about how to do some things that I'd like to see get done in, in science but, you know it's, it's; most of my career has been really aimed at helping other people build careers. So when I was a department chairman for instance, you know, it was about helping young faculty make this transition and to navigate how they could have a science career at a place that is not known for science necessarily. Story_ID: 624429 Speaker 1: At this moment; here you are at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. Now you're at MIT. This is, this is deep grass or whatever, you know, tall oats--[Simultaneous] Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah. Speaker 1: You know, high grass and, and you've got to like get out of here and you've got--so you work on a master's [degree], your master's was in plasma physics, right? Speaker 2: Um hm. Speaker 1: --and what was your topic in plasma physics? Speaker 2: Let's see, I did a kind of a numerical study of, let's see; if you look at a florescent light bulb, the part that you see that, you know, emits the light. You know, it's kind of called a positive column of the thing, but if you look right next to one of the electrodes there are these regions of light and dark that that wasn't very well understood and so I studied a region called a "negative glow"--regions. I did a numerical thing there. So I'll tell you a little, a little story on the side here. (Laughter)-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The person that I that I did my master's thesis with was W. P. Allis and I remember growing up one of the tractors that my father [Walter Rodgers Lowe] had was an Allis-Chalmers Tractor--same family. (Laughter) Speaker 1: Same family? Okay. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Speaker 1: Now I've heard of Allis-Chalmers, right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. So it was on something you called a "negative glow" of-- Speaker 2: Yeah, of a-- Speaker 1: --florescent lights? Speaker 2: Yeah, of a gas discharge (unclear). Speaker 1: A gas discharge? Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I did ah, we were doing calculation of the electron density or something in, I think. This was a long time (Laughter). Story_ID: 624430 Speaker 1: So I, I did that and, and switched, not so much because, you know, I had this burning desire to do, to do solid state physics but mainly because I was looking around for a research group that, that you know that I thought could, could be the place I could thrive in for, you know, to get a PhD in and Millie's [Mildred S. Dresselhaus] group was known to, to black students to be one of those places. So when I was there I mean I think there was probably maybe two other black students in the group besides myself. One of them was close to finishing or just basically finished the semester I joined. So, you know, it was one of those places that that if you go and you work hard and stuck with it you could, you know, you could make it through. Speaker 2: Okay. So what was your research topic for your Ph.D.? Speaker 1: Studied optical properties of graphite intercalation compounds. Speaker 2: Okay. Now what does that mean in layman's language-- Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay. Well, well graphite is like a pad of paper where each layer is a layer of carbon and the carbon is basically a hexagonal net. So where I grew up in the country you probably won't, won't know this reference but if you look at something like chicken wire, this is the wire-- Speaker 2: Yeah Speaker 1: You know about it? Okay. So if you imagine that every one of the little joints between the, the hexagons there's a carbon atom and it is as far as the eye is this net. So you get this layer stacking up in graphite and and these layers are very--the bond between layers is, is very weak. That's why, you know, you can use graphite for pencils because it's easy to slide off. It's also possible chemically to put things between the layers; it's called intercalation. And so we, we were putting, you know, sodium and cobalt and chloride and other kinds of things between the layers of, of carbon and graphite and seeing how it changed two properties. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. So I'm trying to think where the official title of it, but okay, alright. So, now, who, who was your advisor? Speaker 1: That was Milly, Milly--[simultaneous] Speaker 2: Milly, okay alright. So I thought it might have been somebody else since she was an electrical engineer but that's, that's, I guess that's alright. Speaker 1: Yeah, you know that's one thing also nice about, about MIT, that those departmental distinctions didn't really mean a whole lot, I mean in terms of --a student can work with anybody as long as the topic was relevant to the field you were trying to get your degree in and so, you know electrical engineering. Engineering at a Ph.D. level is not much different than physics at the Ph.D. level-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --in terms of kinds of things you work on and the things that you do. Speaker 2: Now was there any kind of theoretical connection in between your thesis for your master's [degree] and your [doctoral] dissertation? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. Now you would be, I guess, according to your Ph.D., a solid state physicist? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 624431 Speaker 1: What were the findings of your dissertation and, you know, what contribution did it make to the advancement of scientific knowledge? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Speaker 1: (Joins in laughter) (unclear). Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, let's see--you know we were looking at how putting different compounds; we were looking at magnetic compounds actually [unclear], well at least compounds that were made up from the magnetic elements. So I guess we used cobalt and, and then some manganese or something--salts that we put between the layers and, and so you know we were looking at how the electronic band structure changed when you put these things in. So I guess we, you know, added to the body of information about these sort of, creating these sorts of graphite intercalation compounds, a metal. Now I don't, I don't know if any contributions were earth shaking or--(Laughter) Speaker 1: What did you find out? Now we know that graphite is used in nanotechnology at lot now because of layered graphite can conduct electricity-- Speaker 2: Yeah, uh hm. Speaker 1: So what did you find by putting other substances between the, did, did you come up with anything that is useful? Speaker 2: Well, you know, one of the things that happens with graphite is that the, the ability of the electrons to move in the layer is very good, so they are very mobile in the layer. The problem is that there are, there are not many of them around. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So when you put things between the layers you get electrons being transferred. You can get electrons being transferred to the layers and once those electrons get on the layers the conductivity is, the electrical conductivity is very high because it uh, you know, they are very mobile. So just like in, in copper or silver or whatever where the electrons are very mobile, in these graphite intercalation compounds the electrons are very mobile so they become highly conductive. That means that the optical properties change and so when you intercalate graphite let's say with a transition metal it goes from being this, you know, this black graphite like substance to something that has a gold color to it. So, so there's a big change in the optical properties, which is sort of, you know what we were studying with my research. Story_ID: 624432 Speaker 1: When you were finished with you dissertation [at Massachusetts Institute of Technology] did you, did you continue to do any research in this area [graphite intercalation compounds]? Speaker 2: No, no, I, I, I didn't. When I left there I went down to the University of Kentucky [Lexington, Kentucky]. Actually I wound up there with one of Milly's [Mildred S. Dresselhaus] former post-docs [postdoctoral researcher], Peter Eklund. He was on the faculty there, so I, I wound up there and worked on sort a different, different direction for a while and I actually met my wife there. (Laughter) So I spent about, about four years there I guess, and then actually I came here to NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] Langley [Research Center, Hampton, Virginia] for a summer and while I was there, the department chairman at Hampton [University]-- Speaker 1: Wait a minute now. Let's see, [unclear] you're going-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --too fast. Speaker 2: Alright. (Laughter) Speaker 1: So you went to the University of Kentucky in 1983, right? Speaker 2: Right, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Alright, so you basically--you're an assistant professor of physics? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Yeah, I mean I was kind of doing the regular thing that people do in, in physics. I knew I wanted to be in an academic environment. Speaker 1: What were you teaching at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] too, before you left, as a Ph.D. candidate? You didn't do any--[simultaneous] Speaker 2: No, I [unclear] I think I TA'd [teaching assistant] a course, a couple of courses in something but, but not--I mean I wasn't actually teaching in any classes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I, you know, I, I went off to, to Kentucky and-- Speaker 1: How did you find that experience without-- Speaker 2: Well, one of Millie's post-docs, Peter Eklund was there and, you know, typically kind of what happens with, with graduate students is your, your thesis advisor finds an opportunity for you to, you know, for that first job or so. So, so I'm sure, you know, Milly orchestrated that opportunity for me and I spent some time there and, you know again; I mean life is a series of, of experiences that you, you kind of find out what you don't like. (Laughter) So, so I mean as I, as I look back on it I mean I kind of enjoyed the teaching to some extent but, but Kentucky wasn't, wasn't a place that I wanted to stay long-term. I kind of knew from the beginning that, that this was going to be a short-term experience, that it was not a place where I wanted to grow old (Laughter) and then I did--I spent four years there and, and when an opportunity came along to go look at something else, you know, to come to the Hampton, I did that. Story_ID: 624433 Speaker 1: Okay. The University of Kentucky [Lexington, Kentucky] to be fair in, in those days the University of Kentucky had a reputation in the black community that was basically earned by its basketball team. I mean, you know, I didn't, we-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: I don't know about the academics of the University of Kentucky but I know the basketball team had, had a reputation of being the last one to integrate in the Southeastern Conference-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) Speaker 1: --all white team as long as they could have one-- Speaker 2: Uh, yeah. Speaker 1: and Adolph Rupp [basketball oach]-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: [unclear] didn't offer up--[simultaneous] Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah that's right. Speaker 1: --and so it was even the people of Lexington, you know, grit their teeth when they talk about Adolph Rupp. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Speaker 1: Now the black people knew, we-- Speaker 2: Yeah. (Laughter) Speaker 1: --I interviewed about five of them down there and they, everybody had the same attitude about him-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and about the university I know it's not, it doesn't have the same stigma now that it did have at time but it-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --in those days it was just getting over that kind of period. Was the campus--what was the attitude on campus there at the University of Kentucky? Speaker 2: I mean, you know, the University of Kentucky was a very large university that, I mean it had pockets of this and that, you know. I mean there were places that we were uncomfortable; there were places that were you know, things were, you know, ambivalence kind of, kind of thing; and there were places that were, you know, friendly. I mean one of the advantages, I think, of being in a big place like that is it's like being in a city. You know you can find, you can find your area of the, of the city that you're comfortable in and that you like and big campuses are like that. You know some students or people think of a place that has 30,000 students as, you know, how can you fit into that somehow if you got to know all 30,000 students and the answer is no. (Laughter) You have a small group of folks around you and and, and the group that you wind up in is the group that makes you the most comfortable and, and uh, and the most successful. Speaker 1: Now, now did you know the Grundys there, [HistoryMaker] Chester Grundy? Speaker 2: Yeah, Ann [Ann Beard Grundy], Chester and Ann yeah, yeah. Yep. I uh, I knew them, not, not well but I, I knew them cause there were only, you know, kind of a handful of, of black faculty there. Now I remember talking to various friends in other departments at, at Kentucky, a black in another departments had this one great story. (Laughter) You know, one of the, one of the greetings that you, you hear people say at Kentucky is, is, "Hi you." That is a short, shortened version of how are you. And so, I don't know if this is a true story or not, it's probably not but my friend was telling me that, that he, he worked in the same building where the president's office was. So every day at, at sort of lunch or something they would ride down in the elevator together and the president always stepped into the elevator and looked at him and said "hi you." There'd normally be people on the elevator and so they would just ride down. You know he'd say "I'm doing fine." You know it's the typical greeting. So this one day the president stepped in and he was in there, my friend was in the elevator by himself and so the president said "hi you" and the, and my friend said well since it's just the two of us I decided I was just going to really tell him. So they rode down, it was a tall building; I mean fifteen, sixteen stories or something. And so they were riding down, he was telling him all the way down how things were going and the situation at Kentucky for black faculty and, you know, so forth. And he got down to the bottom floor, the elevators opened and the president looked at him and said "hi you", walked out. (Laughter) So (Laughter) according to my friend the president hadn't heard anything he said. (Laughter) Now I don't know if that's true. It's probably not true, (Laughter) but it was, you know, an amusing story from those, those those days. Speaker 1: Yeah, well Kentucky had the reputation of a tough nut to crack so-- Speaker 2: Um hm. Speaker 1: --you know I'm sure it's earned some of level. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Yeah and, you know it's a part of the country and time. Kentucky as a state has a, a fairly small black population. I think I seem to remember something like 7 or 8 percent Afro-Americans in the state. (Laughter) You know, it's pretty small. Speaker 1: I don't know now. In the state level I would think there would be much more, I mean many more at the University of Kentucky there'd be maybe seven or eight percent but-- Speaker 2: Well if you fold in, if you fold in the major cities, there's only Louisville and, and Lexington and Louisville is the, the big city. But then you've got all the, the eastern Kentucky and the coal mining hazard and all those areas so, so I mean yes seven sounds low but I wouldn't think that it is much higher. (Laughter) But I, I don't know it's, it's irrelevant at this point. Speaker 1: I would think it's a little higher than that but I, I don't know. It isn't scientific it's just sense of, you know there are so many people in Ohio that came from Kentucky that you know black people, well white too-- Speaker 2: That's, that's why the population of Kentucky is so low. (Laughter) Speaker 1: They got out huh? Speaker 2: Yeah, but I don't know what the actual number is. Story_ID: 624434 Speaker 1: Okay, so these were not exciting years I take it from, you know, these four years at Kentucky in '83 (1983) to '87 (1987). Speaker 2: Yeah, they were, they were pretty exciting. You know I said I met, met the woman who eventually became my wife. Speaker 1: Okay there you are. Now tell, tell us about that, how did you meet your wife? Speaker 2: Let's see now. She had actually graduated from [University of] Kentucky [Lexington, Kentucky] a few years earlier. She had a degree in history and she was also--before I met her she was actually becoming, becoming an ordained minister at the AME [African Methodist Episcopal] Church. So I met her I guess in the cafeteria. I think she was working there and, you know, we got to talking. Eventually, eventually you know we became a couple and eventually got married and, and we were, we were married I guess in '84 (1984). And so we were there, lived there as a family till, until '87 (1987), when we left and came to Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia]. Story_ID: 624435 Speaker 1: Okay, now how did the Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia] appointment come about? Speaker 2: I came to NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] Langley Research Center [Hampton]; spent a summer in their summer faculty, summer faculty research program. So I was working with some folks there and while I was there I met the chairman of the physics department over here at Hampton. I pretty much already decided I was going to, going to leave [the University of] Kentucky [Lexington, Kentucky]. So I, I had also talked to the chairman at, at the physics department at [North Carolina] A & T [Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina] and actually I thought I was going to go to A & T and that's, that's where we intended to go having left Kentucky. Story_ID: 624436 Speaker 1: Okay, we were talking about coming to Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia]. Speaker 2: Yeah, so I was going, on my way to A and T and we [Lowe and his wife] were on our way to [North Carolina] A and T [Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina] and the--for some reason I never really got a, my contract squared away with them. And so Dr. Demetrius Venable [also a HistoryMaker] who was chairman at that time said well, they have a position here at Hampton I'd like, like for you to consider and, you know, he was able to move quickly in getting an appointment and all that kind of stuff and so I wound up here. Speaker 1: Hm, okay. Yeah Dr. Venable yeah, we've interviewed him. He's at Howard [University, Washington, District of Columbia] now. Speaker 2: That's right, that's right. Speaker 1: He was really a force here. Speaker 2: Um hm. Speaker 1: So, so he brought you on board and you started in 1987 here at Hampton, right? Speaker 2: Started in '87 (1987), yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Story_ID: 624437 Speaker 1: So now, now it says here that the university [Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] credits you with securing 10 million dollar, a ten million dollar ($10,000,000) grant from NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] to establish a Howard University, I mean a Hampton University Research Center for Optical Physics. Speaker 2: Um hm. Speaker 1: That's true? Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, we, we were, you know, really trying to, to trying to build up the research opportunities here at, at Hampton. NASA was at that time putting a fair amount of money into supporting black schools to do different kinds of research and Dr. [Demetrius] Venable [also a HistoryMaker] had already started to sort of build these inroads to, to NASA, to do work on optical physics, lasers and LIDAR [remote sensing technology] and all that sort of thing. And so, you know I really worked with him, it was a team, a team effort. You know I mean you don't you don't get 10 million dollars by yourself. (Laughter) It was a team effort with, with Venable and other, other scientists on faculty here in physics to really go after that opportunity. So we spent a lot of time talking to folks in Washington [District of Columbia] and talking to folks at [NASA] Langley [Research Center] and, and I eventually got that opportunity to create that thing. Speaker 1: Okay. So you are also like very important in terms of establishing the doctoral physics program, right? Speaker 2: Right. That was, you know, part of as we started to build the research, I mean we're headed towards you know how do you build a Ph.D. program. There were lots of things happening in the Hampton Roads area with respect to science at that time and new things. We had the CEBAF [Continuous Electron Beam Accelerator Facility], or now the Jefferson Labs now, so DOE [U.S. Department of Energy] high energy physics facility-- Speaker 1: And the Jefferson Center Accelerator-- Speaker 2: Right, that was coming out of the ground and so we knew that there was an opportunity to--between that and NASA that was a great opportunity to, to you know latch onto something that, that had a future and to use it--to use those things to help us build the, the physics program here. So it, it was a really exciting time to, to be here and to work on that stuff and, and we were pretty successful at doing that. It was also when I, about the time that, that I really found, you know, what, what I liked about, about the, the university environment. I mean more than, more than being personally engaged in the research and in some sense even more than being personally engaged in teaching was this idea of, of really building a place, and so I kind of moved into an administrative capacity and that's the place where I'm most comfortable. Story_ID: 624438 Speaker 1: Okay, so, so you've discovering you like administration, I mean or liked building programs and that sort of thing as much as you do or more than you like teaching or doing research actually. Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, more, more than I, I enjoy--I still enjoy teaching, I still enjoy you know the interaction with the kids, and I still enjoy, you know, I mean I don't call it, call it research really any more. I mean it's, it's really just sort of tinkering in the lab and having some ideas and working with some people who have good ideas. I mean that's, that's still fun. Still try to do some of it. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. So that's, that's quite, I mean the Center for Optical Physics [Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] is quite a, you know, project and, so I mean, so--so you were here until 1992. Now what, what happened in '92 (1992)? Speaker 2: I had an opportunity to go down to Alabama A and M University [Huntsville, Alabama] to, to; actually I became department head down there. They actually had a physics department that was a little more well-developed than the one here in Hampton [University]. They were further along the, the learning curve in terms of they had a Ph.D. program already and they had, you know, active research going on in, in solid state physics, and so that was a, that was a good, good adventure. Also I tend to, I, I mean I think every five, six, seven years or so I get restless and I like to go to get something else. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so that was about the time to go see something else. Story_ID: 624439 Speaker 1: Now where is [Alabama] A and M [University]? Speaker 2: It's in Huntsville [Alabama]. Speaker 1: Huntsville, okay. And that's also where there's a big NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] facility? Speaker 2: Big NASA facility and the [U.S.] Army and, and when I was, when I was there; I mean one of the things that folks will tell you about the city is that more federal dollars pass through Huntsville then any city in America besides Washington, D.C. [District of Columbia], and that's because they had the Strategic Missile Command was there and that was part of the whole Redstone Arsenal [U.S. Army post] stuff and you, of course had Marshall Space Flight Center which you know is still there so. Speaker 1: Okay. So when you were at A and M as a chairman of physics did, did you interact with the Marshall Space Flight Center? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: In an official way? Speaker 2: [Nods] Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean they, they certainly funded a lot of the work at the, at Alabama A and M and so, you know, I knew the scientists there and you know talked to them on a pretty regular basis and again, it was you know as, as department chairman you're, you're kind of a pseudo administrator I guess. You know you don't really have any authority to do anything (laughs), and so you know you're in charge of the people that are there to help your help, help your colleagues. So you're kind of first among equals I guess you know as department head. And so I, you know, I certainly stayed in contact and actively worked with Marshalls to try to ensure that the scientists at Alabama A and M had, had the kind of funding projects they needed to do, needed to be successful. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. So you were there from '92 (1992) to '95 (1995)-- Speaker 2: Um hm. Story_ID: 624440 Speaker 1: And then you came back to Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia]. Speaker 2: Came back to Hampton. Speaker 1: So what, what happened? What, what was the cause? Speaker 2: I went into my office one day and, and my secretary said, "Oh, you got, you had a phone call from President [William] Harvey." I said, "Okay." (Laughs) So I called him and, and he told me that he wanted me to consider a position coming back to Hampton as, had a position as dean of the, of the graduate school and vice president for research. So I said well that sounds interesting (laughs), so, so I came to visit and interviewed with him and, and accepted the offer and we moved, moved back. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. So, so you're like now Dean of the Graduate School and Vice President of Research-- Speaker 2: Um hm. Speaker 1: --right? Okay. So what, what were some of your activities here at Hampton? Speaker 2: Well you now as, as VP [vice president] for research, again I was in the role of trying to help the University secure funding. So I spent a lot of time traveling back and forth to Washington. To graduate school you know being dean of the graduate school is, is a nice job because you don't, you dont have any faculty working for you. (Laughs) The faculty work for the other deans really. So, so I spent a, mainly my time was on building the research program. You know Hampton was, was really in the, in the beginning stages of rapid growth in the science area during that time. Dr. Harvey wanted to really build up the science programs. One of the things that he asked me to do was to really look at whether or not we could make a thrust into atmospheric sciences and again, we were looking at that because of NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] Langley [Research Center]. We had a proximity to NASA Langley. It was something that, that they have a very big presence in and so, you know, we started to explore that and, and (laughs) it was interesting we were, we were able to attract two of their like really world-class scientists to come to Hampton. They, they left, they were actually retired from, from the government, and they became faculty members here at Hampton; they are still here. They, they came to Hampton and they built a really fantastic atmospheric sciences program here at Hampton. Speaker 1: Who, who are they? Speaker 2: Jim Russell and Pat McCormick, and Patrick McCormick. So you know they, they were, they were, I guess they were both branch heads at, at NASA. So they were you know up in the leadership of, of the branches that did atmospheric sciences and, and satellite projects and so they have lots of you know really great connections into the field and into people and, and they were, they were exactly the right two folks to capture to come to Hampton. So we created a little, a few bad feelings at Langley (laughs) when we did that. I know we, we beat out a couple of, couple of places like Virginia Tech [Blacksburg, Virginia] and the College of William and Mary [Williamsburg, Virginia] to, to capture these guys and bring them here to Hampton. And you know they are just, just a bang up job in terms of bringing resources and building an atmospheric science program that's, that's you know that's world-class, well-known. You know when you start asking about places that, that places that will do atmospheric science research, Hampton is one of those places that you actually talk about now. Speaker 1: Okay. Did, did taking on the atmospheric science program require like uh much facility build out or construction? Speaker 2: Not, not a whole lot, because we were, we were really looking at trying to put into place the, the sort of connection into a research community and, and if you look at atmospheric sciences I mean there are, there are you know you get these, these satellite programs to go up. These satellites are designed to study various parts of the atmosphere and then there is a science team just built around the satellite. The satellites are basically built by, you know, one of the aerospace companies, launched by NASA, run by NASA you know and, and the, the scientists are really users so the data that comes back down the, down the pipe so to speak. So McCormick and Russell gave us a, an entree into that, to that kind of science and the uh, the infrastructure for, for you know getting data. I mean all that stuff is sort of part of NASA, part of the mission of NASA. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. So, okay, so you were back here at Hampton until 2000. So that's five years-- Speaker 2: Um hm. Speaker 1: --right? Speaker 2: Right. Remember I told you about it, (laughs) about every five, six, seven years. (Laughs) Story_ID: 624441 Speaker 1: So now this is an offer you, I mean like it would be hard to turn down, you know, being the president-- Speaker 2: Um hm. Speaker 1: --of a college. So Bowie State [University, Bowie, Maryland]--now how did you get your hat, hat into the ring as, for the presidency of Bowie State? Speaker 2: Well, you know, President [William] Harvey [Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] has, has a long history of trading presidents. I mean he has lots of folks. I've forgot what the number is now but it's, you know, it's pretty large. People have gone out to be presidents at other, at other places. So the way all that started--now I was perfectly happy being vice president. I knew what he required of me. You know, he's a tough guy to work for but, but you know I managed. And so I remember, you know, he called me into his office one day and asked me if I had ever considered being a president. I said, oh, oh. (Laughs) You know when the boss asks you if you ever considered going somewhere else. (Laughs) So I told him no, no I never, never considered it. I really hadn't. I mean it's not, that wasn't an aspiration I had. And, and so he at the time he wanted me to apply for an opening that was at Grambling [State University, Grambling, Louisiana] and he said that you're probably not going to get this job but I want you to see the process. I want you to go through the process and sort of understand how it works. And so, you know, I applied and he was right, you know, I didn't, didn't make the short-list of that but I did get a chance to, you know, prepare a resume and, and the documents I needed to, to apply for a position. So that was, I said that's interesting. So I went on back to, back to work and was working at being the successful VP [vice president] for Research in Hampton and, and I guess the next position I applied for was at North Carolina A and T [State University, Greensboro, North Carolina]. And that one I had some special interest in. Since I was an alum it was like, like going home, you know. So you always have interest in those, in those things and so I applied there and in that I did make the short list. I got to the airport interview and so I learned more about, about the process. And, and then, I went--cause I didn't get that job. I did get further into the process. And then the, when Bowie became open, I didn't know much about, about Bowie. I was kind of ambivalent about applying to that one because, you know, I kind of envision myself going to a place that was more about science and Bowie is more a liberal arts, you know, kind of, kind of school but--I decided to, to apply and that one I did, I did get and that's how, how I got there. Speaker 1: Okay. Now was it, was it, had they been without a president for a long time or was it someone there who was getting ready resign or what, what happened? What was it? Speaker 2: Bowie has, has an interesting history. I mean it has, it changes presidents every two years whether it needs one or not; so (laughs) there's a lot of turmoil on the campus, a lot of changing of presidents at the place. That kind of still goes on to some extent. So, so the, there wasn't a president there. I guess there was a member of the, of the board of vis--(unclear), no what do they call it? The Regents, the Board of Regents was actually serving as president, as acting president and so I went through the, through the process and, and was selected. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So you became the what number president at Bowie, what do you think? Speaker 2: Well there was controversy even, even about that. (Laughs) The, the official word was that I was the ninth president and, and I had pictures of all the other presidents, and as I got there some of the faculty, the older faculty, told me that a certain one of them wasn't really the president. So I was really the eighth. (Laughs) So okay, (laughs) so officially the ninth. (Laughs) Story_ID: 624442 Speaker 1: Okay, so what, what were the challenges when you started at Bowie State [University, Bowie, Maryland]? Speaker 2: (Sigh) Uh-- Speaker 1: Bowie State is in Bowie, Maryland or [unclear]-- Speaker 2: Yes, that's right. Speaker 1: It's like sub--a suburb of Baltimore [Maryland] or between Baltimore and [Washington] D.C. [District of Columbia]? Speaker 2: It's really, it's really closer to D.C. It's just, just outside of the, the Beltway around D.C. Speaker 1: Alright. Speaker 2: Challenges were that I mean it's a place that has sort of been through a lot of transition and in a few years. There was a lot of sort of I guess animosity is not quite the right word but certainly a lot of you know faculty versus administration kinds of issues going on, shared governance kinds of issues from the, from the perspective of the faculty, you know lots of, the campus had, I guess there were--just as I arrived they were building their first academic building that they had built in fifteen, twenty years or something. So the campus had been sort of, sort of neglected. It was part of the University System of Maryland but because there had always been in a lots of turmoil around the campus it really hadn't reaped a lot of the benefits that it could have from, from being a part of the system. And so one of the things that I felt it was my job was to, to try to bring some calmness, if possible, and if not, to at least make sure that it had the opportunities to, to benefit from the reconstruction programs and the kinds of things that the other schools were benefitting from. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now, now some of the things that you did that I understand is that you, you completed two new buildings on campus, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, we built-- Speaker 1: And you began the construction of a third one. Speaker 2: Right. We built a new science building. I'm sorry, I'm sorry not a science, computer science building and a--we built a new dormitory, the residence hall there, a huge residence hall we built. We started construction on the school of business that was kind of well underway by the time I left and you know the, the construction program in the University Systems is a pretty long thing. It takes kind of like four years to get from something that's planned to it actually occurring if you can you know keep it on schedule. So the things that we had sort in the pipeline when I was there, there was a, a fine arts center that was sort of you know it was in process at that, at that point. We, we had gotten it through the first level of funding and, as I recall. But besides the buildings we, you know we completely redid the campus. The campus is absolutely gorgeous. You know we made it into a really nice environment, nice physical environment to be in. Speaker 1: Now, were the students a part of that transformation? Speaker 2: The students certainly appreciated the transformation. They, they were, they were a part of it and--well, let me give you an example. On the, the grounds there are fraternity plots, and so you'll see this at many HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities], they are places where fraternities have their, their plots. So as we were working toward redoing the grounds, we had to dig up a lot of these things and of course that [unclear] the fraternities and sororities were very upset about their plots. Speaker 1: And what do they, what do they have like time capsules buried or something or what, what-- Speaker 2: (laughs) I have, I have no idea--[simultaneous] Speaker 1: I've been on some campuses where they say there's a rock or something that's hidden--[simultaneous] Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --but with name of fraternity or something like that-- Speaker 2: Yeah, they had, they had that and then they had--[simultaneous] Speaker 1: Tree stumps and rocks and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, and they actually painted some of the trees and that kind of stuff, and the colors and, and so we really worked hard to, to see if we could find some compromise with them. Okay imagine, now as president I and as I mean I didn't have to compromise. I could have just said "I'm sorry guys, no." We just do what, that would have caused all kinds of problems at the, at the campus. And so we tried to make it a learning experience for, for the students and the, the metaphor we came up with in dealing with the, with the fraternities and sororities is that look we are going to renew the grounds, we have the funding to do this. We're going to let you completely redesign your plots within some guidelines and we want to get out that you can't paint the trees any more. Okay? But you know you can put down slabs and you can bring in rock if you want that and we are going to pay for all that stuff, but there is going to be a homeowner's agreement, you know. We are the, we, you, the university and your organization are going to sign an agreement that says: you know we agree that you can't paint your house polka dots. You know the kind of usual thing. I say, you know you guys, when you guys grow up and, and graduate and become homeowners, you know you're going to live in communities that, that's going to be in homeowners' agreement and, and just because you happen to like mustard yellow on your house, that may be against the, against the rules and you can't paint it that way even though you are the owner, you pay the mortgage and all that kind of stuff. So we took a dozen opportunities to have some sort of you know dialogue there and the result was that the, the plots became really, really beautiful and, and you noticed the organi--the Greek organization bought into this, this idea because we didn't do the, all the grounds to the campus at the same time, the people who, the organizations that had their plots in other areas of the campus, you know, they were, they were wringing their hands and then when is it going to be our turn (laughs) to do this? So that, that worked out, out really well. Story_ID: 624443 Speaker 1: So these--science building, computer science, new residence hall and a School of Business were started-- Speaker 2: Um hm. Speaker 1: --and you, I understand here you brought in one of world's fastest supercomputers to (unclear]-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. You know we, actually the way it came about: one, one of the assistant professors in computer science had written a note to me asking about if I would provide some funding--couple thousand dollars--to build a high performance, well to build a computing cluster where you would take a bunch of PCs and connect them together and he wanted to use it to teach, to teach this kind of networking to his students. And, I mean I'm a computer buff and I've been reading about this supercomputer at, at Virginia Tech [Blacksburg, Virginia] and I said suppose we put more money into it and try to build a machine that gets us on the Top 500 List of sup--of computers. So we decided that, well I, I told him this, that you can't, you can't build this thing in the basement of the computer science building. This is not going to be a computer science exclusive computer. It's going to be available for the folks in theater to use and the folks in art, and, and the moviemakers; everybody to use. And so we set out to, to build this thing, Apple was a--it was based around Apple computers, their Xserves. They did a great job of, of helping us engineer the system and, and build it and we actually took one of the students' lounges that, that; you know I told you we had done all of this changing of the grounds. We improved the grounds. We bought statues, statuary for the, for the campus, big pieces of monumental-sized architectural pieces. So we took a student lounge that overlooked one of the lawns--it had this big windows in it and we, we turned that into the, into the computer center for the supercomputer and so you could walk within, you know, five feet of the, of the computer and you could see all the, you know, cabinets (unclear) and--so it was, it was a campus resource that was visible you know to, to all the students--[simultaneous] Speaker 1: So you, you could be on a common area of the university plaza-- Speaker 2: [Nods] Speaker 1: --or, or was it--[simultaneous] Speaker 2: Um hm. Speaker 1: and could actually see the supercomputer and-- Speaker 2: Yes, um hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um hm and, and you know I did not want to hide, hide this thing in the, in the basement on the computer science--you know the computer scientists were the ones who were, were going to make the most use of it. You know, I did want the, the uh, the people in the arts and the gaming folks and the folks that wanted to do moviemaking and all that kind of stuff to, to have access to the system. Story_ID: 624444 Speaker 1: When you were there the Bowie State [University, Bowie, Maryland] athletic teams won some games, true? Speaker 2: (Laughs) Yeah that was, that was a lot of fun. You know the, Bowie had never, had never won the, actually any of the major CIAA [NCAA (National Collegiate Athletic Association) Division II conference of historically African American institutions] Championships. I mean CIAA has a tremendous reputation in basketball for instance and the CIAA; as a matter of fact, CIAA Basketball Tournament is like the third largest basketball tournament in the country. The only bigger ones are The Big 10s and maybe the ACC [Atlantic Coast Conference] or something. I don't know if you've ever been to the CIAA tournament but it's, it's worth the trip. (Laughs) This is Charlotte [North Carolina]; this is a great, great thing. So while I was there we were building, I was trying to, to again build the kind of school you know is (unclear) (core) if you will. I knew a part of that was having winning athletic programs. And so I worked hard at trying to build a really good basketball team and during the time that I was there the, the men's team actually won the CIAA Championship for the first time. When I say that Bowie's teams have never won that's not right, the women's basketball team had actually won the Championship before. The men's team had, had never won. So they won the CIAA Championship in 2003 I think. Great source of pride, the campus had a great time and we had good football teams. So one of the, one of the athletes came to Bowie when I was there near the end of my tenure there was Isaac Redman who's now a running back for the Pittsburgh Steelers [National Football League (NFL)]. So he's the first and only football player I think to go pro [professional]. Speaker 1: Really, the first and only? Speaker 2: Yeah, from Bowie. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I think that's right. Speaker 1: Um. Speaker 2: I think that's right. I mean all the facts kind of disappear after a while. Speaker 1: I know I can't think of one and I probably know too much about football than I need to-- Speaker 2: (laughs) Speaker 1: --and I can't think of one-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --either. So yeah, I think you're right. Speaker 2: Um hm. Story_ID: 624445 Speaker 1: Okay, so now you were there [Bowie State University, Bowie, Maryland] until 2007-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: right, from 2000 to 2007? Speaker 2: Right. Well actually I left in 2006. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Alright. Now why did you leave? I mean what, what was going on? Was, did, was it historical tension in the--[simultaneous] Speaker 2: Well yeah, that was part that was--you know that was always, I mean being a university president is just unbelievably tough. I mean I have great respect for our president here [Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia], Dr. [William] Harvey, has been around for thirty-five years. (Laughs) It's hard to imagine (laughs) doing the job for that long but yeah I mean it's, it gets to a point where it just, just wears you out. You know especially when you have that, that sort of tension. I kind of hit the--when I told you that you know five to seven years is kind of a good, good number for me in terms of, of finding the next adventure and I really felt like I had gotten to the point where you know I couldn't really accomplish much more there. You know we had, you know, it was time, it was time to go. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was time to go. Story_ID: 624446 Speaker 1: So you went to NIA, the National Institute of Aerospace-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --right? Speaker 2: Um hm. Speaker 1: And now how did this uh, well you know, as a Vice President of Research [and Program Development]-- Speaker 2: Um hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So how did I wind up there? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: (laughs) Well, we kind of get back to MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] again. (Laughs) One of the people I met at, at MIT, a very, very good friend, Dr. James Hubbard [also a HistoryMaker] was actually--he's a professor of Aerospace Engineering at the University of Maryland, College Park but they, but his position actually has him at NIA full time. So he actually sits, sits at NIA and so he was telling me about, about this vice president position and you know I, I sort of; one of the things that I had in place at Bowie [State University, Bowie, Maryland] is that at the end of my tenure as president I have a year of sabbatical to kind of get my sanity back (laughs) so I was, I was basically on sabbatical. I'd been, been on sabbatical for well let's say from June until, oh July 1st [2006] until that following April [2007] when I started at, at NIA. So, so I was, he's the one that convinced me to come down and apply for a position and I did and so I wound up at, at NIA. He was you know a good friend from MIT. I think we were, we were housemates at one point. (Laughs) Speaker 1: This is Dr. Hubbard? Speaker 2: Yeah, Dr. Hubbard. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 624447 Speaker 1: Okay. Vice President of Research at NIA [National Institute of Aerospace]-- Speaker 2: Um hm. Speaker 1: --you built a new research center, 60,000 square feet. It's the first permanent building of the NIA, right? Speaker 2: That's right. NIA is a fairly young organization. I mean it just celebrated its tenth anniversary, I think last year. So when I went there it was just, just around five years old. So it was renting space in, you know a kind of office building and NIA is an interesting place in that it's a--I call it a good place to kind of not go cold turkey away from higher education because there are so many faculty, so many graduate students in aerospace engineering that work there. So I came out of the higher education realm and I've been in one all my life, all my life and I've done everything in higher education from assistant professor to president. So when I went to NIA, it was sort of a step away from higher education but not totally. I was still in this environment where there were lots of students and professors around, and as, as vice president for research, my job was to sort of over, oversee the development of the research program, helping find money for the actual research that goes on, but also you know the, the infrastructure research. So NIA, as I said, was basically renting space in an office building. If you walk up to it and say "Give me the tour of NIA," you know what you would see is a bunch of you know offices and Class 100 office building, I mean a Class A office building; so I mean it didn't have a sense of permanence. I mean it had a sense of a little startup company and you know and so I remember talking to the president, Bob [Robert] Lindberg, about the need to start to establish a real presence and the real permanence to the, to the Institute. And part of that would be to, to build a lab building and so he said well, okay, go find the money to do it, find a way to do it. I said okay, I will. (Laughs) We went to talk to the city and use some of the contacts I had developed before and we'd worked with. So as it turned out we were able to secure about $12 million from the state to put up the building and you know $12 million is not much money so we were able to build a 60,000 square foot building with laboratory space and with space to expand in the future. So there's some you know what we call cold dark shell or warm, warm dark shell space out there to, to expand in the future. There's, there were ten flexible laboratories on the first floor where you could do all kinds of things, engineering as well as science. Just a great, great place, Speaker 1: Okay and it is located where? Speaker 2: It was here in Hampton [Virginia], it's actually right across the street from the building we were renting and was called Hampton Roads North, North Research Park. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay, so you're with the NIA now you has like a--NIA had a graduate program? Speaker 2: Yeah, actually the graduate programs really belonged to the, the schools that made up NIA. NIA was a was started by a consortium of universities-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --University of Maryland at College Park and then in Virginia you had the University of Virginia [Charlottesville], Virginia Tech [Blacksburg] and Hampton University [Hampton], and then in North Carolina you had NC [North Carolina] A and T [State University, Greensboro] and NC [North Carolina] State [University, Raleigh], and then in Georgia you had Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia]. Those were the core schools that made up NIA and then there were other affiliated schools: Norfolk--Old Dominion University [Norfolk, Virginia] was one of the schools, [The College of] William and Mary [Williamsburg, Virgibnia] was one of the affiliated schools. So the, the graduate programs really belonged to those core schools. Speaker 1: Okay. NIA kind of coordinates the programs between all the schools to guide students through uh-- Speaker 2: Right, right. So if you were a student of aerospace engineering at Maryland, you could take courses at Georgia Tech. You can kind of pick and choose and those courses were delivered actually to NIA and the idea is that you have this, these great kind of confederated engineering program on the steps of NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] Langley Research Center [Hampton]. Because NASA Langley's real claim to fame is their aeronautics. I mean they do more than that now but its history is aeronautics, and so these programs were to sort of bring world-class faculty and world-class scientists and visitors into the--from academia, into the NASA sphere of influence. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So that, so--alright, so most of the funding for NIA comes from? Speaker 2: From, from NASA. Speaker 1: From NASA-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: There's also, I mean one of the (unclear) things that we did during my time there was to put into place a large contract with the FAA [Federal Aviation Administration], well large for, large for us for, for NIA. So it was a five year, I don't know $10 million or contract or something, so that's in place. It's been renewed a couple of times; well at least one time and expanded some. So that was a major revenue resource for NIA that we developed during the time I was vice president. So the two things that happened on my tenure as vice president was the construction of this building, which was actually completed after I left and, and the development of this FAA contract. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 624448 Speaker 1: Now, now did President [William] Harvey [Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] get on the phone and call you back from (both laughing) from NIA or what happened, what happened? Speaker 2: I mean it was, it was--man I was kind of running out of headroom at, at Hampton, I mean at, at NIA [National Institute of Aerospace] and you know I think I was going in one direction, they were growing in a different direction in terms of our thinking. Also I had a really family tragedy during that time; my son died-- Speaker 1: Oh [unclear] what happened? What happened? Speaker 2: He was in his senior year at, at York College in Pennsylvania and he had some really kind of undiagnosed medical problem and, and wound up actually dying on Mothers' Day, so. Speaker 1: Is this in, what year is and-- Speaker 2: That happened in 2010. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He was, he was a senior. He was about five days from graduating. Speaker 1: Okay. [Unclear] that would--understand. So, so you uh-- Speaker 2: Well I mean it was you know I'd, I'd been thinking about, about leaving anyway but this kind of, I mean I was sort of approaching my five year (laughs) time and, and you know I just didn't have, didn't have a heart to really continue. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 624449 Speaker 1: So, well in, so in 2010 you come over to Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia] as the Dean of the School of Science, Sciences, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. It was really I guess October 2011 I, I came over as dean of the School of Science. So I've been here about a year, a year and a quarter. Speaker 1: Okay. And what are your objectives here and what, what what have you been able to do so far and what are your, what are you planning to do? Speaker 2: Well the, the university; one of the things Dr. [William] Harvey [president of Hampton University] would like to see happen here at the University is for us to become really recognized as a research university as opposed to a--you know a Carnegie-like research class university, university. And if we are to, to achieve that it's going to have to be led by the School of Science [unclear], this is where the, the opportunities for research, the opportunities for funding and, and all that stuff are really and so taking us to that is, is my charge. We have had some uh, you know, we worked to increase our, our funding in the, in the School of Science, our research funding, increase the number of people who are actually engaged in the research activities. We have to raise the level of, of teaching that we're doing. My first year here we increased funding by, by eleven percent over the previous year. So I'm in my second year now, half way through this second year. We're on, on track and I'm not, you know, I'm not sure we're going to make this especially with sequester coming but we're on track to increase our funding by forty percent over the first year that I was here. You know to say we're half way through, I don't know if we're going to make that with sequester and all that sort of thing. We, so, so that's, that's you know the pretty exciting part of what I'm engaged in right now with Hampton. If, we are successful, then the School of Science at Hampton will will look drastically different than it does now in the next let's say five years from now. (Laughs) It will be drastically different than it is now. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 624450 Speaker 1: And what I understand the Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia] offers a marine science [program]. Is this something kind of new here [unclear]-- Speaker 2: Not, not so, not so new here but is, is something new in the sense that we are trying to make that area grow. We found that we actually have a lot of students who are interested in, in that. We're surrounded by water (laughs) here. Sometimes our home by the sea becomes our home in the sea (laughs) it seems you know-- Speaker 1: Yeah, I know. Speaker 2: --because of all the water. But that's, that's new, that's a growth, I think a growth area for us. We're doing some interesting work with fisheries and, and there's some, some ecology bent to that also. Speaker 1: There's some travel too involved right, overseas travel? Speaker 2: Um-- Speaker 1: The marine program? Speaker 2: May--yeah, there are certainly opportunities for that and, and if, you know, get students involved in kind of taking a sea expeditions. You know you kind of go out to sea and do research on, on the oceans and so forth. Story_ID: 624451 Speaker 1: Okay, there's also a computer science program [Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia], especially in robotics, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, that's, that's going great guns, robotics, there's a new thrust in the informational assurance; that's you know a hot topic these days, new viral security issues. So that program is, is really, really blooming. Our students in computer science have a lot of opportunities for employment. They spend some summers at Apple and Google and IBM and Microsoft and so forth. And then, you know, they have job opportunities at those places after they graduate. They also go off to some pretty good graduate schools like Carnegie Mellon [University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] and I guess we've got students at Clemson [University, Clemson, South Carolina] and some other, other programs. Speaker 1: Okay. You, you've also got like a review that you, Hampton was able to attract 2.9 million dollars to offer a concentration in nanoscience, is that correct? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. As a matter of fact the person that really led that is my assistant dean. She actually came, came to Hampton a few months before I did actually; she was, she was acting dean of the School of Science, Michelle Claville. She's a chemist. She wrote a really, really strong proposal to the National Science Foundation [NSF] to do this nanoscience, nanoscience program that cuts across the science programs, across engineering. You know, so a lot people--a lot hooks that people can hang programs on and because nanoscience is really an interdisciplinary kind of topic. Speaker 1: Okay. You had some experience in graduate school when, with graphite and-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --with graphene, that's right? Speaker 2: That's right, that's right. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 624452 Speaker 1: You've [Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] got a Ph.D. program in biology, right? Speaker 2: Physics actually-- Speaker 1: Physics? Speaker 2: Yeah-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and also atmospheric sciences. Speaker 1: Atmospheric sciences, okay. Speaker 2: So if we're going to become this, this research institution that the president [William Harvey] envisions, we're going to have to develop more Ph.D. programs. Biology is probably going to be one of the areas that we are going to do that, because it's where the largest part the enrollment in the School of Sciences is, it's in biology, and we also need to look at Ph.D. programs in some other areas like chemistry and, and possibly marine science, I don't know. Speaker 1: Okay. I don't know if, are you able to track the kind of faculty you need for all this? Speaker 2: Now that's going, that's going to be a challenge. You know, we are a small place and as the president says we have to ride the bicycle while we build it and so not everybody is, is up for that kind of an experience where you really have to start from scratch and you really have to, have to be creative in, in what you do not, not just creative in the science but also creative in how you do the science and find the resources to do the science. And so I, I hope that we can find those special people out there who, who want that kind of opportunity and thrive in that kind of environment. You know, as we recruit we try to determine if a potential faculty member is the kind that, that really needs to have everything in place and, and you know, needs to have everything in laid out and everything working just right and you know if you're that kind of person, Hampton is not the place that you should come to try pursue your career. This is, this is more of a frontier challenge, okay. It's a place where if you are, you know, creative, aggressive, committed, willing to work hard, you can go from being an associate professor in physics to being a university president and back, so. (Laughs) Story_ID: 624453 Speaker 1: Now do, do you still have aspirations to be a [university] president again? Speaker 2: (laughs) Some days, (laughs) some days. I guess when some of my friends ask me that I tell them that, that let's see what they; whoever wants me to be president when I think about it some days I say you have to show up with a pair of golden handcuffs, a big bag of money and a gun. (Laughs) And then there other days when I'm feeling differently about it I'll say well you know, I certainly enjoyed some things about, about being president at Bowie [State University, Bowie, Maryland] and seeing the transformation that happened there and, and you know, going back and just seeing the different place that it is. I mean it's still, but we didn't solve all the problems and hopefully we didn't create too many (laughs) in the process but, but it was a you know very challenging experiences and you if the right place, the right opportunity comes along then if it fits within the whatever of the Lord has in mind for me. Speaker 1: What are the challenges, I know we've discussed with lots of scientists that we've interviewed, especially associated with universities; well always associated with universities is the time that they can devote to research versus teaching and there seems to be always a little struggle going on-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --between school administration in terms of requiring them to teach a large number of courses or, or the time they want to spend on research-- Speaker 2: Um hm. Speaker 1: --being siphoned off through teaching and, and is that a challenge here too? Speaker 2: Oh absolutely! Absolutely it's, it's a challenge here. You know it's going to be a challenge at any, at any small place, that's going to be a challenge cause now you've still got to pay the bills. You know the president has to, has to pay for the electricity, and, and you know, pay people's salaries and, and do all that stuff. So, so there's always going to be a--well as far as I can see there's always going to be a tug-of-war between those two things and as a dean or department head or provost but especially as a dean or department head your job is to try to find some way to manage that and that's one of the interesting things about, about this job and more interesting than quantum mechanics. (Laughs) Story_ID: 624454 Speaker 1: Now are as a, are you, are you involved at all in the outreach programs to the high schools in terms of STEM [science, technology, engineering and mathematics] education were you involving Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia] in that kind of-- Speaker 2: Well we certainly have a lot of those programs--well I won't say a lot, but we have those kinds of programs going on here at the university, some in my school, School of Science, many of them in the School of Science. You know I try to encourage our folks to have a presence as best they can but I also realize that, that maybe we aren't the best people to, to do that to some extent. You know we don't really as, as faculty members at a university we don't really understand all the challenges that are faced by high school teachers. I mean we see their products and we, and we can sit around and say well they need to do a better job of teaching calculus and all this kind of stuff, but we don't really understand all the challenge that they face, that the teachers face, that the administrators face. And so while I want us to, to be kind of a helping hand if you will, I think you have to be very careful not to become a hindrance to, to that environment just from not knowing. I mean it would be like, you know, putting a mask on me and putting me in an operating room with a surgeon. I mean I probably could help if I knew how but I don't really know how and I would probably windup being more of a hindrance to the, to the surgeon than, than a help. So I don't want us to, I don't want our faculty, I don't want our, our folks to be a hindrance to what the, what the school has to, what the, the secondary schools have to do. You know if, if you want to go offer some help, we need to ask them you know how can we, how can we be of help to you and we shouldn't arrive with knowing all the answers. We don't even know all the questions (laughs), so. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 624455 Speaker 1: You say you tinker around with a little research now but, you know, (unclear) even today--what kind of research do you engage in? Speaker 2: Well actually I'm interested in something called boron nitride nanotubes (laughs) and these things are they're like carbon nanotubes and carbon nanotubes basically you take a piece of graphite and you roll it up into a tube and, and the tube is, you know, ten angstroms in diameter or something and it [unclear] the boron nitride you replace every other carbon atom with a boron or nitrogen. These tubes turnout to be really, really strong, they turn out to be stable in air up to like 900,000 degrees C [Celsius], they're flexible, they're just fantastic mechanical properties. They are, if you, when you grow this stuff it looks like cotton. You know, it literally looks exactly like cotton. If you've ever really dream about a cotton field and looked at the balls of cotton when it's, when it's ready to be picked. That's what this stuff looks like when you, when you grow it; fantastic physical properties. The main issue is that people don't know how to grow it. They, there are different research groups that grow this stuff. The growth rate is very slow you know like thirty, forty milligrams per hour and so you can't really get enough of it. You can't buy it commercially for instance. There are some companies just starting up but they actually don't have commercial products yet as far as I know. So what we want to do is to look at some of the different ways that, that you can grow this stuff to see if we can do some science on how you grow it. Speaker 1: This isn't a crystal like-- Speaker 2: Well it's, it's-- Speaker 1: --thing that's grown in a-- Speaker 2: Well, it's a fiber. It literally looks exactly like cotton. If you pull it apart you'll find fibers of, of nanotubes and if you-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --if you put them in an electron microscope and look at it you'll find these long tubes that diameter of, you know, ten angstroms and the length of a micron or something like that so it, so the aspect ratio very, very skinny and long. Speaker 1: But it's not an organic kind of compound, it's uh, it's uh-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Well it's, it's, it's an insulator, it's--a boron nitride if you, if you weren't making nanotubes it would look like a white powder kind of thing. As a matter of fact some of it is used in, in the cosmetic industry. The individual boron nitride crystals when you grow it as a, as a fiber, I mean as a nanotube, it looks like a, a ball of cotton, you know. So we want to see if we can--well we have some ideas of, of investigating some of that. Some of the diagrams you see on the board around you are, are pieces of experimental apparatus that we're, we're putting together. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Story_ID: 624456 Speaker 1: Now when you look back on everything you've done in science to this point I guess as a, both as a research scientist and as a teacher and as an administrator what are your, what would you consider to be your major accomplishments? Speaker 2: Well I wouldn't count anything in research. I mean that's not, not what you know, that's, that's not the path I've been on for the past, you know, twenty years or something, thirty years. In terms of, of administration and the building of science programs, we have developed many of the Ph.D. programs here at Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia], the atmospheric science program, that's all, you know, highlights. Actually building the supercomputer at, at Bowie [State University, Bowie, Maryland] was a highlight we call it the XSEED, X-S-E-E-D because it was to be the seed for a lot of different things. My hope is that some of them will come true since it has not begun. So I mean the highlight reel for me is not really much of a highlight reel. It's, it's well but to my way of thinking it's, it's you know a series of sort of adventures where I've gone somewhere and, and hopefully left the place a lot better than, than I found it, and gave it a future that it would not have had if I hadn't come there to, to work on it. But you know no, no great ah has or things like that, at least not in my opinion, and I was sort of surprised to hear from you guys to consider me a HistoryMaker because I don't consider myself a history maker or, or anything like that. It's just uh, you know [pause] that's me. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, well, now if, if you look back again at everything you've done to this point is there any major thing you would do over again or if you could go change it or-- Speaker 2: No, no. I, I wouldn't change anything and nothing bears repeating. Story_ID: 624457 Speaker 1: Now what is some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: There, there are many; I mean we've got so much increased freedom than we had 20 years, 30 years, 40 years ago. You know when I was in school coming through the things, the sort of things that happened you can't really even conceive of happening now on a, on an average working day basis. There are still really bad things that happen. I mean the Trayvon Martin thing for instance. This is something really bad that happened and, and you can see the cause of that related to America's racial condition and so forth. But for the average person, the average black person I think you can kind of go as far as your, your willingness to work can take you. You know it won't be without, without effort or without issues or without, you know, just the normal things that anybody will face. I, I do believe that you can, you can go as far as your talents and your, your willingness to work can take, take a person. So I very hopeful that, you know, in that sense and that people take better and more advantage of that and I think we are seeing some of that. I'm really concerned about, about black colleges, about their place in, in the future. I mean one of the questions I used to be asked at Bowie [State University, Bowie, Maryland] a lot, how well is Bowie always going to be an HBCU and I said as long as "H" is in there, yes, (laughs) just as the, the University of Maryland, the University of North Carolina always will be traditionally white institutions. As long as the "T" is in there that's going to be true. (Laughs) So for, for, for black colleges you know one of the things that, that we have to I think really, really work on is, and think about is, okay what place will we occupy in the future. There's not going to be the same place that we occupied in the past. If it is, then we are going to go out of business, you know. I think that, that we're headed for a consolidation of, of; well consolidation and reduction in the number of, of black colleges that we have. Just economically we can't, I don't think it's sustainable. We, we are going to have to really raise our game in terms of the quality of education that we're providing to our, to our students and I think, you know, there are certainly places on the way to doing that. You know Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia] is on its way to doing that, certainly the Morehouses [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] and A and Ts and so forth you are, you know, on their way to doing exactly that. So I, I think it has to be sort of a new seriousness of effort and seriousness of thought and endeavor about, about this, this academic enterprise that, that HBCUs makeup. You know, I see us kind of drifting down and I guess I need to be a little careful because I'm, I'm speaking of HBCUs as if they are, are a monolithic entity and they're not. They, there are different kinds of HBCUs, you know, some good, some bad, some in the middle; just like if you look at small colleges, oh one of their traditionally white institutions or predominately white institutions or whatever so HBCUs are, are just a continuum of, of the kinds of schools. So, but in general I think that you know whether you're on one end or on the other or in the middle, that we as institutions are going to have to raise our game to become--you know, we need to be as President [William] Harvey [Hampton University] says extraordinary places, that ordinary is not good enough anymore. We have to become, try to become extraordinary places. Story_ID: 624458 Speaker 1: Yeah, we're just talking about some of those schools in crisis off camera like Wilberforce [University] in [Wilberforce] Ohio is in crisis-- Speaker 2: Um hm. Speaker 1: --St. Paul you were saying-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Yeah. So it's not, I know years ago I think Bishop College [Texas] closed-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and then was opened again. So I don't know what's going on now-- Speaker 2: Um hm. Speaker 1: --but you know so this is a tenuous, you know, I mean it's not, you know, there are--some will close as you said and some will consolidate and you know. That's a diverse landscape of activities going on in black colleges, I mean in terms of their status. Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely and if they are going to survive whether, whether again whether they are on either end or in the middle they're going to have to compete. They're going to have to be competitive with other schools like themselves. You know it's, it's sort of like athletics, I mean there was a time when black colleges got the best black athletes, you know. They didn't have a lot of opportunities so they came to black colleges and, and you know black college athletics was just, you know, top notch and now you can see a point, to you know, in the--I mean I can point to an Isaac Redman from Bowie [State University, Bowie, Maryland], I can point to a Lynn Swan or you know, you can point to individuals and but those people are not average. They're not the average athlete and the programs they came out of in the years that they were at the school were not the average athletic program (unclear). And Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia] has a great, great basketball history in, in the NCAA [National Collegiate Athletic Association], you know, having twice knocked off a sixth, no fifteenth seed or something you know, so. But the question is what happens on the average. So you get over to the academic side, you know, we have to have the ability to recruit and to successfully recruit, successfully recruit the top talent. Story_ID: 624459 Speaker 1: Tell us something about your family now. You, you mentioned you, you have children now, right? Speaker 2: Um hm. Yeah, a daughter [Maya Lowe] and my son [Calvin Allen Lowe] you know is deceased. My daughter is, is a middle school counselor. She got her, her bachelor's degree at Alabama A and M University [Huntsville, Alabama] when we were down there, and she got a master's degree in, in counseling from Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia]. She's a counselor at one of the magnet middle schools here in, in the city. I got two, two grandchildren: a granddaughter that's going to be nine in about a little more than a couple of weeks (laughs) in March and grandson who just turned one and he's actually was born on the day before my birthday (laughs), so that's, that's kind of where we are at this point. My, my wife, as I mentioned earlier is, is an ordained minister in an AME [African Methodist Episcopal] church. She's pastored lots of churches over our career and, and right now she pastors a church in North Carolina, a little town called Conway. It's about eighty miles from here, so and so we're down there most Sundays and just having a really nice time. It's a really great church, great people. Story_ID: 624460 Speaker 1: Well thank you for sharing with us. The last question is similar to legacy be a little bit different. Sir, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: (Laughs) I don't know. My first answer is not at all. (Laughs) I think, I think we, we have to you know try to get some things done while we're here, make some difference and I don't think that, that the differences that you make are always the really big things. So, so I don't have, have a real, real answer to that question and in some sense it's, it's not really important to me. Speaker 1: Okay. Thank you very much for sharing with us. Speaker 2: Thanks!..