 Story_ID: 10097 Speaker 1: My name is Julieanna Richardson. I'm the interviewer, and Vee Toll is the videographer and I'm sorry-- Speaker 2: Gussie Hidell. Speaker 1: Gussie Hidell is observer. And I'd like you to start out by stating your name and spelling it for us. Speaker 2: My name is Samella Sanders Lewis. S-A-M-E-L-L-A, S-A-N-D-E-R-S, L-E-W-I-S. Speaker 1: Okay, and I'd like to have your date of birth? Speaker 2: February 27th, 1924. Speaker 1: And today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is August 23rd-- Speaker 1: Twenty fourth-- Speaker 2: Twenty fourth, 19--2003. Oh, God. Speaker 1: Everyone does that (laughs). And our location is The Historymakers. Speaker 2: Historymakers-- Speaker 1: 1900 South Michigan Avenue. Speaker 2: 1900 South Michigan Avenue. Speaker 1: In Chicago. And I'd like to have, have you give your occupation. Speaker 2: Well, my occupation is retired art History Professor, really Professor Emeritus, Scripps College of the Claremont Colleges in Claremont, California. Speaker 1: But you would call yourself an artist and art historian, right or art curator? Speaker 2: Yes, I'm an artist first and art historian secondly. Story_ID: 10098 Speaker 1: I'd like to know what your favorite food is? Speaker 2: My favorite food. I like shrimp and shrimp creole. Speaker 1: Favorite color? Speaker 2: Favorite color is blue. Speaker 1: Favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Fall. Speaker 1: Favorite place to vacation? Speaker 2: Caribbean, any place in the Caribbean. Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Not really, I have several of them, but probably come from my Southern background. Speaker 1: Do you have any one? Speaker 2: Well, not, not that I favor over the others. They come when I need them. Story_ID: 10099 Speaker 1: I want to start out by asking you about your mother. Her name and what you know about her? Her, her name was Rachel Taylor, right? Speaker 2: Rachel Taylor Sanders. Speaker 1: Sanders. And could you tell us what you know about her background and her growing up? Speaker 2: Yes. My mother was born in New Iberia, Louisiana in the Bayou (unclear) region. And she grew up working very hard as--it's a sugarcane area and I'm sure she cut sugarcane and her mother was Rosa Bouté who had a large family. And she--well, mother worked hard, and she decided maybe she had better things to do. And she was not happy living in New Iberia so she moved to Ponchatoula where married my father, who was fifteen years older than she. And she was not allowed to go to school when she was in New Iberia, but after she moved to Ponchatoula and had four children, she decided she wanted to have a better life. And she moved to New Orleans, but because of legal problems, she could not take us with her because then she was considered as a person who abandoned her children, which she did not. She just decided she needed to make a better life for all of us, but when she came back to get us, she couldn't. My father prevented her, her from taking us. And even though I don't think he wanted to with four daughters, he decided that she couldn't have us. But my mother went to New Orleans, became a seamstress in the French Quarter and would always bring us things back to Ponchatoula to my father's place, you know, clothing, things we needed. But she was a very dedicated and, and in some ways, had great ambitions because she was a--she knew how to make quilts and she knew how to do a lot of things that she couldn't do in New Iberia nor could she do in Ponchatoula. So she was in a way artistically oriented and wanted to do her work and make a, a better life for all of us. But she, she was living in a time when it was not possible for her to do that. Speaker 1: Do you--what age were you when she-- Speaker 2: Five. Speaker 1: --left to. Five years old. Speaker 2: Five years old. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 10100 Speaker 1: Can you give your siblings' names and the birth order? Speaker 2: Well, the eldest one is Gertrude Sanders Miller. The next one was Mercedes Sanders. She died very, very--a long time ago. And the next one is Mildred Sanders Mosher. And then I'm the last one. Speaker 1: So you were the baby? Speaker 2: I was the baby, yeah, the cantankerous baby. (laughs). I was the only one who followed my mother. And I was able to do it because I made my father so uncomfortable because he was always ending up taking me to the hospital because I said I'd swallowed a piece of razor blade or this, that and the other. I fabricated a lot of things. And he just got tired and said, okay, you can--you go and stay with your uncle. You cannot stay with your mother, uncle and my aunt. But later, I was able to go and stay with my mother. Story_ID: 10101 Speaker 1: How would you describe your mother as a person (unclear)? Speaker 2: She was a very warm, very religious person. Let's put it that way. She started out as a Catholic in New Orleans, I mean in New Iberia, Louisiana which was ninety percent Catholic. And she, but she decided she was going to belong to a church in any community she lived in. So she became--in Ponchatoula, she became African Methodist Episcopal. And then she moved to New Orleans, and she became a Baptist, all kinds of Baptist all over, depending on where she lived. (laughs) And when she passed, she was 92 years old and my mother was unfortunately, killed in a--by a neighbor who was trying to kill his wife, 80-some year old man--82-year old man who was trying to kill his wife because she was leaving him. And he killed four people and himself, but he never was able to kill his wife. So he killed his stepdaughter, my mother's land, landlady, my mother and himself, yeah. So that was a real shock for all of us, so much so that that's when I decided maybe I was going to go to the Caribbean or some place and live. I just couldn't quite face my mother being killed that way. She was in very good health at 92 years old and very stately, beautiful woman. But that's what happens sometimes, you know. Speaker 1: No, that's tragic and all when you think about it. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Story_ID: 10102 Speaker 1: Your father, can you describe him and tell about his, you know, give his name, and what you know about his background? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Well, my father was one of five sons and two daughters. And Samuel Sanders and his father owned so much property in Ponchatoula [Louisiana]. I don't know how he acquired it. His name is Henry Harrison Sanders. And he owned almost half of a town, the town of Ponchatoula. It was really interesting because he had all of those sons and he gave, he left them the land and he didn't give the daughters anything. And my Uncle Joe who was the youngest one, he was--he left the farm. He left the family early, and he ended up getting a stream of water because he wasn't there to represent himself. And it was a strange family connection, you know. They sort of didn't--they were not very kind of each other. But my father never really had to work, and that's part of the problem. He owned a big farm because his father had left them enough land to divide among themselves. And he raised strawberries and sweet potatoes, but he didn't farm himself that much. He just sort of hired people. And, you know, they made--they did the work and he made the money. But he wasn't rich, but he was able to buy a car every year, you know, and this is--we're talking about in the '30s and 1930s and things like that, late '20s [1920s] or '20s [1920s] and '30s [1930s], every since I was born practically. But he, he always was able to manage and never really worked for it. Story_ID: 10103 Speaker 1: But you had means because we're talking about around the time of the Depression too. Speaker 2: Yeah, we didn't have--we didn't experience any Depression because he had this, this big farm. And, you know, we, we just didn't know anything about the Depression. It's amazing, but the farm--the land that the, the family owned, as I said, cut across the town. This, the town was downtown, we'll say, and then back where people lived in the neighborhoods, the whole street straight across the whole town belonged to the Sanders, called the Sandersville. And there were white who lived behind us who had to get permission to come through our property to get to theirs. They'd have a, get a right-a-way from us. When I say, us, I mean my family. And that, we still own that land-- Speaker 1: You own it all? Speaker 2: I don't own it all myself, but-- Speaker 1: Okay, but the family? Speaker 2: Yes. We gave some of it to the school. There was a school that was just off the property, you know, going towards the town, and we gave property to the school. But other than that--and my Uncle Ed who was in World War I, his wife sold his share, but that's, other than that, it's still in the family. Story_ID: 10104 Speaker 1: That's pretty amazing cause a lot of people, you know, African Americans, (unclear) the property is left. Speaker 2: Yeah, well, you know, it's interesting because my, my father's father, I want to think that maybe he was African American, but I don't know because he does--didn't look like--I thought he was Santa Claus when I was growing, you know, a little kid. I, I was afraid of him because I figured if I did something bad, I couldn't go around him. And he was blind most of the time that I knew him. His wife was sort of African, but I never knew her. She died before I was born. But he, he looked like Santa Claus, and I have photographs. I'll send you things of those things, of my grandfather and his grandson, Uncle Joe, is standing in front of them. And my former professor from Ohio State said to me, what is that white man doing with that black boy? You know, this kind of statement. So I don't know. I don't know. And, and someone said, well, he was really from Jamaica, but I don't know where he was from. But my sister maybe would know because she knew, she knew my grandfather and my grandmother. And on my mother's side, she knew my great grandfather and my, you know, and his wife. And she was telling me about him, how he was the--he could read and write and he was the keeper of the lodge. And she said he had the most beautiful carriage. And I should interview her for you, but as a part of my story, because she said, and his home was just absolutely beautiful. And he was in that, that area of New Iberia, Jeanerette area. And he was, I have photographs of him. And he was-- Speaker 1: And this is on your mother's side? Speaker 2: On my mother's side. And he was a minister I understand. And he, he always very--he rode around in this beautiful carriage and he used to ride on the big horses and things. And he never, I don't think he ever was one of, he was a minister, so he wasn't one of the workers, the field workers or anything like that. But on both sides, my mother's side goes back farther than my father's in terms of my knowledge. But it's a great deal of, of--my mother's mother, now, they--her name is Bouté, okay. And, and all I know is that I know my, her father's name--we used to call him Pap, Papa Landau, but I don't know. My sister knows his real name, and, and--but it's, it's a very interesting background I think. Speaker 1: And you don't know necessarily how they settled there, you know, or if, you know, like you were saying that your grand--was it your grandfather who may have had Jamaican roots, maybe, on, on your father's side? Speaker 2: Um-hum, um-hum. Speaker 1: Do you know how your parents met, you know, what--you know, I know your mother moved to-- Speaker 2: Ponchatoula. Speaker 1: Ponchatoula. Speaker 2: Which is a Indian kind of place, name of an Indian community, small Bayou area. How they met, I really don't know how they met. But I remember she--I, I was too to even (unclear). Speaker 1: And your, then your father was fifteen years older than her? Speaker 2: Yeah, I knew that much, yes. Story_ID: 10105 Speaker 1: Now, what is your earliest memory? Is it in Ponchatoula [Louisiana]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And do you remember what it is? Do you have an earliest memory? Speaker 2: Yes, I, you know, it's interesting that my earliest memory was not about my family as much as about a teacher I had in kindergarten. And I used to draw a lot when I was, you know, a little small child. And she would pass out these ditto sheets. I don't know what you call them now, but they were like ditto, you know, that copy things where you, you fill in and color in and things of that sort. But somehow I didn't want to color in the way she wanted me to do. And I, when she passed out a pig, the outline of a pig, I decided, well, maybe this will be my chance to show her that I'm not going to do it her way. And I colored the pig purple, but I went outside the lines, just deliberately went, you know, sort of--and I made a purple pig. And she sort of was happy that maybe I did my own pig, own kind of pig. And she gave me 5 cents. (laughs) And she--and we became very close. And my, you know, I--she realized that I wasn't going to be directed in that way, so she found other ways to get me to do things. And she even allowed me to turn the sheet over and draw my own pig, you know. So she really in a way was instrumental in helping me to understand that I could do my own drawings and things of that sort. Speaker 1: Do you know what--do you remember her name? Speaker 2: No. No. Speaker 1: Okay, but so she saw something in you? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And that brings me to the next question. What were you like as a child because, you know, I just sort of, you, you had a mind of your own I take it. Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes. Well, I think early in life, even three, four years old, I decided that I wanted to--well, number one, let's put it this way. They wanted--in the South, they would tell children, don't say ugly things or don't say anything about race around people who might be able to harm you. Don't, don't do this, don't do that. So I decided well, I had to find a way to express my likes and dislikes, mostly dislikes. And I started drawing. I would sit on our porch. We had porches in, in Ponchatoula. I grew up in--I was born in New Orleans, I want to establish, but I grew up back and forth on my father's farm and so forth. But I would sit on the porch and draw. And I wouldn't draw, copy like most children do. I would draw what I saw or what I knew or what I had seen. And usually, they were not like flowers or animals. They were things that I had stored in my memory bank and my imagination, combined. And usually, they--many of them were very tragic situations because I saw people, when I would go to see my relatives in the Bayou country, they were this whole black, white thing. And black men shot and killed, and you know, just all kinds of awful things that I remembered, but I could not speak about. So I began, I guess you would call it using art as therapy, you know. And I--that stayed with me, and I was determined that nobody would break into that and interfere with that. And when I was in the fourth grade, they tried to get me to make milk posters. And I said, no, I can't draw. And I was determined they wasn't going to use my means of expression to make milk posters or to have anybody tell me what I should do. This was the only thing I had left, you know, in terms of speaking or expressing myself. And I--that started when I was three or four years old. And I guess one reason I was able to leave the, my father was because I had to find a way, even as four or five years old to, to figure out how, how you're going to do this. It was like a plan, you know. I said, well, I know he, he doesn't want to take care of four, four daughters, four girls. So I'm going to be as obnoxious as I can so that he doesn't want to take care of me, you know. And he would be happy to send me some place near where my mother is. So I used those, my expression and that determination, I guess you would call it determination or that arrogance--I don't know what it was, to know that I could do things if I tried hard enough and I was serious about it. And I was really serious about it. And I didn't draw from the fourth grade until I got to junior high school, not, you know, where people could see me. I know, I wouldn't let anybody see anything because, you know, in fear of having somebody tell what to do, draw my portrait, draw this, draw that. And I was only in, in high school when I met physics teacher, a math teacher and a physics teacher who encouraged me. You know, they liked art and they liked--and one of the reasons the physics teacher's wife was the ticket taker at the theater. And so we started talking about the movies. And she was a friend of my Aunt Gladys with whom I was staying. So he found out that I had a visual mind or whatever you want to call it and had some creativity. So he would tell me about some relationship between physics and had me do projects and, and art, you know. And the same thing with the math teacher when I got to high school. He would, he helped me to be creative with math, even though I did not study art in high school and they didn't offer it. But I did study drafting. And the drafting teacher was one who recognized that maybe I should be going to the French Quarters in New Orleans to look into the windows of the artists. That's when I would do my drafting real, in 20--15, 20 minutes and then he got permission from my mother and the Principal for me to the French Quarter along with a, a male fellow, friend who was also an art person, art-oriented student. And we both used to go to the French Quarter every Thursday. And we'd look in the windows. We, this particular artist, Alfredo Galley, we looked into his window every Thursday, and this black lady inside saw us do this Thursday after Thursday. So she came out one time and said, "You, you want to come in?" So we said, no, because it was a Red Light District at that time, and we didn't know what was going on, but she was a black woman, looked very nice. So we said, well, the next time we said yes. So we went in and found, you know, a beautiful studio. This man painted counts and countesses and France and Italy and places. And he was from Italy, of course, and he didn't speak English. He, he just refused to speak English, and we didn't speak Italian, but she did. And she told us to bring some of our work so he could see it, if we were interested in art and everything. So we--the next Thursday we went down and we, we brought some of our drawings. We used to make sketches of our classmates and he liked them. So he, he taught, both of us until we went to college (unclear) taught us for, for 2 years. Speaker 1: So that was from your, like your junior and senior year. junior and (simultaneous) Speaker 2: Yeah, that's what it was--in New Orleans they separated the high school, junior high and senior High. And this was the senior High, yes. Story_ID: 10106 Speaker 1: I want to go back a little bit cause it sound like the art was born in you, you know, and, you know, and you had this sort of rebellious period. What I want to know though, just, your mother, you were born in New Orleans. Was that, was that her leaving on her own to go to New Orleans at the time of your birth? Speaker 2: No, no, I was the only one because my mother was kind of sick when I was born. So she had to go to the hospital. And the only hosp--nearest hospital was New Orleans. Ponchatoula is about 50 miles outside of--it's called Greater New Orleans. And it's, it's 50 miles away from the center of New Orleans. And the--I was born in the Charity Hospital in New Orleans. And my was, I guess they had--they were calling it women's problems or something at that time (laughs). And so I--they thought it would be better for her to have me in the hospital. Speaker 1: And so you really grew up in Ponchatoula until you were what age? Speaker 2: Until I was in, 'til I was about eight. Story_ID: 10107 Speaker 1: Okay, do you remember what elementary school you went to in Ponchatoula, the name? Speaker 2: I don't remember the name. I, I have to look that up. I probably have the records from it, but I remember the wonderful principal there, you know. And apparently it was a place where my older sister had gone, and we had a very good reputation as being good students, all of us. But I also remember that my sister, Mildred, I, I caught up with her in the third grade. I don't know what happened, but we were in the third grade together. The fourth grade together--I left after the third grade. Yeah. And I went to New Orleans to go to school. Story_ID: 10108 Speaker 1: Well, I used to live in--I lived all over New Orleans, let's put it that way. But it was one section, and I, I wish I could remember the name of the street, but I went to school. And the sights I would see would be the women selling the plantons and, you know, the things that they carried on their heads, and blackberries and blackberry pies and, and that kind of thing. And it was, I was always intrigued by how they could carry those things on their heads. And the dress was very different. It was really like some of the dolls you see, you know, on New Orleans. And I was really--it's like the kids run out now with the ice cream man. I'd run out and try to get some of those goodies that they, they sold. And, and they had a certain smell to them which was very nice, but I--that's what I remember most. And I remembered really thinking that this was really wonderful to be able to carry things like that on your head (laughs). And I guess it was, it was one of those Caribbean-type things that did, African-type things. But they did and I was--that, that's what I remember most. And I, and I think the smell, one of the smells that I remember most was the French bread (laughs). And I, I loved the ends, you know, I just, I liked--and they would send me to the store to get a loaf of French bread and I would tear--I had to go through a park. And I would tear off the end and eat it before I got home. And then I'd say somebody attacked me and took the end of the bread. But, you know, they soon caught on that that was not true cause if somebody had attacked me, I wouldn't have come there intact like I did, you know. But the French bread was so wonderful, you know. It was fresh, and you could--the smell was just great. Speaker 2: Any, any sounds? Speaker 1: Yeah, the sounds of, I guess the general city sounds of, of New Orleans. And especially people would come back and yell what they were selling. You know, that was kind of nice. But I don't remember any street cars or anything like that. That wasn't at all exciting to me or interesting to me. Yeah, and I would, I must say that the sounds of Mardi Gras, like some people go to Mardi Gras and they like it. It was a very frightening experience for me. And I, you know, they--when I was growing up, they had skeletons on the graveyards and the, you know, the people are buried above ground in New Orleans. And so they would be climbing all over the place, these people in skeleton suits. And they just had to send me back to Ponchatoula during that time or to the Bayou area where my mother was from because I just, and it just really was frightening. And I just didn't like that. I didn't like the carnival. And then I, I really didn't like, you know, the Zulu floats, the Zulu. I went to--when I was on a Ford Grant to New Orleans and to the Caribbean, I went to photograph the Zulus making up, and I wondered why they made themselves black, you know, black paint and red lips or white lips. I've forgotten, but my friend, Celestine Cook, got me, got permission for me to go and talk to them, 3:00 o'clock in the morning, 4:00 o'clock in the morning when they were making up. And I, I just couldn't understand why they would call themselves Zulus when they had they had these grass skirts and throwing coconuts. And what was this about? And so I questioned them, and it was--they didn't know what a Zulu was, you know. They probably still don't know. But that to me was, I was trying--it was humiliating for some reason and, and I said, well, I know it's just a club, but why are they talking about, you know, I knew about Shaka Zulu and the great wars that he fought. And I just said, I don't believe this. These are educated men. They were all--you could not join that group unless you were a scholar of some sort or educated to a, you know, lawyer, doctor, some--they were all professional men. But these are the kinds of things. I don't know how this got into our conversation, but this is a part of New Orleans and sights and sounds and things that I enjoyed and thing that I, I was humiliated by, you know, and I still am. Story_ID: 10109 Speaker 1: Now, were there things about New Orleans that you found, you know, because it's a city life, you know, as opposed to really being in the country. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And I'm just wondering, you know, a young child, how, you know, she took to that and, and it's also a, a stratified society too. Speaker 2: True, yes it is. Well, I lived all over the city as I said. I lived uptown, downtown, (unclear) town, (unclear) town. And, in each--it is stratified. You have, we'll say the so-called Creole and the, the African Americans or the Negroes and I learned, I was able to mix and mingle with most of them. But I did resent the brown people in the one corner and the so-called light brown people in another people corner and the so-called yellow people in another corner. And it was, it's--it was very humiliating to many people, but I saw it as a problem that those people had, you know. For instance, those people who felt superior. And they really--many of the people who were called Creole or mulattos and there's a place across the river, Lake Ponchatrain, where the white men would send their offsprings and the black women to Madisonville to live. So it separated them from the blacks, from the Negroes, but they could not associate with the whites. So they were sort of caught. And those people--in New Orleans the same thing happened. They would go, maybe, maybe not finish high school. It was like a whole cult or something where they would stop--if they could not marry within the group, then they would not marry. And so it was like being inbreeding, you know, and it was, it was kind of not too, too--and it wasn't until World War II that some of that began to change where people began to trust each other, you know, and know that they were all in the same situation. And if, and if not the--Creoles were not only in that situation, but they were probably worse because they were not accepted by the whites nor the Negroes and, and they were, and when they trying to reject the so-called Negroes, but they were not accepted by them either because Negroes were getting an education where you had, become the doctors and the lawyers and so forth. And the average mulatto, Creole or whatever, was passing, not down there because people would know what families they're from. It's a small city. New Orleans is not a big city, and you just know who's who, you know, even if you have blonde hair, we know your parents. We know your grandparents, you know. And so it's not easy to pass in that city without somebody knowing, somebody you're related to. And usually somebody whose a person of color. Speaker 1: Now, do you, you know, I've heard different mulattos describe themselves as, as a culture, you know. Was that presented in that way? Speaker 2: The mulattoes stopped calling themselves mulattoes after a while because--and started calling themselves Creole. Speaker 1: Creole. Okay, well, the Cre--I'm sorry, the Creoles have described themselves as a culture. Was there any more of the culture there than, okay, okay. Speaker 2: No. No. In fact, the, the--many of the people who are Creoles, like the Moreales, for instance, they're, they're descendants are in Haiti. They're from Haitian ancestors. And, and my Aunt Laura and people like that who lived in the Bayou section, their--her descendants were from Haiti also. But Moreales were the mulatto Haitians. My Aunt Laura's was the African Haitians. So, you know, they started out being separated. And they, the Creole, the culture that they have comes from either Haiti or there's a syntax and grammar in terms of the, the language. But they did not speak that language. They spoke a broken French, many of the, the so-called upper-class Creoles who were mulattos really. And they, they did not speak the Creole, Creole, you know, like the, the kind, that unspoken, and still speak in Haiti and in many of the Caribbean countries. It's, it's different in the different Caribbean countries, of course, because it merely means mixed, you know. It's, it's a, it's a mixed language. It's a mixed people and so forth. But their culture is not one that, that is continuously documented, we'll say, because there's the confusion about who is Creole and who is mulatto. And you can learn to speak the language whether you're Creole or not. And Creole is French, Spanish, English, whatever, you know, African. It's all those. Speaker 1: Things mixed up. Speaker 2: Things mixed up. And the food is mixed up. And the food, the food has been elevated to a position of better than, we'll say the--the Cajun food is country food. They call it country food. And the Creoles were not eating Cajun food because they say it's country. But theirs is more, more of a food where, where you can document what goes with what and so forth. And it's not, it's very different. But it does become, it becomes confusing also. Foods, what's Creole and what's Cajun. And, and the Cajuns, Acadians, you know. They're not, they're very, they're very mixed even though they do not admit that, but I've been to funerals where the man would, man, property owner would die, and all of his relatives would come, his children's children and so forth. And they would gather and at the funeral, and they would be white, black and all kinds of mixtures there. So the identity of the one or the other, it's, it's very confusing there because you almost can't tell the black, the, the Cajun, Acadian whose dark frequently from the Creole who is light brown or brown from--and some of them, the mulattos are blonde and still black, you know. So it's a hodge podge of racial mixtures there. Speaker 1: Now, your, your family considered themselves Negro? Speaker 2: Negroes. Speaker 1: Negroes. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: I don't know what my, my grandfather considered himself. I really don't know. Story_ID: 10110 Speaker 1: You were living you said with your Aunt Est, is it Esther, Aunt-- Speaker 2: Gladys. Speaker 1: Gladys, okay. And that's where you went to live at first, right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And with she and her husband, his name was? Speaker 2: Joseph. Speaker 1: Joseph. Okay. Speaker 2: We used to call him Uncle Joe. Speaker 1: Okay, and are they the ones that you said were of some Hait--of Haitian descendant too or not-- Speaker 2: That's my mother's-- Speaker 1: Okay, no, okay. Mother's side, okay, I'm sorry. Speaker 2: Mother's side, my Aunt Laura and Uncle Doll. And my Aunt Laura was--that's my Aunt Laura on the painting that was used for the (unclear). She was a hoodoo lady. Do you know what hoodoo is? Voodoo. Same, but in New Orleans, we call it hoodoo. And it (unclear) it makes your life better or worse, usually better. And she, she was very interesting. She smoked a pipe like the people in the Caribbean. Yeah, smoked a pipe. And she had very strange-looking eyes, you know. She'd look at you, penetrate, penetrating eyes. And she wore a tignom. I never saw her hair until she died. And then she had long, black hair, beautiful hair. And I never saw it because she kept her head tied. And she always wore this white apron and a blue denim dress and, and a pipe. Speaker 1: And did you, did you live with her or you just knew her? Speaker 2: I lived with her for two years in, in the Bayou area. Speaker 1: And you were what age at that time? Speaker 2: Oh, no, I was, I was in--I was working on a Master's Degree--(simultaneous). Speaker 1: Oh, you were, okay, okay, okay. Was she still practicing at that point? Speaker 2: She was not practicing very much, but she would ask--question me about my beliefs and wanted to know if I believed certain things. And my Uncle Doll had, had, one side of his hair was white and one was black, and one eye was blue and one was brown. And he explained that by saying he took somebody's job. He had committed a sin, sort of, and that he shouldn't have done it. And, and the job was ringing the bell for the breaks during the field work, you know, breaks from the field work. And he went to this, this Voodoo or Hoodoo person and--it was a male. And he took the worm out of his eye and the whole side of his face changed and he showed him the worm and things--you know, it was this whole story about why one eye was blue and one was--the hair was white. And I have photographs of him. Yes. It was really very weird, just strange. But he, he swore that he saw it happen, you know. And he had committed what he thought was a sin, a crime, a sin, you know, by depriving somebody of their job when he didn't have to do that, whatever he did to do it, to get the job, you know Story_ID: 10111 Speaker 1: But, you know, it's, it's a legitimate religion, you know, and he believed it and a lot of people in that area, black and white participated, believed it. And the, the whites were afraid not to believe because they didn't know what was going on in terms of who would fix them, you know. Speaker 2: Did you grow up believing it? Speaker 1: I didn't know about it until I went to New Orleans. I knew about it in New Orleans because people were sprinkling dust on people's steps and, and--but I didn't want anybody to sprinkle any dust on my steps, you know. I believed it enough to not want that to happen. And my belief in it was not in terms of good things, but all bad things. And there were these people who talked about love portions, you've heard about that, and all of this. And, oh, I'm sorry. And I just, I didn't want, I didn't, I didn't not believe, but I didn't believe enough to want to participate in any of it, let's put it that way. Speaker 2: So you grew up understanding it as the really, in terms of bad things-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: You know, not so much the good, the good part of it. Speaker 1: Absolutely, absolutely, absolutely. Speaker 2: Okay, so the sprinkling, the sprinkling, what did that represent? That, what did that represent? Speaker 1: Well, I remember even the color of the--you might call it, it wasn't, it was thicker than dust. It was like some sort of, if you would take wood and, and shave it and grind it, you know. And they would it, it was yellow, dull yellow, brown sort of, and that people would put it on the, on the steps of other people. And that's why, in many, many places, you have these people putting brick and scrubbing the steps and making them white and, and really kind of clean steps. But that, that--I understood that as either being to try and put a curse on somebody, a bad omen or it wasn't anything that was a love portion or anything of that sort or something good. It was always something bad. And, and I never knew about anything good that--because I probably--I went to school on the street called Podeato Street. And that's a very-- Speaker 2: This is elementary school--was this elementary? Speaker 1: No, no, this is-- Speaker 2: That's high school? Speaker 1: Junior. Speaker 2: Junior high, okay. Speaker 1: And I, you know, that's where you see all of these things. This is where the musicians would--I think even Louis Armstrong did a song called Podeato and it was, it was a--not the best part of the city. But it was not the worst either, but it was where you could see these kinds of things. And it was, it was mysterious, you know, say something you, you don't know about, you don't trust. And when I went to New Iberia to stay with my aunt, she said, she asked me if I believed in the religion. I said, no, I don't think so. She said, you will. I don't know what that meant, but, you know, I never gained real information on it until I went to Brazil. I went to Cuba first, and then I went to Braz--I went to Haiti and then Brazil. But it was in Brazil that I learned more about the religion. Speaker 2: And what did you learn about it? Speaker 1: Well, I learned about the, that where it, you know, the hist--the origin of it; that it was really a, a (unclear) religion. It was out of Africa and I learned of the old tradition and how--I began to respect it. I didn't know they were all connected until I went to Brazil. I went to Haiti. I went to Haiti, and people, you know, you see these movies about voodoo or hoodoo, voodoo, and you, you think that it's something really very bad. And I noticed that the people who practice certain, like in Santeria and, and Candomble in Brazil, I would go one year, and 5 years later, I'd go back and they still looked the same, you know. They looked young and, and clean and even though they were poor, most of them were poor people. And when the head of the Candomble died, the whole Brazil shut down. So that meant that the people were respectful of the religion regardless of race, creed or color, you know. And it's, it's--I began to see it as a, as a legitimate religion. And I notice now in Haiti, it's respected as a re, legitimate religion, in Barbados, it has been for a long time. It's called Shango Baptist and in Trinidad, Tobago and, and, you know, it's, it's the same thing. And in New York City, it's the Shaungo religion. It's all over, and it's an old religion. And it's, it's founded by people who refuse to be enslaved or who refuse to--by the (unclear) European people, who refuse to become colonized. You know, they fought, they fought colonization. They fought Christianity. They refused to be Christianized. And they--but the religion spread all over the, the world, which is the same as Hoodoo and Voodoo. Speaker 2: So your aunt was right in a way? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: She said, you will. Speaker 1: Yes. Yes. Yes, yes, my Aunt Laura was right. Speaker 2: (laughs) She was right. Speaker 1: Yes, but I'd like you to see that, that painting I did when I was in Miami. Speaker 2: I'd like that. Speaker 1: It's called Obea Woman. Story_ID: 10112 Speaker 1: Now, when you, tell me your school, school. So in New Orleans, you first attended what school before you went to this school on Podeato Street? Speaker 2: I went to Tomalafon Elementary School. Speaker 1: Okay, and that was up until the 7th grade or 6th grade? 6th or 7th? Speaker 2: Yeah, 6th, 6th I think to the 6th. Speaker 1: Sixth grade, okay. Speaker 2: Then I went to Virginia High. Speaker 1: Okay. I'm trying to understand what other things are forming you because you're, you're a different child in some respects. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: You know, and you're, you also, you know, what I sense is that some of your surroundings are, you know, you don't understand all your surroundings. You're very I think aware of your surroundings. Speaker 2: I was never fearful-- Speaker 1: Okay, except of Mardi Gras and the-- Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: Right, okay. All right. Speaker 2: But in terms of the things I saw around me, in terms of what I thought were injust, unjust things, I was never fearful. And when I went to the Bayou area, I couldn't go to the library, we'll say. But I was determined that I was going to find a way to go. And I went to the house of this woman whose husband owned the whole town. (Unclear) he owned the shipping factories, the, the syrup factories, the, you know, you name it, where you employ people. He name, he owned it, Ruth Rowan, was her name. And his name is Mr. Rowan, that's all I know. But she had just become a Christian Scientist and I guess she felt very good about things. She was a former nurse from Dallas, I think. And she, someone told me that she was a Sunday painter, and I was--I said, I need to buy some supplies. And so I didn't know where to go. And I went to see her, say, she lived not too far from my Aunt Laura, in the big house down the, down the way. I walked down there, and she--we talked. And she decided that there was something she wanted to do to help me. And she went out and bought a whole barrel of plaster and all kinds of clay and everything I didn't want, and not too much of what I wanted, but I wanted it. And she said, you can paint on my, in my studio. You can do your work in my studio. And so we struck up a friendship and she was able to--she didn't want me to rides the buses because they were segregated and might have been some problems for me. So she took me to the library and they couldn't refuse. And every place I wanted to go, she took me. But it was because I think I was determined that I was going to find a way to my Art, and even if I had to go--I did not go to her back door. I went to the front door, and the lady she had working for her didn't want to admit me, but she came and said, oh, yes, let her come in. So, and I don't know. I guess I, I just sort of decided there were certain things that I wanted to do and I was going to do in spite of. And also when I was in that area, I decided that I had to get certain information and my aunt and uncle were very fearful because I would go out and do things that they thought would get me into trouble. Speaker 1: Like what? Speaker 2: Well, like going to places where I wasn't welcome. And, you know, insist on being served where I wasn't supposed to be served. And I guess I gained a reputation of--but I had covered it up because I had Ruth Rowan on my side, you know. And she--they would not, would not dare do anything to dis--make her unhappy with them because they would lose their jobs. It was about ec, economics and jobs and--but I, I guess I was smart enough to study those things that might maybe put fear in some people and open doors for me. Speaker 1: Now, you're in your teens at this point, right. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: And this is when, cause you said you started drawing back again when you were 14, right? Speaker 2: Um-hum, um-hum. Speaker 1: I mean not, you didn't stop-- Speaker 2: It wasn't 14. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I started drawing back when I was junior high. Speaker 1: Okay, junior high. Okay. Speaker 2: I don't know if--now in New Orleans, you graduate early. When I was coming up, at 16 we, we were graduating from high school because we didn't have to go through the 12th grade. Story_ID: 10113 Speaker 1: And he was very instrumental in my life. Speaker 2: Can you talk about him? Speaker 1: Yes, he, he was a small-built man. He was, I guess you might say he was in the upper, middle-class of black society and culture. He lived me, next, almost next door to Dillard University. And he, he took an interest in, real interest in his students, but a special interest in Warren Kenner and myself. And because we--he could tell that we wanted to do more than the drafting. We, we would finish our drafting and sit up there and be bored. And, you know, and then he gave us permission to sketch our classmates and I still have those works of my--from the classmates that I sketched. And he is the one who thought that we should go to the French Quarter and see the works of other artists. And he really encouraged us to, to develop our ability, and I guess they called it talent at that time. And when I graduated from high school, and I graduated with honors, he decided that I should go to college. And I wanted to go to college also. And he thought, since he lived next door to Dillard that that would be the, a good place for us to go. And in the Bayou country, you didn't go to college unless you were ill or, you know, you couldn't do any, you couldn't work in the fields or couldn't do anything else, at least African Americans didn't go to college, the Negroes because that was--why, why waste your time going to college when all you're going to do is come out and work in the fields. So that was the attitude that you couldn't rise above your, you know, ability, your, your designed position or whatever it is. And so Mr. Spriggins said, "Oh, yes, you, you two are going to college. " But Warren's mother and father decided he was going to work in the post office so his sister could go to college. That was, she would graduate a year later, but, so he couldn't go to college. But Mr. Spriggins just took me by the hand and said, "We're going to go out to Dillard and you're going to college." And so I registered to go to college and my mother did what she could do to help me, but she had no, no real money to pay for college, which wasn't expensive then. So Mr. Spriggins got me a job working in the dean's office and I took the exam and I was at the point where I really felt there was no need to go to college. I didn't know what I wanted to do. I certainly wasn't going to work in anybody's house or kitchen. But I just didn't have the am--well, I had ambition, but not to go to the college. And I took the exam and because of Mr. Spriggins, they admitted me. But they also told me that I probably would be there one semester because I didn't read the exam papers. I just sort of--just marked (laughs) cause I--the exam was in Philosophy and Psychology. I'd never had those courses. I said, well, this is nonsense. I mean I, I shouldn't even think about this. So I just--it was a non-objective kind of thing. I just marked any place I thought--I mean it wasn't that interesting anyway. And when they told me that I would probably spend one semester there, that's when I decided I would defy them. And I began to study. And I made A's in all of my courses. One, I took a year's course in one semester. And I was determined, you know, and I was at the point where when you would tell me I couldn't do something, that's when I would do it. Story_ID: 10114 Speaker 1: And I guess from that point on--I met Elizabeth [Catlett] in my second semester. I had Dr. Benjamin Quarles as a teacher. I had, I had some really wonderful teachers at that time. And Elizabeth, and Elizabeth introduced me to Paul Robeson, which caused her to be fired because she brought him to the campus. And Etta (unclear), that's when I first saw. She came and gave a concert there. And it was just wonderful, college was, was great for me because I met all of these wonderful people. And Duke Ellington came and, you know, it's--I couldn't have bought that kind of experience. And, and that's, Zora Neal Hurston and, they all came. Speaker 2: That's what I want you to talk about. So (unclear) even you were in, still in New Orleans, the world opened up-- Speaker 1: Oh, yes. Speaker 2: --the door. Speaker 1: Oh, yes, and Jacob Lawrence came to finish his migration series. Speaker 2: Can you talk about Dillard at that point, you know, what the institution was like and, and, you know, who was there? Who was the President at the time and? Speaker 1: Well, Albert Dent was the president and we, there were only 400 students in Dillard [University] at that time. And they had a faculty of mostly PhD's. And it was a, a really extremely wonderful place to be. And now, the only course I didn't like there was Home Economics. (laughs) That's what, I don't know I didn't like it. I think it was the teacher I didn't like more than the course because she was so precise, and you know, and we would call it prissy at that time. (laughs) And it was really, I, I really liked Dillard. I liked going to school there, and I had piano. I mean I didn't study piano, but they taught Music Appreciation which was Carol Blanton. I remember the people from Dillard. And, and she was such a great pianist and, and I remember my English teacher there. And Elizabeth and I were at Dillard about 5 months ago, and we had a conversation about our time there and how we--who was there, and, and how we were able to go and see the Picasso show when we couldn't go into the, we couldn't go into the city park because we were Negroes, but she rented a bus--but we could go to the museum. And the Picasso show was there, and she wanted us to see it. So she rented a bus on her own and had the bus driver drop us off on the steps of the museum, drive through the city park which we didn't violate any, any laws, you know. But it was a, it was a real, adventure for me in a way because after I met Elizabeth, I used to go union meetings and all kinds of places where I shouldn't have been. But--and she began throwing the "For Colored Patrons Only" signs out the bus. And I would be sitting with her. It was kind of exciting, rebellious but exciting. And Dillard had a program that was very strong in academics and they produced a lot of students who went to medical school and, and a lot of really bright students were at Dillard at that time. I'm sure they still are because the woman that, who was president of Brown [University], Ruth Simmons she was from Dillard, a graduate of Dillard. So they produced, they've been academically strong for a long time. And -- Speaker 2: Are they a Catholic institution? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: No, it's not Catholic. Do you know the origins? Speaker 1: It was a, it was a Protestant origin. I'm trying to--I don't know. It wasn't Methodist or Baptist. It was something. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: It was a Protestant (unclear). Speaker 2: So these (unclear). What were the departments and what was your major? I mean you came on sort of a general, right? Speaker 1: I (unclear) to major in, in General Humanities, general, General Studies in the beginning for the first two years. You could not have a major, but I did take Art from Elizabeth, Studio Art and Art Appreciation, and drawing and did figure drawing. Elizabeth even hired a nude model, which they objected to, but she did it anyway. But I learned a lot of basics and, and discipline kind of education at Dillard. And I think almost three-fourths of the faculty had PhD's at that time, young graduate students out of, you know, the major institutions. Just--I especially remember Dr. Quarles--cause I went to Dillard to major in History. Speaker 2: Now, this is what I'm trying to figure out, why--okay, how did you come to major in History when you really, you know, your interest, you had been sort of, being tutored in Art. And, and then Dr. Spriggins, I mean, -- Speaker 1: Mr. Spriggins. Speaker 2: It's Mr. Spriggins, you know, wanted you to go on to college, but--so where did the history come in? Speaker 1: I liked history, and I thought that if you go to college, you, you don't major in Art because, you know, it wasn't -- Speaker 2: No career. Speaker 1: No career. (laughs) Not that I was really interested in a career. And, and you, you could not, you could major in Art, but you had to major in Art Education. And I didn't want to teach. I had decided by that time or before that, that I really didn't like teachers because that experience I had with teachers, principals and teachers telling me to draw the milk post--I didn't--I guess I held, held a lot of grudges in a way. And to me, that was like all teachers, not good. No, Mr. Spriggins was different, yeah. And I was a good math student until I went to high school and, and my math teacher didn't like girls and all the girls would get C's or less and the boys were different. But, and when he told me that, that's what I ended up with, a C, you know. But I was, I was an A student in Math also because I could do Math. And I was a good student in Physics, you know, Sciences, but I, I had no idea that I would major in Art Education, and that's all Dillard offered as a major. That's why I left Dillard because I didn't want to major in, in Art Education. And I wanted to Art, studio art, and do it well. And so I went to Hampton. Story_ID: 10115 Speaker 1: So now tell me about your first meeting with Elizabeth Catlett or even the first attending the class there? And at that point, she's young. So it's not, you know -- Speaker 2: She just out of, out of--she had one lone job in Texas before, after graduate school before coming to Dillard. She was young. She hadn't married Charles White at that point. She married the semester after I was there. But she was--I was really afraid of her because she was very aggressive in terms of responding to people. She was--not her students. She really loved her students and, and was very kind to them. But I saw how outspoken and aggressive she was, and I knew that that didn't work in the South too well. And I'd been taught that you protect yourself by not being too outspoken, and, and--but she was, she was very outspoken, even to the President, to anybody, any authority. It didn't make any difference. And I was sort of--she was, she's a tall woman, you know. Elizabeth is a, sort of a tall, very different kind of person. I'd never seen, I'd never experienced anybody like her in, in New Orleans. She was not a part of the society, but she was. Her father taught at Tuskegee, and he was a, a mathematician and so forth. But she was different from anybody I'd ever experienced. And I, I was curious, but I was also afraid because she would do things that I'd been taught not to do, like throw things out the bus or either to the bus driver and say, do your dirty work and things. She was--I guess I really responded to her because these are kinds of things that, that -- Speaker 1: That were brewing inside of you. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: That you would have been doing, but for -- Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Absolutely--And she really changed the course of my life in terms of, of making decisions. When I left Dillard, she got me a scholarship to Iowa, University of Iowa. And I came to Chicago and made a decision that I was going to go on and I got one at Hampton also. She got me a full scholarship to Hampton and a full scholarship to Iowa. But I decided that I wasn't going to go to Iowa because there might be too many people there who would impede my progress. And I think I was right. And I went to Hampton. And that was a great experience also. So the black colleges have really been places where--except for teaching, where I felt I was able to get a great deal from. Story_ID: 10116 Speaker 1: Now, talk about your meeting with, you know, how, how you or encounters with Benjamin Quarles? Speaker 2: He made me really like History. I found out his--well, I, I knew that he was a expert in, I think it's Frederick Douglass expert. And I--he was, he was, had so much knowledge and so much experience, but yet he was so kind and nice to his students. And, and I was one of his students, and he, he was particularly nice to me because I think he saw that I really wanted to learn about my own people and so forth. And I considered him as the master or the expert, and he--he's just a Professor I'll never forget, you know. I remembered him, he and Jay Saunders Redding, when I met at, he taught me at, at Hampton. And it's interesting because neither of them were Art people, but they were literary people. And history people, but they're both literary really. And, they were, he was, he was not an easy teacher. He was a tough teacher in terms of insisting that you do your work. And I think for the first time, I had somebody who really took charge and say, you do it. And once you do it, then he would sit down with you and, and we would talk about things. And he treated me like a, a person. Speaker 1: Now, were you living on campus or were you part, part -- Speaker 2: The first semester, I was not. The second semester I was, yes. Speaker 1: And, so this is a small university, but yet, you know, your exposure was very great, so-- Speaker 2: It was so rich. Speaker 1: --so this is 1940, like '44, '42, no, '40 [1944,1942, 1940] -- Speaker 2: Forty One, '42 [1941, 1942]. Speaker 1: Forty-one, '42 [1941, 1942]. Okay. Speaker 2: Forty-three [1943]. Speaker 1: Okay, that's right. Speaker 2: And you are--any other anecdotal experiences? You know, you said you met Paul Robeson, you know, Paul Robeson came to campus. Speaker 1: Oh, yes, yes. And I regret today that I didn't do what Elizabeth [Catlett] told me I should do. She said you should draw him, and I didn't do it. And he was--oh, I remember the towering figure and he was so handsome. And I think, I felt I couldn't capture that, you know. He was such a handsome, wonderful, he was, just kind-looking man, you know. And I was in awe of him, and I just, just sort, you know, sat there with, with my mouth open. And I remember, it was in the auditorium that she told me that. And he was standing behind me. And I said, well, I meant, you know, when I was at Hampton, Dr. [Alain] Locke was my commencement speaker. You know, I just had these, these experiences that by the time I went to Ohio State, I was -- Speaker 2: You were set. Speaker 1: Well bred-- Speaker 2: Well bred-- Speaker 1: (Unclear) me and Speaker 2: And well exposed. Speaker 1: And they could not get me out of my own things that I wanted to do. Story_ID: 10117 Speaker 1: What did you learn from Elizabeth Catlett at that time because up to this point, you know, you're an artist and--and I just want to ask you one question, you know, in something I read, you said that you used house paint. Was that, as a child, you know, painting or was that -- Speaker 2: As, as a child and as a student. And I did a black Christ and everything I used house paint cause I, I was painting on 4x8 plywood. And it was a commission for a Camp Lee, Virginia for the chapel. And felt, well, since it's the chapel soldiers, I should make the, the figures black. And I made the figures, including the Christ, black, And it was objected to by the chaplain who said it would be offensive to, to white soldiers. But I said, but this is--they didn't commend this chapel. And why would it be offensive and they, this is not their chapel. And they, next thing I knew the commander of the base came, and tried to get Loenfeld and the president of Hampton to make me change it to a white Christ, and I said, I don't think they have enough spirituality or spiritual qualities to--I don't want them to have it period. And fortunately, they had not paid for it. And by that time, we settled that they couldn't have it. I decided they couldn't have it, not matter what. And Lowenfeld was so happy because he had me make the decision. And I made the decision that I would not change the color of the Christ because it's, as far as I'm concerned, whether black or white or whether--and I don't think Christ was white. I think he was, you know, more Arabic looking and so forth, and, and whatever, it's the spiritual quality or characteristic that I was interested in. And you can get that in any race of people. The Japanese paint Christ as a Japanese, and the Chinese, as a Chinese, and the Africans as an African. So I felt I had that same privilege. And I just said, the, they didn't have enough spiritual qualities for me to allow this to go and be theirs. It could never be theirs. And my ceramics teacher put it, kept it for me when I left Hampton [Institute]. And it stayed beneath his porch for about 40 years, and then Hampton, the present--president decided he wanted to buy it. And he pulled it out, and had it restored, but he called me and asked me what kind of paint did I use. And that's when I told him I used house paint. That's what I used. That's all I had. And it's, it's in the museum now at Hampton University Museum. But it was years and years, and it didn't--the house paint didn't deteriorate. (laughs) Some of it was moldy, and that's why he wanted to know what kind of paint. But I used-- Speaker 1: So back to, you know, Elizabeth Catlett and Dillard, you were saying that--I was asking you what you learned from her. Speaker 2: I learned almost the opposite of what I had been taught by Mr. Galley. You know, you focus on the visual aspects, what you see. You paint your portrait, we'll say. And I took my portraits to Elizabeth. She said, do you know these people? I said, "No, I don't know the people, but really, does it make any difference?" She said, "yes. Well, if you don't know them, then you should find out something about them that attracts to them so that you want to paint this portrait. And I notice you have a background and a foreground. They're all together. Whoever, if you paint a person's portrait, unless you just pose them in front of something, whatever in, is in the background is maybe their environment. It's their environment, so that's a part of what you consider in your painting." So she taught me that there was no such thing as separation of, of figure, field, but they were all integrated. And, and we used to go out on the campus to draw trees. So she demonstrated to me that the tree was in an environment. And you, you look at the whole thing. And we began, with a mark, we'll say, and you build on that or a shape and you build on that. And you don't, we'll say, some people will draw a person, a painting of a figure and they'll draw the head first and then add the body, add part of the body. And you don't do it that way. You get the curvature and the movement of the bod--the figure. And you base it on the total figure. And so I, I learned a lot from her in terms of how to see, another way of seeing how to see things and conceptualize things, which I didn't learn from Mr. Galley. He taught, taught me value and he taught me of what the Renaissance artists would have, Italian Renaissance artists would have done in terms of seeing, their way of seeing, which was very different from what Elizabeth saw and taught. And it's interesting because she did paintings, but her major was sculpture. Speaker 1: And that's what I was wondering. Did anything of, you know, about her being a sculpturer sort of, differ in terms of how you were taught? Speaker 2: That's when I--yeah. I started doing sculpture (unclear) with her. And I still--I gave my first piece to Uncle Joe which I regret cause I don't know what he did with it, but I did, I know what it looked like. I have a photograph of it. I took a photograph of it, and I have that. And then I moved on, and I, I was able to do sculpture, major in sculpture in a way at Hampton. And I did, I did some really nice sculpture. I think the Virginia Museum bought a piece, and they didn't buy a piece, but the person on the Board bought a piece and gave it to them. And I went to get a photograph of it, and they told me I didn't have anything in the museum. But she was to, this woman was able to get a, a photograph for me. And it had Virginia Museum on the bottom of it, you know. It's in their collection. And then I did--I won some prizes in Atlanta, at Hale Woodruff shows in sculpture. I was a, basically, at Hampton, I did a lot of sculpture, but also some paintings. But when I got ready to leave Hampton, I didn't want to leave--I had a big piece of sculpture, and I didn't want to leave it, and I didn't want to--it was a mother and child. And it had been published in Loenfeld's book. And I didn't want to leave it, and I couldn't take it so you know what I did with it. I broke it up, took a sledge hammer. I, it was like Beloved, you know. I would rather destroy it than to see it, to isol--you know, just leave it there and abandon it. And I didn't know who would take it or who would do what with it, whether the person who, who took it would really care for it or would really want it. And by that time, I had stopped selling Art. Loenfeld was trying to psych me into selling Art again, but I didn't want to sell Art to people who would abuse or just wanted it for decorative purposes or something. They didn't really try to understand that. And I would throw it away first or tear it up first or destroy it. Speaker 1: 'Cause these were your babies. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: Now, so would you say that you started really emerging as an artist--I mean though you had really, you were born as an artist, but do you think you started emerging at Dillard or was it at Hampton? Speaker 2: Well, it was both. I, I started learning about what I, seeing it differently at Dillard, we'll say. But I really developed at Hampton. I think so. Story_ID: 10118 Speaker 1: Do you have a Charles White story at all because you said that you had, you know, that he, he and Elizabeth Catlett got married a semester after--your second semester I think. Speaker 2: Yeah, Charles. I have a Charles White story. I have a book from Elizabeth . It was called The Natural Way to Draw, by [Kimon] Nicholaides. Nicholaides was a very famous teacher at the Art Institute of Chicago and he was, his book has been published and republished and so forth. And Elizabeth gave it to me for Christmas. And she tried to get Charles to sign it, and he wouldn't. That was my first encounter with Charles. (laughs) And no reason at all, you know, because I don't know why he wouldn't sign it because Elizabeth and I were friends, but Charles, we were, we were never quite friends. But we were--when he passed, his wife said, you know, Charles really loved you, and we want you to come to his funeral or his dedi--you know, a celebration of his life and so forth. But we, we--I taught at Otis Art Institute and Charles was there. And I don't know what it was, I think it was because I was so close to Elizabeth that, that he had problems with me because I wanted to buy some of his work. And he was going to--but he was letting other people have it for less than he would, charging me. And I, you know, I should--we just didn't quite make it. But, you know, we--he, he liked and I liked him, but we, we were combatants in a way. Speaker 1: Strong personalities. Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 10119 Speaker 1: Well, I want to ask one other question because the social activism that is occurring, you know, that Elizabeth Catlett is sort of bringing you. Can you describe what is happening in New Orleans at that time and what sort of movement and how, you know, was that part of, cause we're talking about the early '40's, right-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --at that point? So what, you know, then what were the protests occurring, you know, what was actually that part of? Speaker 2: Okay, well, this was during the WPA period when--Elizabeth was never a part of the WPA, but Charles [White] was. Speaker 1: Oh, was he? Speaker 2: And Elizabeth was, in a way, mingling to some extent with the Tulane University people. So there was a beginning of some sort of integration of arts, the arts, we'll say, but not legally. And there was no protest movement as such. I don't think there's ever been one in New Orleans where, like you had in Montgomery [Alabama] and places like that, but there was something we called 'Bump Night'. We used to do. We used to go downtown on Canal Street and bump all the white people off the sidewalk, you know, that sort of, just aggressive kind of gang-like characteristic, and to say we're here and, you know, make statements about--we wouldn't be saying anything, just bump 'em off, you know, just get out my way. And (unclear) that was a statement that we did on Friday nights. And, you know, just groups of us, we'd do that. And I--strangely enough, when I was in high school, during the summers I worked at a photography studio on Canal Street. And whites with, with a, oh, a lot of oil paints and cotton. You know, they used to paint the photographs. Well, I had that job. I don't know how I got it, but I, I got the job doing that. And so I really was never any, except for the Elizabeth was protesting the riverfront workers, you know, how the, the dock workers and the, how they had to unload those rotten bananas and things like that. So she was involved in the union work, and I used to go to the meetings at the Y--YMCA and YWCA. And every (unclear), and I became a Shop Steward when I went to Hampton with the, involved in the unions. But it was a political kind of thing, but it was, it was really about working people. It had nothing to do with integrating the schools or anything of that sort, but it's about making conditions better for working people. Speaker 1: And so in many ways, you know, artists were involved--some artists were actively involved in that whole, you know, in, in those areas as sort of a protest. Story_ID: 10120 Speaker 1: Now, at Hampton [Institute], it's a different institution-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --you know, than, than a Dillard [University] where you were from. And can you talk about that and, you know, what you found there. And then you--did she know though, know him (unclear)? Speaker 2: Oh, yes (unclear). Speaker 1: Okay. Vic, okay. Speaker 2: Viktor Lloyd Lowenfeld (unclear). And she persuaded him to give me a 4-year scholar--a full scholarship to Hampton. Speaker 1: And can you talk about him and how he had come and what his background was? Speaker 2: Yes, he was Austrian Jew whose family, except for one person, one brother, was sent to the gas chamber. And we were with him when he found out what had happened to his family--when I say we were, he had about 15 students, John Biggers and myself and just a number of us. And he didn't really know. He left Austria. He was head of the School for the Blind in Vienna. And he didn't know what really had happened to his family, and, and he didn't--he knew that one brother had gotten out. And he was in Los Angeles working at the school for the blind or something like that. But he, he was--when he found out, you know, we were all with him and tried to console him and things of that sort. But he got his wife out. And he had a son who is now at the University of Indiana I think in Psychology or something. But he was a wonderful man who didn't show us how to do anything. But he had us go through exercises where we would gain control of our arms and fingers and drawing abilities. And he tried to get us to express our experiences rather than showing us about still life or this, that and the other and no matter how poorly we would draw in the beginning, he would have us make statements about ourselves. And that's the, the--his book, "Creative And Mental Growth," that's one that he published his students in. And he was, he was a psychologist, a mathematician and a art historian. But he, he used us as, I guess you might say participants in that, for that particular book, that's "Creative and Mental Growth". That was the first one he wrote when he came to this country. But he also had written one that was not allowed out of, of Germany and Austria at that time because of his racial and religious background of Jewish, being Jewish. But he was so supportive of his students and I rebelled against him too in a way because he had me as a visual person. And when he talked to me about that, then I started making things very differently, just to defy him to tell him that he couldn't tell me what I was, you know. And, you know, just, just that kind of rebellious feeling about people telling me what I was and who I, what kind of deranges I should make and so forth. That's what I felt, that it was an invasion of (unclear). And I just--but he, it, it interested him because, until he died, he invited--he and his wife invited me to come to see them. And every place I would go, he would--when (unclear) get in trouble, he would come. So he was the most important figure in Art and Art Education in this country during his, the '40's [1940s] and '50's [1950s]. Even in now, he's very important. He started a movement that got people away from tracing and coloring and things of that sort. But he, he really--he, he's shown our works in museums and--but that work that the Virginia Museum bought, they bought when I was a junior at Hampton. So he really--and he had got permission for us to stay out until 12:00 o'clock and do our drawings and paintings and really work as artists. And he was so dedicated. Story_ID: 10121 Speaker 1: So, who, now besides John Biggers, who else were some of your classmates--I mean do you remember the others or other names that we would know? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No, Princess Jennings is one. But she's, she's, she lives in Norfolk [Virginia]. She does ceramics and does sculpture. And there are few others, but I don't--oh, there was one really bright young lady, Anna Belle Baker. She went into nursing after she left Hampton. She decided--but she was such a good artist, such a good artist. But she, she liked [Viktor] Lowenfeld, but she didn't like him, you know. She would, called him names and things like that. She was very rebellious. But he didn't hold that against her, you know. But she, she didn't like being at Hampton, I don't think. And she, Pearl Primus, she, she got her, she started wearing her hair in a natural and the dean of Students didn't like that. I think when Pearl Primus came to dance, she decided she was going to be like Pearl Primus. And, you know, Charles White, confuses her with me because he said that's what I did. I didn't do that, but I, I didn't bother about straightening my hair, you know. But I didn't--wasn't influenced by Pearl Primus. But, see Charles was there when I was (unclear) painting his mural on the women, you know, important, historical figures in black history or Negro History. You heard of the famous mural? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: You know, that's, that was-- Speaker 1: So he was there on a Fellowship, and what was-- Speaker 2: It was (unclear) -- Speaker 1: --and Elizabeth [Catlett] was there (simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: So he was part--was that still part, was that--that was Roosevelt, but that wasn't part of the WP--was that part of the W? Speaker 1: Or maybe it was WPA. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: It must have been WPA. Story_ID: 10122 Speaker 1: But Elizabeth [Catlett] would, they were both there-- Speaker 2: Oh, at Hampton when you-- Speaker 1: Hampton, when I was there. Speaker 2: When you were there. Speaker 1: Yes, first semester. Speaker 2: So she lived with you the first semester? Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: And she was teaching? Speaker 1: She was teaching. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But her, I think she, she didn't teach me at Hampton. She taught me at Dillard. But when she, she went to Dillard--Hampton before I went to Dillard, I mean before I left Dillard. That's when she persuaded (unclear) Lowenfeld that I should come to Hampton because she had gotten me this scholarship at Iowa. And then we decided that maybe was not the place to go because I couldn't stay in the dormitory. I had to stay in the YWCA, and it was still so racist and segregated that she didn't really want me to go there. After leaving Dillard, you know, and the freedom we had there, and then, well, she felt that Hampton would be better environment for me. And I, she was right. But she was completing her, I think she was teaching summer school, and she had completed her summer, but I did get a chance to sit in on some sort of a conference they were having. Lowenfeld was a very important person. I think he, he knew most of the Bowhouse Architects and people like that and the people--some of them who settled in Chicago. And he was, he had a big conference. And I was able to participate or sit in on that really. And I learned a lot by just sitting in at the, on the conference. And then he had one on Latin American Art and Latin Americans and Dingo (unclear) and all those people. But-- Story_ID: 10123 Speaker 1: I'd like to comment on this period of time because American art even as an esthetic is, I mean this is early in its devel, I mean development, black or--and black Art, forget it. I mean it's not viewed as-- Speaker 2: Right, yes-- Speaker 1: But I would like you to sort of comment on, I mean and, you know, sort of in hindsight, you know, about the importance of this period. Speaker 2: Well, this was a period when I was able to really get exposed to African Art. Dr. William Shepard who was a graduate of Hampton, was the first black missionary to go to Zaire. And he collected a lot of Bocooba Art. And much of it he sent to Hampton. And they had it stored there on the second floor of one of the buildings. And we were able to see it and work with it and understand it, we hope, and it was a real experience to be exposed to African Art. And then Rudolph Igree was at Hampton. A lot of, lot of Nigerian, a lot of people from Ghana--not Nigeria, were at Hampton. And that was a real experience for me. I, cause I'd never been exposed to African Art before, never. And when I started seeing those, those figures and those masks and those just wonderful things--and it does, it did influence my, my Art, my understanding of culture and background. And Rudolph, you know, he's, he's from the Igread House and, and he became an Ambassador and so forth. And he was a Senior there, and Harry Belafonte was (unclear) maybe at Hampton when I went there. And he married. Speaker 1: Julie Belafonte. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: No, no, he married--I'm sorry, no. Oh, his first wife. Speaker 2: Yeah, she was, she was Miss Hampton. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: She was a senior, yeah. Speaker 1: Because he was in the Navy and she was from a well-to-do family, right? Speaker 2: Well, not so-- Speaker 1: Not so well, okay. Okay. Speaker 2: And she was from a family in Washington, D.C. whose mother made hats. And, you know, sure they were middle class, and some of the society people, but they were not--I wouldn't say, well to do, you know, in terms of money standards. But what was her name? Margarite Speaker 1: Marguerite. That's right. Marguerite. Speaker 2: Yeah, well, Marguerite was there and Harry, that's where they met. He was in, he was in the chorus at Hampton, Navy Chorus, but he also studied with a man who was a real fine choral director there. I'm trying to think of his name, but, but he was--Mr. Flax, I think his name was. And it was really something, and met, I met, that's where I met Zora Neal Hurston, cause a woman--I used to do the backgrounds for the Velmar people (unclear), you know, the backstops and all of that. I don't-- Speaker 1: The flats. Speaker 2: The flats, yeah. And I got involved in all of those things. I used to write poetry and, you know, it was sort of, things that I wanted to do. And I liked the drama teacher. She, she went to Howard after leaving Hampton. She just died not too long ago, but she was a good friend of Zorrie Neal's and she brought her there. And I met Diahna Washington when I was at Hampton. It was so incredible, you know. And it, I appreciated those people then. You know, and when you look back, and you said, I met this and that one, and you really didn't know who they were, I knew who they were. Speaker 1: See, that's what's amazing cause you hear these names, you know, and it's like all of these people in this one--you know, it's hard to even think of that now. Now, (unclear) Hurston, so much has been written about recent--I mean what was she like? Speaker 2: She was a funny lady. She--I remember listening to her talk about the tales and all of that. You know, she had written about strikes on the road, which I understand now were a bunch of lies, but maybe, you know what people wanted to hear. (Unclear) autobiography, but she was, she was--I laughed. She made me laugh so telling her tales and stories and things that we were in Ogden Hall, which is one of the big halls that, on Hampton's campus, sort of a central kind of meeting place, an auditorium really. And I don't know what it was that she said that made me start laughing, but I laughed so I couldn't stop. And the lights were out fortunately, and, because you had to stay at the, until the end whose presentation it was no matter who. And I had to crawl out of that auditorium in the dark. And I was upstairs. I had to go upstairs and then go out. I couldn't stop talking, I mean laughing. I mean it was so absolutely funny. And she--I remember her so vividly and, and I'm trying to think of the professor who, who brought her there and the, and the name will come back, but not today I'm afraid. But, and Duke Ellington introduced his black, Brown and Beige Symphony there at Hampton. And they don't even know that, you know. I was telling the current president, and she said, really. I said, yes. And the soloist, you know, it was, it was so incredible. There had so many things, so many people came there. And we didn't know who Diahna really was. She had her head tied up and she was, she was on the outside some place, and (unclear) place in the parking lot and she'd be sitting on the fender of a car, you know, and practicing. She was young too. She was in her teens. Speaker 1: She was in her teens, oh. Speaker 2: Dinah Washington was not old when she came to Hampton. She was a teenager, and I didn't know that. And she started out very early. And I remember all of those people. I didn't realize she was so young when she was there because I, I know when she died, and I said, wow, she was young as the students there or younger than some of them. If, if when she died--and I think that it was correct because she died in Los Angeles, and I think it was her birth, death date or her birth date was correct. A lot of those people were young, and we didn't see it that way, you know. Story_ID: 10124 Speaker 1: And you (unclear) what is, what did you, what is happening with you, you know, in this period of time? You know, you're soaking all this up. You are under the tutelage of, you know, of Victor Loenfeld, what--but I'm just wondering how are you changing or what are your thoughts? Speaker 2: Well, I think I did some things back then that I'd like to, not go back to doing, but combined with the way I feel now, and what I'm doing now. I don't think we have to lose periods where we feel that there's a, some satisfaction. I don't think--I, I did some paintings then. They're all at Hampton [University], and I secured them by placing them in the museum there. But I did things based on experiences and I came up during the period of John Dewey, a artist experience, and I, I do firmly believe that if I can bring the past with the present, that I'd have what would be the most important phase of my art. And I'm not trying to force it, but, you know, I'm trying to get those quiet periods when things happen. And that's why I--I'm glad I have my studio. I have a big studio now, and I go there and my husband sometimes goes with me, but I put him in another section and let him sit and read or go to sleep, whatever he wants to do because I, I don't want anybody, I don't want any other bodies in there or presence. I want to, as Mia Rose saying, listen to the silent voices and just go and let it happen. And it, it can happen, and it is happening. I'm working on trying to make it happen. I'm working on my Brown vs. the Board of Education, which is going to be next show in New Orleans. And I have feelings about that. Speaker 1: What are they? Speaker 2: Well, it was a good deal that went the wrong way. And I think--this is my belief. And I'm getting so much from the, the environment I was in, and I see so little of people who, who know anything about themselves or their history. I was talking to a young lady the other day, and she's a graduate of the Art Institute [of Chicago]. And she, she has, doesn't seem to know anything, not just about African Americans or blacks, but about the world cultures and art--just no, no knowledge. Everything begins with the United States and, and Paris and Europe, you know, everything begins with Europe. But we know better. And yeah, I majored in Chinese Art History, and I know that Asia, Africa, Asia and the--Latin America had a lot to do with what happened in this country and in Europe. They're the backbone of that so-called modern period. And Wilfredo Lam [Wifredo Oscar de la Concepción Lam y Castilla] from Cuba did not, was not taught by Picasso, he taught Picasso. And the so-called scholars have it just the opposite. So we're never going to make things better until we learn more, become ourselves and, and learn more about ourselves. Speaker 1: And our own history. Speaker 2: And our own history. Speaker 1: So in many ways, you feel that integration had, had, had some sort of dark consequences? Speaker 2: I don't think there was ever any integration. I think there was an attempt to assimilate, to have people assimilate and, and we assimilated them and they didn't take none of us. I don't think there was ever any integration. I think that's the wrong term. Speaker 1: Wrong term, okay. So now-- Speaker 2: But I am going to have another side. I have a, a lawyer friend whose going to try to present-- Speaker 1: The legal part. Speaker 2: The legal part. Speaker 1: Well, that's great. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: As part of your work? Speaker 2: Well, no this is a wall paneling. Story_ID: 10125 Speaker 1: the pieces that you did during, you know, your Hampton days, can you name some, cause the one you said you destroyed, do you remember the name. Speaker 2: Of the mother and child, big sculpture. But the paintings, one was a water boy. And it was my--it's a boy and it's, it's--and I painted it on unbleached muslin, using rubber skin glue and a primer, a white primer, you know, paint primer. And it's, it hasn't deteriorated at all. And it's, it was supposedly restored by the Addison people in Massachusetts where the, you know, that--and they thought it was on canvass. That wasn't canvass. It's, it's a (unclear) that's all we had. Speaker 1: Is Muslim, muslin. Speaker 2: Unbleached muslin. And we stretched out, made our own stretchers and stretched them and, but it's, it's very impressive. And then I did a sharecropper family. I did a lot of paintings and some of them that I threw in the trash, I saw on the television program from Germany that one of the, Dr. Nicholas, he was my English, had picked them up out of the trash, I guess. And was working for the State Department in Germany. And I saw the--I saw they looked familiar. And I realized that those were my paintings. And I didn't think to cut them up or tear them. I just sort of took them off the stretcher and threw them away. And I asked him if he--he's got a job at Brown University when he came back. And I, I called him and then asked him. He said, yes. He said, you threw them away, and I picked them up and I liked them. And I, I was looking at some television program from Germany, from, you know, State Department kinds of things. And, but I--that's when I wouldn't sell my work, and [Viktor] Lowenfeld--I said, you know, I don't know why people want to buy my work. I said because they're, they're buying part of me, and I don't want that. I don't them to buy me. You know, I was kind of nutty at that point, I guess, you know, about being possessive about my work. And he said, but you have to learn to share your experiences, your ideas and your work with other people. And I said, no, I don't have to do that, you know, let them do their own thing. And in a way, I said, but, and I would rather throw it away--and I really didn't care too much for those works. I didn't throw them away because I liked them. But he liked them. And I guess I had a different standard of esthetics and, in terms of Art and he liked it. Maybe he liked the colors. I don't know what he liked, but I, I have, I also have, some of the works that I did, I still have them. Story_ID: 10126 Speaker 1: I have, I can account for every period in my development, from the time I was 8 years old. My mother kept a piece that I drew that, that she had in her kitchen, on the backdoor of her kitchen door, back, inside door of her kitchen door. And I have that and it's documented. And I have slides of them, four by fives and 35 millimeters. Speaker 2: And the piece that you did when you were 8, what is it? Or it's a-- Speaker 1: It's a piece about Halloween. It's a boy and a girl and a pumpkin, you know. It's a big piece, big piece. And it's, I had to use crayons I think, yeah, crayon. This was about my true love or something, I don't know. But I have it. And I had it--it was tearing on the edges and I had it restored. And so I have a record every period, pre-school, (unclear) elementary school. I have high school. I have that time at the gallery. I have my first piece. I have the exhibit that day, Hale Woodruff showing at (unclear). He had a, a yearly show, you know, and I won a prize with one of my, I have a photograph of the sculpture that won a prize, one of a family. I always do families. And I also, I also do a lot of people with books. And so I have every period documented--not intentionally so. I did a series of ink paintings when I was in, at (unclear), and I've just let them go little by little, you know. And I have periods from the '40's and the, and I guess, '30s, '40s, '50s, '60s-- [1930s, 1940s, 1950s,1960s] '60s I have, I have some of them in the show of these (unclear). And '70's [1970s], every, every 10th, decade, I have. Speaker 2: --is represented. Story_ID: 10127 Speaker 1: He was the one who, who also, Lester Grainger (unclear) Speaker 2: So you're saying, oh, Lester Grainger, okay. Speaker 1: Lester Grainger. We had a very unique rapport (unclear), I know. Speaker 2: So, so, you're saying, so what happened. Let's, you said you were in a competition--the, one of the board members--well, there're two things. One of the board members from-- Speaker 1: Virginia. Speaker 2: From Vir-- Speaker 1: Williamsburg, Virginia. Speaker 2: Bought. Speaker 1: Bought one of my pieces, a sculpture, a beautiful piece I think, and gave it to the Virginia Museum. And then I went to see the sculpture, get a photograph of it, and they told me I didn't have anything there. They didn't have anything there by any Negroes. They might have had a [Henry Ossawa] Tanner hidden away some place, but they told they didn't have anything there by me. And she was able to get the sculpture, I mean a photograph for me. And I'm going to find out her name because the woman who is at William and Mary College where she was is going to get that name for me of the person who served on the board of Virginia Museum. And she's the former director of the Museum at Hampton, the one whose going to get the information for me. Story_ID: 10128 Speaker 1: At this point, is the period of time that Hampton is building its own Art collection too, you know, internal, you know, with--cause it has a-- Speaker 2: A long-standing art collection. And it's the first museum. Howard [University] had the first gallery or something. I don't know what it was, but Hampton [Institute] had the first museum. And it, it started collecting, the [Henry Ossawa] Tanner was many, many years ago. Speaker 1: That's right, that's right. Speaker 2: And it's been building on that for many years. So, and the Shepard, Dr. Shepard went to Africa in 1890 and he started sending things back, we'll say, 10 years, 5 years after he got there. And so it's, it's been going on for a long time. Speaker 1: Now, you were talking about Lester Granger too, that, that he, you know, you got--this is your Senior, Senior year or-- Speaker 2: Senior year. Speaker 1: Okay, and you go to New York. Speaker 2: To New York, and he, and, and while in New York, I was introduced to Raymond Laurie and designers. And Mr. Granger wanted me to come to New York and work--I don't know what, what he wanted me to do, I think in, maybe the Urban League as a designer or something. But he wanted me to come to New York. And I, I could have had a career, well, I'm saying as an artist in New York early, because my work was really selling. And it was, we were exhibiting all over because of Lowenfeld's experience and people knew him. We were at St. John's College. We were at, we were at a lot of places. And so the name was out there, but I decided that I would go on and continue my education because I didn't want to--I don't know. I, something said, you don't want to do this, you know. You don't want to go to New York and be a full time artist because you, you want--I, I was at the point where I wanted to say more than that, rather than to isolate myself in a studio and do art, you know. I, I, had to sell it. I didn't want to sell. That was the thing. I didn't want to sell my art. And if you're going to make a living being an artist, you have to sell your art. And I had, I had just passed a period where I was able to sell some things because I saw my art as my children, as you, you, you were correct. And I just didn't want to do that. And I ended up going to Penn State briefly when I was, when I graduated. And then I decided I'd had enough of Lowenfeld. I couldn't do anything wrong. I had to go some place where I could do something wrong, and fight with people I guess, where people didn't agree with me or I didn't agree with them. So everything I did in Penn State was wonderful. I didn't like being wonderful. I liked the challenge of testing my ideas, I guess. So I went to Ohio State where nothing I did was wonderful, but I didn't back away from it. Speaker 1: Now, why Ohio State? Speaker 2: Because Lowenfeld recommended Ohio State because they had an agreement that they would accept the Hampton students, I guess. And first, he had me apply to the University of Virginia. And he knew they wouldn't accept me because they didn't accept Negroes, no matter how talented or what kind of ability you had. They didn't accept them. So they had to pay for my--give me a, had to pay me a stipend to go to Ohio State. So, and then Lowenfeld was able to get me a scholarship from Ohio State so I had two, two scholarships, one that paid--I made more money than I did teaching at the time (laughs). So it was, and then--so I was able to go through from the bachelor's and first I tried, couldn't making, but, couldn't make it, and went to France to study with Haider (ph.) in the atelier there in France. And I changed, went back to sculpture. And I didn't like the sculpture teacher because he was really a kind of racist guy and he didn't want--he was sexist also. He didn't want women to do welding or anything of that sort. He didn't want us to do--just modeling. And I didn't want that. I, I wanted to do modeling, but I didn't want to do that exclusively. So I changed to painting and at the same time, I was taking Art History courses, in Latin American Art and, and I--Anthropology. I was taking Native American Culture and so forth because there was a Native American Museum on campus. And the professors in Anthropology were all from the University of Chicago, really outstanding people. And so I, I sort of had a minor in Anthropology which could, which could have given me a Master's in Anthropology and Art, Studio Art. And then I moved more heavily into Art History. So I did 90 hours beyond the required amount. And I did a, sort of a dual major in Studio and Art History. And, you know, I was able to get a Fulbright [scholarship] and do all kinds of things. When I went to Ohio State, they--I did Philosophy and a lot of things, but in a way they were happy to get rid of me because I just wouldn't respond to situations. I had a good situation there in that we would go to New York and we would, we would go to studios of famous artists, Calder, Alexander Calder and people like that and very, really interesting. But there was still a lot of racism there that we couldn't stay in the dormitories. There were only 400 Negro or black students at that time and 40,000 students. And it was, it was really very a bad situation except I did have some interesting teachers. And I got credit for some Art Education courses where I taught the courses on [Viktor] Lowenfeld cause he was, nobody there had studied with him, you know. They didn't know his theory and so anything and so, but it was, it was--I was trained for it and then I knew from Dillard [University] and Hampton [Institute] that I had a culture, and they could not belittle me at all. And I insisted on doing things from my own culture and assimilating some of Western European. I liked (unclear). I liked, you know, that was the wild beast kind of movement in terms of the black lines and things. And I, there were certain artists I liked. And I, I liked Latin American Art Diego Rivera and people like that. But I knew generally what I wanted to, what my subject matter would be. And that was a no, no. You're supposed to not express yourself through your own subject matter. Then that, that's not the good thing. I said, well, you know, those European artists did, so why can't I. But I had to fight my way through Ohio State. And in my, on my, my, my final exam, my, you know, was supposed to be about Art History and so forth, they wanted to know what I thought of Paul Robeson. I said, you know, what does that have to do with--are you going to give me a decree or, or am I, did I earn it? I mean what does that have to do with this, my experiences here, my studies here? Speaker 1: Was this part of an oral and-- Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: So this was part of your orals then. Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes. Speaker 1: For your PhD or your Master's 'cause--so you went for--so you went, you stayed at Ohio, you went to get your Master's and then you--that was your, your, your study was in-- Speaker 2: In studio. Speaker 1: In studio. Okay. Story_ID: 10129 Speaker 1: But then what made you decide to go on and get your PhD? Was that because that was your plan from the beginning or? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No, that's Grimes, James Grimes. He was from North Carolina. And he said, you know, Samella, you're too mean to go out in the world now. I think you should stay here and, and work on your PhD because he would bring me--I studied Studio with him. He was an Art Historian also. I studied Studio with him, and he would bring me some of his paintings and show me. I said, I think you ought to start over again. Paint, paint it, paint it white and start over again. I mean he was a terrible painter. And I couldn't lie to him, you know. He said this is awful. You know, I just told him, don't show me this. I don't want to see this. And he'd studied with Aikens and people like this, same people [Henry Ossawa] Tanner studied with, you know. And I reminded him that Tanner did better, but (laughs), but, you know, at that point I just wanted to use the studios. I really didn't care whether I passed or not. And it wasn't for the grades or for the Ph.D. or for this or the Master's. I just wanted to use those studios and, and I didn't want to teach. I was there principally because I had good grants and I could use the studio. And I could do my Art, and I could learn about the cultures I wanted to know about. I learned about--I came, I was able to come to Northwestern for a quarter because it's the Big 10, Big 10 schools where you could transfer a quarter to another school. And, and [Marshall] Herskovitz was there. And, you know, I could sort of pretty well chart my course, and especially when you have a, a dual major, you can sort of--and I had a lot of, as I said Native American Art and culture and history. They, it wasn't Art then. African art wasn't art then. It was Anthropology. Speaker 1: And was that the same thing with Native America. It was Anthropology? Speaker 2: Oh, yes, oh, yes, oh, yes. That's why the people from the University of Chicago taught me a great deal about Anthropology and a lot of it was the Native American culture. Speaker 1: Now, the Native American was it white wash, what you learned or was it, was it, is it? Speaker 2: No, not in Anthropology, not through the University of Chicago people, no. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They were, they were the real-- Speaker 1: They were the real deal. Speaker 2: They were the real deal. That was when--who was president of the University of Chicago then? It was a great--considered as one of the greatest and most forthright-- Speaker 1: Institutions. Speaker 2: Institutions. Speaker 1: Well, you know, they trained--actually, what I do know about them is that they trained a lot of people who went to teach at the HBCU's-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: --more than anything. And then they, you know, they had the Rosen, you know, a lot of the Rosenwald art. Speaker 2: Yeah, the, the foremost Anthro--foremost person in the termites and the bugs--what do you call it, Anemology, was trained at University of Chicago. And she was Carter G. Woodson's niece. And she was Mar, what's her name, Margaret, Margaret? But anyway, she was trained. She was the foremost expert on land termites in this country, and in part, most of the world, really. She would go to France and different places. But she went to a, to Florida A&M. That's where we went. And she was one of the ones who was interested in the bus protests. And there was 15 of us who were threatened and investigated as Communists and so forth because we belonged to the NAACP and all of that. But she was trained here at the University of Chicago. Story_ID: 10130 Speaker 1: We were talking about you doing your orals and how they were asking you about Paul [Robeson], and that was 1951, right? Speaker 2: Yes, I, I told them that if my--I said, this had nothing to do with my course of studies here, and if you want to know what I think of Paul Robeson, I think he is a wonderful man. And I do know that his own teammates spiked him and he was on the team (unclear). And I knew enough about him to know that he had reasons to feel that he was not being treated properly. And I said that he's a great man, and I admire him for his stand. And what else do you want to know, you know? What do you know about him, in other words. And, but you had to go through all that racists stuff, you know. Do you think he could--and, and when I was in Upstate New York, about [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.], when he's decided that he was going to, poor people all over the world, you know, and so forth, they were, you know, isn't he going too far? So Speaker 1: So was it, was, was Ohio [State University] disappointing in that way because, I mean you had spent time in New York, the rest of the time had been sort of a Southern experience. And there was always the--you know, there's a different perception-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: --of the North. Was it disappointing in that way? Speaker 2: It was very disappointing. In fact, I think Paul Robeson came to speak in, in Columbus [Ohio] and he--there was a riot, you know, when he came there. And he never was allowed to speak on campus. And it was disappointing, but there were some good teachers there who were very competent. And, but it was disappointing in that we could not eat in the dining hall. We could not stay in the dormitories. And we were treated absolutely as third-class citizens, not even second class. It was, it was very racist. And you, you--I had teachers who would make statements, one of the persons in Latin American art. And I, I had to challenge her. She said, "Mayan Indians have long, black, straight hair, not kinky hair like the Negroes." I mean--so I waited until she finished her class. And I said, I asked her what did she think of her class in terms of their understanding the English language and so forth. And she said, well," I think they, sure they understand it." I said, well, "Why did you have to elaborate and say, (unclear) the Mayan Indians had long, black, straight hair. Isn't that simple enough? Why did you have to add the rest of it?" She said, "Like what?" And I said, "Like kinky hair like the Negroes. What does that have to do with the Mayan Indians. And the contrast wasn't necessary because you had already made a simple statement." And she said, "oh." And we became very good friends after that. She left there and went to the University of Florida and we still were in touch. But, you know, she sort of appreciated the fact that I rescued her from that kind of racism in a way, for that particular time. Speaker 1: You made her aware. Speaker 2: Yeah, I made her aware, sure. Story_ID: 10131 Speaker 1: Is that when you went to University of Maryland, Morgan State, I'm sorry. Was Morgan State after Ohio State? It was-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. But you (unclear)-- Speaker 2: What happened, what happened was before they would allow me a PhD. I had to go some place and get some experience cause I was about 25 or 24 (unclear) Speaker 1: That's what and you got married. That's--right, the same year that you got your-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No, I got married in 1948, '49 [1949]--before (simultaneous) (unclear) Speaker 1: PhD. right, that's right. Speaker 2: And, but they--I hadn't had an experience outside of Ohio State, you know, and in my studies in college. So they wanted me to go and take a job some place which is what I did when I went to Morgan. So I didn't get my PhD until after I'd spent a year at Morgan [State College, now University.] Then I got the PhD. And went back to Morgan for another year, which was trying, very trying. Speaker 1: Trying in terms of the facility and the resources or trying in terms of the school and-- Speaker 2: School. I was, I was going to the Maryland State prison teaching young, black men and, you know, to draw. And that was unbecoming to a college professor. And I was doing things that (laughs). You know, why not? It helped them. It helped take their minds off of being in prison. And many of them were very young boys, you know, but this was during the time when that Maryland, that highway from Delaware to Maryland, they were arresting anybody black, you know, like black, driving black or whatever it is. And, and I used to go to the Maryland State prison. And then some students decided they wanted to go. They were older than I was, you know. And I said, okay. You know, but they decided that, that I was doing the wrong thing, you know, and, and I was disloyal, that was disloyal to-- Speaker 1: To the institution. Speaker 2: And to, it became disloyal to the state of Maryland and the United States of America when they finished with it, documenting my records. I had to get a lawyer. I got a lawyer, the lawyer who did the case for the North Carolina Textile Workers. And I gave him a painting, and he took the whole school on. Yeah, and he had all that removed. Speaker 1: So they said it was un-American or, you know, because you were supporting the prison population or educating them? Speaker 2: Well, they just wanted, didn't want me to go there. Speaker 1: They were upset, they were upset. Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: They thought it didn't reflect well on the institution. That's right. That's right. Speaker 2: And at the same time, the Baltimore Museum was collecting my work and I, and it was a woman there who said, anything you make, let me know--because I still worked painting. I can remember I had a show of a hundred and two paintings or something like that. And I was teaching and I was doing a good job, you know. But the whole thing was they really wanted me to--they brought me in. They wanted me to be chair of the Department. There were only two of us in the department. And Charles Stallings was a well-trained man who, who knew what he was doing. But they wanted--they said he didn't have the personality they wanted, so they wanted me to fire him. And I wouldn't do that, as chair of the Department. I said, how can I be chair of a two-person department? But they insisted that I was. And I wouldn't follow their orders. I wouldn't build up a dossier on him that would criminalize him almost and get rid of him. And, so both of us were in trouble. And, but I stayed a year, let's see. No, I, I only stayed at Morgan until, for 2 years, let me see-- Speaker 1: Two years. Speaker 2: Yeah, two years. And then I went to Florida A&M. Story_ID: 10132 Speaker 1: And so how was the experience cause that's where you became--you ended up becoming Chair, right? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Okay, and so how was that--and you stayed there for 5 years? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, so how was the experience at Florida A&M and what, because it's a--now, Florida A&M is isolated though so, but it was good. Speaker 2: It was a good experience, but I was in, participating in the bus boycott. Speaker 1: Oh, that's what you-- Speaker 2: And that (unclear) that called for an investigation of me as a Communist. (laughs) Speaker 1: I mean it's a wonder you didn't have file already following you around the country (laughs). Speaker 2: And I'm sure it's still there. I'm sure it's in Washington some place. Yeah, yeah. I was investigated for Communist. And then (unclear), they didn't bother my husband because, but he was the bookkeeper for the bus protests people. And I wasn't anything but just carrying people around. But I had the better job. And so they figured well, if they work on me, then maybe we would let up and not bother. I didn't think the President really wanted to do that, but his whole Board of Trustees were white men. And they were racists men. And the governor even came to my thing where I testified. Speaker 1: He came to your defense? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Or came to, oh, came to your hearing. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: The Governor, the Governor of Florida-- Speaker 2: Charlie Johns, his name was, Charlie Johns, the governor of the State of Florida helped to interrogate me about my Communist activities (laughs) just belonging to the NAACP and carrying these workers around to their, to their jobs so they wouldn't have to ride the bus. And we weren't--we were not welcome too much on campus because there were about 15 of us, including Margaret, who was the niece of Carter G. Woodson and people like that. We were, there were 15. There were about, almost 200 people on campus, and most people wouldn't speak to us. Darwin Turner was there, you know Darwin. He died, but he was there and somebody else who was responsible for my being there. He was in drama, and he was a very, very important person in Drama. But, anyway, you know--I don't know. We would just go and get the, we went to Upstate New York. We started an NAACP chapter of 2, 2 blacks and about 90 whites. You know, we just wanted to make the, the country better. And we just wanted to--we felt a responsibility to do something for our children, our grandchildren and we knew, I knew that part--no matter what you say, if it comes from experience, my Art had to have a political, social, cultural base. And if that's my life, then that's, I should participate. I can't have that without--in an empty vacuum with more experience. And, and that, that fear, I didn't have any, you know. I just had fear of the graveyard things with the skeletons. But, you know, I said, if I have to die this way, then this is what I have to do. I can't, I can't not do it. Speaker 1: And what you're really commenting on is, I mean not, not--well, what you're commenting on in many ways is the role of the artists, as sort of social activists. Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: You know, where people don't always think of, of artists that way. But, but-- Speaker 2: Well, when I was at Ohio State, one of the best things that happened to me is that they hired Ben Shawn to come and do a stay, a 6-week stay at Ohio State. I was the only student who wanted to take his course or his--I had him one-to-one with Ben Shawn for 6 weeks and yet nobody was more social and political than Ben Shawn. And so I did have real advantages there. And they brought Susan Langer, Philosophy in the New Key and she--we were, I was in her group, but she didn't have a large group, small, 2 or 3 people. Speaker 1: Well, how would you describe your political leanings at that time? What were they in line with? You know, what were, what were they? Speaker 2: Well, I went to the Wallace lectures. But it's strange, you know, I, anybody I thought would improve the country. I even voted for [President Dwight D.] Eisenhower, you know. It didn't matter who, what political situation it was. I just thought, well, anybody who can improve. I think I read that he had something for the black soldiers, you know, helped them out or something. That, it defied one of the presidents and, but, you know, I, I tried to keep up with what happens in the, in the world politically and socially. And, but I did, I did go through it when in Columbus, I remember going to the Wallace lectures. And I don't, I don't know that I voted or what I did, but I do know that I was, I tried to (unclear) what he was saying. And I don't think he was Communist. He might have been social, more social, leans, leaning towards Socialism. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But the Democrats, you have to realize, when I was coming up in the South were demons (laughs). They were awful. So you almost didn't have much choice, you know. Yeah. Speaker 1: The Republicans were the, were the party. That's right. Speaker 2: The liberal ones, yeah. It's amazing. And yeah, they were, I remember in, in Tallahassee, we were in the lines trying to vote, you know. And they wanted you to have, what kind of, have some kind of thing to vote. I don't know what it was. Speaker 1: Probably a--I've done some, a crop-- Speaker 2: Some kind of land something. Let's see. What did they call it? I don't--I've forgotten now. But it was a clearance that you had to have, requiring of you, knowing that most black people have it, whatever it was. But we, we did--we stood in those lines and voted for somebody. And I, I think, I know we voted for Eisenhower, not that we cared that much, but he seemed to be the lesser of the evils. And voted for Truman, of course-- Speaker 1: Well, [Harry S.] Truman had a lot of-- (TAPE INTERRUPTION) Speaker 2: We knew [Richard M.] Nixon was a terror. My, my sister used to work for, for the one that he framed, the woman, Helen Gahagan Douglas. She used to work for her. And that picture that he criss-crossed and had her in the middle of folk. We knew that before he went to, before he-- Story_ID: 10133 Speaker 1: My name is Julieanna Richardson, and I'm the interviewer and Scott Stearns is the videographer. And I want you to start out by stating your name and spelling it for us again. And I want to have today's date, and we'll continue from there. Speaker 2: I don't know today's date (laughter). Speaker 1: It's April 22, right? Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: 2004. Speaker 2: Oh, ready. My--Samella Lewis. I'm--it's S-A-M-E-L-L-A, L-E-W-I-S. This is the 22nd of May--April (laughter), April, 2004. Story_ID: 10134 Speaker 1: When we last stopped we were, you were actually chairing the Department at Florida A&M, and had gotten--because you were very involved in also and sort of active in workers' rights and things like, the University didn't like that so much. You were talking about that. Speaker 2: Right, right, Civil Rights. Speaker 1: About Civil Rights, that's right. And so, can you talk about how you, you know, any other significance of your time there cause you were there for five years. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And I'm just wondering, cause they wanted you to actually chair the department--(simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --that's what they had brought you there for. Speaker 2: Yes, yes. I did chair the department. And we had no money, of course, had $400 for the year. And, and I painted the president's portrait so we got maybe a couple more thousand dollars in the thousands, when I painted his portrait. And it was a really great experience for me and--because I was able to work with a lot of very talented students there. Denmark James, Denmark and I also worked with some of the music students. And they were, the faculty was a very good faculty. But I had difficulty because my husband was involved in the bus boycott and I was involved. And because I belonged to the NAACP, they said that was a Communistic organization at that time. And we were able to do a lot of things. We founded really the, an Art organization for black artists. Hale Woodruff came and we had a lot important people to come to Florida A&M to participate in art symposia and things of that. And it was, it was just great. But I didn't, you know, my children were beginning to hate all white people because they thought they were all--they, they were thinking they were all terrible. And I didn't want that to happen so--because the police, the chief of police was a member of the Ku Klux Klan and, and they came by and shot the windows out of our cars and, and just really damaged our house. And so not too long after that, when the board of trustees told the president not to get me anything, and I had gotten a Ford Foundation grant. And they, the University decided that they could not do without me. And the Ford doesn't take people out of their positions where they can't return, where the University needs them so badly. But they really wanted me to leave, but they didn't, they were instructed not to give me anything. So it was, it was really trying, but challenging at the same time. Story_ID: 10135 Speaker 1: So who was the president at the time, do you remember? Speaker 2: Yes, George W. Gore, Jr. from Tennessee (laughter) Speaker 1: He was the President of Florida A&M. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: See, we often don't--we forget these things, at that time, that a lot of the universities had--their boards were all white. Speaker 2: Yes. And they, the presidents were generally sons and dau--sons of white men. I mean Dr. Dent, he was, if he was father wasn't white, you know, I would be surprised. And Dr. Gore, he's very fair. And-- Speaker 1: That's fascinating. That has not been talked about a lot. Speaker 2: I know, I know. Speaker 1: Can you comment about that a little bit more? I mean that is-- Speaker 2: It was extremely common, and most of the people, for instance, at Dillard [University] when I was there, the president had a bachelors degree in Hospital Administration. And he was president of Dillard, and most--Dr. Benjamin Quarles and those people were there. And he was over Elizabeth and Benjamin Quarles. They all had either master's or PhD's and the president had a bachelors in Hospital Administration. And it was very common for these--I guess Atlanta was an exception, Morehouse [College] and people like that. They, the private schools were exceptions, but the state school--and Dillard was a, is a private school too. It was, it was a church school, but that was a problem. I guess those people rewarded their children with these positions. It's like, you know, the, the slaves, and house slaves and the field slaves. And they, they rewarded them. And that, that was so common. And many of the people who were not prepared to teach were given, were honored with these kinds of positions. We were not too long out of slavery. We still have a bit of it hanging onto us, but it was, it was that way. Speaker 1: You know, it's not anything--I, I'm hoping that I can get more people to talk about those things because they're not--and, you know, and in the recent thing with Strom Thurmond's (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yes, oh, I knew about that when I was at Florida A&M. I knew because I had gone to what--the college was called Clafflon College earlier, before it became whatever it is now. It was called Clafflon College. And his daughter was a student there [Essie Mae Washington attended South Carolina State College]. And she lived with the faculty. She did not live in the dormitory. And he would come to see her about once a month in his--he was governor [of South Carolina] then. He was Governor. And everybody knew about his daughter. This was no secret. And I kept telling people, and she came, I knew she came to California. And she was a teacher in the system here. I knew that. Speaker 1: This is not related to (unclear), but why do you think she came out at this point? That's what I didn't under--(simultaneous)? Speaker 2: Everybody in South Carolina knew about it. I don't know why she came out at this point because, I guess she said her children insisted that she do this, clarify the whole situation. And I don't know exactly why. Speaker 1: He was just dead and gone by that. I mean she could have changed the course of history (unclear), (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Of course, she could have, of course, of course. But I don't understand it, why she waited so long because we all knew. Speaker 1: So you're saying in many respects that the universities, you know, at the administrative level, were, I want to say, ground--I mean places that people were placed who were of these mixed-- Speaker 2: Of course, of course. Speaker 1: --of people who had some power. Speaker 2: Of course, and they were, for instance, Elizabeth [Catlett] really was dismissed from Dillard because she brought Paul Robeson to speak and to sing, and she was involved with the unions. She was--but she was still doing her work as a, a teacher, and doing a great job. But it was also to keep other blacks in line, the students in line and the teachers in line with the segregated policies and things of that sort. And anybody who moved out of that, they could dismiss them. Speaker 1: And that I know happened to Horace M. Bond at Lincoln University when he was very Africa-centric set. Speaker 2: I knew him, yes. I knew him when I was at Dill--at Hampton, he came to Hampton quite a bit. Story_ID: 10136 Speaker 1: So how old were your children at the time that you were at Florida A&M? Speaker 2: One was born there. The younger one was born in, at, in Tallahassee. And he was, when we left, he was only about three, three years old or less than that. And the other one was in, just out of kindergarten. Speaker 1: And their names, give their names too. Speaker 2: Allan Stephen Lewis is the oldest one. That's Allan up there, and that--he's got his PhD now. And Claude Anthony Lewis. Story_ID: 10137 Speaker 1: Now, you also said--so you had, what was vibrant about the experience there because you had a teeny little budget. You were fighting with the administration-- Speaker 2: I know, I know. Speaker 1: --but you said you enjoyed it. Speaker 2: Well, in terms of students. They were--I don't think they'd had opportunities to work with somebody who, who was in their corner, and who fought for their, for them to get supplies because they couldn't buy supplies. And I, when I see what they're doing now, I mean they're gone ahead. And, and they were never, one of them, I--Doctor--let's see, what is her name now? She, she's, the man who started the Negro History, you know, you know, the-- Speaker 1: Oh, Carter G. Woodson? Speaker 2: Carter G. Woodson. She was the, she was the niece of Carter G. Woodson. She was in the Biology Department. So I had relations with people like that and the Presbyterian minister, Metz Rollins who, J. Metz Rollins and his father was a Presbyterian minister. His grandfather was a Presbyterian minister, but when he said he preferred human dignity over religion, you know, if he, he had to choose between the two. Then they barred him from the Presbyterian, and it was eight years before he could get a church, another church. So it was that kind of individual that I was able to meet. Dr. Collins, that's, that's the name of the--and she was the foremost Anthropologist in terms of, of land termites. She was a graduate of University of Chicago and really just outstanding, but there were some outstanding people there. And I enjoyed them, and I enjoyed working with the students. I had quite a few students who now are in very good places, you know. Speaker 1: So in many way, the--our black colleges at that time were these sort of bastions of conservatism. Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely. Speaker 1: And you said about the NAACP, that they were negative about the NAACP? Speaker 2: Yes, it was Communist organization, yes. We're talking about the '50's [1950s], and the NAACP, at that time was a Communist organization, and they, they really--anything that we did to help our own cause was negative as far as those presidents were concerned because they were there to look over us and to prevent any kind of advancement in terms of, and they (unclear), it's true. As I said, Atlanta might have been an exception. And before--when I went to Hampton, before I went to Hampton, there had all-white presidents. And I went there during the, the acting tour of a black president. And, and then the other president after him was a man from the Virgin Islands called Marrone (ph.), which I know it's Marrone because we used to call him moron (laughter). We just (unclear) and so, it was to keep us in our place. And both cases had real exciting experiences. For instance, at Dillard [University], I, I did get to see a lot of poets, at Xavier [University] and Dillard. I did get to see a lot of entertainers. Etta Motten and, and Duke Ellington came to Hampton [Institute] and did his 'Black Bottom' and 'Beige Symphony', he, he premiered it there. And Dinah Washington came to Hampton. So we, we were able to see those, those kinds of things. But at Hampton, the president, the board of trustees, which was most white, all white, I think, but mostly white, but, said that we didn't need an Art Department 'cause we could paint outside or we could, we could do it in the gym, you know. And that's when, I've forgotten the great anthropologist, Ruth Benedict, she was on the board of Hampton at that time. And, you know, and I--yeah, it's been a problem. We, we've had a problem. Story_ID: 10138 Speaker 1: And I'd just had a show down in New Orleans about "Brown vs. the Board of Education". And I'd, I painted about thirty paintings about it. And then I had six shades that you could pull down and see--and, and one of, the first one, did we, did we lose more than we gained and so forth, you know. I moved on with six different statements. And at the end, I had a big shade for people that was, that remained down for people to write their comments. And it was full the first day, and most people felt that we lost more than we gained because we lost our communities. We lost our, we lost--and, and when we, what we had to go through to go back now to where we were then or worse (laughter) than where we were then because we don't have the great teachers we had, because, you know, we've just like given up. And our students are still discriminated against and segregated. And so, but I didn't think that that show would sell because I had these smatterings of, of, you know, people throwing (noise). Speaker 2: Do you want me to pause for a second. Speaker 1: You know what's interesting about that is that, in these interviews that I do, I often ask people, you know, because a feeling was that things had not gotten better, and everyone says they're better, you know, except for you and a distinct minority. But I feel instinctively that they are worse. Speaker 2: I think so. Speaker 1: And that we've lost, we've lost. Speaker 2: Those people probably didn't live during the time when I lived or something because I know we had wonderful teachers who were concerned about us. They weren't paid much, but they were really in our corner. We had wonderful principals. And we, we didn't look at as much television. We went to performances, and we gained about--we knew about our communities. And we supported each other, but now, we have teachers sitting and reading the newspaper in the classroom. They, and they can't control their own situation, and it's, it's really--I know when I was, I mentioned to the president of Scripps College that I thought we had lost. She said, "Oh, no"--she's lawyer. She said, "But we gained so much." I said, "What did we gain? What did we gain?" And she couldn't tell me what she had gained because she, she has no way of knowing. She sees a lot of basketball players, and she sees a lot of people, clowns in the TV (laughter). But she, she couldn't tell me one thing. Story_ID: 10139 Speaker 1: Let me ask you, so in the world of the black college environment and in the world of black art at the time, who were--Hampton [Institute] stood on its own, right? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, Speaker 1: What were the places that were standing on its own? Speaker 2: Well, Hampton and Atlanta, some of the schools there. I, I don't know about Spelman [College] because there are some reports that, you know, they were controlled by a particular family. But I don't know that. And, but I know that Hampton stood on its own. Speaker 1: Now, you decided--so, your children are afraid, sort of you, and you and your husband are active. And so--how does the opportunity come for you to go to New York? Speaker 2: Yeah, okay. Well, I had talked with Dr. [Viktor] Lowenfeld, he would, he always came to my rescue (laughter) in situations where I had turmoil and problems. And he said, well--he told me he had a heart condition, so he couldn't come down to Florida. He couldn't do anything at that point, but he did have this ex-student who was head of an Art Department in Upstate New York. And he would speak to him about inviting me to come there to, (unclear) State University of New York at Plattsburg. And he, but in order to go for my interview, I had to pretend I was marching in the procession because every place I would go or what I would do, they would tell people we were Communists. And the administration, including the dean, who I was responsible for helping to come there, bringing him there. But they, they really wanted me to--they couldn't fire me because I had tenure, and I had, at that time, the only PhD in our history in the State of Florida. And so I went (excuse me) (coughing). Hold on one second. Just go ahead and finish drinking and set the cup down before you talk again.) Speaker 1: I went to upstate New York, just sort of slipped out, you know (laughter), and went up there and had my interview. And I was able to get that job, and I was teaching Chinese Art History and Humanities. They had a great, this, Plattsburg had a great Humanities program at that time. And that's how I--Lowenfeld was instrumental in that. Story_ID: 10140 Speaker 1: [Viktor] Lowenfeld, do you know, I find him a very interesting man in many ways, I'm wondering--what do you think made him the way he was? Was it because he had been, he and his family had been persecuted? But what made him so committed to helping black people? That's, that's, you know-- Speaker 2: Well, when Lowenfeld first came to this country, he went to Harvard [University]. He worked there. And he felt that he was not needed, that he was not--he didn't just want to teach. He wanted to fill a void that some people might have in terms of their lives because he was not just an art educator. He had worked, he was head of the School for Blind in, in Vienna, Austria. He, and he had lost much of his family to the gas chamber. He, he just felt a need to work with people. He said that when he worked at Harvard, the art department, they had flowers, and, and people had no real concern about life and he felt, not much purpose either, in terms of their own lives. So he came to Hampton [Institute], and he--and he, he never touched any of our works, but he told us what to do in terms of our own situation, where he had us make strokes and lines and not just try to draw anything, but to express ourselves. And he made us go inside of our ourselves to think about what was important to us. And he was a fantastic teacher. (interruption) Speaker 1: So, now-- Speaker 2: He, he asked me to stay after he left because he felt that they would not treat him--treat me like they treated him. They treated him very badly, this new president who came in, treated him badly. Speaker 1: He left in what year, do you know, you remember? Speaker 2: Forty, '46 [1946]. Story_ID: 10141 Speaker 1: You had gotten the Ford Foundation grant while you were at Florida A&M-- Speaker 2: To go to Ethiopia. Speaker 1: To go--okay, did you go, did you go? Speaker 2: No, they wouldn't, they, they told the Ford Foundation they couldn't do without me. It was $11,000 at that time-- Speaker 1: Which was a lot of money at-- Speaker 2: --at that time, yes. Speaker 1: I see, okay, so-- Speaker 2: And that's when this, Dr. Gore called me and said, if you don't stop working with that group, that you'll be eating peanuts. I said, well, I think peanuts are very good for you (laughter). Speaker 1: Dr. Lewis, what I love about you, you've been a fighter the whole time (laughter) so--. Speaker 2: So they fired my husband instead of me 'cause they couldn't fire me, you know. I would have had a case if they had fired me. And when they investigated me--I want to tell you about this, the governor of the state of Florida was on the panel to question me. His name was Charlie Johns. No, they, they told the Ford Foundation they couldn't do without me. Speaker 1: So when you--this is even really before the [Senator Joseph] McCarthy, you know, period. People don't, you know, you hear a lot about blacks in the Communist Party, you know, in the South, and, you know, the intellectuals who were involved and the people concerned about Movements-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: --but you don't hear a lot of--I haven't heard in these interviews, I shouldn't say you don't, about retribution, you know. You hear, but you don't hear about the retribution of our own, you know, organizations. Speaker 2: Right. Story_ID: 10142 Speaker 1: Now, at Plattsburg [New York], what is that experience like? You said that they--(simultaneous)? Speaker 2: It was a great experience. The president's name was Dr. Angel, and he was an angel, really. He was, he was wonderful. He said that most teachers only know their field, you know, and so they're not broad, broad enough. That's why they had such a good Humanities program. I think he brought Robert Frost, brought Sea--Pete Seeger there, and he brought Robert Vaughn there, and he brought the woman who wrote, another anthropologist, I mean a great anthropologist [sic. philosopher], Susan Langer. And, you know, just all those people. And they were almost opposite, and he thought that we should study something related to our field, but not necessarily directly in that field. So he would, he had a program where we could go to India. We could go to China, we could go--well, we could go to Taiwan at that time. And we could study, and maybe not necessarily directly in our field, but something related. And he got grants for us to do this. And we would come back and, and have seminars with students about our experiences and he, he brought to the school, he brought--Harry Belafonte flew in a whole boat, planeload of people from South Africa, students. They had to escape South Africa and go into Tanzania. And he provided scholarships for all of those students. Speaker 1: That's pretty amazing. We're gonna change tapes. That's amazing. Speaker 2: Yeah, he was, he was a mathematician. And when he died, he died in North Carolina, and he didn't want them to mention anything about his being president of anything and they didn't, in his obituary. No, he just--he was like a hippy, you know, had a long beard, and I kept up with him. Story_ID: 10143 Speaker 1: I guess the broad Humanities background was beneficial to me. I could, I studied Chinese Art History because I was so carried away and impressed by the calligraphy, especially the calligraphy I couldn't ready , you know. And I learned to read some of it later on, but the ancient calligraphy and the Soon Dynasty calligraphy. And I remember seeing Frances Kline's paintings of, what was Chinese and Japanese calligraphy. And people called it Abstract Art. And I would, I, I, I'd had a feeling for that, and I wanted to know more about it. I wasn't against Western Art History, but it was boring to me, you know, the floor plans and, of the gothic cathedrals and this--they were all sort of the same kinds of things. And I just didn't--I wasn't excited about it. And I was excited about Chinese calligraphy, and I said, well, I want to know more about this. And my professors realized that I was not going to be--I had one of the greatest Renaissance Scholars to teach me, Dr. Ralph Fanning, but I still didn't like Renaissance Art, in particular. You know, I liked Michelangelo and people like, but, you know, the whole thing of those details about it that, that were boring, I thought. So I studied Anthropology and Native American cultures and knew that France Kline and, got his impetus from Chinese and Japanese calligraphy and knew that Jackson Pollack got his from Native Americans. So why not study the source rather than those people who, you know, were interpreters of it. Speaker 2: And at the time that you were doing your study, what was the over study of that area in terms of, you know, Chinese Art and also Native American Art, cause--? Speaker 1: Very, very few people were, were doing it. Very few people. They were studying maybe Native American culture, some people, but no, they were not really interested in it. They were (unclear) (exterior noise)--African Art was not considered as art at that time. [Marshall] Herskovitz was going to Africa and different places, but it was Anthropology. And only when Rockefeller--Nelson Rockefeller gave the collection to the Metropolitan [Museum], his collection, did it become art because it was deemed art then. Speaker 2: Now, what do you think? Speaker 1: Yeah, we've got a problem with the-- Speaker 2: You could ask the question. Speaker 1: What do you think you learned from your study of Chinese Art and Native American Art, but first let's deal with Chinese Art. What did you learn? Speaker 2: Well, I was fortunate to have a grant, NDEA, National Defense Education Act grant to study Chinese history, language and culture. Well, I learned about the difference, in terms of the different religions. I learned about what the Chinese thought of Christ. I learned, you know, about Daoism . I liked what I was getting because it broadened my experience and my scope. And I learned about Buddhism--Chinese Buddhism, Japanese Buddhism. I just learned to appreciate the silence and the culture, the foods. It was a, an all-encompassing kind of thing, you know, wherein, when I studied Western Art History, it was restrictive in terms of a discipline that moved in one line maybe, cause I could not relate to European culture. I, I was, there was something about it, and, and even now, I don't want to go to London or Paris or any of those places because why go there when I can go to the islands that influenced them, and why go there when I can go to Africa that influenced them. Yeah, I prefer the source. Speaker 1: So, do you think your, your art was actually influenced by your study of Chinese? Speaker 2: I don't, I think, when--some of it was, yes, yes. Speaker 1: Okay, and what would you say was? Speaker 2: The fluid lines that I began to merge--that began to emerge because before that, I was making things that were enclosed in the form and line. But then I began to move out of that. And it was the Chinese studies that did that for me, and more calligraphy and more of the scholar painters. The scholar painters were those who painted with their beards and those painted after a little sip of drink (laughs). They became freer. And those who had nothing really to worry about, the scholars, they were scholars. They didn't have to worry about working in the fields and things of that sort, but they were the most impressive for me because they were the most free paint--they had free, freer styles and--. Speaker 1: And art in Chinese society, what role did it play? You know, did it play a role typical of, you know, European society or was it different? Speaker 2: It's very different, yeah. The art, well, the calligraphy and the art, which is art in Chinese society, calligraphy is art; writing is art. Remember, we used to talk about penmanship. Well, it's art. And you study the works of masters, and you are not really recognized as an artist until you know that work well enough, not to duplicate it, but to find your way out of using it and also to find your way out of it in terms of adding to it your own particular touch, your own particular style. And you can't just--like we put together things in Western Art, you know, and find something new, it's--that's what's important, is to make something different and new. Well, that's not, you, you bring tradition with you. Story_ID: 10144 Speaker 1: The first one I did, I sold to a press agent for, who's the woman who gives all the stuff to AIDS, that movie star? Speaker 2: Oh, I don't know who that is. Speaker 1: She's English, and she's very famous. Speaker 2: Okay, I'm trying, press agent? I'm not sure. Speaker 1: It's her press agent. What's her name? Speaker 2: That gives all the money to AIDS? Speaker 1: Yeah, she give, she's, and she's a good friend of Michael Jackson, who is, you know--. Speaker 2: Elizabeth Taylor. Speaker 1: Elizabeth Taylor, yeah. I sold it, the first one to her press agent. He promised me that I could borrow it back and show it whenever I needed to. And when I got ready to borrow it, he said, no, no, no. No, I can't let you have my painting. I'm sorry. So I painted one better than his (laughter). Speaker 2: What is year on this piece? Speaker 1: I don't know (laughs). Speaker 2: It's really, it's stunning. But that's what I'm saying, your pieces have simple lines, but always a--it's almost like a calmness and an internal. That's why I was wondering, you know, about the influence there? Speaker 1: Yeah, oh, I loved China. I, I--and I was the only one to go to Quemoy and Matsu [Islands, Taiwan] where they had--they were digging out the islands, you know, the, the mountains and the Taiwanese were in there. And that's where the Chinese were bombing at that time. Speaker 2: So how many trips have you made to China (unclear) or do you know? Speaker 1: Three. Speaker 2: Three trips. Was the first trip, when? Speaker 1: The first trip was sixty, 1962, I think it was '62 [1962]. It was on a grant, the Ford Found--no. Speaker 2: No, (unclear) cause the Ford Foundation, that would have been '64 [1964] to '66 [1966]. Speaker 1: No, I did one in '62 [1962] also. Speaker 2: You did one, Fulbright? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Was it the Fulbright? Speaker 1: Fulbright, that's what it was, yes, yes. Story_ID: 10145 Speaker 1: The Native American Art though, the study was a little different of that, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, yes. Speaker 1: Can you explain that? Speaker 2: Yes, I, I started studying--Ohio State had a Native American Museum. And nobody paid any attention to it or didn't go to it or bother. And, and I started studying with some anthropologists from the University of Chicago. And I wanted to do something other than the Western Art, so my professor, Dr. Grimes, said, why don't you do something about Native American Art. And I started studying and working and dealing with that. And I found out that Ohio has a great Native American culture, you know. So that's when I started collecting Native American Art. And the Woodlands, and I have all kinds of Native American Art, but then when I came to Scripps [College], I found out they had one of the most important Native American collections. And they were getting ready to give it to the San Bernardino Museum on permanent loan cause they couldn't give it away. And the, the San Bernardino Museum, at that time, was mostly famous for eggs and things of that sort, nothing of any importance in terms of art. So they were discrediting it as art. They had a curator in, for the whole college complex, to say that this was not Art. And I had the black students, five or six black students, they'd do these things in the summertime, when students are not there. And I--we marched on the board of trustees and the president's office and told them that they--it was illegal for them to do this, that if they're gonna give the museum, the work on permanent loan to a museum, it had to be a creditable museum. And they had studied, you know, I had students studying about--most of it was a women's collection, you know, where the women did the work. And so Scripps is a women's college. And I challenged the president about giving away things that benefit the women students at his college. And they had not, had no--I had Harvard and different people to come in to say that this is an important collection. It was one of the most important collections in the country, and they had loaned out things and never gotten them back, you know. So we made an issue of that, and I documented the--I got a grant from Fulbright to document the collection. And I did that and photographed the whole collection and had, got faculty support, and we saved the collection for Scripts. And that, this--it's the most important collection they have now. Speaker 1: That's pretty amazing. Speaker 2: Yeah, and the general--they, they still denied that they were doing this, giving it away. And they did it with the African collection. They didn't want anything that wasn't Western. The Chinese collection they had five, they had Emperors' cloths and things and tablecloths and things of that sort that they were throwing in the trash can. Speaker 1: How did these collections develop and, and away? That's, I mean I'm try to--I know that I grew up in, you know, Central Ohio, where there were the (unclear)--. Speaker 2: Missionaries. Speaker 1: Missionaries? Speaker 2: Missionaries, missionaries. Claremont's [California] a missionary town. And they, the missionaries would go in there and take these things and give--and bring them back and give them--well, Dr. Shepard was a black missionary. He went and he gave Bacuba, Kuva things to Hampton [Institute]. He was a graduate of Hampton, and he gave it to the, the place in New York, you know, the library system. What is it? Speaker 1: Schomburg Speaker 2: Schomburg, and Howard [University], he gave Howard a collection. But, and then you have these people who go to these Native American reservations, these missionaries. They collect, they send these things back or they keep them for a while, and then they give them to the colleges and universities or sell things off. You know, missionaries were the ones who collected all of that. And in Africa, the universities like UCLA went go to Africa, and they'd tell the people the work wasn't worth anything, and they would bring back a lot of these collections and sell them to big-time collectors and, yeah, rip people, rip the countries off, rob them of their heritage and their treasures. And it's still going on. Speaker 1: Right, that's true. Speaker 2: These poor people. Story_ID: 10146 Speaker 1: So, in the, in your study, but the study of Native American Art and culture has really been more of artifacts than of the culture itself, right? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Was there much study at the time that you were doing study, of the culture that would have been called Native American culture or? Speaker 2: No, the reason the anthropologists were doing research, and they would, they were trying to learn more about the cultures at that time. Speaker 1: So the age, they were looking at the art, and looking at the age and how far they were dated back (unclear)--? Speaker 2: And who did what? You know, like the women did certain kinds of things. The men did certain kinds of art forms and what they were used for, ceremonial purposes, but what ceremonies, you know. And with Africa, they tend to say this is a ceremonial piece. Well, what ceremony, you know. What, what is it for, really? That, that doesn't tell you anything. Speaker 1: But Dr. Lewis, you never, did you ever think about becoming an anthropologist yourself? Speaker 2: I never majored--I had a minor in Anthropology, and I could have gotten a, you know, a degree in Anthropology, but I chose not to, but I did have a minor in Anthropol--and worked with Susan Langer and, not Ruth Benedict because she was, I think she had, she was in some place telling people who they were and who (laughter) what was important in their lives. That's what was happening frequently at that time. They were not learning as much as they were deciding for themselves what was-- Speaker 1: What was important and what wasn't and who was--? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --who had credibility and who didn't. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Who was civilized and who wasn't. Speaker 2: (Laughter) that's right. Story_ID: 10147 Speaker 1: Okay, so now when you got your Fulbright Fellowship, were at--you were at Plattsburg, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, and so, you're saying you--did you (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: But I got more than one Fulbright. Speaker 1: You got more than--okay. Speaker 2: I got a New York State Fulbright, and then I got a Fulbright, you know, on a Fulbright. Yeah, I got more than one, and I had a post-doctorial fellowship from--I think it was a part Fulbright and something at the National Science thing in Washington. So-- Speaker 1: So this is for--these were, you know, were in the early '60's [1960s], and this is, you know, there's a lot of movement in the country, and you are now in the North as opposed to the South, but you're in an environment where you say the president was like an angel-- Speaker 2: Um-hum, um-hum. Speaker 1: --and so it's a very, sort of fertile time-- Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: --and a free time in some respects in terms of your career and what you're learning, you know, experiencing. Now, during this time, are you maintaining contact with Elizabeth Catlett, and, you know, is she--now, okay. She wasn't, that wasn't, she wasn't with Charles [White], was she--(simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: She and Charles were divorced, was she, in the '40s, [1940s], I think-- Speaker 1: In the forties [1940s], okay. Okay, so had she joined up with Poncho [Fransico Mora] at that time? Speaker 2: She joined up with Poncho as soon as or before they were divorced, and before the divorce was final. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes, she went to Mexico by herself. Speaker 1: So she had been, she had been--so where was she during this period? Speaker 2: When I was in Plattsburg, she was in Mexico. Speaker 1: She was in Mexico. Okay, cause she really spent a significant amount of time (unclear) (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: And she's been in Mexico since the late '40's [1940s], yeah. That--she had a choice of leaving the country on her own or being taken out in a box. [U.S. Senator Joseph] McCarthy (unclear) many and people like that. And she was, she was in political exile. She couldn't come back into the country, even when her mother was ill. She had to bring her mother to Mexico where she died. And the first time she came back into the country, I got the Claremont Colleges to invite her to come to speak. And the State Department did not know the--not the State Department, but those people at the, you know, who tell where you can go and where you can't go, knew that she was there, but she came in under an assumed name. She was Sophie Greenberg (laughter). But we had a big conference at Northwestern [University]. Jeff Donaldson [of AfriCobra] called it, and we had a hook-up with Elizabeth, a telephone hook-up, and we had such difficulty getting that through. And they, they stopped it in the middle of the talk. Speaker 1: That's, you know, this--why don't you hear as much about her being in exile as, you know, Paul Robeson. You, when you (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: They were great friends. Speaker 1: And when people talk about Elizabeth Catlett, as if she chose Mexico as her place. Speaker 2: No, no, they said her--she was dangerous. She was working for human rights at that time. She was with the Carver School in, in New York, in Harlem. And New York University wanted to take over the Carver School, and they fought New York University. And this is when she really was branded a Communist. You know, you don't fight certain people. And she, she was given--she had no choice. Speaker 1: Dr. Lewis, why was she--(simultaneous)? Speaker 2: But let me tell you what they did when they, she went to Mexico. They had her arrested as an undesirable alien in Mexico. And she went to--she was in prison in Mexico. And Poncho was able to work it so that she could get out. But that's when she met a lot of Cuban women who were in the same prison. No, she was not there at her own, because she wanted to be there, and stay there. She had to become a Mexican citizen in 1962 so she could participate in the voting and the politics and things of that sort. But, no, they thought her work was dangerous, and all she was doing was--she did make a few things about the Civil Rights, Congress and things of that sort. And she worked with the unions here, but that was illegal or wrong because, you know, you don't--it's not becoming to a college professor. That's what she was told at Dillard. Speaker 1: So her--where was she born originally? Speaker 2: She was born in Washington, D.C. Speaker 1: Oh, D.C., okay. Speaker 2: And her sister is still there, and her father was a, taught at Tuskegee, taught mathematics, I think, and her mother was a graduate of one of those women's college, not in Atlanta, but--(simultaneous). Speaker 1: Chaney, no, it wasn't Chaney. Okay. Speaker 2: I think it might have been Chaney, yeah. And she was, she couldn't get a job as a teacher, so she was sort like a truant officer. And she had a uncle who was, did really one of the first heart transplants, but he did it on a Native American reservation. And they had property in North Carolina, and, and he wanted to move his family from North Carolina, so he had to buy the whole car on the train. Speaker 1: Pretty amazing stories. Speaker 2: Yeah, it is. Speaker 1: So did she develop, you think, a love for Mexico over time? Speaker 2: Yes, oh, yes, absolutely. Speaker 1: And August, you know, Negro League baseball players, people, I mean lots of people even escape there, I mean, you know, a lot of people escape (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well, Cuernavaca is full of people who, you know, the Jews and the people who were persecuted there, they're all there. And I'm getting ready to go and see her. In fact, I leave on the sixth. I got my ticket. I leave on the sixth of next month, and spend a couple of weeks with her. Speaker 1: That's soon. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: That's very soon. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Story_ID: 10148 Speaker 1: You know, well, during the break I want to ask you one other thing, but when we--I'd like to take--how did you end up then coming to University of Southern California? Was it University of Southern California? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Why you would have this wonderful period, you know, at Plattsburg and why the change? Was there a better opportunity offered? Speaker 2: Okay, well, I was thinking about my children again. Plattsburg, when I was there was practically an all-white community. And I could see changes in my children. Well, the younger one came home and wanted to know did we know any Negroes (laughs). He was about five years, maybe he was five years old, and did we know any Negroes (laughter), yeah, are they good people or bad people? And he didn't want to go to Africa cause some of those huts might fall in on his head. So, you know, but--and then the older one, during a Halloween, he came home, he says, "You know, the kids started coming up to me"--he had a sheet over his head and only the little eyes and things and hands out. And they said, "Hi, Allen." And he said, "How'd they know me," (laughter). And so they were getting absolutely confused. And they were nice, environment, but it was still, you know, we were the only ones almost. And it was-we had to, we had to take the children where they were, could more different kinds of people. And, of course, the people in Plattsburg all hated the Canadians, the French Canadians because they would come and, you know, lunch in parks and things. But I was a professor five, near the Dean, and I, I just had to give up and leave because it was a beautiful environment for us, but I could see what it was doing to the, the boys. Speaker 1: And you thought California would offer something, you know, more diverse (unclear)? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, and when they came out (clearing throat). I have this allergy with these plants and things. Speaker 1: I had lost my voice (unclear) because, as you can tell, I had a virus. But they thought that maybe I was have an allergic re--you know, maybe sinuses. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So does that happen twice a year? Speaker 2: Yeah, when we came out here, well, I, I needed to get out of Plattsburg for the sake of the kids. I didn't mind the cold because I'd become adjusted to it. But I didn't want them to grow where they only saw one kind of people. You know, and even they had the run from the others, it was okay. Just, just introduce more people in their lives, different kinds of people, more cultures. And, and I was afraid too that they would be growing up disliking their own people, you know, cause they didn't know, didn't know--they, it was foreign to them, except for us, you know. And I didn't want that to happen. So I had to move from Florida because I didn't want them to hate all white people, and I didn't want--I had to move from Plattsburg because they didn't know any black people (laughter). So, you know, just--you have to think about your kids. Story_ID: 10149 Speaker 1: He, he's now big time, of course, and books, all kinds of books on him. But he told me some things, he said--and he was, he was, now he was more in the line Communistic thinking than most people. And they didn't bother him, you know, (laughter). But--cause, you know, he was doing all those paintings that related to persecution of, of Jews who were called Communists and so forth. But he said that if he were black, he said, I would have to--I've forgotten exactly what he said, he--it's like I would have to be a Communist. We, we discussed not only Art, but life in general and politics and things of that sort cause that's what his Art was based on. Speaker 2: And had already been told--now, your art, though, during this period of time, what was it, was it--was it still, you say, in stages of development? You had found your voice already, right? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: [Viktor] Lowenfeld had helped-- Speaker 1: I found it with Lowenfeld. Speaker 2: Lowenfeld had helped you do that. Speaker 1: Yes, yes, and they didn't like my voice at Ohio State [University]. They thought that I should not think about myself, and that it was--that I couldn't get any good Art out of that. And they didn't want me to make anything that had black people in it because that was compromising my art (laughter). And also, at that time, figurative form was not recognized as being--it was sort of passé. And I insisted on making who I was and what was my life and what my experiences are--were. They didn't like that, but I didn't like what they were doing either. I, it's not that I didn't it, but I thought they had a right to do it, but I also had a right to do what I was doing. So I didn't fair too well with some of the teachers. I got--well, one teacher in my, my Anthropology class, it was, her name was Mrs. Wilder, who said, she was teaching Mayan Art, and it was really Art History, that Mayans as historical. And so she said, one day she said, the Mayans have long, black straight hair, not kinky hair like the Negroes. And I said, "Mrs. Wilder, what do you think of your students in terms of the intelligence of your students? You think they understand simple sentences like the Mayans have long, black, straight hair. Isn't that enough? They know what long, black straight hair is, don't they?" I mean I was furious, you know. And I said, you know, it's, "You were saying, not kinky hair like the Negroes as though it's a derogatory kind of thing, you know." And she said, "Oh". So I waited after class, and I talked to her about it, and she admitted that maybe she owed somebody an apology. We were friends after that. Story_ID: 10150 Speaker 1: So you said in New York that met people like [Alexander] Calder, I mean, so all that. So it was not only from, you know, Art History standpoint or Humanities standpoint, but it was productive in terms of contacts and things-- Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: --there. Now, what black artists were you having contact with then, during that time? Was--? Speaker 2: Well, (unclear) Romie [ref. to Romare Bearden]-- Speaker 1: That's what I was wondering, okay. Speaker 2: I met Jacob Lawrence only, I met Jacob Lawrence in New Orleans when he was doing the Migration Series. But I, I hadn't seen him after that until he came--we invited him out here where we had the Migration Series at, down in La Jolla, at the La Jolla Museum. And they say it hasn't been together in a long time and so forth, recently, but that's not true. I have a document, and we have it in the catalogue I have in the back, where we had, not only his Migration Series, but we had the [Pablo] Picasso, Brock, [Jaques] Lipshitz and, and the impact of, that Africa had on their works. And we borrowed those from Metropolitan and from the Museum of Modern Art. We had a Rockefeller grant to do this, this program down at the--it was, it was a fantastic exhibit. And they, and they wouldn't allow here at the [Los Angeles] County Museum because we went, we went beyond 1950, and went into the '60's [1960s] with the death of Malcolm [X]and things of that sort, went beyond the '60's [1960s]. And they didn't want that kind of political art in, in the museum over there, not pertaining to blacks. They would have Max Beckman and Jewish situations, but not-- Speaker 1: This is in California, right? Speaker 2: This is right over in the County Museum on Wilshire Boulevard. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: Yes, I worked with them for a year. Story_ID: 10151 Speaker 1: But California really opened up another--I mean this has become your home. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And it was, it's been very fertile, a fertile place for you in many ways, right? Speaker 2: Well, not in terms of my art necessarily. I do my art here, and I show in New York and I show in New Orleans, and I show in San Francisco. Speaker 1: So not from a showing standpoint or exhibition? Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: But from, from a standpoint of-- Speaker 2: Inspiring me or something? Speaker 1: (Laughs) You've been here, like most--I mean, I won't say most of your life, but, you know,-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I've been here a long time. Speaker 1: A long time. Speaker 2: Well, I was here because Scripps College was a, was a great place for me to work. I started working at Scripps when they didn't give grades, and they'd give comment--they gave comments. And it was, and I had some good students. And I, I trained Alison Sarr and people like that, you know. And it was maybe about ten black students I was able to touch and to deal with. And it was a great place, and they didn't--Plattsburg was good, was really the reason I got the job at Scripps because they had a Humanities program at Scripps, and I worked in that and the Art History. I taught the Chinese Art History for the, all of the colleges. But it was really the fact that I settled here because I worked there for fifteen years. And I, after that, I started traveling and doing the magazine, and, you know, I didn't have any time to move. (Laughs) I was busy going to Brazil and going to Africa and going to this place and that place. And this was a good place for me to be at the time. I have considered going back to New Orleans because I'm not inspired by California in terms of my art. I'm inspired by the Bayou country and Louisiana and this, that and the other. And I'm, I'm not--I hope I'm not waiting until it's too late to go, but I might, I might go on back there. Speaker 1: To live, you think? Speaker 2: I--it would take me a long time to move with all I have here, but I probably would never sell this house. I'd just let my sons stay here or something. But I, I'm looking for a place maybe where I can go and have more exposure to the things I'm really concerned about and the things that I really like to--when you, you see my Aunt Laura and my Uncle Doll. And I went out to this--I was in New Orleans recently. And I went out to the Bayou country, the, the Great Dame of the Bayou--Bayou Teche region. Nothing has really changed. It's still like that. A few more houses, you know, the prestigious looking houses, but, on the Bayou, but that's all. Speaker 1: So the people, everything--it's almost as if time stood still? Speaker 2: That's right. And when, when a friend of mine told me that nothing had changed, he's from Jeanerette [Louisiana] an area out there, Estelle Jones' husband, I couldn't believe him. And I went out to see for myself, and he's right. I mean the people aren't as racist as they were. They don't seem to be. And black people seem to be more, in good positions and things of that sort, what, what could be counted as good positions, like the, somebody managing a, what do you call it, a gasoline place, a--and nothing. And we went to the library where I couldn't go in when I was there, except that this white woman who decided that they weren't gonna discriminate against me. And there's a black guy in there who's just about running the place. But that's the whole thing in terms of positioning black people has changed. But the rest of it, the houses are still the same, the churches, and the, you know, it's, it's--I don't think the towns have grown. Nobody wants to really move there, you know, because nothing is going on there. But it's-- Speaker 1: But it's calling you in many ways because it reminds you of your childhood. Speaker 2: Yes. Of course. Speaker 1: But it's, well, this is, you know, California is sort of, not bland, but-- Speaker 2: (Laughs) I know. Speaker 1: No, it's really, you know. Speaker 2: Yeah, I know, you just don't, you don't--it, it, there are little groups of people. Like last night, I went to Stan's place, and he had all her friends and his friends there, not all of them, but you can find any niche you want here, but I don't happen to want most of them. And, you know, lots--so much pavement and, and not enough greenery for me. We don't have enough parks and, and, you know, and not enough real people. And, you know, we're in neighborhood, and we were--most of the African Americans who were here have either died out or moved out or gone to Texas or Dallas or someplace fun. It's changed so that we don't have the comradeship and friendship that we had. And you go to the South, and it's a whole different kind of thing, you know. Speaker 1: And just-- Speaker 2: I, I don't want to go to Mexico, and I, I--cause I don't speak the language well enough. And I don't want to--but I, I just don't feel as though this--I have my studio over there. It's a beautiful studio, designed by an architect, but I go over there, and there's graffiti on it. And, you know, that has to bother you, if you're sensitive at all about, you know, beautiful things and simple things. So California is a good place for movie stars (laughter), and people like that, and (laughs), but it's not ordinary people, you know. And you go and you see all these--and they have so many poor people here. And you just wonder what you can do. I would like to paint about their plight, but you know, I'm so disturbed about it that (laughs), I can't even rest long enough to paint about it, you know (laughs). Speaker 1: Now, New Orleans has a lot of poor people too. Speaker 2: I know, but they're-- Speaker 1: But it's the character of (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, but I, I wouldn't stay. I'd just have a place in New Orleans-- Speaker 1: I understand. Speaker 2: Where I would drive out. Story_ID: 10152 Speaker 1: You came about when there wasn't anything called--well, anything officially called black art. It may have been, I don't know, primitive. I don't know if it was (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: Yeah, they, they were calling us--they weren't even recognizing it. They were calling African Art, primitive. Speaker 1: Primitive, so there was no art. Speaker 2: We didn't have any art. Speaker 1: And in the '60s [1960s], there were--and I want to mention, I want to ask you about one person, but I'll do that later. But in the '60s [1960s], then you had this, I don't want to call it Revolutionary Art, you know, but the black experience of the black artist, you know, the black (simultaneous) (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Um-hum, (unclear) that-- Speaker 1: --just coming, you know, out. But those, a lot of that wasn't necessarily classically trained as you had come out of. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: And, and it's in that period, you know, that you're, well, in New York, but you're also, you know, here in California, and so I just want--because, you know, a lot of people during that time period, who had been classically trained, they were sort of like cast aside as useless. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: I mean not, useless, but old fashioned. Speaker 2: That's right, that's right. Speaker 1: No one was listening or paying much attention to them. Speaker 2: I know, I know, I know. Speaker 1: And so it was, whether it was guerilla or, you know, of the street or theater or things like that, that's what was developing. So I'm just wondering if you can sort of put yourself in that because out of this period comes the National Conference of Artists. And you had mentioned another black arts organization, you said, you started. I think it was--? Speaker 2: It was the National Conference of Artists. Speaker 1: Okay, right. Speaker 2: At Florida A&M. Speaker 1: It was Florida A&M? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Florida A&M. I--because when you mentioned it, I (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Now, that whether--the, the records now have been construed to say that it started in Atlanta. It didn't. It started at Florida A&M. Hal Wooddrupt was the principal speaker. Margaret Burroughs was there, and there was a, a man who lives in South Carolina. He wrote a whole history of it. He was fifteen or fourteen years old. And he--that was his first experience in being with artists. And he's, he's an artist now, but he's, he holds a good position in South Carolina at South Carolina State University. And he wrote a long article about the founding of it for the "Crisis", NAACP Journal, you know, the "Crises". And that's when it really started. And I know that we invited--it was called the National Conference of Negro Artists then. But, you know, I don't fight anybody about it. I don't care (laughter). Speaker 1: So who was part of that early besides Hal Woodruff, you know, convening the meeting? Who else was--? Speaker 2: James Porter was there. And Margaret and, I've forgotten the man's name in West Virginia, at West Virginia State, he was there. Well, I have photographs of all of us. I have photographs. Speaker 1: And was, well, you hadn't mentioned David Driskell, and (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: And he wasn't there. Speaker 1: He wasn't there. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. He came along--? Speaker 2: He came along with the exhibit out here. He was at Fisk [University]. Speaker 1: At that time? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: At that, at that time, he might have been Talladega. Speaker 1: He may have been at--okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, he was at Fisk. But when we did the show at the [Los Angeles] County Museum, he was at Fisk. Speaker 1: Okay, cause Porter was his, his mentor--? Speaker 2: Right, and Lois [Mailou] Jones. Speaker 1: But she wasn't there either. Speaker 2: No, no, Porter was there. Speaker 1: Okay, so what was the thought at that point? Speaker 2: Well, the thought was that we were not--we were being ignored as Artists, and we--most of them were artist-teachers. They were from the black colleges generally. And we wanted to form an organization where we would be more effective as, as artists, and as--and Hal was at New York University at that time. He had gone to New York University. He had left Atlanta, and he was at New York University. And we had to somehow communicate with each other if we were gonna be effective. In order to communicate with other, we had to have an organization. And that was the beginning of the organization. And, and the next time we met was at Lincoln University in--no, not in Pennsylvania, but in West Virginia. But, no-- Speaker 1: Missouri. Speaker 2: Missouri, yeah, Missouri. Yeah, and they-- Speaker 1: Do you know what year that was, because--? Speaker 2: That was two years later. This was, let's see, we went at Florida A&M--I went there, and when did I go there? Speaker 1: Fifty three, you were there from '53 [1953] to '58 [1958]. Speaker 2: It was probably about '55 [1955], and then in '57 [1957], we met at Lincoln University. Speaker 1: And then, did the organization continue or did it take sort of a lull at some point? Speaker 2: It, it might have taken a little lull, but it met. When they say it was founded was in--two or three years later at, in Atlanta. I think they say that (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: So why is that stated then? Speaker 2: Well, because--I don't know why it's stated, you know, that, that it--they don't show any history. But the history is there. It's not only there, but we were all photographed and it was the same organization, and they just changed the name to NCA, National Conference of Artists, left Negro out. But they didn't change that until later. Speaker 1: That was really in the '60s [1960s], right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 10153 Speaker 1: What did you think of this, you know, the, the Black Power Movement in the '60s [1960s] and the, and the art that came out of that? What were you thinking really, yourself, at that point? Speaker 2: Okay, in the '60s [1960s] with E.J. Montgomery, do you know E.J.? E.J. is-- Speaker 1: Hold on one second. Remember that in the '60' until this plane passes. Speaker 2: Okay, but E.J. Montgomery is in Washington-- Speaker 1: And he's in-- Speaker 2: She, she. Speaker 1: She. Oh,-- Speaker 2: Evangeline Juliet Montgomery, we call her E.J. Speaker 1: Okay, Evange-- Speaker 2: Evangeline Juliet Montgomery. She works for this Arts America program which is no longer, but she works for the State Department and sends out-- Speaker 1: She does now for the State Department? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: Okay, well, good, 'cause-- Speaker 2: She's in charge of the European and Asian Division even though--and she sees to it that the African people, people in charge of Africa do the right thing. She's a real powerhouse. Speaker 1: Okay, we will do that then. Speaker 2: And she's been working for artists for many, many years. She used to live out here in California. Speaker 1: Okay, well, we will do that because I have a--we're setting up a regional office in D.C. That's the first one. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, and she is the, she is really--she gets little recognition, but she, she is really a very, very important person in terms of what has happened cause she sent Sam Gilliam over to Asia. She's sent Bettye Sarr over to Asia, and not with ten, fifteen thousand dollars, with a hundred thousand dollars to do what, the, the programs that they should be doing. She traveled, had--the woman who did a lot of Jacob Lawrence's work, worked with her. And she went ahead--over her head to the director of the program, and had me do several venues in Brazil of Jacob Lawrence's work, and, and in Trinidad and, and in the Caribbean in general and in Africa. She, she did that. Speaker 1: (Unclear) pretty amazing. Speaker 2: And, well, she-- Speaker 1: Now, why do you mention her when I talk about the, you know, cause I'd asked you about the Black Power Movement--? Speaker 2: In the '60's [1960s]-- Speaker 1: The '60's [1960s]. Speaker 2: -- that's when I thought of her. She and Ruth [G.] Waddy and the three of us worked--that's when we started the "Black Artists on Art" book. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: But before that, Ruth Wattey had an organization here where she was able to--it was called "Art West". And E.J. had "Art West North", you know, up in San Francisco. And when people would see us coming, they would want to hide because we were, we were out there with the artists and, and demanding that local museum and places like that, San Francisco Museum, that they either have works by African American artists that were creditable--we didn't say that, put just any kind of thing in that, but--or if they didn't, we, for instance, we picketed the Whitney because of that, you know. And with, what's his name who went to the prison, Attica, and he became chair of the Department, the, the chair of the--Washington, you know, and of the National Endowment for the Arts. He became chair for the arts program, Bennie Andrews. Speaker 1: Bennie Andrews, okay, sure. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Well, we worked with Bennie Andrews and we just, you know, we, we did-- Speaker 1: Oh, that was a famous picket, that picket of the Whitney, right? Speaker 2: Yes, oh, yes. It was written up in-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --and they picketed this museum here too, the [Los Angeles] County Museum. And the chairman of the board said we, we didn't know the difference between racism and lack of efficiency or something, I don't know. But everything that they would have over there for--they had very little in terms of Africa Americans, very little, almost none. But, but they always wanted us to pay for, you know, pay all--make all the payments for any expenses, but when they had other shows, the County and people like that would pay. So we protested and picketed their shows. They had the Cubist epic without mentioning anything about Africa. Now, you can't have a Cubist show without some discussion of the impact of African art on it. And so we--we had Bernie Casey out there, and they had, we had doctors and lawyers, and people out there picketing the whole show, and every night, I would--I was working for them. And I would picket them at night (laughter). But E.J. came down from San Francisco. Howard Smith was up there substituting for Raymond Saunders, he came. And we just drew the people in, you know. And, and those people who were important in terms of Dr. Banks, a big-time collector here, black collector, we had him out there. They said, you know, you got to come and support what we're trying to do. We're trying to open doors. Speaker 1: So you, that's what (unclear), so in 1969, you published "Black Artists on Art", now how did that come about? Is this, what is the--how did that idea come about, and was it because, that you --? Speaker 2: And Ruth [G. Waddy] and E.J. decided that not enough was being done. But I also have the group that I gathered, you know, this--the Asian fellow, Chinese fellow, his wife, she's Caucasian. And, and I had a Jewish friend, and that, we just came together and each put in a thousand dollars and published the book. Speaker 1: And this was the first book that had been published any place--? Speaker 2: That's right, that's right, that's right, except for [James] Porter's book which was a history book, but it was--it was not, the artists did not speak for themselves. And we insisted that the artists should speak. We wrote introductions and conclusions, but we decide this is something that where the artists had to speak for themselves. Speaker 1: Right, now, but, Dr. Lewis, you didn't answer my question about what you thought about the, the art, some of art that came out of the '60s [1960s]? Speaker 2: Well, some of it was--I, I thought the [Black] Panther Art was kind of cruddy, but there was some really important art that came of the '60's [1960s], even though maybe, in terms of technique, it might have been lacking, some of the technique, but the statements were very clear, and they were there. And, and so people can always learn technique. That's what Elizabeth [Catlett] had said, you know, and she--you can always learn technique, but you can't always have ideas. And I thought the ideas were fantastic, and that's why, you know, we, we also in San Francisco and in Oakland, made way for people to go back to school and to study, when they were not accepting--for instance, in my, my grandson's school now, Stan Lathan's daughter, she's there. There, there're not more than ten black students in the whole place. And it's not the fault, always the fault of the University. It's, some of it's our fault that we don't want our students to, our children, to study Art because it might make them derelicts, and it might make them--they can't earn a living. So, but that's not true. They can earn a living. They can a good living. Art is all over the place, you know. You can--I mean it's not just paintings on the wall that we're talking about. But we, we're not only tried to have--we didn't try to put those people in museums until we thought they, they had enough technique to express their ideas. But we did have shows in small galleries. For instance, some of them did wonderful sculpture and we exhibited on crates, you know. We didn't have any pedestals and things of that sort. But people supported that, and they came. They were looking at the work, and we found that the neighborhood gallery, first Bernie Casey--I talked Bernie Casey into helping to support a gallery, and--cause he's, he's an artist first. And he, he--when he was in his twenties, he, he stopped playing football. He said it was too brutal for him. And he was in his prime, but he, he played football at Bowling Green State so he could do art. So he was, he's on that photograph with us, and he supported us. And we set up this art gallery, and it was called "The Gallery". And Betty Sarr had her first show in that gallery cause nobody was showing her work. And she got rave reviews. But--and then they moved it from that--we took an old, it was next to a furniture restoring place, so we couldn't get insurance. And we took a, an old, you know, one of those storefronts, and put a balcony in there, and it was really, built it up. It was really very nice. And then we moved, after we--it became too small and so we moved over on Pico Boulevard to a very nice place where Elizabeth had shows. Story_ID: 10154 Speaker 1: You know, when David [Driskell] came out here to do this thing at the [Los Angeles] County Museum, Jeff Donaldson had been offered the job, and somebody before Jeff. But they would not take it because it would not allow them to show the 'Art of the '60s' [1960s]. They, you couldn't beyond 1950, and if you look in the catalogue, you will see there's no '60s [1960s] art in that catalogue. And David took it. I thought he--it was wrong that he took it because they put that limitation on him. But we--I, I've all--I talked to him about it. I said, "David, it's really, you know, they're, they're shortchanging us when you do that. " I had a problem with, with, what's his name? Charles White too. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Charles White had a show over at the County Museum. It was on the fourth floor, curated by the matte cutter, not the Curator of Prints. He and two other fellows had a show there. He said he was doing it for the brothers. I said, but it's an insult, Charles. And he said, you got--but we, we got our foot in the door. And I told him where he had his foot (laughter). So Charles and I didn't do too well after that. Story_ID: 10155 Speaker 1: Okay, so with the "Black Artists on Art", you founded "Contemporary Crafts", right. Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: And that was--now, there had not--had there been much of a black arts publishing house before-- Speaker 2: No, no, no. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No, and then I, I've been doing--it, I did a black art book with Harcourt Brace, and then it moved to--Harcourt wanted to limit it. And I said, no, you can't just limit it to the schools. You've got to put it out there, and they said, no, we're paying for it, so. And I, I still had--maintained my copyright, which is good. So I took it back, and I went to Florida, well, I went--had some people in Florida publish it for me. I'd, I was paying for it. And it was a better publication. And then the University of California, Berkeley, picked it up. And now that's, they're calling me--this is unbelievable. They didn't expect the book to sell so well. And they don't go into, they don't print third printings. And they didn't expect the hard covers to sell so well. They--it's like they don't like the fact that it's selling well. And I don't know what it does to them because it doesn't make any more work for them. It brings in more money. But I asked somebody asked who works for the press, and they said, well, they're used to just getting funds from the University and from grants. And they just don't want to be bothered. And so, they won't print any more hard covers. They want to do the same thing Harcourt did. So if you want a hard cover, you're out of luck. If I want a hard cover, I'm out of luck because they've sold out the hard covers, and they're not printing anymore. Speaker 1: This is why people wind up (unclear) self publishing--. Speaker 2: I know. Speaker 1: They do and for that reason. Speaker 2: That's right, that's right, that's right. Speaker 1: Now, you--okay, so, "Black Artists on Art", how many copies did that sell? Speaker 2: Well, the, the first volume, we sold in the state of California alone, 19,000 copies. We had printed, (laugher), we had printed 25,000. We didn't, we didn't know about publishing. We didn't know. And so we took that money and did--reissued the first volume since we'd sold out, just about, you know. And we had sold out, and that's why we had two volume one's. And then the after volume, we made money on that and put in volume two. We also have a children's book too. Have you seen that? Speaker 1: I don't think so (unclear). Speaker 2: And it goes up through Elizabeth Catlett, and, and it's history that explains in language children can understand and the visuals are history. But we, we've done--and, I've got so many catalogues and things that, that we've done. But the book, and hardcover books and things, and--but--and I'm doing, I just finished my birthday book. I'm taking it to Mexico to edit and to do things, you know. But that's gonna be the, the most important. Elizabeth's book is important, you know, I did a big book on her. You've seen that one. Well, the Barthey (ph.) book is gonna be--he spent his whole life as an artist, didn't teach any place, whole life. And I have his papers. Speaker 1: When did--how did you get his papers? Speaker 2: Well, I worked for him, with him for ten years, and James Garner, when he passed, James Garner told me to help him decide where to distribute the works and things of that sort. Okay, I offered the papers to the Schaumburg, and they--but they would have to take everything, you know, like his diplomas and this and this, and they didn't want those. So I said, okay, then you don't want his papers. Then I looked through the papers and found out that he had promised the papers to the National Collection. So, you know, and they--I told them I want to finish my book before passing them on to them. But he should, they should have gone to Schomburg [Library] because he had--they had a whole room of his works there that he had given them--he hadn't given them, but James Garner said, let them keep those, you know. But anything--he re-copyrighted everything and, and we gave some to the--the Museum of African American Art here had honored [Richmond] Barthe so he, he left certain things from his, his studio to them. And, you know, but I got his papers because I was doing this book on him, and he really wanted me to do this book. There's no real book out on Barthe. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: And he has things at Falling Water, which is the most important house in the world, it's the most beautiful, considered as the most beautiful house, he has a large sculpture of Rose McClendon in the patio. And nobody mentions it, no art historians mention it. And he did the sculpture inside of the Mr. Kaufman and Edgar Kaufman, Jr. There's three pieces there. [Jaques] Lipshitz has one little piece and they go crazy over it. But they never mention that Barthe has anything there. And they don't put anything of Frank Lloyd Wright's houses and places unless he approved. And he was alive and well when Barthe did that for the Kaufmans. He was a very good friend, close friend of the Kaufmans. He spent summers at that house. Nobody mentions him, but he's gonna--that's gonna be on my cover. Story_ID: 10156 Speaker 1: The idea of publishing was that you could get the images out there, right? Speaker 2: Um-hum-- Speaker 1: And legitimize it in a way. Speaker 2: Right, absolutely. Speaker 1: Okay, and, now, how did black art (unclear) come, the idea of that come about? Speaker 2: Val Spaulding and a young woman who was working at Chapman College and the three of us sat down in a living room in Clare--in the Claremont. And we decided that not enough was being done to give visibility to black artists. And we each, we thought that maybe it wouldn't cost that much for us to put out a magazine. We were wrong. (airplane noise) Speaker 1: Hold one second. Okay, "We thought it wouldn't cost that much, we were wrong". Speaker 2: Yeah, and Val was an English teacher in one of the high schools in New York, not New York City, but in Jamaica, New York. And the other person was an accountant or something like that at Chapman College. She's now a lawyer with her own firm, lives in Oakland. But we just wanted to do something. We, we saw that there was no visibility, especially in most cities and most places, and even in, in the black colleges, no visibility. So we decided we had to--we wanted to do something. And Val had a little money, and, and none of the friends, and I had--we each put up maybe $500 just to get started. And then we found out it was gonna cost much more. And we had, the first one, we had that pull out, especially of the Catlett boys. They just paid for it on time, and we got this printer who accepted down payment, and then payment on time. And we just did it, you know, just had the conviction that we could do it, and we did it. And when I decided I had spent enough money on it, like two hundred and some thousand dollars of my own money down in Florida, I got Hampton [Institute] to take it over. And they're continuing it. Speaker 1: Oh, so that's what, and the name changed too (unclear)-- Speaker 2: The name changed because they started doing things in the Caribbean and in Brazil. And "Black Art International Quarterly" really is, has, is tied so to the Black Art Movement here. And those people, they, they're considered--they know they're black, but they don't deal with it in the same way we do here. So we didn't--we wanted to have, be in, have them included so that they would, you know, feel as though they're a part of this whole Black Art Movement because what I feel that we're never gonna really learn more about our heritage and our culture if we keep saying people from, from the Caribbean think they're superior and all kinds of things. And we have to know more about them to--before we can even speak about them. So we did issues on Trinidad, did two on Trinidad-Tobago, and we did issues on Barbados, and you know, what, I, I wanted to bring this closer so that we would know something the culture, art and culture of those places. Speaker 1: The significance of that, though, also at the time--and I know that, I want to talk about you being the founder and director of the Museum of African American Art here. But there was not, I mean you mentioned like the doctor, I can't remember his name, here. Speaker 2: Dr. Banks. Speaker 1: Banks, yeah, who's a collector. But for the most part, blacks were not necessarily collecting their own work. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: So this, a publication like--I mean there were a lot things. You look now, and I'm not saying it's changed tremendously, but people are aware-- Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: --and there are collectors out there, you know, and not just buying things to match the furniture. Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely. Speaker 1: And so there's been, so you played a very, very, very, very important role in that happening. Speaker 2: Well, also, we made, had a venue for writers to participate. We didn't write all of the articles. We edited and did, did things like that, but we asked certain people in certain fields to write. They could not have been published before, you know. And, and they could use that also in their promotions, you know, in the colleges and universities. And they'd look at the, the magazine, they couldn't discredit it because it was polished. Speaker 1: Beautifully (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yes, yes. So, that's--it served many purposes. Story_ID: 10157 Speaker 1: So that, as it says on your resume, the year that you started that magazine is the year you founded the museum. It seems like a awful lot to be doing in one year. Speaker 2: No, I, I have a bad habit. I start things and I get people to help me (laughter). Yeah, Mary Jane here, really helped me with the museum. She's here. She's a, she's was a, she was a cultured historian who taught at Occidental College until she had a big fight with them. And she's, she's a really, expect in terms of Caribbean cultures and things of that sort. She's--she did our dissertation in University of the West Indies at Jamaica, in Jamaica. And she really has, has been instrumental in helping me with, not only the magazine, but the museum and--I said, you know, Mary Jane, don't you become a director of a museum or something like that. And, you know, she had quit Occidental, so we gave her, gave her something to do (laughs). She wouldn't agree that it was that simple, but we, we've been working together for a long time. And I always sort of try to get--I know I can't do all these things by myself. But I, I know other people who can help me do those things, and, and I--we can work together in doing those things. Speaker 1: Now, what were you wanting to accomplish with the museum? Speaker 2: What did I want to accomplish? I wanted, I wanted it to be in a neighborhood or an area where people congregate and live and shop. And I've been to Japan, and I saw the museums and galleries on top of department stores. That's where they have a lot of them. And I said, now, why can't we do that, you know, people shopping and, and they just come to the museum. They don't have to buy anything. They can do their shopping, and, you know, and that's what my idea was, in terms of the May Company. And it just so happened that one of our board members, we had the museum as roaming all around, you know, trying to find a place. It started at Scripps College, Claremont Colleges, they gave us a little space. And then, well, we, we ran our grants through them (laughs). And we, we collected things, and they stored them for us. They didn't show them, they stored them for us. And that was a great help. And then when we found the storefront or some place, we'd take them out and, or we found a place that would, where we could set up an exhibit, we did, we did it. But I, I had worked out with Nancy Hanks--she was head of the National Endowment for the Arts, and I had told her that there was no museum that dealt with African American people West of the Mississippi, and that we had to have something. I was serving on panels for the National Endowment for the Arts. And one days, she finally said, well, you're been complaining and groaning, and--but I have fifteen thousand dollars you can have if you can get a non-profit number. This was like October--before the end of the year. I put a lawyer, a Jewish lawyer on board, and he, he got the non-profit number for us, just went right through. He was with a big firm, big law firm here. And so we, we got our non-profit number, and she gave us $15,000. And we got $15,000 every year for about ten years, I guess. But then we had to raise other monies. And that's where the Avants came in, Jackie--Clarence and Jackie, they helped us and whose, "Guess Whose Coming to Dinner? What's his name? Speaker 1: Sidney-- Speaker 2: Sidney Poitier, yeah, he, he was on our board. And we had, we, we thought it was important that we put people on the Board who could help us attract money. And they did, and it was very successful. Story_ID: 10158 Speaker 1: Now, who did--I'm wondering, I may have the wrong place, but Lonnie Bunch, he came out here-- Speaker 2: He was--that's another museum. Speaker 1: That was another, that's--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: That was, it came after us. It was a couple of years after us. Speaker 1: And that was? Speaker 2: California African American Museum. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: California. Speaker 1: California, not--okay, okay. Speaker 2: It was really called "The California African American Museum and Culture Center." The, what her name, who was a Congressman? Speaker 1: Maxine Waters? Speaker 2: No, no, no, before Maxine. She had a baby. Speaker 1: Yvonne Braithwaite-- Speaker 2: Yvonne Braithwaite Burke. She said that the state would not approve an art museum, so they had to make it a museum of culture or something like that--History and Culture, that's what it was. So it was no art mentioned in that museum. And then it was changed, the name was changed to make it a, more of an art museum, but that was a number of years after our museum had been founded, yeah. Speaker 1: Now, your museum now is still alive and kicking. And-- Speaker 2: I don't know how hard they're kicking, but they're still alive (laughter). Speaker 1: You know, the thing is that when you look at African American museums around the country, it's still, it's been a hard, it's so hard and it's very shaky-- Speaker 2: It's very shaky, yes. Speaker 1: I mean I think Margaret [Burroughs], you know, that DuSable's [Museum] getting some important money in. Curatorally, they still needed some work, but, you know, they--at least they're getting money for a facility and things like that. Speaker 2: Right, yeah. Speaker 1: And then, well, you have some newcomers on the market. I mean the Detroit Museum which I haven't seen. People say it's a beautiful edifice but there's not much in there. Speaker 2: Not much in there, no, that's true. Speaker 1: And when you--Barry Gaither, he's been struggling, you know-- Speaker 2: He's, poor Barry, yeah. Speaker 1: --for years. And that was, but curatorially, he knew more than Margaret cause I remember, you know-- Speaker 2: Of course, of course. Speaker 1: --first going to DuSable when I first got to Chicago. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, he knew more than Margaret, but he's struggling. I don't know if he'll ever finish that museum. But the galleries have come into their own now. That's what's important. The Stella Jones Gallery is absolutely stunning, it's unbelievable. Then there's a gallery here. It's out (unclear) Fine Arts. She's up on La Brea [Avenue, Los Angeles, California] And she's--has a show of two friends now, Romie [Romare] Bearden and, what's his name who just died not too long about, but there, it's, it's a museum-quality show, really, that they have in the gallery there. And a lot of good galleries have sprung up, and-- Speaker 1: So that's true. So you really believe that has been--that's the growth and not so much the museums, but it's the qual-- Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: Okay, and people are making money too. Speaker 2: They're making money, yes. Stella Jones, she has a fantastic gallery and she, she has not had a bad year. She's been in business about eight years now, not one bad year. And she just renewed her lease for ten years so she feels competent that she's gonna make it. Story_ID: 10159 Speaker 1: And I want to talk to you now about you're, where you are, you know, with your life, and the things that you want to do right now. And I, I then I want to go and ask some more specific questions about certain people, you know, things like that, and, and, Black Art, you know, in general. But I want to first start out with you because you, you know, your work--there're not many of you left, I mean of the old crew. Speaker 2: Um-hum, um-hum. Speaker 1: Elizabeth [Catlett] is here. Speaker 2: Yeah, she's, she'll be eighty-nine, she's in eighty-nine in, eighty-nine in April. So that's getting-- Speaker 1: It's getting up there. Speaker 2: Plugging along. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And, but, you know, Jacob Woods-- Speaker 2: He's gone. Speaker 1: --is gone, Romie [Romare] Bearden is gone. And there're not many, you know, left around. So, I mean who can even comment or know the history and, you know, participated in it. Speaker 2: Um-hum, um-hum. Speaker 1: So I'm just wondering, you know, you know, where you are because--I mean your work is stunningly beautiful, you know, and, and I'm--and, you know, I--so I'm just wondering, you know, about? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, okay, I'm, I want to stop writing. I don't want to stop, but I, I, I need to get back to my, my art, my sculpture, my paintings, my prints. I want to in a way isolate myself, you know. I don't want to do a lot of shows or anything like that. I just want to--I think what I did at Hampton was very important, the works that I did there. And I want to find out how I can tune into that, and where I am now, you know. I don't want to copy or repeat, I want to just tune into that period. And I think--I don't think I can do it with being on the treadmill of showing things and traveling too much. I want, I want some silence, some quietness, some peacefulness so I can bring out of me what I think is still there. And I think I have--I'm probably at a stage where I can do more and better work, but I can't do it to show. I don't want anymore shows. I really don't. And I'm at a point where--okay, I have good retirement, and I, I can sell a work when I want to, but I don't, I don't want to get into that. I really don't. And I'm not gonna show at--I have one more gallery. It's in Arkansas that I promised I would show some work. That's the last one. I'm just not gonna do it, cause I, I need to commune with myself, you know. Speaker 1: Well, what is in there that you --what do you think is still in you that you want to bring out? Speaker 2: My best work. I think, I don't think I've done what I consider as my best work, cause you're, you--I'll probably always feel that way because when you, when you think you've done your best work, you probably need to stop (laughs), you know. And, cause then you, you have nothing to, to seek or to drive for, you know. So I need to work. I need to--I have something I want to say that I haven't said. And I, I need the privacy, the silence, the--I, I believe in, who said, wrote about the 'Silent Voices'? I've forgotten his name. He's a French philosopher. But I, I need to listen to those voices and things, you know. And, and that will be, I think, my greatest contribution. Story_ID: 10160 Speaker 1: Let's talk about also your feeling about the status of Black Art now, and maybe what you're excited about and what you're not. You're excited that it is accepted-- Speaker 2: Yes, yes. And it's developing, but I'm, I'm not excited that people don't look back into history, and I mean like your HistoryMakers, you know, you're documenting things. But I hope a lot of people will see it and read about it because I think history is extremely important to the present-day situations. And I, I just can't--I'm disappointed that more, more people who are artists can't see themselves in, in their history; not that they have to dwell on it, but they have to build on it. And that's what I had to do, and maybe that's--when you get to a stage in life, that's what you think. I don't know, but I didn't wait until I got to that stage. Story_ID: 10161 Speaker 1: But we do need to talk about the "African American Art, Arts and Artists". We didn't talk about that publication. And that I consider--do you consider that your most significant? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: And it's, it's-- Speaker 2: The, the "Catlett Book" did so much for Elizabeth. Speaker 1: Elizabeth, but the-- Speaker 2: This informed more, more people, I think, African American Art and artists. I think it, it got the student population informed, better informed. They didn't think there was any African Artists out there. According to their teachers, there aren't. But they know better. Now, they can challenge that. And, but, I think it's, it's important that more people write and do research because otherwise, you know, you go in the studio and you're just sort of pumping out stuff. And nobody's gonna pay any attention to it unless there's some history to go with it. Speaker 1: But Dr. Lewis, not everyone is a Samella Lewis who has that background. How many people--there're not many of you, that are, I mean people in the arts field who can write. I mean you have to, I mean that's--but I'm saying, you can paint, and a painter, you know, you can act, but that doesn't mean that you have been trained as a Ph.D. art historian and can do that. So I understand what you're saying, but there're not many when you look through it, that have had (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: No, I think people can learn and try and learn what they want to learn, you know. I, I have gotten C's in English and things of that sort, but I, I wasn't doing my best, and I wasn't paying much attention to what I was doing. And I, I just--and J. Saunders Redding taught me a real lesson, you know. And he gave me a C. And he told me why, you know, cause he knew I wasn't doing my job or working or studying. And, you know, if, if people want to learn, they can. You know that. We're not--and it doesn't take that much time really, cause you're, nobody's asking you to memorize everything. But, and sometimes I make up words, but I, I feel I have the right to do that, you know, the words are more than important than what the dictionaries say I should use. And I, I'm creative enough to (laughs) do my own, and, and when I was doing the Harcourt Brace book, my editors says, said, "there's no such word". I said, there is now. (laughs), yeah. And they had this whole big fuss about black. And I said, well, you know, anytime you can capitalize Chicano, and that's not even a race--that's not a race, and you're gonna lower case black, which is from the black culture and it's, you know, black American in America, I said, no, you can't do that. You--Asian, then Chicano and this, and then black, small "b", I said, no. I'm not gonna have my kids and my grandkids see that, no. I'm not gonna be a part of it. If you want to do that way, that's your business, but I don't want to do it that way. We had a fight about it, and they finally did it my way, you know, yeah, yeah. So, I got so I hated that editor, and she--we're very good friends now. She, she--oh, gosh, so. Story_ID: 10162 Speaker 1: I want you to tell me one of your favorite Elizabeth Catlett stories. Speaker 2: Okay, well, my--I guess one of my favorite ones is one that she wrote me when I was picketing the [Los Angeles] County Museum. And I'd have to give it to you because I'd want it to be--it, I, I have it in my file. And she told me to gather up how many thousands of Negroes (laughter), to march on--it was really quite something. I said, Elizabeth, I can't do all that, go around and gather up people. But she was that kind, she is that kind of people, where she believes in, you know, get some force behind what you're doing and organized forces and march on them. And, but also I think, I think one of the things that stayed in my mind most was when we were on a bus in New Orleans, going to the French Quarters from Dillard [University]. And there was this sign that said, "For Colored Patrons Only", and she sat behind it, and then threw it up to the bus driver, took it off and threw it up to him--bus driver, and said, you do your own dirty work. And I'm not gonna put this in front of me, you know. And then at one, another time, she threw it off the bus, out the window (laughs). And I saw a, a real determined woman. She, they could have put her in jail. She didn't care, you know. She was determined to--that she was not gonna be belittled and segregate--discriminated against in that way, where she paid the same amount of money as any white person who got on that bus. But also, she did--she took us to the museum in the park where we were not supposed to be in the park. Black people were not supposed to be in city park. And, but we could go to the museum, but the museum was in the park, so how could you get to the museum, if we're not supposed to be in the park. So she hired a bus with her own money, and had the bus driver drive us to the steps of the museum, where were proceeded to file out and go into the museum without stepping in the park (laughter). So she really was able to accomplish a lot, and we saw the Picasso Show. She wanted us to see that show, where he was--and at the same time, there was a [Henry Ossawa] Tanner in the basement at the museum. And she mad them pull it out, so we could see that too. I mean I have so many Elizabeth Catlett stories, that, you know, that's a long, long friendship there. Speaker 1: And what is so interesting is that she started out as your teacher. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: But she almost, but the relationship very quickly, you know, was not of teacher-student in many ways. Speaker 2: Right, right, right, yeah. Speaker 1: Do you think it's because--do you think you, both of you are very similar in many ways, and she allowed you to be yourself? Speaker 2: Well, she says that she thought I was the best student she had, ever had. And that's a, that's saying a lot. But that's, I think that's one of the reasons. She felt that I was her best student. And she gave me a great deal, you know, and she spent a lot of time with me and had me involved in her life because she thought I was an excellent student. And she, she tells me now, I heard her say this, and I said, no, that's not true. She said, you're, you're, you're more important than I am. I said, how do you mean that, Elizabeth? No, I'm not more important than you because you're another person. But she feels that I've accomplished more because of the broad spectrum of things I've done. And she told me that, maybe some time this year. And, but, you know, I don't feel that way. I think she's--she said, I'm, I'm just an artist. She said, you're an Art Historian and an artist. And so she feels very proud that she had, she had a lot to do with, you know, who I am. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Well, she's right in terms of--I'm telling you, and this is what I've found troubling about this interview, that you've negated your, you know, the purpose you've served in many way Speaker 2: Well, I know, I, I just have to do what I have to do. Story_ID: 10163 Speaker 1: Now, Hale Woodruff, do you have any stories about him at all or did you have much contact with him or limited contact? Speaker 2: Limited con--when he came to Florida A&M, that's when I had more contact with him. And I remember, you know, if driving fifty miles an hour was speeding in Florida at that time, and, you know, if we're in the car and I had to get him back to the airport on time. And I was driving fifty miles an hour, and he said, well, you're driving too fast, [dit, dit, dit, dit?]. I said, no, you've got to get this plane. So, you know, that, I, I really--and we talked about my students and how he could help them. I was trying to get him to sort of have, send somebody up to NYU [New York University], but he didn't, you know. And he was a, he was nice man. Speaker 1: Did he speak of why he got started, you know, or why he wanted-- Speaker 2: Wanted to? Speaker 1: To be an artist? Speaker 2: Be an artist. He--I can't remember what the speech was about really, but we wanted him because he had--he was at NYU, you know. And he was--that was the next step for--(simultaneous). Speaker 1: For, to even move up that (unclear) from the black. Speaker 2: Um-hum, um-hum. Speaker 1: Was he (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: He had left Spelman [College], I think it was Spelman--the Atlanta University system, Clark and Spelman and what have you. But he, he was in the big time, and they wanted to know more about it. And I think he, he really talked more about what he was doing and, and he did it a lot based on Africa too. That's what was so impressive. And I don't think he's been given the credit that he deserves. It's funny, you know, how some of them are given credit and others--Charles, for instance, has not given, been given that, you know, he should have. Speaker 1: You don't think Charles White is given the credit? Speaker 2: No, he's, he's--he's--no, I don't think he's, he's been given the credit. I think he's popular among black people. But I think he, he's doesn't have the credit that Elizabeth and Romie [Romare Bearden] and Jacob Lawrence, no, he doesn't. He, he doesn't have that. Speaker 1: Why do you think the difference? Speaker 2: I think it is because he stayed with Heritage Gallery for so long, and they ran his life, and they ran his career. And they were not very good at it. No, I don't think--see Jake was different. He, he lived around a little bit, but he stayed with one gallery, predominantly one gallery for a long time. But he moved out of that, in and out, you know. And, but Charles [White] stayed with these people out here, and they weren't--they were West Coast people. They were not East Coast people. And they were not considered as real Art--they sold his work, but they didn't sell it to the museums, the proper museums and things like that. They sold it for their benefit. They didn't really promote him. Speaker 1: So do you really think that those--I mean cause all of, well, except Elizabeth, but she was represented by a New York gallery, wasn't--isn't she (unclear)? Speaker 2: She's with June Kelly, but she is--I mean CBS is doing a special on her and so forth. But that's not happened for Charles, you know what I'm saying, you know. And she's been on Sunday Morning and none of those things have happened for Charles. Speaker 1: So do you think, though, I mean cause Romar Bearden and Jacob Lawrence are probably the two most celebrated. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay, but you think it's because of New York, do you think or what do you think? Do you think it's because of who collected them or represented them or that they were--I'm just--? Speaker 2: Well, I think that Jake, with Jake, it's, it's not--he, he was in New York for a while, you know, a long time. But he also moved to Washington, Seattle, Washington. And when he--he was with the right galleries that promoted him. And he did the murals here and there. And Charles did some murals, but they mostly in black institutions. And Jake did the mural at the Sports Arena in Seattle, and he did--he's done quite a few things. And Romie has done things for this, the city of Atlanta and San Francisco and they've, they've--and Charles sort of stayed with his one gallery--[interruption]. But, no, I think, I don't think it's just the East Coast with either one of those. I think they, they moved around more. And they, I think the Heritage Gallery where Charles moved and--for instance, Romie came out here for a big show and, and I, I just think--and I saw--Charles spent a lot of time teaching at Otis [College of Art & Design]. That might have curtailed some of what he could have done. But I think staying with that one gallery for fifty years or whatever, you know, was too much. And they were not especially, they were not a great gallery. They did the work for him, but they, they were not a great gallery. And his adopted daughter is in charge of his works now, but she doesn't even respond to people when they call, you know. So he's, he's falling out of favor because--except for the people who've already collected them. And there's no way they can get a Charles White now, except that they buy it from somebody in Chicago or what have you, who already have it. So his, it's not, not looking good. Speaker 1: So, you know, 'cause recently Chicago had the, the Art Institute had their retrospective [A Century of Art], and people were appalled at the, the collection, me included. I mean, but it was so sparse and, and very spotty-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: -- not-- very spotty. Who was in and who was in and who wasn't' there and--but I, are there artists that you think, have disa--sort of disappeared off of the public venue that you would like to mention, you know, and because, you know, I mean those, I mean those three--you have the ones that are, you know, Sam Gilliam, and I mean Bettye Sarr, I mean you have the, you know, the younger, like group coming or not young, but the-- Speaker 2: Yeah, younger than (unclear)--. Speaker 1: But I'm just wondering who else do you think should have had the, you know, the predominance and, you know, of those three? Speaker 2: Well, there's a great water colorist in Boston. And I'm trying to remember the name, but he's, he's so good. And he has not, he was on dialysis for ten years, home dialysis, and he painted masterful water colors, I mean as good as anybody ever painted, any of the older, oh, you know, like Turner and people like that. And he's, he's showing in--at Stella Jones in the near future, but he's been neglected. And it might be because he was not well, but he was still working hard. I'm trying to now remember his name, but I--as I said, you got to get me my book so I can (laughs)-- Speaker 1: That's (unclear) (laughs). Speaker 2: Yeah, I can remember. But, and there's this guy in Chicago, he's getting a lot of PR. He's on the cover of my book too. But it, you know, I have to, I can't remember all the names. Speaker 1: It's not Richard Hunt? Speaker 2: No, no, Richard--this is, he's younger than Richard. Speaker 1: You're talking about--he's younger? Speaker 2: Yeah. He does these history paintings. Speaker 1: Wait, you're talking about--? Speaker 2: He does wonderful paintings. Speaker 1: Younger? Did he just have an exhibit? Speaker 2: He's had one out here, and he's had (unclear)-- Speaker 1: He didn't come out of the Studio Museum, did he, of Harlem? Speaker 2: Yeah, he might have, but he came out of Otis really, out here. Speaker 1: Oh, yes, no, I--we're talking about the same person and why I can't remember his name, okay. Speaker 2: I can't either, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, cause we actually--we interviewed him. That' right, he came out of Otis-- Speaker 2: He's very, very good. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: And he's, he is getting attention, but he deserves a little more, I think, than he's getting because he's done some powerful works, you know, some great works. And the last show I saw of his, I was not overly impressed, the one out here, but, and we interviewed him. But it was, it was okay, but it's like he's shifting gears and maybe thinking that maybe that might give him a little more attention. But I don't think it will. Story_ID: 10164 Speaker 1: Do you have any viewpoints on African American Art and where it's been, its epicenter in this country? Do you have any thoughts about that or is that, you know, not the case? Any region that has been more of an epicenter for African American Art? Speaker 2: I think in terms of real substantive kinds of things, that San Francisco is, is integrating, shall we say, African American artists in the museums more than New York is--I mean in permanent collections. There's a Museum in the Park in San Francisco--I've forgotten the full name of it, but when I went there, I was really amazed, how they were using African American artists, as a continuation of history and culture and mixing it with Asian and this. And it was really important. And they were, they were buying these pieces themselves. They were not asking the community to buy them and things of that sort. And when Elizabeth [Catlett] got a grant from, who's the lawyer that did the--he's--Johnny Cochran. Speaker 1: Johnnie Cochran. Speaker 2: Johnnie Cochran gave Elizabeth twenty-five thousand dollars, a grant, and it was to make a piece in the particular museum that we chose, was to pay the balance, twenty-five, thirty, forty thousand dollars. And I suggested that they would--should do it at the San Francisco Museum, not the Museum of Modern Art, but the other one in park because I thought that they were doing more to collect and to emphasize the African American artists and art. And she did a piece of sculpture for them, and it's, it's beautiful. But at that, that museum, I, I wish I could remember the name of it. And I'm just sort of going blank now, but it's in the park in San Francisco, and it has a great Asian art collection, and they've just remodeled it. And, and I saw a lot of African American artists in that museum. Speaker 1: So you're really (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: So, so this museum here, it doesn't even have a Romie Bearden. It has a Romare Bearden print, but we've--a friend of mine bought and gave it to them. And she--they accepted it because she was very rich and, and she had given them a whole Middle Eastern collection. And so, you know, they just--but, and, and you know, the Metropolitan Museum had not had a show of African American artists in something like sixty or seventy years, and the National Museum, it was eighty years when they finally had the Romar Bearden show. They had never had a solo show by an African American, but they had many solo shows by white Americans. But museums are still lacking in terms of collecting and, and respecting African American artists. They had a small show of the Hampton [University] Collection of Jacob Lawrence's at this museum, this small collector and Frederick Douglass Collection, but--and it was sparsely done. It was not even installed properly. But that's, that's the reason, I guess, we, we set up these African American museums, period, because when Elizabeth [Catlett] had her show here, it was fantastic. And it had been traveling, and I was able to get it for the Museum in the Park out here, at the California Museum. And they let us have it for $6,000, which is nothing, you know. And she came. And it was, it was a beautiful show. And I made them put mirrors in the walls so that they could see the back of the piece and, and get more pieces in there, and the front at the same time. It was really, quite something. And they just don't do it for it. They don't do it. And the, I guess the Met took a collection of the woman and her husband--Dave and Reba somebody, but he's the CEO of Alliance Capital. She's black and he's white. And she made them take--she's very powerful in the Art world, Reba, Reba--I don't know. Speaker 1: I think I've heard of them recently, yes. Speaker 2: Yes, (unclear). She put ten of my pieces in there. They wouldn't have accepted those same pieces from me. And she put the whole exhibit that was traveling, called "Alone in the Crowd", it was at the Chicago, the Museum of Chicago Art Institute [sic. Art Institute of Chicago], you know, they would not have accepted any of that from any one of us. And they had the Philadelphia Museum, the Yale Art Gallery and the Virginia Museum of Fine Arts, all of them took that show. It's that money, the power behind it. And I wrote her a letter and, and thanked her for at least getting--because the Met [Metropolitan Museum of Art] had not shown, they had this--since that ridiculous show they did about, it was in the '60s [1960s] or '70s [1970s] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Was it the photography? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: It was a photography exhibit and that, you know, they didn't have anyone black in it. Speaker 2: No, no, they had a-- Speaker 1: Oh, they had one person. Speaker 2: Yeah, this was a black show, but it was like a comic thing. Speaker 1: That's right, that's right, no, cause there was a big--that was the picket you spoke of. Speaker 2: Um-hum, um-hum. Story_ID: 10165 Speaker 1: I want to ask you, you know, what you really want your legacy to be? Speaker 2: I really want to disappear (laughs). No, not, I just want to--I, I, I just finished my trust, and I don't want any funerals. I don't want any--I don't want anybody to know I'm gone, just let me go. And I don't want any supports, life supports. I don't want that, you know. I just want to go and, and let somebody else pick up, maybe where I ended, you know. And I'm hoping--I have a grandson. I have great faith in him. And, I don't think he's gonna be a writer, but I think he's gonna--he's a musician. He's gonna, and he has a lot of depth. He's, he's already recorded with Oscar Brown, Jr. and people like that, you know. And he's saying things that I think ought to be said. And I just want, you know, when people go, well, life goes on. Let them do what they're gonna do next. But, you know, I don't have any legacy that I want to tell anybody to remember (laughs), you know...