 Story_ID: 85363 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: My name is Ted Landsmark, L-A-N-D-S-M-A-R-K, and my full name is Theodore Carlisle Landsmark. Speaker 1: Okay, could you spell those? (Laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter). Actually, T-H-E-O-D-O-R-E, Carlisle, C-A-R-L-I-S-L-E, and the name is pretty important to me because at birth, and just for record-keeping purposes, I was Theodore Augustus Burrell, B-U-R-R-E-L-L, and I changed my name when I moved to Boston [Massachusetts] after graduating from law school and when I knew I would be starting essentially a new life and a new career, to Theodore Carlisle Landsmark because Carlisle is my grandmother's maiden name, and Landsmark is my mother's maiden name, and I felt that they were the ones who had done the work (laughter) so they ought to get the credit. My folks were divorced when I was very young and so I was basically raised by my mother and grandmother and folks on my mother's side of the family-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --so early records, if one is looking for such, up through the time I came to Boston in 1973, would be under the name Theodore Burrell. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what kind of name is Landsmark? Do you know that? Speaker 2: Landsmark is actually a Dutch name. My grandfather [William Landsmark] came from Sint Eustatius in the Dutch West Indies, and he came to this country around 1914, 1915 to work. He and his family had been involved as laborers on the building of the Panama Canal and that work ended and so they looked to the United States as a place of opportunity, and when he arrived, he spoke fluent English and Dutch, and after he'd been here a couple of years, he got a call from the government indicating that they wanted to draft him, and he pointed out that he was a Dutch citizen and had to go down to the Dutch Consulate which, of course, didn't wanna recognize him as this strapping black man, and he--story has it that he unleashed a line of invective at the secretary in Dutch, and she understood that in fact he was fluent in Dutch and so he ended up being exempted from service in the First World War [WWI]. He then went on to become a Garveyite--very active in politics in Harlem [New York City, New York], the Back-To-Africa movement, and continued to be in his own way something of an intellectual until the day he died in his late 70's; but most of the time he was a coal yard worker. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, I'm gonna ask you about him and your mother. We're just trying to slate it-- Speaker 2: Emm-hmm (ph.). Speaker 1: --and--but that's good. I just wanted ask about the name because you don't hear it much. Speaker 2: No, it isn't. Speaker 1: Right. Now, when is your birth date? Speaker 2: 5-17-1946 [May 17, 1946]. Speaker 1: And what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I am President of the Boston Architectural Center [Boston Architectural College, Boston, Massachusetts], which is the largest architecture and interior design college in New England. Speaker 1: All right. Now, sir, what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is April 10th, 2003. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We are seated in the Memorial Library of the Boston Architectural Center, which is a library that's part of the history of the Center and goes back to the turn of the 20th Century. Speaker 1: And I understand that this library we're sitting in was brought in piece-by-piece and re-constructed, you know, according to its original look, I guess. Speaker 2: The library that we're sitting in (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--I mean the room--the conference room. Speaker 2: Right. The, the room that we're seated in was originally part of a much older building that existed on Beacon Hill, and our new campus building, which is a modernist concrete structure, was built in Boston's Back Bay in the late 1960s, and this room was transported with its books in its entirety as a reminder of the long history of the place. And, in fact, it--it's really a wonderful room because people come in and are shocked to see it because many people think that we were founded sometime in the late '60s [1960s]. We work on the basis of some fairly radical teaching principles that feel more like the '60s than like 1889 when we were founded, and so this room takes people back to its roots. Story_ID: 85364 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, before we get into depth, there are five "People" magazine-ish type questions that we always ask. The first one--and they just require a short answer. Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: The first one is what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: (Laughter). What is my favorite food? I eat almost anything, but I really like certain types of Chinese food-Dim Sum and--I, I like to try exotic foods, and lots of seafood. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Probably blue. Speaker 1: All right. Now, do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: I like early fall. Early fall because it actually occurs in New England. We, we have high hopes here for spring as we have high hopes for the [Boston] Red Sox, but spring never seems to come and the Red Sox never seem to win the big one (laughter). So I would say probably early fall. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Yes. I really like Coastal Carolina; the area between Savannah and Charleston [South Carolina] in particular, and I also like to visit San Francisco [California], but San Francisco and, and Boston [Massachusetts] are very much like sister cities, so if I want a, a slightly different version of Boston, I head out west and I just drive up and down the coast around San Francisco. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: I probably do but I, I can't think of it off hand, so maybe we should come back to that; I'll probably stumble onto it in the course of the conversation. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Story_ID: 85365 Speaker 1: Now, now, I'm gonna--you stated some of this already, but can you--how far can you trace your family back? How far can you go? Speaker 2: On my mother [Rubye Landsmark]'s side I can trace my roots back probably four generations to Saint Kitts where my great-grandparents were educated. My grandmother came from Saint Kitts around 1917 and worked in New York as a seamstress and also cleaning people's houses, but her primary vocation as it were was as an evangelist in East Harlem. On my father's side, I can trace my roots back to my grandparents who, as I understand things, were partly Pennsylvania Native American, and I'm not quite sure of what tribe, with a mix of some Russian. But most of the family history I know is traceable back to the West Indies and Saint Kitts and Sint Eustatius in particular. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, now, you were born in Harlem [New York]? Speaker 2: Well, I was actually born in Kansas City at--just at the end of the, of the Second World War [WWI] in Kansas City, Missouri. My father [James Burrell] was stationed out there and my mother went out to visit and there I was. But I moved from there as soon as I realized where I was, and that meant that we were back east when I was probably two or three months old and I grew up in East Harlem. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, are there any stories passed down through your family, through your grandparents or your parents about what life was like in the 19th Century or, you know, a long time ago--stories of slavery or-- Speaker 2: There, there weren't any stories of slavery, and I think the 19th Century stories that I'm aware of go back really to the end of the 19th Century by which time my great-grandparents had become educators in Saint Kitts in particular. They were related to clergy, and I have to assume that they were actually pretty well-off; they were certainly well-educated. They started schools and they were involved in that. I am not aware of where direct links to slavery would occur in my family background; of course they had to be there, but I'm not sure of, of when and where, and I don't know whether I would trace those to the American side of my family or to the West Indian side--more likely to the West Indian side. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I, I think that's an interesting question actually, because a lot of the work that I do as an avocation has involved documenting and trying to do some analysis of slave-made artifacts, and a lot of that work has gone on in South Carolina in particular; it's an area I found myself drawn to over the years so I've been in and out of there on a regular basis for more than a decade at this point and continue to have a lot of friends and connections there, and in fact I, I'm even looking for real estate there at this point. But when people ask whether I'm looking for my own roots there, I suppose in a conceptual way I am, but I'm not aware of any direct connection that I might have to slavery in South Carolina or, or elsewhere; it's gotta be there but it's just a question of, of where, and I haven't looked quite that far back. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 85366 Speaker 1: So there're no stories or anything about anecdotes that have passed down about life (unclear). Speaker 2: Not, not in terms of that-- Speaker 1: --Now, there are stories about how my grandfather [William Landsmark] came to this country and, and they say a lot about how families functioned in those times. My understanding is that my grandmother was originally engaged to marry his brother, who went off to work on the building of the Panama Canal, and his brother became ill and died, and once he died, the younger brother who became my grandfather, had the responsibility to then follow through and marry my grandmother. He then came from Sint Eustatius in through New Bedford [Massachusetts], as part of a fishing crew; got off in New Bedford, made his way down to New York and ended up working most of his life in the coal yards in New York. So that was a bit of lore that we were able to trace back at least to the West Indies. And I've been back to Saint Kitts, but not to Sint Eustatius. I think at some point I'd like to get back down there to do some research. I know that-- Speaker 2: About what year is it, do you think, that your grandfather made it to New York? Speaker 1: Oh, 1914, 1915, in that--in that range. I do know that there are some pretty good records that are kept by the Moravian Church. When my grandparents arrived in the United States, my grandmother at least was a Moravian, and Moravian archives are rather like Mormon archives in some respects. Missionaries go out and they collect family data and then that family data goes into storage, and a lot of that is available down in Winston Salem, North Carolina where many, many, many Moravian records are kept. I was doing some research there a number of years ago on decorative arts and on material culture, and suddenly realized that I could walk into a room there and there in the Moravian texts would be information on not only my grandparents but also on their predecessors, but I haven't had a chance to really dig through that. Story_ID: 85367 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, you said that your grandfather [William Landsmark] was involved in the Universal Negro Improvement Association [UNIA]-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --under Marcus Garvey. Speaker 2: Yes, he was, he was a very active Garveyite, he was always politically engaged; of course, I didn't know him during that period, I wasn't born until well after that, but he was very actively engaged in anti-apartheid activities, and he was certainly a role model for taking on political action and for being a person of conscience and also for being public about that. He was very proud of his work on behalf of blacks in this country and abroad, and was the kind of person who said that if you believe something, you need to act on it, and I've tried to do that in my life. Speaker 1: Okay. Did you have--did they give you any sense of how large a movement the UNIA was? Speaker 2: Well, I know that it, it subsumed him--it, it, it became a, a, a central motif of his life years after the movement had essentially been broken up by, you know, federal action and tax cases and harassment and all the other things that, that happened to the leadership. He still viewed that as not just a model of right political action, but also as a kind of--a statement of a cultural purpose; that is, he always emphasized that membership in that movement transcended the political and economic activity and really became a way of shaping one's cultural identity, and particularly in a country like America where cultural identity is so important that those followers of Garvey who connected to each other and developed a shared cultural identity around that kind of activity were in effect creating something of a new cultural identity for African-Americans that got beyond what we knew of slavery and created a new sense of internal cultural nationalism that was very important. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, did he know Marcus Garvey personally? Speaker 2: I think he did. He--you know, I was fairly young when, when he would talk about those things, but I think he did. Speaker 1: Yeah; the reason why I asked is 'cause he was in Harlem [New York], you know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--right. Oh, no, he would--you know, they were all right there, it was in Harlem; I mean it wasn't as though he was in another city. I know he marched, and my guess is he did a lot of other things; he was a very literate man, a very articulate person, and my guess is that he was heavily involved in writing and other activities related to the movement, but I--you know, you, you sometimes think of the questions you wished you'd asked too late to ask them, and I was in college becoming very involved in civil rights activities and the like, and he was still alive and living in New York, but I was taken up with my own activities going south and doing organizing in New Haven [Connecticut] and what have you, and in retrospect I wish that I had asked him a number of those questions before he died. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what was his full name, and can you spell it for us please? Speaker 2: William Landsmark, L-A-N-D-S-M-A-R-K. And I don't think he had a middle name. Speaker 1: Okay. And he came here around 1918? Speaker 2: Well, a little bit before that because he, he also found that he was here just long enough to get a draft notice from the American government, and because he was a Dutch citizen when he arrived, he was able to go to the Dutch Consulate and in his fluent Dutch, persuade them to write a letter indicating that he was really not eligible to be drafted, and so he wasn't. I don't think he was opposed to military service but I think he liked to pick his battles, and he had pretty much just arrived. You know, in reference to a lot of that I, I'd refer you to books written by my first cousin who's a little bit like my younger sister, Janus Adams, and she's written several books of days--J-A-N-U-S A-D-A-M-S--that have gone into various aspects of our family history and related family histories, and a lot of that history is in the three books that she's written. Speaker 1: Okay. They're called the Books of Day? Speaker 2: Well, they--there're three different titles but they are daily books that talk about various things that have happened in African-American history on specific days. Story_ID: 85368 Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, tell us about your mother. Can you give us her full name, and spell it for us, and date of birth? Speaker 2: Rubye, R-U-B-Y-E Irene Ultima (ph.) Landsmark was her full name. She married my father, James Burrell, and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--And did she grow up here? She grew up in New York? Speaker 2: She grew up in New York City; she was born and grew up in New York City in East Harlem--oh, in Central Harlem. Speaker 1: About what year was she born? Speaker 2: And she was born in 1921--April 21st, 1921. Speaker 1: All right. Now, did she go to school in New York or-- Speaker 2: She went to school in New York, she attended Episcopal Elementary Schools. In those days, the better schools were often affiliated with one church or another, and our family was Moravian, but it turns out that the Moravian school was apparently farther away than the Episcopal school (laughter), and so they converted and became Episcopalians, so she went to an Episcopal primary school and then into New York City public schools; graduated, got her, her license to become a nurse, was a public health nurse in New York for over 20 years working in Harlem in schools and with kids in public health centers, and then she decided that she wanted to improve her lot and so she went back to college, or went to college; she started when I was--late in junior high school, and graduated in the same year that I graduated from college so we had a great joint celebration, she went on to get her master's degree and became a public school teacher and put another 20 years into public school teaching, so when she retired, she ended up retiring from the New York City School System with two pensions, so she's done rather well. Story_ID: 85369 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what was your mother [Rubye Landsmark] like around the house and, you know, around the-- Speaker 2: Well, my folks were separated and then divorced when I was quite young; I was three I think, and--two or three, and I had very little contact with my father [James Burrell], so basically I was raised in a household with my mother and grandmother, and then I had two aunts--a musician named Marjorie de Lewis, a quite distinguished writer and accompanist who traveled around the country with a number of dance groups through the '50s [1950s], '60s [1960s], '70s [1970s], '80s [1980s], and my other aunt Muriel who was a public school teacher, and so basically I was influenced by my mother, my two aunts and my grandmother. And then my grandfather was kind of in and out, at that point, of the household. And my mother was working full-time, always, as a nurse. We established early on the kind of work and school schedule wherein, you know, she made sure that I was up and off to school, and then she went to do her nursing. I would get home around 2:30 or 3 in the afternoon; my grandmother would take care of me late in the afternoon and then my mother would get home around 5 or 5:30, we'd cook supper, I'd do my homework, and we just lived that way. It was modest, but we weren't poor. We didn't have a car for example, we moved into a public housing project when my mother finally decided that it was no longer acceptable for her to live with her mother while she was trying to raise me, and so when I was probably nine or ten, we moved into the projects. And, you know, it was a fairly comfortable existence, you know. We had food and clothes and weren't on welfare, but it, it, it wasn't easy, to be sure. And I think I developed something of a sense of independence from all of that because I didn't have brothers and sisters, and it was pretty clear that I had to take care of myself and take care of myself in those days meant, to a very large extent, learning to read early and learning to get involved with creative activities. Story_ID: 85370 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, tell us about your father. Can you give us his full name, and spell it for us, and his date of birth? Speaker 2: Right. Well, he was James Theodore Burrell, B-U-double R-E-double L, and he was older than my mother by ten or twelve years. He was originally from outside of Philadelphia--I think Chester, Pennsylvania; he moved to New York and became a subway conductor, which I thought was pretty cool, and he spent his life working in the subways of New York. After my folks were divorced, he remarried and ultimately became a Jehovah's Witness. I didn't end up having very much contact with him from that point on. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right. So, he wasn't around; you didn't really see him (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--No, not really. You know, I think that the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Not even for special events like graduation? Speaker 2: Not really. And, and I'd have to say, in retrospect, that that was--I mean I'd see him a few times a year and, as was often the case in, in those situations, if he was making his child support payments, then there was more of a likelihood that I'd see him, and if he wasn't, then I didn't, and he was--from what I could tell, somewhat inconsistent with that. So I probably saw him three or four times a year. He was not much of a presence in that regard, and I think in part because of that, when I, you know, became an adult, I made the decision that it was more appropriate to change my name to Landsmark because they were the people who had done the work of raising me and that was the family line and tradition that I was prepared to carry on. Story_ID: 85371 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, tell us about some of the sights and sounds and smells of childhood. Speaker 2: Hmm. Well, childhood for me was very much influenced by the fact that I had polio when I was three in the last big epidemic that swept the country in 1949, so for some fairly extended periods, from the age of three to five or six let's say, I wore braces, I spent time in rehab, I was constantly going through physical therapy, and so some of my earliest recollections are of being in hospitals, primarily Bellevue Hospital in New York working with therapists there, being visited by some celebrities who would, you know, do hospital visits; I was a pretty cute kid. So, you know, there are photos, I guess, somewhere of me and Rosemary Clooney and, you know, those kinds of entertainers who (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Jerry Lewis. Speaker 2: --yeah, that sort of stuff, and I have a vague memory of being in an iron lung as a young kid, and I have very strong memories of nurses who were physical therapists working with me doing stretching exercises, getting me to a point where I could walk again. And then there were all of the sights and sounds of New York. My mother [Rubye Landsmark] felt very strongly that we're living in a city that was full of things that we should experience, and so we would go to Chinatown and smell foods in Chinatown and we'd go for walks in Central Park when I--once I learned to ride a bicycle we'd, you know, bicycle around in Central Park and experience that; we went to museums. In Harlem [New York City, New York], there were always meals and scents and the street life of 125th Street, the street preachers, going to the Hotel Theresa-- Story_ID: 84688 Speaker 1: Tell us about--some more about Harlem [New York City, New York]. Now, you all lived right in the heart of it (unclear). Speaker 2: Well, I lived for a number of years with my mother [Rubye Landsmark] and grandmother on 126th Street and Fifth Avenue, and I think that Langston Hughes may have lived right across the street from us, so it was very easy to just walk a block down to 125th Street for any kind of shopping, and my grandmother made a point of saving our afternoon walks so that we could go together, and we'd walk down 125th Street, you know, past Lenox and Hotel Theresa, and down as far as the Apollo [Theater]; we could see who was at the Apollo, you know; shop for whatever, you know--nuts and stuff. It was all there. But mostly what was there was incredible street life, and street preachers and political activists and people selling newspapers and a, a sense of extraordinary community--musicians who'd be playing in doorways and people would be drawing. You'd walk by the offices of the [New York] Amsterdam News and, you know, kinda look in and see people who were, you know, puttin' out a newspaper on a regular basis. It, it was an extraordinary time to, to be in Harlem in the '50s [1950s] when--there was plenty of music and there were writers there, and you got into the '60s [1960s] and James Baldwin was doing readings and there was stuff goin' on at the library, and if you walked uptown a little bit, you could go to the Y[MCA] and you'd just watch the most incredible basketball players, and there was life everywhere. And, you know, clearly, there were downsides of that life, too. I mean I, I do remember, for example, going to my barber shop around the corner and being whisked away because some guy had been thrown on top of one of those fences with great spikes on it and impaled on this fence and, and, you know, his body was on the fence. You knew there was drug-dealing going on and, you know, periodically people would get shot, but guns weren't then what they are now, and you knew that there was an underworld. My grandmother played the numbers all the time. You knew that there was a lot of other stuff goin' on around you, but there wasn't the sense of, of despair, there wasn't a particularly strong sense of poverty; we knew that we were poorer than other people but there were lots of poor people in New York at that point. You didn't necessarily feel--I certainly didn't necessarily feel isolated from the life of the city. It was very easy to get on a bus or on the subway and to find yourself downtown at Macy's or at the Metropolitan Museum [of Art] or in Greenwich Village in 20 minutes, half an hour; and no matter where we went that we felt that we owned that just as much as we owned Harlem, so I, I know that there were barriers that existed in a lot of neighborhoods, but our sense was we--you know, we were from Harlem so we owned the world and, you know, anything we wanted we could have. Story_ID: 84689 Speaker 1: Now, now where did you go to school? Speaker 2: Well, I started in elementary school several blocks from where I lived--a short walk, and it (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Name of the school. Speaker 2: Well, it was, it was P.S. 133, and it was a school that attracted, for a variety of reasons, a group of more middle-class aspiring kids than not, just because of the demographics of the neighborhood. And after the Brown v. Board of Education decision in '54 [1954], the School Board in New York decided that they wanted to see what the effects of transferring black kids from a exclusively black school to a white school to see if it made any difference in terms of educational outcomes. And so the school I was attending, P.S. 133, was selected to find several elementary school kids who would then be bused to a predominantly white school elsewhere in Manhattan, and they ended up selecting four of us--my cousin and myself and two other kids--Bobby Burns and--I don't know whatever happened to him, and--oh, Linda something. And the four of us, from the fourth grade on, were bused to primarily Jewish schools outside of Harlem, at the upper end of Manhattan. So from that point on, I found myself as one of a very small handful of black kids in primarily white schools that were public schools, but public schools in Manhattan in, in primarily Jewish neighborhoods. Speaker 1: Now, how did you find that experience--in a Jewish school? Was the culture--was the culture-- Speaker 2: I think, I think that the goal was to put us in more Jewish schools because the culture of those schools tended to be more progressive, liberal, inviting, than might have been the case at schools in other neighborhoods. I found that any interest that I had in political activity once I got to middle school, for example, was likely to be very much reinforced by the Jewish kids whose, you know, parents were often as not leftists or might have been involved with any of a range of, of activities that had involved the communist party or the liberal party in New York, and so a lot of my political thinking which had initially emerged from my grandfather [William Landsmark] being the Garveyite, I think, came to then be refined in that Jewish context. I started to meet kids who were white kids involved with civil rights for example, white kids who were involved with post-Holocaust activities, kids who were involved with the arts and with expressions in the arts that were politically motivated--a lot of anti-war activity. Not so much anti-war initially--not in the '50s [1950s], but ban-the-bomb activity--that sort of stuff. So I--you know, that was very exciting, but I also realized very quickly that being bused in that way could have a devastating--in fact did have devastating effects on one's social life because you weren't in the school neighborhood that you were bused to outside of the hours when you were in classes or maybe, you know, briefly for a, a sports activity. So you were there from 8 to 4 and then gone, and never there on weekends, so you didn't really get to build relationships with people who you went to school with. Then you got to your home community and you wanted to maintain and build some kind of relationships with the kids in your home community, but you couldn't do that because you weren't there in school with them so they didn't know who you were. So, in fact, for kids who were bused under those circumstances, you know, unless you had a large enough cohort, and there were only four of us, where you knew that you could continue to kind of hang with each other, you never became a part of the community you lived in and you never became a part of the community you went to school in, and so I think we all became rather independent individuals; you sorta had to be pretty tough and independent because there was no home base to speak of. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, now, what was the name of the Jewish school you attended in grade school? Speaker 2: Well, again, it was a numbered school so it was P.S. 98, and then Junior High School 52, and they were both in the Inwood section in Upper Manhattan. Story_ID: 84690 Speaker 1: Now, what were your favorite subjects in school? Were they-- Speaker 2: English, social studies--anything that related to history and (unclear) getting a sense of culture. I liked art, I loved art appreciation, I loved going to museums, we got to concerts and the like, both, you know, through my family and through school activities, and I loved doing all of that. But I enjoyed writing, and when there were opportunities to speak a little bit, I enjoyed that; and, again, I think that's partly because I'd had polio as a, as a young kid, you know. Eight or 10 years had gone by at that point, but I couldn't be an athlete, so I--that wasn't an area where I could really excel. I enjoyed reading, I enjoyed doing science projects, and I enjoyed kind of playing with stuff to the extent that one gets to, you know, do a science project in the projects, for example, which, you know, is--was a little bit problematic, so I, I viewed myself as a person who might become a scientist. I didn't know what it might be to become an educator or a lawyer; we didn't know those kinds of people. Except for the doctors I went to, I didn't know any doctors. I mean I can't say that we really knew any middle-class people as such. There were no insurance brokers or those kinds of folks living in the projects. Most people were blue-collar, you know, mechanics and, and people who worked in shops and the like. Story_ID: 84691 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, did you have any mentors in school, or teachers that took a particular interest in you that you looked up to? Speaker 2: Well, my third grade teacher, Mrs. Campbell, was a terrific inspiration. I saw her many years later and was, you know, grateful to tell her that I'd gone on to Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut] and had become a lawyer, and that was great. She was just an outstanding teacher in this very good school in Harlem [New York City, New York]. And then once I got to the, the school in Inwood [Manhattan, New York City, New York], there was a woman named Rose Zeer (ph.) who was a great inspiration, and I think won a whole bunch of awards for her ability to connect the basic public school curriculum to a kind of broader cultural community; she was the kind of person who got us into art galleries in downtown so that we understood how art gets bought and sold, and understood how it ended up in museums and took us to chamber events and those kinds of things, so they were important to me. The bus driver--when I was bused, it was on a public bus, so it meant that every day I got on a regular city bus and rode forty-five minutes and then got off and walked to school. And part of the security and safety arrangement that my mother [Rubye Landsmark] made was that she introduced herself to the bus drivers who were likely to be on the bus runs when I would be getting on the bus, and I was instructed to make a point of always getting on the same bus so that the driver knew I was there. And I mean, you know, you're talkin' about a fifth grader being bused for forty-five minutes alone, and I found that the bus drivers were a remarkable group. I think that they gave me a, a sense of the role that a lot of civil servants play in cities as part of the glue that keeps cities together, and I've always appreciated that. When I worked in City Hall, I always knew that if you got to know people like cops and bus drivers and people who work in parks, that in fact, they were very often sort of unsung heroes and mentors for a lot of kids in communities. Story_ID: 84692 Speaker 1: Now, tell me about high school. Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: Where did you go to high school? Speaker 2: I went to Stuyvesant High School, which is one of the examination schools in the city of New York. At the time I applied and tested for it, there were very few black kids there. I think that in my graduating class of about 750, there were probably 10 of us, 12 of us--something like that. I'll never forget my first homeroom experience there because by then, I had pretty much gotten used to going to schools where almost everyone was white--from the fourth grade on. I mean for four or five years, I'd been through schools where everyone was white, and I got into my first homeroom and there was a black kid seated on the other side of the room and I remember my shock at seeing a black kid and saying, "Oh, my God, there's a black kid in this class," and then suddenly realizing that that's what I looked like in all of the classes I'd been in, but of course when you're living inside the skin, you don't think of yourself necessarily in that way unless you're reminded of that. So I went to a high school that was primarily science and engineering-oriented. Everyone left that school and went to college. The really great thing about it, apart from the very high quality of the education, was that it was within about a half-mile of the edge of Greenwich Village [New York City, New York], so after school, depending upon how much work you had, it was always possible to kind of wander down to the Village and at least walk through before you got on the subway to go back home, and that gave us a chance to get a sense of what was going on in the, in the early stages of the folk music scene and the club scene, and to develop a, a kind of sense of street smarts that I already had from being in Harlem [New York City, New York], but a very different sense of what it meant to sort of watch out for yourself in kind of any neighborhood. You knew that if you developed the instincts to stay outta trouble in East and Central Harlem on the one hand, and Greenwich Village on the other, that there wasn't any place that you couldn't deal with anywhere in the world. I mean it was just the kind of attitude that you get about how to take care of yourself on the street. Story_ID: 84693 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, you're in [Stuyvesant] High School. What activities were you involved in? Speaker 2: I wrote, I was a gymnast. Even though I had polio, I had recently (ph.) good upper-body strength, so I got into things like side horse and parallel bars and, you know, working out on those kinds of machines (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--(Inaudible response). Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah. And, and that was kind of fun because it gave me a sense of having some power in my body which was very important to me because, you know, one of my legs was just so very weak that I think was really important. You know, it's all about how you establish your sense of masculinity in a world and, you know, part of that is about, you know, showing physical strength, and I was able to do that. I ended up becoming captain of the cheerleading team; Stuyvesant in those days was an all-boys high school, and so we had a cheering team made up mostly of guys who had been athletes who'd gotten injured, and who wanted to kind of stay close to the teams and travel with them, so--and in some respects, we had some kind of athletic wannabes or whatever--rejects--on the cheerleading team, but we also had a relationship with a local girls' high school, so once or twice a week we had to go up to the girls' high school for our practices, and I would say that half of the guys on the cheerleading team were former athletes, and the rest of us were guys who wanted to be players (laughter). So, the opportunity to be captain of the cheerleading team was an opportunity to leave campus legitimately twice a week, and to walk onto a girls' school campus as a kind of--guy--and that was okay. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We had a lot of fun with that. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: I wrote poetry, I won some poetry awards, I did some short-story writing, and I was also frankly, because of the cheerleading team, directly engaged in a lot of political activity. The cheerleaders at Stuyvesant High School, in those days, were in effect the political organizers and shock troops for any major political activity that occurred that involved the school, so when George Lincoln Rockwell, then head of the American Nazi Party, did a speech several blocks from the school, we were the ones who led all of the students out of school to demonstrate against Rockwell. When Jack Kennedy [President John F. Kennedy] came through in a motorcade, we were the ones who led all of the students out to, you know, kind of line the, the path of this motorcade and to cheer for Kennedy. When teachers went out on strike, we were the people who would get the message out to students that we were going out in sympathy with, with the teachers. So it was a way of learning, when I was about 15 or 16, how to lead large demonstrations. You know, we learned passive resistance, we taught the cheerleaders passive resistance; it was where I learned crowd control tactics, all of which became useful once I got to college. I'd encourage anyone who's thinking about a life in politics to do some cheerleading 'cause it's, it's great training for dealing with crowds. Story_ID: 84694 Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now, anything else about high school you wanna mention? Speaker 2: I, I think that being in high school in New York was intrinsically exciting because what it meant was that if you wanted to connect to great study opportunities, you know, we all get--can just go up to the New York Public Library, as a group, and spend time learning how do to research--if you were doing a science project, we knew that we could go as a group to the planetarium or the [American] Museum of Natural History, or to The Cloisters, and you could just walk in as a group of Stuyvesant High School [New York City, New York] kids and say, "We're workin' on a project; how can you help us?" And people would stop and they would take time. So that, in some respects, growing up in New York and being in high school in New York during that period was kinda like living the Internet; everything was there for you--great bookstores and great museums and great art and great music to listen to and clubs to stand outside of or try to sneak into in the middle of the night or whatever, and you learned how to get the best stuff without necessarily having to get in trouble to do it. So that very few of the kids who were there ended up doin' drugs, or ended up knocking up their girlfriends, or ended up, you know, kind of disgracing their families or ended up, you know, floating dead in the East River. The folks watched each other's backs in part because we were constantly reminded that we were in one of the best high schools in one of the most amazing cities in the world, and that someone expected something of us; that there was a future that all of us had and that we had a, a duty or a responsibility to be preparing ourselves for some kind of leadership role. Story_ID: 84695 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, when you were on the verge of graduation from high school, I mean, did you know what you wanted to pursue as a career? Speaker 2: I thought I wanted to go to some kinda public service, but it was interesting because my mother [Rubye Landsmark] and I went to my guidance counselor at that point who advised me to become a chef which, of course, didn't sit at all well with my mother. Well, again, you know, there are levels of racism, even in exam school [Stuyvesant High School] in New York City. It wasn't clear to me as to what college I was gonna end up going to; I applied--in those days, you were limited in terms of the number of schools that your high school would send transcripts to, and so I knew that I had to choose very carefully; I could choose a public school in New York State-CCNY [City College of New York] or whatever, which I did. You could choose--you were encouraged to choose at least one private college in New York State because the State Board of Regents gave out scholarships to kids who performed well who went to private schools in the state, so that meant, you know, you'd choose a place like Cornell [University, Ithaca, New York] or Hobart [College, Geneva, New York] or what have you. And then, for your other two or three choices, you were on your own, and I was heavily involved with church activities at that point. I met a seminarian who had graduated from Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut] and who strongly encouraged me to apply to Yale, and I thought he was nuts. This was, you know, white guy from the Boston [Massachusetts] area--really nice guy, terrific guy who, you know, had high hopes for me, but I recognized that even Stuyvesant High School only sent maybe half-a-dozen of any graduating class of 750 or so on to Ivy League colleges, and I was in the bottom quarter of my class; I'd worked really hard and all that but, you know, I was also working part-time and doing other things, so I thought the prospects of my getting into Yale were remote at best. He took me up to New Haven and kind of walked me through the campus which, of course, was, you know, an epiphany; I hadn't seen anything like that. And he strongly encouraged me to at least apply. You know, it was one of these--you know, you-don't-know-if-you don't-try kinds of things. And they turned me down, but when they turned me down, they suggested I do a prep-school year somewhere because I was still 16 at that point; I was still fairly young, and they thought another year of seasoning would be good, and I thought, well, I have been accepted at CCNY, I can join all my classmates and do that, or I can head off to, you know, some unknown prep school, and that was an easy choice, so I got ready to go to CCNY. And then one day at my after-school library job, I got a call from St. Paul['s] School up in Concord, New Hampshire from the admissions director saying that they had heard that I was thinking about going to prep school for a year, and that they hoped that I would consider them, and I, of course, thought it was, you know, some joke, and they went on and said, "No, we're very serious, and we'd love for you to come up to visit." And I kind of knew where Concord, New Hampshire was and explained that we didn't have a car or a way of getting up there, and they then said, "Well, we'll send you a plane ticket." And this was 1963, and I'd never been on a plane, so I-- Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: (Laughter). So I said, "You send the ticket and I'll come." And sure enough, ticket arrived and I flew into Boston and took the train up to, to Concord, and they knew exactly what they were doing. The school doctor in those days owned an old Jaguar convertible, and this is now May, and he picked me up at the train station in this old sorta growly Jag Convertible, and it became hard to say "No," to anything that they asked for at that point, and the reason they wanted me was that they'd been around for more than a century, and had never had a black graduate, but their chaplain was an Episcopal minister who then went on to become the Bishop in Washington [D.C], and he was black-- Speaker 1: Which one? Speaker 2: I'm gonna block his name; I'm thinking John Thomas [Walker]; but anyway, the chaplain was black but they never had anyone who'd graduated who was black, and they wanted someone. I mean it was 1963, and there were, there were a couple of kids behind me in--you know, in lower forms, at the school, but they wanted it to happen and they wanted it to happen sooner rather than later, and so they were looking for post-graduate students who'd be willing to come up who would have the sophistication to be able to walk into a circumstance where there were very few other black kids around. Most of the kids there were from the Greater New York or New England area, so they wanted someone who wasn't intimidated by a bunch of arrogant young New Yorkers, and I showed up and I was perfect for 'em. So I did a post-graduate prep-school year and I re-applied to Yale and became a political science major at Yale. But I did spend that very interesting year up in New Hampshire. Story_ID: 84696 Speaker 1: Well, how do you find the prep schools? Now, do you have to stay on campus and everything at the prep school? Speaker 2: We live on campus. Speaker 1: Yeah, what's the name of it again? Speaker 2: St. Paul School--Concord, New Hampshire, one of the leading private preparatory schools in the country; it had an Episcopal background and, you know, that helped 'cause I could sort of settle into a lot of it very quickly. I helped found a Shakespearean society while I was there, we created a film society while I was there, and there were a number of people who have since gone on, not just to Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut], but to, you know, major careers doing other interesting kinds of things. Garry Trudeau, you know, of "Doonesbury", was there a couple of years behind me, and John Lindsay, the former mayor [of New York City], had been there. You know, it was that kind of New England, hockey-playing--the, the, the--TIME Magazine had done a piece on prep schools just before I got there and they called St. Paul's a hockey-playing upper-crusty St. Paul School. And I felt comfortable there; I never felt alienated there; I did learn to be a hockey goalie, and I learned to get along with people who were very much unlike the white Jewish kids I'd known in New York who always viewed themselves as, to a large extent, outsiders--powerful, but outsiders. The kids at St. Paul's didn't really think of themselves as, as powerful; they just knew that they were going to run things when they graduated, and it didn't make any difference what they were gonna run; they were gonna run newspapers, they were gonna run television stations, they were gonna run big companies, they were gonna run stockbrokerage firms but there was just the kind of quiet confidence that they had about themselves that I found very instructive. But there was also a sense of kind of New England noblesse oblige there; that is, "We are privileged to be here, we have obligations to those less-privileged than we, we don't flaunt what we have, and we work in ways that are subtle, discrete, low-key," you know, the floppy old pair of loafers and the 10-year old tweed jacket that suffices; you don't flash anything, and intellect matters--a lot. Doing your homework, studying, knowing history, having a little bit of a sense of Latin, being able to speak foreign languages, knowing something about science and physics--were all things that were important for a well-rounded person to be successful. It was important to know who philosophers were and it was important to read poetry. And I'd been exposed to some of that certainly because of some of the kids I'd met, particularly the more cultural-oriented Jewish kids in New York, but it's one thing to know, you know, Upper East Side and Upper West Side Jewish kids, and it was something very different to encounter the kids who lived on Park Avenue and whose parents had houses out on Long Island. Speaker 1: Okay, now--well, tell me about Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut]. So I take it you didn't have any real bad experiences there-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Nothing--you were well-treated pretty much. Speaker 2: Pretty much so. Speaker 1: Were there any other black students there at-- Speaker 2: Well, there were--probably--there was probably one student per class, and each class was about 75 kinds--75 to 80 boys, so there were under-classmen who were coming up through the ranks. But for me to arrive as a post-graduate student, and it turned out the first post-graduate student they'd ever had, was a very unique experience, and there was no question I was treated with some sense of specialness because, you know, people had been alerted to the fact that, that I was basically gonna be the, the first black student outta there. Now, it turns out that there was another black kid in my class, but most of the kids didn't know it because he was so light; he was from Washington [D.C]. He hadn't made a big deal about his being black; he hadn't denied it but he just hadn't made a big deal about it and so a lot of the kids just had no idea that, that he was actually African-American. Story_ID: 84697 Speaker 1: So anyway, by the time I got to Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut]--I was just 18, very confident, very well-versed in what to expect from Yale kids. You know, it was interesting 'cause a lot of kids got there, they were number one in their class and, you know, captain of the hockey team and championship high jumper and all of that sort of stuff and then they end up on a campus with a thousand other people exactly like themselves (laughter). And there was a lot of acting out that went on, you know, as to how people then sort of created a new identity for themselves when they weren't "the" big man on campus anymore; and from my perspective, I'd already been through that. I'd been through it in high school and I'd been through it in, in prep school, and I had a pretty clear sense of who I was and what I thought I wanted to do in terms of public service, so I wasn't intimidated by anyone, and it made it real easy to just settle in and start to study political science and to get myself ready for this career. And, as luck would have it, from the time I arrived through the five years I spent as an undergraduate; I was there for four, and I took off one year and went back to New York and did some Job Corps recruiting but, you know, in the five years I was there as an undergraduate, and then the four more years I spent there getting my law degree and my degree in environmental design from the architecture school, I had the good fortunate of being involved with all kinds of political activity with all kinds of very interesting people. So, I was in Davenport College where [President] George W. Bush was a classmate of mine; I knew him well. For all the things that they say about him--I mean he was easy-going, fun, hung out a lot, spent a lot of time with his fraternity brothers, drank a lot, was not the hardest-working guy there, partied. By the time I got to law school, I was--I took my first class with Hilary Clinton in constitutional law; [President] Bill Clinton was a classmate of mine--Robert Reich. Throughout those years, there were a lot of people at Yale who had an early knowledge that they were gonna do something that was related to either public service or the media, and we fed on each other. The guy who was the political editor of the Yale Daily News in the year before I was, went on to become the mayor of Knoxville; the guy who was the editor in the year after I was, went on to become the mayor up in Portsmouth, New Hampshire. I went on to spend seven years working in the mayor's office here in Boston [Massachusetts]. The guy who smuggled Nikita Khrushchev's memoirs out of Russia was the editor-in-chief of the Yale Daily News at that point--Strobe Talbott, who's now in the State Department. The people who worked for the Yale Daily News went on to write for the New York Times. People who were involved with the Film Society, as I was, went on to become film producers in Hollywood. And we, we just sort of knew that we were at Yale, which had a commitment to doing public service-oriented things at a point in time which is to say, in my case, 1964 through 1969 as an undergraduate, and then another three years at the graduate level, where the world was changing and we felt we owned it. Story_ID: 84698 Speaker 1: Whether it was contributing to civil rights, whether it was my marching at Selma [Alabama], whether it was participating in anti-war demonstrations at the Pentagon, whether it was fund-raising after [James Earl] Chaney, [Michael] Schwerner and [Andrew] Goodman were killed, whether it was being in New Haven during the Bobby Seale trial--and there were so many experiences that put us either on the edges of or in the middle of political activities that meant something, that all of us knew that we were just on our way to, you know, doing something that mattered. I was at the meeting that led to the murder by the New Haven Black Panthers--of one of the guys at the meeting that led, then led to Bobby Seale's being indicted in New Haven [Connecticut]. But I didn't even know; I--you know, you were just sort of there. You didn't always know what was really going on, but you were always in a room with someone who was doing something significant, and so you always had this sense that if you were prepared to rise to the occasion, just going to class, just going into a dining hall, was gonna expose you to someone or something that was part of your education and your training. Speaker 2: Okay. So this case [New Haven Black Panther trials] was Bobby Seale was about the [Black] Panthers-- Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: --murdering another Panther [Alex Rackley]-- Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: --over some conflict? Speaker 1: There was some internal conflict and, you know, one guy ended up floating a couple of days later in a river outside of New Haven, and somehow the federal authorities thought that since Bobby Seale had done a talk or something, that he was involved and they thought he'd been at the meeting and, you know, had ordered a hit or something like that, and that led to the big Bobby Seale trial in New Haven in the, in the early '70s [1970s] but, I mean, he was acquitted and he hadn't done anything. And I know he wasn't at the meeting (laughter) because I was, right? But it was--as I say, the kinda situation where things were always happening around you and you didn't always know what was going on. I was at the meeting that involved what the Panthers in New Haven were doing around community organizing. Then, the meeting took a break and the, the college kids who were doing the organizing left, and then the Panthers went on and completed their internal business where they did whatever they did, so I--you know, stuff like that was always happening, and it was also a time when, you know, there were plenty of soft drugs around and people did all that sort of stuff. You know, people were smoking dope whenever possible, they were doing mushrooms and, and, you know, other kinds of hallucinogens. One of the favorite campus activities was related to the fact that the author of "Love Story"--the novelist--and I'm blocking his name-- Speaker 2: Erich Segal. Speaker 1: Erich Segal was on the English faculty, and Segal had also been the script writer for "Yellow Submarine", and so he had a print of "Yellow Submarine" which he would periodically lend to the Film Society for fundraising purposes. And, of course, if you have a print of "Yellow Submarine" on a college campus, everyone gets high in order to see the film, so I mean--at the same time we were doing political activities, people were doing a range of social activities, cultural activities; and it was a very exciting time to be there, and people did in fact go on to do all kinds of other very interesting things involving politics, media, what have you. Story_ID: 84699 Speaker 1: Now, were you involved with SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee], I mean, directly? Speaker 2: Well, to the extent that there was much SNCC activity on the Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut] campus and there wasn't a lot, yes. I was president of something called the Yale Civil Rights Council, and we did a lot of fundraising for SNCC. You know, we saw our jobs--since we couldn't be where they were physically, we saw a lot of our job as doing fundraising; we raised thousands of dollars for them. You know, we'd do all kinds of fundraisers and benefits and events, and then just send the checks down to them, and I ended up getting my first real southern experiences in part because of them, and SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership March]. I did go down for the Selma march [in Alabama], and ended (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--The one where they had the fight on the Edmund Pettus Bridge? (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Right, the, the Montgomery to Selma march [sic, Selma to Montgomery March] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, I think it was the one that came after (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--That's right, right. And I didn't get to march; I mean I was just a college kid but I did a lot of the background stuff; I mean, you know, we got down there prepared to do whatever we were directed to do, and we were told as soon as we got there, "Look, you're a bunch of northern kids, you don't really know the--this part of the South. There are some things we don't want to send you out to do 'cause you're just not experienced doing this, but there key things that we think you need to do here, including addressing the envelopes, dealing with the mailings, making the phone calls, making the sandwiches, you know, doing all the background stuff." And so there were several of us who went down and participated in that, and then the night [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was killed, I got a call from--interestingly, one of my kind of fraternity brothers who had been a classmate of mine at St. Paul School, white guy, and he just called and said, "You know, King just got shot, we've gotta go." And he and I got in his little sports car and drove all night, stopped at his parents' big estate in (unclear), Virginia, and then kept driving down to Atlanta [Georgia] and, you know, connected with all the people who were doing funeral preparations. And again, licking envelopes, making sandwiches--just doing the stuff that you do so that people who are out front have backup and support; I mean that's what you did as a college kid. And in both of those experiences, you know, just the, the act of driving into Alabama for the first time in my life, in, in that case with three white seminary students from Yale, knowing that we were driving a car with out-of0state plates, and that there were three white guys and a black guy in a car, it was clear as to what we were going do and we knew that freedom riders and people supporting freedom riders were getting killed, you know? We knew Viola Liuzzo had gotten killed, we knew about [Michael] Schwerner and, and [Andrew] Goodman and [James Earl] Chaney; I mean we knew that, that it was just part of the risk, but it was who--it was what you did. You know, if you were committed to change and, and you thought it was important enough--there was nothing heroic about what we were doing, you just had to act out of conscience and, and do the right thing, and so we did. Story_ID: 84700 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, now, now you pursued two degrees in Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut]. Speaker 2: I did. Well, I ended up with three, actually. I completed my undergraduate studies in political science; I did take a year off between my sophomore and junior years and I went back to New York and lived in the city; I worked in Harlem [New York City, New York] just kind of re-connecting. A year of prep school and two years of Yale were startin' to give me a slightly frayed sense of who I was as a black kid coming outta Harlem, and so I went back and became a Job Corps recruiter and union organizer, and spent a year working in Spanish Harlem [East Harlem] identifying and sending kids off to Job Corps camps around the country, and giving them a chance to get out. And then I went back and completed my last two years as (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--I'm sorry-- Speaker 2: Emm-hmm (ph.). Speaker 1: --so you completed your bachelor's degree in what year? Speaker 2: Sixty-nine [1969]. I was originally class of '68 [1968] and actually finished in '69 [1969], and then went directly into law school. I only applied to one law school 'cause Yale was the political place, and I thought if I'm gonna be a lawyer, there's only a certain kind of training I want; I don't want to spend my life drafting wills, I want to be where the people are who are committed to doing progressive public policy, and so when I got to law school yeah, I mean there's [President] Bill Clinton, there's Hilary Rodham, you know? There's Bob Reich [Robert Reich]. There were a number of faculty--Tom Emerson [Thomas I. Emerson]; he'd done the Scottsboro [Boys] case and he was the person who was teaching us constitutional law. There were a number of people there who were fundamentally committed to progressive social values and who taught law from the context that we were, most of us, not likely to become corporate attorneys, but that we were more likely to become involved with some level of public service, and so I only wanted to go to that law school and I knew a few people there, and I talked to them and, you know, I, I guess they also felt that it was a good place for me to be so I did enroll at the law school. I was married at the time, by then; I had gotten married, just after I completed my, my undergraduate work, to a young white woman, sculptor, and, you know, I took a little bit of heat from family and friends about that 'cause I'd--here I'd been involved in all this civil rights activity. For a period of time, I had dated Whitney Young's daughter; you know, I'd been involved with that sort of stuff but, you know, I also knew that it's important to go with your heart and my heart was with the person I married, so I started law school, she was an artist. She applied to art school at Yale, was turned down, but her work was the kind of work that I knew would be interesting to people in the architecture school, so I encouraged her to apply to the architecture school, and the following year she was admitted to the architecture school. I then took a look at what was goin' on at the architecture school and I said, "Well, this is cool and it's more interesting than a lot of what's goin' on in the law school." So I then applied for a two-year program at the architecture school, their environmental design program, so that we would both complete our studies at the same time, and then I didn't tell either the law school or the architecture school all of what I was doing at either place, so I ended up graduating with both degrees. I don't know if that's still possible but I--I was kind of nuts (laughter). Story_ID: 84701 Speaker 1: Sounds like you were, you were pretty smart. I mean I don't know how you--how else to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Well, you know, the thing is--you know, one thing I've learned in life is that if you're really passionate about the thing and you cut away all of the superfluous activities that often get in the way of just focusing on accomplishing a particular thing, you can, you can accomplish things that you never would have expected to accomplish, and when you look back, you can ask yourself, "How did I do that?" And the only way you did it was because you were so passionate about it; you said, "I'm gonna make this thing happen." And that was the period when I felt that I could be married, have a part-time job, be enrolled in a law school, be enrolled in the architecture school, and still have, you know, a little bit of time to myself; and it got done. So (laughter), I was crazy when I think about it but it got done. So, yeah, I finished with degrees in law and architecture and Karen got her architecture degree, and then we moved to Boston [Massachusetts] because her family was from this part of the world, there were a bunch of architecture firms in this part of the world where she might be able to get some work. There were interesting houses that we could think about working on that were cheap enough so we might be able to, you know, even afford, you know, an old, you know, run down thing and rebuild it ourselves which we started to do, and there were good law firms here and ultimately I found a law firm [Hill & Barlow] that represented most of the architects in town, and a lot of architects nationally. So, you know, they looked at the fact that I could read plans and specs, and also read and write contracts, and it was a very short interview. And I came to work in Boston, and again I was fortunate because when I got to the firm, I had no idea, but it worked out that Bill Weld [William Weld] had the office across the hall from me and he went on to become governor [of Massachusetts]. Mike Dukakis [Michael Dukakis] was the person (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Weld, W-E-L--E-L-D? Speaker 2: Right. Mike Dukakis who, at that point, had been a state legislator and subsequently went on to become governor [of Massachusetts] and ran for president, was the partner at the firm who was training all of the young associates. There were people who were at the firm at that time who left to go on to become judges and law school professors and college presidents, and it was just a place that, once again, had a very high level of political and social commitment so that you did your work, but you, you did it in a context where people were always saying, "You're not just writing a contract; this contract has social or political or cultural implications, and as much as you're just writing what seems to be a straight contract between two parties here, to what extent are you weighing what the wider implications are of what you're doing?" And not every lawyer does that. So that there was always a, a kind of dialogue that went on around our own particular senses of our social responsibilities and our ethical responsibilities to do work for the client in a way that best represented the client, but also acknowledged that the client didn't operate in isolation from the rest of society. So we learned early on that there times when you have to sit your client down and say, "You shouldn't do this." And that's not what a lot of lawyers do. Story_ID: 84702 Speaker 1: Okay. All right now, now I read that you spent time in the Peace Corps, too. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: That's not-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --that's not true? Speaker 2: No (laughter). Would have been fun, I suppose but no, that's one thing I never got to (laughter). No, no; the closest I came to that was, was the Job Corps recruiting I did in, in Harlem [New York City, New York], and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Job Corps instead of Peace Corps. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I learned quite a lot from that. I lost a couple of clients. You know, you start working with an individual and, and they're committed to getting out of, outta Harlem and, and into a new life for themselves and then they do somethin' and they get shot and killed. And so you show up in the morning, you pick up a file and, and you getting to work on, you know, this person's file and you get a phone call and you find out that the guy got killed the night before, and it just--it, it really--it, it gets you focused on how--sometimes it's very important to know that you're not just processing paper, and that sometimes you really need to expedite things, and it's not good enough to say, "Oh, this is a bureaucratic problem here, come back next week" because they might not have 'til next week. And in my own case, having gotten outta Harlem, you know, things had deteriorated in, in even those, you know, few years that--you know, drugs were coming in to a much greater extent. You could see that, that, that parts of the community were really fraying at that point. You knew that that guy you were working with was you, and that if you didn't move fast enough, as that seminarian had been able to move quickly enough to help me get to Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut], if I didn't move fast enough to get a kid to the truck-driving school down in New Jersey, he might get killed. And so I learned a lot about client service, and recognizing your clients as real people and not just as, as numbers or as, as cases that you're working with. So no, I was never in the Peace Corps but I--the Job Corps work was, was like being in the Peace Corps in, in East Harlem at that point. Story_ID: 84703 Speaker 1: Okay. Now--so, after law school--I mean you got the--got the job, you're, you're operating as a lawyer who can read architectural plans and-- Speaker 2: Right. I, I was on my way, and then I quickly realized a couple of things--one was that I was working for some clients who, if they'd known that I was the one doing the work, probably wouldn't have wanted a black lawyer working for them. You know, it was just encountering the levels of incipient racism that you find when you become a professional, particularly in those days, early '70s [1970s]. The second thing, I got divorced shortly thereafter 'cause of, you know, family stuff that wasn't working out. I tell everyone don't, don't think it's always gonna be a bed of roses when you move to your wife's family's territory. But that was also in part a, a function of race and pressure that they put her under, around--well, the--I would have to say their own insecurities about having their daughter marry a black guy, even a black guy who, you know, had the credentials that I had at that point. Speaker 1: You were like Sidney Poitier in "Guess Who's Coming To Dinner" (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--That's exactly who I was; that's exactly who I was. Speaker 1: You had it goin' on. Speaker 2: Right but, you know, it works out okay in "Guess Who's Comin' To Dinner", it doesn't always work out quite the same in the real world. I mean, you know, when we see each other, we're still, you know, civil and friendly and all that, but--and there were a lot of those kinds of pressures going on. But I also began to wonder, after a year at the firm [Hill & Barlow], whether doing that kind of work was really the best way for me to be spending my life and so I left, and I got a job as the number two person running a black construction contractors train association [Contractors Association of Boston] where, once again, I could link what I knew in terms of, of construction and architecture in the building trades with what I knew as a lawyer. And after less than a year, I became the director of that, and we were working on minority contractor set-asides and increasing the utilization of minority workers and contractors throughout New England but primarily greater Boston area, and that was very satisfying- Story_ID: 86248 Speaker 1: So, I, I became director of this minority contractor's train association [Contractors Association of Boston], and a lot of that work involved meeting with government officials and primarily white contractors to negotiate, set-aside agreements to guarantee that a certain percentage of work would be done by people of color and by people from that immediate community; there was less pressure in terms of bringing women into the construction trades at that point but in a peripheral way, we also addressed some issues around women. And so on a regular basis I'd find myself going to Boston City Hall for meetings with the Redevelopment Authority or the Building Authority, or what have you to set up and negotiate these arrangements, and there was one morning when I drove downtown; I was runnin' a little bit late for the meeting and I was able to park my car and I was kind of rushing across a, a section of City Hall Plaza which encompasses the large plaza in front of City Hall, but then also has some sort of side areas to it that are kind of extension to the plaza, and I was coming across one of the extensions but I couldn't really see the plaza, and as I was walking--well, kind of rushing, to get to this meeting, there were a couple of kids who turned the corner and I saw them--high school kids--and I saw them, and I saw that several of them were carrying little placards that said "Resist," and those placards didn't really register immediately as meaning anything; I mean I didn't have kids, I didn't have kids in the Boston Public Schools, I wasn't following closely the fact that there was a, a lot of dissension and, and violence going on in the city [Boston, Massachusetts]. I mean you pick up the newspaper, you saw that there were negative, you know, bad things goin' on, that school buses were being stoned, but when you lived in the city, you didn't feel that directly and immediately because it was all going on in South Boston or to a lesser extent--much lesser extent--in Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts], and if you didn't live right there, you didn't see it; you didn't feel it. If you didn't have kids in the schools, it wasn't something that you connected with; if you didn't work or live with people that had kids in the schools, it, it just seemed like something weird that was going on that was gonna have to play itself out and, you know, the city was gonna survive. It was obvious that busing was here, it was gonna prevail, the courts were gonna see to it that it was gonna prevail, the cops were on the streets so it was gonna be violence, but that, you know, you'd go through a few weeks or maybe a coupla months of that and it would get resolved. So none of us ever thought that it would impact any of us directly, and, you know, I know a lot of people, who were my peers at that point, who just weren't payin' close attention to it, you know? We didn't grow up here; it just wasn't our issue as such. We cared, but it wasn't something that we'd been around long enough to have engaged with. So I saw these kids with the "Resist" signs and it just didn't register until I get closer to the corner and realize that they were the front edge of a group of about 200 high school kids who were in a march, and it was an anti-busing march. Story_ID: 86249 Speaker 1: And then I thought, 'Well, this isn't so good,' because I'm walking right into the front of this march as they're turning a corner, and I could get a sense of the scale of the march, but it was also clear that if I kept walking straight, maybe just another 10 or 15 feet, they would pass right by me and go right behind me. And, you know, they were chanting, but they weren't making that much noise; I mean it was a big group of kids in a demonstration, so I kept walking. And I must have gotten another five or six feet, you know, after this realization comes to me, when the first kid--not the first kid marching, but the first one-a the kids who was part of this group, saw me and, and yelled out, "There's a nigga, get him!" And a couple of the guys jumped out from the, from the crowd; the first one sort of swung and hit me in, in, I guess, my forehead or something, knocked off my glasses, and then a second kid jumped me from behind, knocked me down, and looking back at the, the film and tape, there were probably five or six kids who actually, you know, laid a hand on me or tried to, you know, punching and kicking me. I was probably down on the ground for no more than a couple of seconds and, you know, I managed to get up, and I think there was an adult who was part of the group, who was kind of escorting the group, who, who actually intervened--it, it appears in the, in the contact sheet that there is a white person pulling one of the kids back, but by then I'd stood up. As I'm standing, I saw--now, my glasses are off; I saw this kid come running at me with an American flag on a flag pole, and he swung it at me, and as he swung, I just leaned back just enough, and it went whoosh, right by the front of my face, and he then ran on. And the whole crowd, at that point, sort of broke into flight and took off. And I took another couple of steps; you know, again, no glasses. I took another couple of steps and a reporter ran up to me and had his pad out and immediately said, "What's your name? What's your name? What are you doing here?" And it was at that moment I looked at, at this tan-colored suit that I was wearing, this tan-colored three-piece suit, and I realized that the front of my suit was just covered with blood 'cause they'd broken my nose and some, you know, bleeding all over this suit. And it was at that point that I realized that I was hurt and, that if a reporter was there, and I knew that this was some sort of demonstration, that what was going on was probably something pretty important. So I gave him my name, and I said, "I work for the Contractors Association [of Boston]." And he said, "Well, do you have any comment? You've just been attacked here." And the first thing I said was, "Yeah, I wanna meet with the mayor about this." And the reporter ran off. Now, all of this took--what? Ten seconds. Then, the first police officer reached me; the police had been there, but they had not been directly with the crowd. So, this cop then comes running up and takes my arm and says, "You're hurt; we've called an ambulance." And at that moment, it occurred to me, having been in a lot of civil rights stuff, that if there was a reporter there, there was probably gonna be a photographer there somewhere. And my recollection of the way photographs get read, particularly after having been at the Pentagon, at Selma [Alabama during Selma to Montgomery March], in Atlanta [Georgia, after assassination of Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], at a bunch of demonstrations--the way a photo is read is not always the way it gets captioned. Plus, I'd studied photography at that point. And so the first thing I said to the police officer was, "I'm fine; let go of my arm. I do not want you holding my arm escorting me to this ambulance which is coming because it's gonna look like you're taking me into custody." And he immediately let go of my arm and made a comment to the effect of, "I guess you're okay." Story_ID: 86250 Speaker 1: And then, very shortly thereafter, [Clarence] "Jeep" Jones, who was then Deputy Mayor--black Deputy Mayor, who had been in the Mayor's Office, which looked down right over where all of this had occurred, showed up. He was like--I mean it, it couldn't have taken him more than a minute and a-half; I don't know how he did it--to get down, you know, four or five flights of stairs. And he was right at my, my arm, and he knew who I was; he says, "Teddy, you okay?" He had seen the whole thing from the Mayor's Office window. And I said, "I'm okay," and I said, "Jeep, I'd like a meeting with the mayor." And he said, "We'll take care of that; don't worry about that, but are you okay?" And I guess it was at that point that I realized that I really was hurt; I mean my nose was broken, I'm covered with blood, and so, at that point, they then got me over to an ambulance which had arrived from Mass General [Massachusetts General Hospital], which was just down the street, and whisked me off to Mass General. And there again I was lucky because it turns out that the physician who was on duty was a brother--this young black guy. And I came in, you know, and police come in, I mean all these people are escorting me; it's, it's 10:30 in the morning so I mean it's not like there's a lot of other stuff going on in the hospital; it's usually a fairly slow time. And I come in with all of this commotion going on and, and he asked what had happened and he found out what had happened so, you know, he, he--they did an x-ray and they checked stuff out and they found out the only damage was that I'd broken my nose--or had my nose broken. And he said, "Look, we can put a small band aid on this, but there a bunch-a reporters outside; we could also put a large kind of wrapping on this thing so the people understand the magnitude of what has happened here." So I said, "We'll go with the wrapping." So if you look at the photos when you walk out, you think I've been nearly killed. In fact, only my nose was broken; I coulda been killed. I mean if the flag had actually hit me in the head, which is what he was swinging for, I probably would have had a serious concussion and I, and I could have easily have been killed. I mean it's, it's luck in the fact that I could see it and I just--I mean he just barely missed me. But by the time I came out of the OR, you know, the press was waiting and they wanted interviews and they wanted to know how I felt and what had happened and, you know, what was the deal, and by then it was 11 or 11:30 in the morning, so the kids had gone on to continue their demonstration outside of the Federal Courthouse where Judge [W. Arthur] Garrity's court was, and then they'd disbursed so, you know, some of the reporters had followed that, and that was over. Story_ID: 86251 Speaker 1: So here are all these reporters waiting to know, you know, what I was about to say and, you know, it, it was at that point that all of the training, all of the civil rights and anti-war and high school cheerleading and, and prep school and, you know, only black kid in a primarily white Jewish school, and growing up with polio and being laughed at and ridiculed because, you know, I had braces and couldn't run, it all came together in one moment. And I knew that I could either express raw anger at the kids, or I could make a statement that ultimately would be a caption that would talk about the larger issue of how kids get used by political people for their own selfish purposes, and that it was time for Boston [Massachusetts] as a city that believed that it represented a larger set of progressive and open policies, to realize that it had to take a hard look at itself, and that I didn't have any anger towards those kids 'cause I thought they had just been used, but I did have deep anger towards a system that had been perpetuated for decades in this city, that had let racism rise to the level where the courts had to step in in a way that mandated busing, and that if people had looked at themselves first, the, the city wouldn't be in this situation, and I therefore wouldn't be in this particular situation. And I guess it was the right thing to say because there were a lot of people who came to me after that; you know, all of this happened in early April, I guess April 5th, and Easter was coming, Passover was coming, there was a moment--it was 1976 so we were leading into the Bicentennial Year celebrations which Boston was expecting to play a big role in, and it was a moment in the city's history when the symbolism of the, of the photograph ["The Soiling of Old Glory" by Stanley Forman] which, of course, I hadn't even seen yet, but the--it was clear to me that the symbolism of the event would resonate and, of course, the next morning I saw the photograph that won the, the Pulitzer Prize, and I, I had to think of myself with a sense of irony that I'd studied photography, I'd been a photographer, I'd been the photography editor of the Yale Daily News, I'd done all this stuff, I'd studied photography with Walker Evans, I'd studied film--I knew all of this stuff about, you know, use of media, and I'd always wanted to win a Pulitzer Prize (laughter), or something like that and, you know, here was my shot at it but I was on the wrong side of the camera. I mean it's clearly a great photo--not my best likeness but a great photo nonetheless, and it was around the world instantly; I mean the wire services picked it up and it was in the [New York] Times and it was in Japan and it was in West Africa and it was in London [England]--it was everywhere. Story_ID: 86252 Speaker 1: So, what ensued was a period of, of meetings that I was able to help facilitate. I mean it was really other people doing it because I hadn't been involved in any of this stuff up to that moment, but my presence in that moment was enough for a number of people who, like myself, had basically been on the sidelines, to realize that we couldn't just sit on the sidelines anymore. There were church groups, there were religious groups, there were social groups, there were all kinds of activity groups that started to come together, asking me to come to talk as a way of facilitating their own internal conversations about not just busing per se, but about the fact that they weren't addressing racism in Boston [Massachusetts]. And so, for a year and a-half, two years--and even though I was running the, the Trade Association--continuing to do that sort of stuff, and ultimately moved off to a job at Harvard, building a power plant and housing and, and those kinds of activities, I was deeply engaged with all that, you know, throughout this region, you know, up in New Hampshire and Maine and stuff like that. And on one level, you know, I had to ask myself, "Well, is this what I really came to Boston to do?" And it wasn't, although I had--I had heard tapes, when I was still in college, of school committee meetings here in Boston where school committee members were calling black kids not just niggers, but monkeys; and this was late '60s [1960s]. So I knew that there was some bad stuff going on up here, but I hadn't come up here to change the world, I came up here to be a lawyer and be a professional, and maybe do some public service, and here it was, you know, literally three years after my arrival and boom, I'm just thrown into this thing, and thrown into it at the very center. And so there was a lot of stuff that I did, and a lot I learned, about both the black and white communities, about both what one can accomplish and about the limits of what one can accomplish. For example, a group of us got together--I had not organized this, but the group came to me; and it involved, among others, Mel King, and--who was then a state rep--very progressive, thoughtful, great leader in this city. And Mel and the group came together with the intention of running an ad in the New York Times and in the Washington Post, with clips of the headlines showing the violence that was going on in the city around busing. Again, it's April--before Bicentennial Summer [1976]--and running an ad in a way that would say, "If you're thinking of bringing your convention to Boston this summer for the Bicentennial, or being a tourist here, you might want to know some of the other things that are going on in town before you finally book your hotel room." And we took that to the Post and the Times--Washington Post--and in both cases they said, "Well, this is political; we, we can't--we don't run political ads like this. Plus, it involves headlines from the [Boston] Globe and the [Boston] Herald, and they own the copyrights to these, so we can't run the headlines just like this, unless you get their permission to run these headlines in this form." Well, it's obvious we weren't gonna get that, so we then re-did the ad and paraphrased the headlines so it's just, you know, text, and sent it back to the, to the papers, and the papers said, "Well, you know, this is an ad but it has what amounts to editorial content, and we've had to check with the people on the--in the editorial side and the editorial side people are saying that this isn't really the kind of thing that we would want to run." Now, what was interesting was that at the same time, those folks from the newspapers made phone calls to the Massachusetts Legislature; I think Billy Bulger [William M. Bulger] was one of the people who probably got a call, and said, "You know, there's a group of people who are about to run an ad, and before they run this ad, maybe you want to talk to them because they--they're gonna try to run it someplace." And so we started getting calls from the State House and from the Mayor's Office, saying, "Okay, we understand that you folks are thinking about doing something; can we talk?" And it was at that point that we then got into a series of meetings with people, both at the State House and in city government, and we presented them with a list of expectations; we didn't even feel that they were demands, you know. We wanted to see more sales clerks in places like Filene's and Jordan's, we wanted to see the transit systems open for employment, we wanted to see more stuff done with kids, we wanted to see more affordable housing. I mean it was just the list that one would expect in a city where there was so much pent-up feeling about the negative racism that we'd all encountered. And here was a moment when we could actually have access to people who said that they were gonna do something. Why? Because the Bicentennial was coming and they couldn't afford to risk losing the money if somehow we found a venue to run that ad. And so some stuff started to happen; and at that level, I felt that we were achieving, you know, some level of satisfaction or at least movement. Did we get everything that, that Mel and the group would have preferred? Probably not. But we laid a foundation for Mel, among other things, to, to run a strong mayoral campaign in 1983. I mean Mel came within a whisker of becoming mayor because people were mobilized around that issue; not just around busing but around all of the racism that we were dealing with in Boston. And not just the racism per se, but the complacency that most of the community had approached racism with by trying to isolate it in one community by saying, "Oh, that only happens in South Boston," or, "It only happens in Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts]." The fact that, that the attack on me occurred on City Hall Plaza which is the common ground, was what got people to thinking that maybe complacency wasn't the best way to address all of the overt and incipient racism that was so endemic in the city. And so, in some respects, I think it helped produce some change. Story_ID: 86253 Speaker 1: Now, the photo ["The Soiling of Old Glory by Stanley Forman] has produced a lot of speculation and mythology all over the country as to who you were and what happened, and I know this--I heard various stories. One story is that you were a--an arch conservative-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: --who--in fact, I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Really? (Laughter). Speaker 1: (Unclear)--for years (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--That's interesting. Speaker 1: (Unclear)--that's what somebody said, "Well, this guy was a conservative Republican, and this is"-- Speaker 2: (Laughter)--No, no way, no. Speaker 1: --and there are some that, that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--No, my (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--I mean they thought that you would stand with the flag (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yes, yes, that I've heard from a number of people because the--of course the still photograph gives the impression that the, that the flag-bearer was lunging at me. And it was very interesting for me because that night--that's right, the first time I saw the photo was the night of the event, before it had been published. What happened was that the police saw that there were photographers present, and they asked the photographers for their contact sheets, and so that night, I got a phone call saying--from the police, saying, "We have something we'd like you to come take a look at." So I go down to the, the police station down here in downtown, and I--as a photographer, I was used to looking at contact sheets, and they put this contact sheet in front of me that had all of the photos leading up to the photo that won the [1977] Pulitzer [Prize for Spot Photography], and my recollection is that that photo was the next-to-last photo on Stanley Forman, the photographer's, role of film, so--and he didn't have a motor drive if I remember correctly; he was just snappin' away--snappin' and crankin'--so, that night I saw the photo and the photos leading up to it, and that night I thought, 'Oh, yeah, well, this is a good one.' And the police were using that photo to identify the kids, so in fact, the kids were arrested within 24 hours, and none of 'em had a criminal record. So, they all pleaded guilty because there was no record, they were required to apologize to me in court, and that was the extent of it. And they've subsequently gone off to their own lives; I think three of them have gone off to just have quiet family lives. One, interestingly, came to me when I was working in the Mayor's Office, and he acknowledged that he'd been through a whole bunch-a personal problems and that--I think he'd been through AA [Alcoholics Anonymous] and stuff and, you know, one of the conditions is that you have to go back to the people that you've hurt and make amends, and he found me in City Hall and he came back and said, "You know, the, the apology that we offered then was what we had to do, but I'm just telling you out of conscience that I'm really sorry for what we did that day and, you know, it was just the way we felt at the moment; it was what we were thinking at that moment, and I have a kid now." And he, he gave me a photo of himself with his probably 3 or 4-year-old kid at that point, and he said to me, "I still live up in Charlestown and I, you know, I'm raising my kid very differently than I was raised there." And then I subsequently found out that one of the other guys got himself into some deep trouble in South, in South (unclear) with organized crime figures there, and he apparently lead-piped the wrong person at one point, and South (unclear) justice took over as I understand things, and he was basically banned from the community. But he was connected to people who were able to get him work, and so he now lives in a community several hours outside of Boston, and a least for a while, he was working on the Big Dig--the big construction project here. He was permitted to do that, but then he had to go home right after that, so he can't even live in the community any more, but he's permitted to make money 'cause his mother still lives in the community. So, you know, the--a lot of the communities have their own ways of, of kind of meting out justice. Story_ID: 86254 Speaker 1: Now, that's something that would be unusual to a lot of people--that South Boston [Boston, Massachusetts] is that tight where the community can actually determine whether you work or not. Speaker 2: Oh, yes (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah, I've heard stories of other (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Well, it's no different; it, it's no different than, than the role that [Marlon] Brando played in "On the Waterfront"; I mean--one of the things that, that we've learned about Boston [Massachusetts]--one of the things I certainly learned about Boston is that it's a waterfront community, and in waterfront communities, people who work on the docks go back generations; they go back to the '20s [1920s], the teens. They're rarely, if ever, paid enough to get far beyond being laborers on the docks; a handful do, but over the years, the jobs in effect and the union positions get handed down from generation to generation, and because people are paid so little, it's taken as a matter of course that certain shipments of certain things that might be useful to people in the community always leave the dock a little bit lighter than when they arrive. So everyone knows in the community that if it's TVs that you need and the TVs have come in, then you make a phone call, and everybody can get a TV. And that goes back generations, which also then means that nobody is gonna rat on anyone else because everyone is connected to everyone else where everyone holds everyone else accountable. That means, among other things, that if someone really messes up--like someone attacks the wrong person, or someone does someone wrong, someone abuses a girlfriend, justice from within the community prevails. Story_ID: 84711 Speaker 1: Now, catch us up with your career now; after, you know, we just told this big story, this interesting story, of how you had turned like a tragic incident into something good. Speaker 2: Well, it, it's, it's funny. I ended up doing public service in a variety of ways but entering it not quite in the way that I'd intended. I always expected that at some point I would do some work in the Mayor's Office, for example, or for a governor and, because of the photograph, I got to be well-known, and people also came to understand that I have a commitment to doing stuff in cities, and particularly stuff in cities involving young people in education 'cause that's how I got to be here. And I'd spent several years as a graduate dean at the Massachusetts College of Art [and Design, Boston, Massachusetts], which was, still is, the only independent publicly-funded art college in the country, and I loved doing that stuff--as an administrator; it put me in touch with culture and it felt like being in New York and it was great. But Ray Flynn [Raymond Flynn] who was then mayor [of Boston], kept chasin' me sayin', "You know, it's great that you're doing all this arts stuff but we need you to work in city government." And eventually, he prevailed and I spent five years working in the Flynn Administration and another two under Tom Menino [Thomas Menino], his successor, working primarily on human services and focusing on issues of violence and kids. Did a lot of work with schools and public health; we were able to cut the murder rate in the city by nearly 80 percent by employing an epidemiological model and figuring out how you get people who are likely to be killed away from the people who are likely to kill them at the right time, and if they're assaulted, figuring out how to get 'em to care fast enough so that there only an assault and not a murder. We did a lotta stuff that worked very well, and we were fortunate in part but--I spent seven years working on those kinds of issues and also (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Now was that initiative organizing-driven? Speaker 2: Yes, it was driven entirely by the recognition that a police department, or any other group of city officials, cannot accomplish much on their own and that, in fact, the community has to take care of itself in that regard. And the community often has resources that it doesn't appreciate fully--always has strengths that it doesn't always recognize because often, communities are characterized more by their perceived deficiencies than on the basis of their strengths, and so a large part of what we were doing was helping communities to recognize their strengths and to then build on them, and the strengths could be the grandmothers, it could be the network in the parks, it could be the Vietnam vets who were willing to work with young kids around not just coaching basketball but also developing refereeing skills which then translated into negotiation skills which then enabled people to talk rather than pull a knife. It, it was very much an organizing project, and it worked because we were able to help identify people in communities who could then do the organizing work. It wasn't as though we in City Hall could do that work--we couldn't. All we could do was to mobilize leaders, and what we found often as not, was that the leaders who were most effective were not the people who always got the recognition as the leaders in the communities; they were the people sitting on stoops, they were the people in the grocery stores, they were the bus drivers, they were the people who everyone looked up to and would go to if there was a problem, but they weren't necessarily the lead clergy at the churches. They weren't necessarily the head of the Boys and Girls Club; it might just be a lower-level coach, but everyone knew that you went to Jimmy rather than going to Mrs. Dobbs. And we were very effective at that; I mean I look back at that with great satisfaction. I know that there were lives that we saved; now, I'll never know exactly who they were, but I know that there were people we saved because we started this in a year where the city had a record number of murders for us--150. And by the time we were done, that number was down to 35--a year, and that means that there were a lotta people who didn't die because somethin' else happened for them. Speaker 1: (Unclear) it was the best--most effective project [Boston Gun Project, also known as Operation Ceasefire] in the country. Speaker 2: I think it was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--That's what people say (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah; statistically, it, it spoke for itself. So that was very satisfying. Story_ID: 84712 Speaker 1: But after seven years of living with a beeper and picking up the Boston Herald every day to figure out what my agenda was gonna be, I wanted to get back to the academic world that I'd left when I left Mass College of Art [Massachusetts College of Art and Design, Boston, Massachusetts]. I had taught at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Boston, Massachusetts] and I had taught at UMass Boston [University of Massachusetts Boston, Boston, Massachusetts], and I began to look for a different kind of career path that would take me back into the academic world but as an administrator, and things came together so that I got to be President of the Boston Architectural Center [Boston Architectural College, Boston, Massachusetts], and we're the biggest design school in New England--architecture and interior design; we are very unique because we have an open admissions policy. So it means that someone who always wanted to do this kind of work but didn't have a portfolio or got discouraged 'cause no one said, "Hey, you could be an architect" can come here and can learn the rudiments and get a degree with us or sometimes transfer to another school--that's part of our mission. And we also are unique because almost all of our faculty--300 faculty--almost all of them are volunteers; they're practicing professionals who do their job in the daytime and then come here to teach their studios at night. So, we're not the kind of school where people are worried about being on a tenure track; we're a kind of school where all the faculty are here 'cause they love teaching, and they feel as though they're teaching the people who will succeed them in their firms. And so it's a community, in and of itself, where the students are working in the firms during the day and coming here to study at night. The faculty are working in many of the same firms in the day, and coming here to teach at night, and it's--I can hardly begin to tell you how much fun it is to be an administrator in a place like this because it permits us, among other things, to raise issues around accessibility into the professions, why it is, for example, that so few women--215 percent of the licensed architects in America are women. Whitney Young, back in 1968, criticized the American Institute of Architects [AIA] because only one percent of the architects in the country in 1968 were African-American. And in the year 2003, it is still one percent who are African-American, two percent Latino, three percent Asian, all right? It's a profession that hasn't taken the hard look at itself in the same way that Boston [Massachusetts] had to look at itself around race or other communities or professional groups have had to take a hard look at themselves and ask themselves what's wrong. And you see, at a place like this, where we're committed to accessibility and committed to training people who wouldn't otherwise have the chance to get it, I have a context and a platform to address some of the same civil rights issues that I was addressing when I was back in college, and some of the same issues that I found myself addressing when I was in school in New York as a kid. That is, what does it mean to be a person of color in a primarily white work environment, professional environment? How do you train yourself? Where do you discipline yourself? When do you get mad? How do you focus that? What's theatrical? What's emotional? How do you use the skill sets that we have as African-Americans who are used to working in both a black world and a white world? How do we use that so that it's not just, you know, the boys talking about, you know, two cultures, but how do you use it in fact so that it benefits more people? And I used to say that that is an issue that I struggle with every day; I don't struggle with that anymore, you know. It's the challenge I face every day to figure out how we get more people involved in these professions, how we keep all of the work that involves the structure of the built environment. Who are the contractors? Who are the architects? Who are the workers on the site? Who gets to use it? Who gets to drive the cars on the road after it's built? And how come so few of us are in positions of control in terms of all of that? And how do we change that? As a college president, I get to deal with that every day and I love it. Story_ID: 84713 Speaker 1: Sir, what are your hopes and concerns for the black community today? Speaker 2: Well, the biggest concern is that there is such a large disconnect between the myth of our having achieved a level of equality and assimilation that the special efforts that need to be made to enable us to climb up the ladder can be dismissed, and that goes very directly to the fundamental issue of the horrendous numbers of African American young men who are in jail or prison rather than being in professional schools or colleges. The populations of most of our historically black colleges have become vastly, predominantly populations of women, and that's great for the women who are there, but it says a lot about the men who need to be there with them, and it is a fundamentally destabilizing long-term issue because no one, virtually no one in this country, is doing enough to off-set the disappearance of the black male from, from the American economy. I mean we, we, we've essentially disappeared as workers in this economy. Story_ID: 84714 Speaker 1: Sir, what would you see, at this point, as your legacy? Speaker 2: Well, for better or worse, I will be remembered for the moment of the photograph ["The Soiling of Old Glory" by Stanley Forman] on City Hall Plaza. But that's not my legacy; I think my legacy, which many of us share--you know, personal legacies are irrelevant. You know, we come and we have our time and then we're gone. It, it's, it's, it's what we do to benefit larger communities, I think, that really matters, and the older I get, the, the more wisdom I acquire, the more that becomes apparent to me. It's the ability that we have to preserve our culture, to relate for current generations the importance of our culture and our history and our past and who we were, to what it is we hope to become. I have been fortunate to be able to begin to collect and assess and, and develop some knowledge on early African-American artifacts, particularly in the 19th Century, the stuff we made for ourselves. There's a huge amount of research that has to be done in that area, and I think that ultimately if I have a legacy, it will be in, in the realm of having encouraged more people to collect and value and respect and understand things like face jugs and quilts that could serve as road maps, and pipes and buttons and coins that served as a form of currency, and wooden ware that has distinctly African-derived markings on them even though they were made in the middle of the 19th Century. I think that my work ultimately is about African art and culture, and not so much what is important or unimportant within it or about it 'cause we don't know that entirely-yet. You know, it evolves and, you know, our sense of what is more or less important changes over time. But I've been particularly interested in finding those vernacular objects--those things we kind of take for granted, that we make for ourselves which--without which we couldn't survive--baskets and, and metal pieces. And to try to get more people to understand how important they were both in terms of our own economic survival because they became our tools, but also in terms of our cultural survival because we imbued those with a cultural meaning through designs or colors or a range of other things that have enabled us to become who we are today, and I think that's pretty important. Story_ID: 84715 Speaker 1: Now, one last question but quickly. How would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: I guess I would like to be remembered as a person who did emerge from circumstances that would have been perceived to have defeated a lot of people but who, through the help of others, was able to find strengths--to overcome polio or a single-parent household or living in the projects, and was able to then use those strengths which other people helped me to find in myself, to then help other people to find strengths in themselves. I think that one of the best things that one can do as an individual is to help someone else find a strength in a person where they didn't see it. And if I could be remembered as one of the many people who helped others to find strengths in themselves where they didn't see them, that would be a good thing. Speaker 1: Okay. Thank you, sir. Speaker 2: Thanks...