 Story_ID: 10806 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers today. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Ma'am could you please state your name and spell it for us please. Speaker 2: My name is Felicia. That's F as in Frank, E-L-I-C-I-A ,Middlebrooks. And that's spelled just like it sounds 'Middle' like middle of the road M-I-D-D-L-E-B-R-O-O-K-S. That's all one word. Speaker 1: Okay. And can you give us your date of birth and place of birth please? Speaker 2: I was born on the 29th of May, 1957 in Gary, Indiana. Speaker 1: And what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm morning drive co-anchor of morning drive for WBBM radio [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: And what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is April 3, 2003 (laughs). It's my oldest sister's birthday. I should know that. Speaker 1: Okay. And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: 1900 S. Michigan [Avenue] at HistoryMakers headquarters [Chicago, Illinois]. Story_ID: 10807 Speaker 1: What is your favorite color? Speaker 2: Wow, you know what? I always hesitate before I tell you this 'cause you're gonna think, my favorite color is charcoal gray. That's a different answer, isn't it? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Charcoal gray. I love charcoal gray. Speaker 1: I haven't heard that one. Speaker 2: (Laughs) Yeah, I know. Speaker 1: Now what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: Oh gosh. My favorite food would be--actually my favorite food is popcorn. That's my favorite food in the whole world. But if you're talking about a meal food, I love Mexican food. Speaker 1: Okay. Now do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Yes, fall. I love fall. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: No, I don't. Speaker 1: Okay. And now do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Yes, I do. "You'll never change that which you can tolerate." Speaker 1: Okay. That's worth a moment's pause. Speaker 2: Oh yeah. You can apply it to anything in life. "You'll never change that which you can tolerate." Story_ID: 10808 Speaker 1: Let me ask you about your family tree. How far can you trace your family back? I mean what do you know about your ancestors? Speaker 2: I can go as far back as my maternal grandparents' parents. And that's as far as I go. On my dad's side of the family just my grandparents. Speaker 1: Okay. So--well have you heard any stories--I mean are there any stories that you can relate about them to us and what they were doing and where they were? Speaker 2: What do you mean? How--? Speaker 1: Well, you know, what kind of lives they led? What part of the country they lived in? Speaker 2: Well my maternal grandparents were born in Linden, Alabama. My paternal grandparents were born in Fairfield, Alabama and my parents were born in Birmingham, Alabama. My mom's dad was a coal miner. And his wife, my grandmother did not work. And there were six children in her family. And on my dad's side, his mother--he never met her. Because she died in childbirth shortly after he was born. But she was a twin from what I understand. And so I never got to meet her but I'm told I look like her, which used to scare me when I was a kid. Because I had never seen her before. My dad's father--we lost him in 1985. And my mother lost both of her parents about three weeks apart when I was just nine years old. Speaker 1: Okay. Now are there any stories that come down through your family? Now your family has I guess a lot of history in Alabama. Speaker 2: Yeah, so are there any stories that come down through the family about--? Speaker 1: Nineteenth century or what was going on during the Reconstruction of the Civil War or any of that? Speaker 2: No. I've never heard any stories. But I'm told that--My mother's maiden name is Rembert. And I'm told that there were a lot of Remberts. They even had a Rembert Hill in some portion of the South. In fact, we're getting ready for our family reunion. So I'm one of the people assigned to do research on the family tree. So I haven't gotten that far yet. Speaker 1: Yeah, there was an AME [African Methodist Episcopal] minister named Rembert Stokes. Speaker 2: Really? Speaker 1: And I heard he was from that part of the country. That would be interesting to find out. Yeah, yeah. That would be interesting. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: That would be interesting. Speaker 2: Rembert Stokes [president of Wilberforce University, Wilberforce, Ohio] was one of the pioneer of Wilberforce, you know, university. Speaker 1: I'm familiar with it's name. Now on my father's side, I had something kind of uncanny happen during my career at CBS. I was doing an interview with I think Tallahassee, Florida. It was one of the city officials. And we were talking. And when I gave him my last name, he says, "Oh, have you ever seen the Middlebrooks plantation?" (laughs) I about jumped out of my skin. I said, "What?" So I made some phone calls. And it turns out that plantations are typically sold and resold So I was never able to find the Middlebrooks plantation. But I thought it was very interesting that there even was one. And it could explain some things. I mean, you know, Florida and Alabama, neighboring states. It could have easily--we could have easily migrated from that slave plantation to Alabama. Story_ID: 10809 Speaker 1: Tell me about your father. Can you give us his full name and spell it for us--? And his date of birth and (unclear)? Speaker 2: My father's name is Raymond R-A-Y-M-O-N-D Middlebrooks Junior. And he was born November 15, 1932. Speaker 1: Okay. And he was born in--? Speaker 2: Birmingham, Alabama. Speaker 1: Birmingham. Speaker 2: As was my mother. Speaker 1: Okay. And--well what kind of person was he and what did he do? Speaker 2: My dad was one of the hardest working men I've ever seen in my life. I'm so grateful for all the things he taught us. I come from a family of four girls. But my dad treated us as though we were boys. Because, you know, we learned how to do everything. My father's one of these people that is like a jack of all trades. He grew up poor. And it was difficult for him. Because he ended up pretty much on his own. When his mom died, he went to live with his grandparents and they helped to raise him. Help my--My grandfather helped to raise him. He was always naturally smart. He got no further than high school, but he entered the army. He learned a trade. He was an upholsterer. And he carried on a business for quite some time until he was stricken with phlebitis. Which is a circulatory disease that does not allow him to stand on his feet for long periods of time. But he taught us (laughing) how to do some upholstery work. I mean to this day I can take down a sofa with the right tools. My father is a very happy person. Very loving. Believed in giving us culture. My parents made sure we had piano lessons and that we went on lots of field trips. And, you know, we'd go to various ethnic restaurants so that we could taste other cultures--Get a taste of other cultures. And my dad is just very strong. He'll be seventy-one this year. And I have to make an appointment to see him. 'Cause he's on the move all the time. He's head of the deacon board at the church I grew up in Gary [Indiana], Trinity Missionary Baptist Church. And he and my mom are like--they're best friends. And so I really got an example of what love looks like growing up. And still today. Story_ID: 10810 Speaker 1: Okay. Yeah. Let me ask--your father worked for the steel mill. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's--yeah, my father was a steel worker with Youngstown Sheet and Tube. Which later became Jones & Laughlin Steel, which later became LTV Steel, until just a few years ago then they went out of business. But he worked as a cranesman. The eighty-four inch hot strip (laughs). Yeah. For over forty years. Speaker 1: Now did he--do you recall, I guess I have to ask this, you know, with the families of steel workers. But was he engaged in struggling around labor issues and--? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. That's where I learned my--that's where I learned my basic principles and standing and support of unions. Because my father was an officer--Local 1011--[East Chicago, Indiana] of the United Steelworkers of America. So, yeah, he was very much--I'm not sure if he was a shop steward at any time. But I would,would venture to guess that he probably was. He was very active in his union. And, you know, that was during the era that unions were very powerful, very powerful. Not anything like the unions are today. Speaker 1: Right. They don't seem to have the juice they had. Speaker 2: No, they don't . Speaker 1: Right. And, you know, with him being a steel worker, I know when you gave us your favorite phrase or saying it reminded--It sounded like a strong--that--One of those strong statements from the labor people. Yeah. Speaker 2: What was it again? Speaker 1: "You will never change that which you can tolerate." Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: It sounds like something a union person would say. Speaker 2: You know. Speaker 1: Yeah. But my dad--. Speaker 2: So--yeah, yeah. My mom and dad both had a very strong work ethic that they passed on to their daughters. You know, we were always taught, "You give the man a full day's work for a full day's pay. You know. You don't call off sick unless it's absolutely necessary. And if you really hate the job, stay there until you can find something better. But do your job. Do it well." Because for our family we were raised that, you're doing your job ultimately for God. And so that's your real boss.That gets you through a lot of things. Speaker 1: Yeah, I'd say. Speaker 2: Stay with me to today. Story_ID: 10811 Speaker 1: Tell us about your mother. Can you give us her full name and spell it for us and her date and place of birth. Speaker 2: Okay. My mother's name is Geraldine G-E-R-A-L-D-I-N-E Middlebrooks. Her maiden name is Rembert "R-E-M-B-E-R-T". She was born in Birmingham, Alabama. Her birth date is May 17, 1933. Speaker 1: Okay. And now what did she do and what was she like? Speaker 2: Well my mom is a very sweet woman. She is--let's see. Where should she be in the birth order? She's second to the baby in her family. Out of six siblings, there's only three surviving,including herself. Her nickname in our family is 'Dine. They took the 'dine' off of Geraldine, so everybody calls her 'Dine. My mother is a very strong woman. She and my dad met at--Let me think of the name. The name is Lloyd Noland Hospital in Birmingham [Alabama]. My dad was orderly and my mom was a nurse's aid during that time. And that's how they met. But they had gone to school together. Through elementary school, junior high and high school. But they never were interested in each other until they met at the hospital and they started dating. My mom is very adamant about education, she's a retired school teacher. And, you know, a lot of people ask me if I ever took voice and diction and how did I learn to speak this way. Because my mom would not let us lapse into slang. I mean we were allowed to play around. But she meant business, you know, and I'm so grateful for that. And I remember as a kid saying to her, "Mom, what does this mean?" And she'd say, "Well let's look it up right now." And she'd get a dictionary and sit down with us. I mean patience. And this--we're talking about a woman who worked. You know. She worked--l et's see. When I was a kid she worked at Joyce Jantus manufacturing. And they did clothing, a line of clothing called Joyce ware. I'm not sure if they still exist today. But she worked there. And had a regular nine to five. And my dad worked. But we always had dinner together. We had breakfast together when we could. And if my dad did swing shift, then those were occasions that we couldn't. And I remember the things they put into us. I mean, as a kid, my mom would tell us about, you know, the duties of housekeeping and teaching us washing dishes and ironing and giving us live skills basically. But she was very disciplined and we learned a lot about that. When I got old enough to decide what I wanted to wear to school, my mom would make sure we pressed and ironed our clothes and even put tags on the outfit. You know, the dress that we wore said, "Monday and then Tuesday and Wednesday," and so on and so forth. I wish I still did that today. But she kept us organized. And I remember hot breakfasts in the morning. And she was a doting, very loving, caring mother. In fact, if she doesn't hear from me every two or three days or we don't talk for a week, she'll be worried and she'll call. And she's like that about all her kids. She was one of those old fashioned teachers. That if we're out in public and one of her old students sees her, they run up to her and hug her and you know. So I'm very grateful for the strong work ethic my parents gave me. And I'm very grateful for the fact that both of them emphasized education. Education as a deterrent to racism. You know. And they made sure that we were fully equipped. Speaker 1: Okay. Now where did your mother go to school ? Did she go to school in Birmingham? Speaker 2: Yeah, they both did. And they went to Westfield High school [poss. Docena, Alabama]. And to this day they still have high school reunions all over the country that are really organized. I'm truly amazed. Speaker 1: Okay. Now when she was trained as a teacher--. Speaker 2: Did she go to college? And where did she go? Speaker 1: Yeah. She went to Alabama State [University, Montgomery, Alabama] a couple of years. And then she married, had children and went back to school. Actually my mom went back and got her Master's degree from Indiana State [University] which is in Terre Haute, Indiana. I mean she was making like straight A's, you know. And I remember her saying to us, "Girls, I have to do my homework now. You've gotta give me some quiet 'cause you know, I'm at the age where you just can't fail," you know. And she would be really disciplined. So now I see where a lot of that in me and my sisters came from 'cause we got that determination and that tenacity from my mom. Story_ID: 10812 Speaker 1: When did your family come to Gary [Indiana]? I mean when did your parents come to Gary? Speaker 2: I believe it was around 1956. Because I was born in 1957. I think it was either '55 [1955],'56. [1956] Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And--'cause my older sister is four years older than I. And I think that 's about the time--what happened is back in that time when black people were migrating North from the South, it was tradition for the husband to get a job first. And then send for his family. And that's what my dad did. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He got a job, you know, they had heard that there was great pay in the steel industry. Which was true at the time, it was a booming business and Northwest Indiana was at the heart of it. So my dad came up here and got a job. And I think they stayed with another family from Birmingham [Alabama] because there were families who would help each other. And then they, you know, moved out on their own once my dad got settled. Speaker 1: Was there a steel connection here? Because I know Birmingham, Alabama has steel mills too. And--. Speaker 2: I don't--. Speaker 1: (unclear). Speaker 2: I don't think so. All I remember is hearing my parents say, "Yeah, up North there're some good jobs," you know. You remember that old expression, "Oh he's got a good job," you know. And there were--there were a lot of them. I mean by the thousands that came to migrate to Gary, Indiana. Story_ID: 10813 Speaker 1: I want you to reflect back on your childhood and give us a sense of some of the sights, and sounds and smells growing up in Gary [Indiana]. Speaker 2: Okay, wow. I remember--And I get real sentimental about this. 'Cause I had such a wonderful childhood. I remember when my mom--before she started working would have home-made biscuits in the oven, that you could smell when you walked in the door. And I remember seeing the ironing and that can of Niagara spray starch and she had been ironing up a storm all day long. And asking us how school went. I remember a time where she would wash clothes and hang them up on the clothesline outside with clothespins. Nobody does that any more. I remember the ringer washer. I remember having dessert for dinner every night. I remember thinking, everybody had dessert (laughs) every night. And that all the kids, you know, were raised like me." It wasn't until I became an adult that I--I realized how fortunate I truly was. I remember my dad getting us all excited that, "On the weekend girls, we're gonna take a family outing. And guess what we're gonna do? We're gonna start early. We're gonna go to Riverview." Remember that Riverview amusement park [Chicago, Illinois]? "And we're gonna go to Brookfield Zoo [Chicago, Illinois]. And then we're gonna have lunch at Grant Park [Chicago, Illinois]." You know. My mom would actually pack a lunch and we'd have the picnic spread on the grass as a kid. Oh my God, that was just wonderful. And then we'd top off the night at the Y&W theater--the drive-in where we would sit on top of the car and watch. And there was always fireworks before the show started. Right when, you know, when the sun was going down. I remember chocolate cake and collard greens on Sunday--and corn on the cob. I remember getting our new puppy. It was actually for my birthday. And his name was Lucky and he chased us around the house and nipping at our heels. I remember my parents having our home built and how we would take trips to the house to watch the men construct that. And that was a phenomenal experience for a kid. And I remember taking a putty stick and filling in the baseboard where the nails were. You know, where my dad would say, "Well, let's put you to work." And I remember riding in the full basement before it was finished on our tricycles, you know, before my dad and mom had the walls paneled. --which was a big thing back then. I remember my parents being very active in the PTA [Parent Teachers Association]. And to this day my dad and mom still have their PTA pins. I remember bake sales and cake walks. And I remember music recitals 'cause we all took piano lessons. And I remember when Nelson Brothers used to have showrooms with pianos. And that's where we would have our recitals. And we'd get a new dress and we'd all be scared, you know, wondering if we were gonna make the performance and make our parents and our teacher proud. Oh wow, I remember school plays and, you know. And my dad with his super eight camera taking, you know, filming the events. I remember my parents inviting their friends over who had children. And how we would go through cleaning up the floor. And how my mom would take that old fashioned Johnson Glow coat wax and wax the floors preparing for company. And how we'd dance up a storm. I remember on Friday nights, sometimes my parents saying, "Okay, it's board game night," and we'd sit around playing Monopoly and things like that. And our prizes were peanuts and candy corn and whatever we could get, you know, in a bowl. My mom would set out candy and--I remember church on Sundays. And grape Kool-aid and (laughs). I can go on and on. I just had a wonderful, sweet childhood that I took for granted. Because I thought everybody had the same kind of life. It wasn't until I actually became an adult in my early twenties that hearing other people about their childhoods, that I--and that, you know, that's pretty late in life, you know. But it was--it was about that time when I realized, Gee, you've had an exceptional childhood." You know. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I'm very grateful for that. Speaker 1: Yeah, it sounds rich. It does. Yeah, yeah. And as I was describing that to you, I could just feel the textures and the smells, you know, associated with all those wonderful memories. And I am so grateful to God for that, I really am. Story_ID: 10814 Speaker 1: What kind of little girl were you? Speaker 2: (Laughs). Speaker 1: What did you like to do? And what (unclear)? Speaker 2: I was a skinny, very timid little girl. Insecure. The middle child. I never felt like I fit anywhere. I felt like a misfit. I was a talker early. I spoke--At two years old, I was speaking, you know, full sentences. And my mom and dad made the error, you know, of buying Dr. Seuss books and I drove them crazy. I'd follow them around the house, you know, 'A Cat In The Hat', and 'Are You My Mother?' And 'One fish, Two Fish, Red Fish, Blue Fish'. All of it. And then I memorized it and drove everybody crazy. I remember taking cereal boxes and cans of whatever and reading them, you know, and then asking my parents what this meant and that kind of thing. So I was--I showed a very strong talent for in the literary field. I was always afraid of math, hated math. Still do. I excelled in school. I was a real bookworm. And in high school, I never really fit. You know, I was--I knew some of the popular kids. And I knew the nerds too and I was somewhere between. I ended up being the senior class secretary. But I didn't go to the proms any of them. Speaker 1: (unclear). Speaker 2: Yeah, I was really shy. Really introverted socially I was. Scared of my own shadow. Very timid. Yeah. Speaker 1: So you didn't have a lot of attention from boys (unclear)? Speaker 2: I was scared of boys. I didn't--I didn't really--I was a late bloomer too. So by the time I was really interested, high school was just about over. And then I discovered boys my freshman year in college. And then I dated like crazy. I lost my mind then. Story_ID: 10815 Speaker 1: What grade school did you attend? Speaker 2: We lived on the East side of Gary [Indiana]. And I went to Daniel Hale--Daniel Hale Williams School--Elementary school [Gary, Indiana]. I still remember parts of the school song. But I went there until the third grade. And then we got our new home on the west side of Gary. And then I transferred to Ivanhoe Elementary School [Gary, Indiana]. Speaker 1: Okay. Now just a--this is kind of off the track but--. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But when you were a little kid and all the activity in Birmingham [Alabama] is on television, and you were pretty small-- Speaker 2: I don't remember any of that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I don't. Speaker 1: I just wanna know did you remember your parents talking about it or anything. No, I don't. And that was there home town, you know. And I'm sure--I'm sure they kept abreast of every thing. But no I don't have any recollection. I was too young I think. Speaker 2: Yeah, okay. So in grade school were there any teachers that really mentored you in grade school really that really stand out. Speaker 1: Yeah, there were. There were some that mentored me and one in particular that pushed me so hard it was damaging to a degree. Because she would embarrass me in front of the rest of the class and that kind of thing. But for the most part, my teachers were loving and very supportive. It was the old fashioned kind of education where the teachers got to hug you and nobody questioned it back then. I remember when I had a lisp, terrible lisp. I couldn't say 'snake'. It was 'nake' and 'fee-faw' and all of that. And my parents sent me to a speech therapist. At the time, they had them in school and I had to go to sessions with her and talk in front of a mirror. And she taught me how not to sound like that like I had a Castilian accent or something (laughs). And I remember going through that and feeling good. And thankful that my parents recognized that I had a problem. You would never today--I mean if I tell people that they'd probably, "You did not have a lisp." That's the same as saying I stuttered or something. I didn't stutter but I had a major lisp. I had a art teacher named Mrs. June Brown, who I love and adore today. And I recently saw her last year. And she was my art teacher. And she was one of the kindest souls I've ever met. I had a coach. Coach Redman who was wonderful. I was not very athletic. I was sort of a gawky, gangly tall skinny girl. I always say I looked like a chocolate Gumby (laughs). Speaker 2: Now what did he coach you in? Speaker 1: Oh, well he was the phys-ed coach. Speaker 2: Just a phys-ed teacher. Speaker 1: Yeah. But he was really cool. And he used to lecture the kids, you know, so he was more than just our coach. We would play volleyball or do tumbling. And then we'd have to gather around him and he'd talk to us about life and how to stay out of trouble and that kind of thing. I had teachers in junior high who were wonderful. I had teachers in high school who were wonderful, that I still keep in touch with, some of them, you know. And it's really a neat experience to revisit them and even my college professors. You know, have been great. There are people that you need to tell you have talent, you have skill and you can make it. Because you know, life gives you a thousand reasons why you can't. you know. And my parents believed in me too. Story_ID: 10816 Speaker 1: Did your parents take you to church a lot? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Oh yeah, oh yeah, oh yeah. Choir. We had choir practice on Saturdays. We were in the Girl Scouts. So we all had the meetings at church. We were active every Sunday in church. And my parents still are today in that same church. Speaker 1: What is the name of the church? Speaker 2: Trinity Missionary Baptist Church [Gary, Indiana]. I grew up Baptist. And I was baptized at age thirteen. Story_ID: 10817 Speaker 1: In high school you say weren't--you were like a late bloomer in high school? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah, I was. Speaker 1: And what was the name of the high school? Speaker 2: West Side Senior High School [Gary, Indiana]. It was a college prep school. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Now were you engaged in any activities in high school? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah. Yeah. I was a member of a club called the Protogenes (ph.). I was a Y-team member. I was in the Booster club. I did a lot of extracurricular work in the radio/TV classes. That's where I really--that's where I fell in love with journalism. I knew about sixteen that I wanted to be a reporter. So I was active in those kinds of things. Booster club kept us really busy, 'cause you got to go to all the games homes and away. And that was really cool. Speaker 1: So you didn't play an instrument in school? Speaker 2: Yes. I was in the high school marching band. And I played flute. And to this day it still bothers me. I never made first chair! Never! (Laughs) I was always second chair. Yeah, but I played flute. Speaker 1: Second chair, first part though, right? Speaker 2: Nah. Story_ID: 10818 Speaker 1: [Audio only in this segment] You know what, I meant to tell you when you were asking about my dad, he also worked the Illinois port off of Bishop Ford [Highway, Chicago, Illinois]. I didn't know that's where it was when I was a kid. But he used to work--We used to call it on the docks. And he would work there. And he had two or three jobs. He worked at a service station once. I remember he got robbed. And that was real scary. Story_ID: 10819 Speaker 1: I played a flute in the high school band. And I have a complex to this day, because I never made first chair. Speaker 2: Did you play the first part or the second part (unclear)? Speaker 1: I don't remember, I don't remember. But I remember I was second chair. Speaker 2: You probably play second chair, first part. Speaker 1: Yeah. (laughs) I don't remember that far back. Speaker 2: First parts are really complicated. Speaker 1: Yeah they can be. They can be. Yeah, but it was light, you know, to carry. So there wasn't a big deal about that when you marched, 'cause we had steps, you know, when we marched. Speaker 2: And that gives you access to the games and (unclear) of high school. Speaker 1: Oh sure. Yeah. Speaker 2: So even though you were shy you're around all the activity. Speaker 1: Yeah, I was. I was, yeah. But I was very timid in high school. I mean I was--I think I was a runner-up for the best personality, believe it or not. And I did end up being the senior class secretary. But I was sort of nondescript when it came to a lot of the social things. I never went to any of the proms. And I was really shy and pretty much afraid of boys. Speaker 2: That's strange. Speaker 1: I was a late bloomer. Speaker 2: You know, in a family with so many girls that you wouldn't go to the prom. Speaker 1: Yeah, well my sisters did. I was the only one that didn't. Speaker 2: Were you asked to go? Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. But I--I don't know. I just didn't wanna go. Speaker 2: I couldn't imagine you not being asked. Speaker 1: (laughs). Speaker 2: You totally didn't wanna go. Speaker 1: No I didn't. You know--and adolescence was very awkward for me. I grew up skinny with acne, you know. I needed braces and thank God my parents were merciful and didn't put that burden on me. I did that later myself (laughs). I was a wreck. But I would write. I could write and I was a good orator. Speaker 2: Okay, alright. That's kind of unusual. Speaker 1: Oh,yeah. Speaker 2: So the high school you went to, this is sort of a magnet school or a college prep? Speaker 1: It was like a college prep school [West Side High School, Gary, Indiana] . It was at the time the larges high school in Indiana. It was built in 1968 I think. I graduated in '75 [1975]. So there. Speaker 2: So it was an integrated setting? Speaker 1: Yeah, it was integrated. But not so much any more. It's predominantly black and Hispanic. But when I first started going there it was fairly integrated. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But still it was predominantly black. Story_ID: 10820 Speaker 1: When you were in high school I guess Gary [Indiana] was changing. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: The first black mayor was elected I guess when you were in middle school actually? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah. It was about--'cause I remember my dad holding a political party to introduce Richard Gordon Hatcher. He became to second black mayor of a major city. I think Carl Stokes was the first in Cleveland [Ohio]. And didn't sit too well with the white population in Gary. This was during a time where everything was bustling. I remember being a kid sitting in the car and seeing all these legs pass the window. You know. We'd go downtown and go shopping. But on occasion my parents would say, "Well, you girls stay in the car." Well today, you can't leave your kids in the car like that unprotected. But, you know, they'd run an errand or so. And I remember that downtown was "downtown". There were two theaters, the State Theater and the Palace Theater. And my parents would look in the papers and check the ratings before they allowed us to go. And then they'd take us down there and see what time the movie was over. And be waiting for us outdoors. It was a great time. But when Mayor Hatcher took over for Mayor Katz--now Martin Katz was the mayor--his predecessor. He was convicted on a number of charges, I think fraud and some of everything else. And he went to prison. That was never highlighted. Everybody just focused on the fact that we had a new black mayor and who is this guy anyway? And so the city began to change. It experienced a lot of economic downturn. Primarily due to white flight at the time. People moved to Schererville and Merrillville and Whiting and Highland and Griffith [all Indiana]. All of those towns are known as the Hub or the Region we call it in Northwest Indiana. And so things began to rapidly change. A lot of the anchor stores downtown like Sears [& Roebuck] and [J.C.] Penney moved out to Merrillville to Southlake Mall, which is now I think called Westfield Mall [Westfield Southlake Mall, Merrillville, Indiana] now. And they took the businesses with them. And so it was desolate. And I remember being a senior in high school and being part of the editorial column. And I wrote an editorial in my senior about what that had done to Gary and how devastated it was. And then that came, of course--or on the heels of that came the depression in the steel industry. That it was pretty much wiped out due to foreign steel competition. And I remember when I joined the steel mill which is how I worked my way through college, I remember that when you were laid off you got a supplement if your department were affected by foreign steel imports. So it became pretty bad. It's almost nil now. Speaker 1: Is that right? Speaker 2: Mm-hm. Speaker 1: And Gary has gone through a lot. Speaker 2: Yeah it has. They're starting to try to rebuild now. But--and everyone had great hope for the Jackson family and the Jackson 5 and had thought that they would give back to the city because the city so embraced all of them. And that didn't happen. Speaker 1: Now did you know the Jacksons? Speaker 2: No, I didn't. That's like the sixty-four thousand dollar question (laughs). Everybody asks that. No, I didn't know the Jacksons. But quite a few big names came out of Gary during that era. Including some actors like William Marshall. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: And Karl Malden who came from Gary. But no, I did not have the privilege of knowing them. But we went to all their talent shows. And my parents who gave us allowances would say, "Okay, we're going to Cole Mays." Cole Mays was a jewelry store that also sold records in the back of the store. And I remember my parents saying, "We have to support these young men. So now girls, you're gonna take your allowance money and we're gonna all buy records." And that's what we did. And we weren't the only family doing it. I mean everybody supported them. Because we wanted to see them make it. Speaker 1: (Unclear) buy the Jacksons' records? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Oh yeah. But we wanted to. It wasn't a tough push. But I thought that was really neat that our parents. And it was all of our peers. Their parents were doing it too. We were trying to--remember the 45's you could get? And I think they were seventy-five cents per record. And we had our hi-fi at home. You know, and our dad would play the records for us. But, yeah, we supported everything they did. And Gary was--We used Speaker 1: To have this place called Memorial Auditorium which burned down a few years ago. It was in the center of downtown. And that's where all of our talent shows would be held on Easter Sunday afternoon. And Denice Williams who was an accomplished R&B singer would come back to town and help host them. And it was really cool. Speaker 2: She's from Gary [Indiana]? Speaker 1: Yes, she's from Gary. Speaker 2: There are so many people--and she has such a distinctive voice. Yes. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And the first--the first black Miss Indiana, Kellee Patterson [1971]--Her name was Pat Patterson and she changed her name to Kelly. She sang for a while. Made a couple of records and then sort of disappeared. Speaker 1: Right, right. But William Marshall that you mentioned--. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You know--. Speaker 2: 'Blackula.' Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Remember the blaxploitation movies? He was an actor with this powerful voice. Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. Theatrical, almost like a Paul Robeson. Yeah. Speaker 2: It's unbelievable to some that he's from Gary. Speaker 1: Well, but see--and then but why would people say anything like that? What does that mean? Speaker 2: See because--I think it's because that people don't expect--didn't expect a lot of culture to come out of Gary. Speaker 1: And that's unfortunate. And you--and you know what? I still fight against that kind of stigma today and it makes me ill. Because I think, you know what, I probably had a better upbringing than a lot of the people who are critics who never drove through Gary, who don't know what it was like. When I grew up it was not a terrible place. It was a beautiful place. We didn't have to be afraid for our lives. We'd play under the streetlights. And when the streetlights came on, you knew you had to be back at home. That was the story for, you know, for tens of thousands of communities around the country. It wasn't just us, you know. And we didn't have gangs and that kind of thing. I think the worst you had to worry about as a kid was the bully at school or being hit by a car 'cause you didn't move. You know, you were playing cricket in the street (laughs). but we had a wonderful childhood. I mean you made up your games and things if you didn't have anything to do. Speaker 2: I think it was '70 [1970] Gary's reputation took a hit from some of the blaxploitation movies--. Speaker 1: Oh. Well not just Gary. That was all over the country LA [Los Angeles, California], New York. You know, blaxploitation films weren't made in Gary [Indiana]. Speaker 2: No. There's one--Well it was actually made by Fred Williamson called 'Original Gangstas' [1996] and the whole thing takes place in Gary. Speaker 1: See, I don't know anything about that. Speaker 2: Yeah starring Jim Brown and Pam Grier of all the (unclear)--. (Simultaneously) Oh I know what you're talking about. 'Cause they, you know, they show that in BET [Black Entertainment Television]--reruns all the time. Speaker 1: And they try--. Speaker 2: But that wasn't--They were trying to clean up the town. I think Jim Brown comes back to the--well the son that he never knew, I think, was murdered in a street gang killing and he went to avenge that death. Yeah, no. So I don't think--No. Gary got a bad rap from after the white flight took place. The city began to really look economically depressed. Downtown was literally--was a virtually a ghost town. And I think people lost hope. There were so many hundreds of folks getting laid off from U.S. Steel which we called the 'Big Mill,' Bethlehem Steel, LTV and Inland. And everybody worked in the mill. There's no shame in that. It was a factory town. That's what it was. Speaker 1: I think like Gary too, was the focus of black political activity. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: And a lot of people are very proud of [Mayor Richard] Hatcher. Speaker 2: Oh absolutely. And it was something--it was quite an accomplishment. Speaker 1: The '72 [1972] convention--[National Black Political Convention]. For the black political assembly is historic now. And it held (unclear) all the people that came from all over the country--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Right. Speaker 1: To meet in Gary. Speaker 2: Yeah. [U.S. Congresswoman] Shirley Chisholm and all of that--that group of people. Yeah. It was a--quite an interesting time politically. I was just too young to appreciate all of it. But I remember my father giving a party. You know, when they were introducing him, Richard Gordon Hatcher as a candidate. And I remember him being young and slender and--with glasses. And coming down to the crowd to speak to him--to them about his agenda. And I remember my parents hosted that. And I remember we were told to stay upstairs. We couldn't come down stairs 'cause it was in the basement. And I remember those old steel percolators. You know, those coffee--big coffee--tall coffee urns. And, you know, they were hosting this sort of meet the candidate thing for him. Speaker 1: Okay. Now hopefully things will, you know, get better. Speaker 2: I hope so. It looks like it's trying to turn around. The current mayor they have, Scott King is--he's been doing some good things for the city. Yeah. Story_ID: 10821 Speaker 1: In high school you were involved in radio/television. You said you spent a lot of time doing--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah. We had a radio/television course which was phenomenal. You spent the first semester in radio and the second semester in television. I remember that one of our assignments in radio was to take the test for what was then called the FCC [Federal Communication Commission] Third Class operator's license. Which is now, you know, obsolete. And I remember paying three dollars. Asking my parents for the three dollar fee. And we got on a bus and we came her to Chicago [Illinois] to the Dirksen Federal building to take the test. And everybody was so nervous. And I was one of just a handful of students that actually passed. 'Cause I was really serious about, you know, radio and serious about television. Speaker 1: What did you have to know to pass that that though? Speaker 2: Oh, you had to study how to read the meter. Meter readings, transmitters, amps, everything. It was very mathematical actually. But it was basics. And I was seventeen years old. So I was pretty proud of myself at that young age, I had a third class operator's license. Which was a requirement at the time, to work in a radio station. Speaker 1: Is that no longer a requirement? Speaker 2: No, it's obsolete now. But I still have mine (laughs). Speaker 1: Okay. So you could just have talent and get on the radio now without having (unclear)? Speaker 2: Well it depends--no. Well you've got to have talent. But it takes more than that. I mean the job that I have requires a skill-set that I was not aware that, you know, sometime down the road I'd have to know so much. It's--you have to have more than just a good voice. You better know how to write if you're in news radio. And you have to--we operate our own boards now. It, it--when I first came to Chicago, we had the luxury of having technicians run all of the equipment. But that changed in 1986. Speaker 1: But there's no license that you have to get? Speaker 2: No. It does not require a specific license now. You just have to know how to do it. But we do take transmitter readings on a microprocessor. The same thing that a technician would do. But we do it ourselves. Story_ID: 10822 Speaker 1: Are there any high school teachers that really stand out as important to you? Speaker 2: (Pause) Mrs.--Miss--Miss Mucha. She spelled that M-U-C-H-A. She was a teacher that I really enjoyed. Who was head of the yearbook staff and the newspaper staff. I learned a lot from her. Mrs. Dowdell which is D-O-W-D-E-L-L was my--one of my English teachers. And she pushed me really hard. And it was wonderful. Because she forced me to write and rewrite and rewrite. In fact, through her I won a scholarship. The title of the essay was called 'The Power Of Education'. And also she helped me to enter a contest the Veterans of Foreign Wars, which I have a picture. I was in the eleventh grade. And they had a contest where you were to talk about what it meant--no, why you were proud to be an American. And I won two metals two years--consecutive years. And I got like a $250 scholarship. And now that doesn't sound like a lot of money now. But that was a help. It helped buy some books for me. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) It was a lot of money then. Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: simultaneous--Alot of money. Speaker 2: This was like'74 [1974]. 1974 I think. Yeah. Speaker 1: So when you graduated from high school in Gary what year is this? Speaker 2: 1975, June of '75 [1975]. Oh let me go back. There's one more teacher that was significant. Mr. Whittaker who was my English teacher. And he drilled us constantly on proper spelling and pronunciation, which I carry with me today. I seldom ever use a spell-check. Seldom ever. Story_ID: 10823 Speaker 1: When you were on the verge of graduation you knew you wanted to be a journalist? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. I was sure by the time I was fifteen, sixteen years old. I just wasn't sure whether it--whether it would be radio or television. But I was sure I wanted to write. Speaker 1: Okay. So what did you do when you graduated? Were you ready to choose a college? Speaker 2: Yeah. I enrolled at Purdue University [West Lafayette, Indiana]. As it turns out they ran out of dorm space. So I had to stay home the first year. My first year was spent at Purdue Calumet Campus in Hammond [Indiana]. My parents were really supportive. I got a dorm placement in January of 1976 and went on the main campus. And I attended that--the main campus for three years until the first semester of my junior year. And I ran out of money. And that coupled with the fact that my dad was diagnosed with phlebitis and he became very ill. He was in the hospital forty days in intensive care. He had a blood clot that escaped from his lower leg and lodged in his lung, nearly killed him. So I came home. And all of that was going on at the same time. Interestingly enough I worked at a radio station at Purdue on campus. The year that I was at home I worked at WLTH [Gary, Indiana] radio, my first radio station in Gary. And I worked there free. Just to learn how to take in a phone interview. How to bulk erase carts and just the basics. But when I had to come out of school, I thought it was the worst thing that ever happened to me. I thought my life was over. You know, I was driven, really driven and like a hungry young lion, you know. I was just very depressed about it. And I came home And I knew the only thing I could was get a job and go back to school. And that 's what I did. I worked as a secretary for the Gary [Indiana] Human Relations Commission at City Hall. Made little or no money. I think I was taking home--I think I was grossing like $175 every two weeks. And I volunteered to work on their newsletter free of charge so that I could keep up on my writing skills and keep them fresh. And then my sister and I applied to work in the steel mills. And it was very difficult, I didn't have a car at that time. And my dad was recuperating from surgery, and it was very difficult in our family at that time. I had a kid sister--two kid sisters actually. One in high school--one in elementary school and one in high school. And a sister older than I. And she had gone off to college. And I remember when we were applying for jobs in the steel mill, we'd go downtown on Broadway in Gary and take a mill bus. A mill bus would go out to Bethlehem Steel, Inland Steel, and LTV Steel, but they only traveled on shifts. So if you went out to apply for a job at 8:00 in the morning, you couldn't come home until 3:00 [p.m.]. And so we'd have to wait out there all those hours. And it was winter. And it was tough. It was very tough. And my dad put in a good word for us in the un--in the employment office. And I never will forget. This guy named Ernie gave us a typing test. And I was, you know, 'Jane of all trades' after my dad, you know, and I could type and so could my sister. But they ended up--we ended up being the first women to infiltrate the number--number three sheet mill. We were hired together. And that was quite an experience. But see we were raised tough, you know, like boys. And so working in the steel mill was nothing more than a means to an end for me. Speaker 1: So actually you were hired to do labor? Speaker 2: I was a steel worker laborer. We had the hard hat, the metal tarsal toe boots, the leather padded gloves. Because you'd get steel splints in your hands and they were very painful. We goggled. He had the nig--the flannel shirts. You know. You'd go to an Army/Navy surplus. Or they had stores back in that day that you could buy shirts and jeans and things just for, for steel workers. We'd get on a bus. I worked swing shift. You'd get on an old green bus. And it would take you to the locker-room. Now since the steel industry was a male dominated industry, they had to set up a trailer for the women. But my sister and I were the first two to break in. And the guys were all, "Well who are they? And they're not gonna wanna pick up anything. They're probably weak and whatever." And we shocked the heck out of 'em. And then word got around that we were Raymond Middlebrooks daughters. So it was great. They treated us really well. I remember one of my first encounters with racism when we told our foreman that we needed to try to get on one steady shift so we could go back to school And I encouraged my sister to go to Purdue [University, West Lafayette, Indiana] with me. And I remember him saying to me,--saying to us, "I'm gonna make it as difficult for you as I possibly can." And then he promptly split our shift. He knew we were coming to work together. I had a old Volkswagen beetle. So my sister didn't know how to drive at the time. So she had to take lessons within a week and learn how to drive and buy a car. Because he had split our shift. And the guys heard about it. And they traded shifts with us. So that we could still go to school. And I remember--Oh my God! The benevolence of my professors who would see me nodding. You know, and how I was allowed to stay after class sometimes and take notes, extra notes or, you know, have things prepared. They really worked with me. And that was such a blessing. Speaker 1: See this foreman--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah. Speaker 1: It's really disturbing to hear that he would--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Oh that. Yeah. Speaker 1: Take that attitude. Speaker 2: That's run-of-the-mill stuff. Pardon the pun (laughs). but you know what? That happens in life. And it only made me hungrier. That's all. You know, I was discouraged. But for two minutes. I'm one of those people that I'm generally--Like my name means happiness. My dad named me. And I get depressed some times about things. But I don't stay down too long. I just--life is too short. You know. So it just put more fire in me. And we worked hard. We were in the cold end. Where--Where the steel was rolled into coils. You see them on trucks on semitrucks. We'd climb up on those trucks and help tarp them, strap them. We were called floor bundlers. And my sister and I'd work together. And you had to--you had to take--oh, I guess the steel strapping was about two and half inches wide. And you'd have to take the strap of steel and wrap it--like you're sewing a garment almost. You'd have to put the steel strap through the eye of the coil. And read the ticket. And sometimes we would package steel for casket companies or for RJR Foods, which made Hawaiian Punch cans. And sometimes they wanted oil sprayed on them. Sometimes they didn't. And you would work to their specifications. You came out oily. Oil in your skin, in your hair. You know. It wasn't glamorous. But I didn't care. It was a means to an end. I wasn't trying to get a career in the mill. But the money was phenomenal. I was twenty-one years old and living at home. I couldn't've asked for a better situation. So that's how I ended up going back to school. It took me a full seven years to work my way through. Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: But--but in the interim, while I was working through, I also picked up jobs at various radio stations. So by the time I was twenty-four years old I had four radio stations under my belt before I came to Chicago [Ilinois]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And people wondered how in the world , how'd you do that? Well, I did it 'cause something that on its face looked unfortunate turned out to be a huge blessing for me. Story_ID: 10824 Speaker 1: What were your experiences at some of the stations? What was the first one? Speaker 2: WLTH in Gary [Indiana] was the first one. And then I got hired at WBAA FM in Lafayette [Indiana] which is a Purdue [University, West Lafayette, Indiana] station actually. They had an all campus call out and there were over a thousand applicants. And I was chosen to be one of ten. Speaker 1: And that's while you were still in Indiana? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) While I was in school. Speaker 1: You were in [West] Lafayette. Speaker 2: I was in Lafayette. I was one of ten people chosen. I was--There were eight men and two women. And I was the only person of color. And they didn't let us touch any of the equipment. It was a union shop. But I learned, you know, my skills in terms of pronunciations. I had a plant show. And then we did a lot of classical music. So I had to go through all of the, you know, Tchaikovsky and all of that. You know, it was really neat. A great experience. And then when I came home I went back to WLTH and this time I was paid minimum wage. We got a nickel a mile for gas to go cover stories. And then I worked at WJOB in Hammond [Indiana] which is a terrific station. A very political--A political-- Speaker 1: What do they do? Speaker 2: Political programming. They did sports and hard news. And so I got a lot of training there. And then I worked for WGVE [Gary, Indiana] which was a vocational education station. So those were the stations I worked at prior to coming to Chicago [Illinois]. Story_ID: 10825 Speaker 1: Well how did you come to Chicago [Illinois]? And tell us the story about how you--? Speaker 2: Well toward the end of the seven year stretch working my way through Purdue University [West Lafayette, Indiana] going--as a steel worker, 1982 I was nearing graduation. And Purdue had a program where the dean of the school of humanities would recommend several students that they thought were eligible for internships. Who were good enough, where they thought you'd had a--you'd have a future. I was one of the students chosen. Went through the interviewing process and ended up being one picked from Purdue University . Came to Chicago, had to compete with other kids from Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois] and Loyola [University, Chicago, Illinois] and DePaul [University, Chicago, Illinois] etc., etc. And I ended up coming to meet with the interviewer at CBS-Channel 2 [Chicago, Illinois], and it was a snow storm. It was January of 1982. And I was told to go back home. And I thought, "No! I've driven all the way from Hammond. And I don't wanna do this." So they said to me, "Well, Harry Porterfield is in the building. Would you like to talk to him?" I said, "Oh my God, I'd be honored." And we talked for a while. And he--he was co-owner of a radio station--of WLTH radio for a while. And I told him I'd worked there. And he was real excited about that. And he still lives there. He lives in Miller [Beach, Gary Indiana neighborhood]. And so he let me--He allowed me the privilege of being his intern for one semester. Which was five months. During that time I learned a lot. I went out on stories with him. Got exposed to other journalists and learned a lot. Towards the end of that term I applied for a job in the news room. And I got hired as a telephone operator (laughs), which had nothing to do with what I wanted. But it was a means to an end. I had my foot in the door. I answered phones for several months. And a desk assistant job came open. I applied for that. Was not the lone applicant. And I was chosen finally in May of 1982. And I became a desk assistant. I worked the five o'clock, six o'clock and ten o'clock [p.m] news. And there were other shift--schedules that I worked where I had to work the early morning news. So often times I work from six a.m. to six p.m. And then before six months of that--before I was in--when I was into that job about six months, I applied for a freelance position with WBBM radio. So I was then working actually three jobs. I was working for Channel 2, 'BBM radio and I was still working in Gary at WLTH radio. Story_ID: 10826 Speaker 1: I was hired as a desk assistant in May of 1982, after completing my internship with Harry Porterfield. And that was a terrific time. Because at that time, [WBBM-TV] Channel 2 was the number one station in town. Everybody who was worth their salt as a journalist wanted to be there. I got to see a lot of phenomenal--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah those were--. Speaker 1: Bill Curtis, Walter Jacobson and Harry Porterfield. Oh it was phenomenal, phenomenal experience. So I was just immersed in all of this journalism. And top journalism, great writers many of whom ended up going on to the network. So as I--as I was working as desk assistant job, which is basically a glorified gopher, I was told not to stay in the job more than six months otherwise I'd get pigeonholed. One day I saw a posting for--actually two jobs at WBBM radio. And I got an an aircheck together. And I was shaking all the way up there. I was really scared. But I went up there and submitted my aircheck. As it turns out they hired two other reporters to fill those positions. But they called me back and they said, "Well we really liked your sound. Would you like to freelance?" And, of course, I said yes. And I was petrified. Petrified, but I did it afraid. And I'd never worked in a format where you had to anchor one hour at a time. I'd only been on the air--fifteen minutes was the longest I'd ever been on the air. So I had to learn to pace myself and breath and all that. So that was a real experience. I was only twenty-four years old. And I was wearing braces at the time. And so here's this tall gangly looking girl coming into the newsroom. And everybody was like, "Who is she and where'd she come from? And what's her background?" That kind of thing. I had to prove myself. That was a very difficult experience. Speaker 2: And so you freelanced as an anchor? Speaker 1: Yeah. I freelanced as an anchor. I filled in when people called off sick. So I had to be on call basically at all times. I remember being called at church--during church services. Because I told my parents, "If somebody calls for me, I don't care where I am, interrupt me." Because I always wanted to make sure that they knew I was dependable. I was a dependable employee. And again that goes back to my work ethic from my parents. So I had that job at Channel 2. And then I worked for WBBM radio and I still had a job in radio in Gary. So I was actually working three jobs and I was living in Hammond, Indiana, driving back and forth. But I was young, you know, and I was hungry. And again, it was a means to an end. I figured one day I'd have one job. (laughs) One day and I could get some rest. Speaker 2: Well has it worked out? Speaker 1: No. (laughs) Actually the very opposite has come true. Yeah, I have one job. But who would have ever thought that I'd be in morning drive. You know, I never would've believed that. That's I'd have to be up at 2:30 in the morning and working a 3:30 [p.m] to 11:30 [p.m.] shift. And so no, I still don't get any sleep. But I do have one job. Speaker 2: Okay, now how did you--Now talk about your rise here at, you know-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You're freelancing? Speaker 1: Yeah. I was freelancing at WBBM radio. And I never knew when I was gonna be called in. I would ask often, "Are you ever gonna hire me?" And they'd say, "Well, we don't know. Something would have to open up." Now back in that day nobody left 'BBM radio unless they died. That was the only way you were gonna get in. And one fine day, one the greatest reporters they've ever had, her name is Dianne Apt decided to go on a sabbatical. And she says, "I'm gonna take some time off." And they said, "Well Felicia here is your chance. But we can give you the job with one caveat. You'll have to quit your job in Gary at WLTH [radio]. You'll also have to quit your desk assistant job at Channel 2." When you're young, you take risks. Today I might not have taken that risk. But I said, "Well fine." Well they said, "You do know that she's gonna be gone six months. If she decides to come back, you're out of a job." I said, "Fine. I'll take my chances." And it turns out she ended up being happily married and she moved. And so when she left, that left a vacancy. And I began--I began that job full time in the summer--or the spring of '84 [1984]. And I was a street reporter. And then they let me anchor on weekends. So that was really neat. And it was kind of a scary experience coming from Northwest Indiana. Now you're in the big city and, you know, it's not like television. When you're sent out on a story, you've gotta find out where the news is happening, if it's a fire or a murder or whatever it is. A political rally, a dinner--a political dinner. And you have to map things out for yourself, and find out how to get there. We have to get into cars and check out the keys and all of that. It's a whole different life. So the thing I lived about it is you had this great autonomy. You know. You could decide how you were going to shape the story. And I remember going out on my first murder. And it was in the early days of drive-bys. And I remember it was in Humboldt Park [a Chicago, Illinois neighborhood]. And how crowded it was with all the minicam trucks and how exciting that was. And I remember being told, "Always seek out a white shirt when you're talking to a police sergeant 'cause that's the sergeant. You wanna talk to him." And I remember standing next to the sergeant and I was standing next to the body and didn't even see it. I was just focused on that white shirt. And when I looked away, it was so scary and macabre seeing this body riddled with bullets. You know, and that was a first for me. But it was really exciting being a street reporter. I remember my first story was a six alarm fire on Lawrence Avenue [Chicago, Illinois]. And that was really scary 'cause they didn't tell me where the cars were (laughs). I didn't have a microphone or a tape recorder or anything. So I really--They tease me today, that I got baptized by fire literally. So I, you know, took on the job full-time and it was rigorous. And I made some mistakes and learned. You know. And learned how to write better and faster. You know, writing is like making a fine wine. It doesn't happen overnight. You get better at it and better at it. And radio really challenges you to write well. Because all we have is your ear. And you could really tell good writing when you hear something and it kind of sticks with you. And we only have seconds to pull you in. And if you don't like our voice or what we're saying, you'll turn the dial to another station. And we can't chance that happening. So you have to be an extremely good writer. And a fast one. So that helped me hone my writing skills. Story_ID: 10827 Speaker 1: You seem to have a tremendous mind for detail. Speaker 2: (Laughs). Speaker 1: And, you know, I don't know how much of that is training and how much is talent. But you seem to really have a mind for relating detail. Speaker 2: You know, that's interesting. I never--. Speaker 1: That's gotta be a good quality for someone (unclear). Speaker 2: I never--yeah. Well thank you, but I--you know, I guess I never really thought about that. But my job requires me to think in organ--in an organized manner and with detail. And I think part of that is because you have a challenge to paint a picture with words. You know. And you need to be able to describe it. I mean I do a lot of writing now. I just finished my first novel. And I'm also writing a nonfiction. And I remember all the interviews that I've done over the years with authors. And I always ask them what their secret is and how they do it and how they put texture in a story? You know. So, yeah. I suppose I am detailed. Detail oriented. Speaker 1: Does your family have a tradition of telling good stories? Or--? Speaker 2: Oh wow, my parents have some terrific stories from their childhood which are neat to listen to. And I have a funny family. They're a bunch of comedians. You know. And they tell us stories about, you know, the old neighbors and, you know, the faces they'd make and different things. People that were retarded in the neighborhood, you know, and people with mental illnesses and things. 'Cause nobody talked about that back then. And you didn't go to a sanatorium or anything. You know. People stayed in the house right? Speaker 1: They'd be upstairs. Speaker 2: (Laughs) Yeah right. Sort of like the 'Boo Radleys' of, you know--of the community. So yeah, I don't know. But that's really interesting. I've been told that I'm very organized. And I never thought I was until it occurred to me that even when I have a pile of stuff, I know where everything is. And I like order 'cause it helps you do your job better. It makes you more efficient. And I'm not a big--I don't believe in wasting time. My mother said something to me when we were children that stuck with me. I don't know if my sisters took it to heart like I do. But my mom would say, "Never let the sun go down on a day where you can't look back and say, I accomplished this and I accomplished that and I did this and that. Because life is too precious and it's short. And tomorrow's not promised. So you wanna make sure that you can look back on a day and make sure it's filled with what you got done." You know, accomplishments." Speaker 1: Now when you assess a story--do you see--I mean you have to kind of quickly assess what the beginning of the story, middle and the end of the story all at one time? Speaker 2: Yeah. But, you know, what's interesting about assessing any story is they're multifaceted. There are many sides to a story. You always hear "there's, you know, his side, her side and the truth." Yeah that's true to a degree. But there are many facets to any story. You know, they're the hard news part of it. But there's also the human interest part of it. And there's the offbeat part of it which is interesting. And one of the advantages of working for a twenty-four hour news station is that you have a chance to explore all of it. You know, many facets. A reporter will go out in the field and cover a story and bring back four different versions that all say something different. But the core of the story remains true. You know, it depends on what it is. Speaker 1: Yeah. A station like 'BBM [WBBM radio], you know, all news, all the time. Speaker 2: Right. It's a powerhouse. That's for sure. Speaker 1: Do they learn the different versions of the story? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Oh yeah. Well with a twenty-four hour operation, you have the ability to do that. It's unlike television where you have twenty-two minutes, twenty-three minutes to fill for a half hour show for the 4:00, 4:30, 5:00, 5:30 [p.m.] whatever. We--We have the luxury of being able to do many things and be creative with a story. And also the beauty in radio is it's immediacy. We don't have to wait to set up a truck or a camera. That's the beauty in radio. All we need is a telephone. And that cord is our link, you know. Between us and you and the newsmaker. And then we have to put ourselves in your shoes as a listener. What is it you're curious about? You know, because this is a service organization. A service field. And I have always seen myself as a public servant, a conduit. Story_ID: 10828 Speaker 1: Can you sort of give us a sense of what happened next? Now you--How do you go from street reporting to--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) To morning drive anchor? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: The fall of 1984, there was a decision made at the network level that they wanted to try something new. Because prior to my being named to morning drive as a co-anchor, it was all male. And the industry is male dominated, even still today. Women have made some gains, but we've got a long way to go. Now WBBM is one of the crown jewels of the CBS Infinity [media] chain. And so it's a prototype. It's often used as a prototype to try new things. And I remember being told--And I remember feeling totally, you know, nonplused about it. I could not believe they were offering me an opportunity to audition. I thought, that's just like telling me I'm gonna be President of the United States. I'm like, please get out of here, you know. But they said, "We really like your sound and we'd like to have you audition." So we put together some tapes. And it was me and another woman. And I felt sure she would get it. She had more seniority than me. And I felt sure it was her job. And they told me, "Well if you don't get mornings, we're gonna put you in afternoon drive. So either way it's a win, win for you." And I was just--oh my God! Thrilled and honored and all of that. Well, the tapes were put together and sent off to New York [New York]. And a decision was made that they had chosen me and John Hultman. And we partnered together for fourteen years. And it was a very, very difficult experience initially. Because there was a mindset in radio news that women did not have credibility. "And how dare you put a woman and a twenty--." By that time I was twenty-seven. "Twenty-seven year old black woman from Gary [Indiana]! How dare you. Who is this woman?," you know. And I had a lot to prove in a relatively quick time. Speaker 1: Now John Hultman had been there a long time. Speaker 2: Yes. John--Yeah. John had been there since 1968 when they first went all news. And he was wonderful, you know. And we had such chemistry. And that's not something you can manufacture. It's either there for it's not. And they were concerned about the sound, you know, of whoever they would ultimately pair together. So when we did these audition tapes, they paired him up with the other woman. They paired me with him and there were several other guys. And so they chose John and myself. And it worked beautifully. And we had a wonderful fourteen year run. Ratings went up and everything went very well. But in the interim my having to prove myself to guys who were rather antiquated in their thinking. It was very difficult. And my bosses were wonderful. They were progressive thinkers. And they knew that there could be some backlash. And so I really caught it. And when it caught on, and it became the standard for all CBS stations, other women around the country would call me and, "How did you do it? What did you do when the guys would bully you? And what did you--?" You know. And so I ended up having to be sort of a teacher and a mentor. Because I had already gone through it. Speaker 1: Did you get bullied? Speaker 2: Oh my gosh, Are you kidding? Absolutely (laughs). Absolutely. It's a male dominated industry, you know. And I had things said to me and done to me. And you know. There was sexual harassment and all kinds of things. And I never reported it, of course. But that was part and parcel of being a trailblazer. You get burned, you know. But now that I've made that path, it would be much easier for another woman to replace me. And I've been doing morning drive going on nineteen years now. And I have about twenty-one years--next month it will be twenty-one years with the company. So, you know, it's worked and by the grace of God our ratings are terrific. We're number one. You can't get any better than that. Speaker 1: Now you get a chance to do feature stories (unclear)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Not as much as I used to. I used to make an effort to try to do documentary kinds of things for which I've won many awards. But now our time is so consumed. It is so labor intensive with us running the board, that you don't have any energy. I mean when I get off the air after a five hour stretch of nonstop talking with only a three minute break at the top of each hour, I'm spent. When I get off the air I have to do commercials. And then I go home after that. I do a lot of public speaking. And I have a production company. I'm starting to run a nonprofit myself. So I've got a lot to keep me busy after that. After I leave work. Story_ID: 10829 Speaker 1: But in terms of features, you won an award for one feature at a--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Oh, I've won a number of awards. Speaker 1: Yeah. There was on battered women. Speaker 2: Yeah. I did a feature and got a first place Associated Press 'Best Reporter' award for doing a feature called, "Silent Night, Lonely Night: Battered Women at Christmas Time." And that really touched my heart. It was really horrific to see what some women who are victims of domestic abuse have had to endure. And this was a particularly difficult time. Because their children had to suffer through not being in their homes, living at shelters during Christmas. So it was a very poignant piece that I really enjoyed. I did--I've done features on the Catholic church. I've done features on the black hair care industry during the era where a lot of black companies were bought by white conglomerates. And I don't know if you remember the days of the Revlon protests and things like that. Where they bought a coffin and piled up all the Revlon and Alberto Culver products and Clairol and all that as a protest. That turned out to be a pretty big Chicago [Illinois] thing. Because a lot of black hair care--. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) That's right. Speaker 2: Companies were based right here. And so that was another feature--Another series that I got an award for. But I used to do them. I was much younger and I had, you know, the energy and we had technicians back in that day. Where they were actually running our equipment. Now it's so labor intensive. And the industry has changed so much and so dramatically that I don't have the time that I'd like to have to do those things. Story_ID: 10830 Speaker 1: What sorts of pieces are you producing there? Speaker 2: Well I'm doing a lot of things. Saltshaker Productions is based here in Chicago [Illinois]. It will always be based here. But I do have an office in Los Angeles [California] on the Warner Brothers studio lot. My ultimate dream is to write novels that we will base screenplays on and poignant material, social changing material. Compelling material. Not just mere entertainment. I've given an event--I haven't given it in three years--it's on hiatus-- called, "Hollywood Comes to Chicago." Because there is a dire need for a connect. There is a disconnect between L.A. [Los Angeles, California] and New York [City, New York] and the Midwest. There are a lot of talented people here who love to write. Who have great skill, but they have no connections. And so what I do is bring studio executives to Chicago. And all you do is pay for your admission. And then you get exposed to these people and you get to talk to them directly and find out what it is they're looking for. So we're working on putting that on for next year. But Hollywood comes to Chicago is now a 501(c)(3) [non-profit status] and it's an entity onto itself. I really feel really strongly about that. I just feel that there is a calling on my life to do that. And so far things have worked really well. I didn't know that there was a real hunger out there so I did it just on a fluke. Just on my gut instinct in 1999 was the first one. It was given at the Palmer House Hilton [Chicago, Illinois]. I had very little advertising and 100 people showed up. And it was wonderful. We had Harold Ramis who is an actor and film director, very well known, who still lives on the North shore. But he, you know, works out of Hollywood. And we had representatives from Paramount pictures, New Line Cinema. They all came. And it was wonderful. And it gave people a one-on-one opportunity. You know, it's--The event is meant to target those who are geographically disenfranchised. And I mean you can fly to New York, but you don't know a soul. If you make an appointment with someone in L.A. they could--I'm telling you, the way things work in L.A., you can come for an appointment and they'll say, "Oh I'm sorry, so-and-so had to take a meeting this morning. Can you fly back later?," you know. So this way, you're guaranteed that you're going to have exposure to people who are actually the decision makers. The movers and the shakers. And that's important. So I'm working on that now. Speaker 1: Okay. That sounds like that should be a valuable thing here in--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Oh I believe that. Speaker 1: Film activity in Chicago. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Absolutely. Absolutely. Speaker 1: Columbia [College, Chicago, Illinois] training so many people. Speaker 2: Yeah. And that way they don't have to fly out of town to get--to get the same thing in the advantages that they would get if they went to New York or L.A. Trying to bridge the gap. Speaker 1: Okay. And you say your interested in social change pieces? Speaker 2: Yeah. I--you know, I wanna go to a movie--When is the last time you went to a movie and it was so good? And it was so compelling that your friends or whoever you went to the movie with could not go to sleep? You went to eat after, to talk about that movie. And you just couldn't get it out of your mind. It's rare that we have those kinds of movies. You know what I'd like to see done? I'd like to see more 'To Kill A Mockingbird,' you know. More 'Shawshank Redemption', more movies like that, that cause you to think. That are not just frivolous. You know, I mean I understand we do need a break. We do need to go see something silly that's just gonna make you laugh your socks off. That's what movies do. But they also color the way we think, and they shape the way we think. And that's why I named the company Saltshaker. You think of the properties of salt. Salt flavors, it enhances flavors. It also preserves. It used as a preservative in meat. It cleanses-- saline solution, you know. And you think about all the wonderful properties of salt. I'm not trying to change the world. I just want to make it a little better. Enhance it. Story_ID: 10831 Speaker 1: Recently you were engaged in a--some serious negotiations with WBBM. Do you wanna talk about (unclear). Speaker 2: I can talk about it, Yeah, on its surface 'cause that's--I've put that behind me. Basically its--it boils down to the, the differences that exist for women versus men in radio. If I were white male and number one, I wouldn't have, wouldn't have had that battle. I asked for a raise based on proof of performance and my longevity in the market place. I have more seniority than anyone in morning drive here in Chicago [Illinois], male or female. I'm one of the few women in the country who has a prominent position in radio. You see, radio is still in the dark ages, it's not like television. Women are in front of the camera, they're behind the camera, they're behind the scenes. In radio that's not so. If you look at any radio station around the country, women are positioned as window dressing, basically or sidekicks or the girl that laughs or makes a social commentary on the guys bashing women or whatever. The giggler, you know. It's been very difficult for women to break through that glass ceiling. I've not only penetrated the glass ceiling, I'm you know, I'm sitting at the top of the building. And it was, it was unfortunate. It was very painful. It was made public, but not by me. And there are people who are basically professional resurrectionists who wanna keep it in the news. But it's no longer news. That contract was negotiated a year ago. I've put it behind me. And I know that I've delivered excellent service. I'm very proud of my record. I love my job, otherwise I wouldn't be there. Believe me, I've had many offers to go outside the station. I've always chosen--I'm there because I want to be. And I love my work. But I'm hoping that what I went through will make it easier for some other woman around the country. There's something we call the 'seven figure club', there are no women in the seven figure club anywhere in the country. Other than Sally Jesse Raphael might have been in her radio days and she could tell you stories. Women don't do very well-- Dr. Laura [C. Schlessinger] might be another one. These are the two most prominent women in radio. And one of them is no longer in radio. It's a, it's a hard stretch for a woman. It's very antiquated for women, Speaker 1: Okay. Now one thing the controversy did I think the black community--Correct me if I'm wrong is call a lot of people's attention to you being the number one drive anchor--. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: In radio. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: A lot of black people didn't know. Speaker 2: Didn't know. Well a lot of people didn't know I was black (laughs) in the first place. Is that what you're saying? Speaker 1: Well that's true. Plus black people in Chicago [Illinois], their attention is, you know. A lot of younger people listen to music. Speaker 2: Right. That true. Speaker 1: Exclusively. And that's all they listen to. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) That's true. Absolutely. And then there's the political crowd--the hard core political crowd listens to 'VON [WVON radio]. Speaker 1: That's true. Speaker 2: Most people (unclear). Speaker 1: Yeah. If you--If you wanna just distinguish it for the black community only. But, but WBBM's audience is primarily white collar people who are in business, who own businesses, who are the movers and shakers in town. And there's not one among them--and including the black community where these are people who are knowledgeable, who are educated. They know what WBBM is. But yeah, you're right. There are a lot of people who did not know I was a woman of color and still--until they started seeing my picture plastered everywhere. One unfortunate thing about the way that story was portrayed is it basically published a lot of things that were leaked unfortunately. Not be me of course. But leaked during those negotiations, which was done that way by design to hurt my ability to get more money. I was painted as greedy. But what they never said to you is, "Look at what all the guys in morning drive are making and they aren't number one. This woman is not even asking for a million dollars. And she's being taken to task for it basically tarred and feathered because she asked for a raise." I was offered a one and a half percent raise. I think anybody would have asked for more than that. That's not even the cost of the rate of inflation. You know, and I've earned more than that. So I have no regrets. It was because I'm a woman primarily that that happened. And women had not faired well. Had not faired well. I'm saying had not. Because I fared well I'm an exception. But it's been difficult. There's been nothing easy about it. Story_ID: 10832 Speaker 1: What advice would you offer for young black people, especially who wanna get involved in the media? Speaker 2: I would say if you're gonna go to college and get a degree, either don't get a degree necessarily in journalism or do a double major. But always have something that you can fall back on 'cause the industry is vastly different than it was when I entered. One degree was fine. But if you can, get either a double major. Major in journalism and something that complements it like political science or something like that. But always have a back-up plan, always. You'll need something to fall on. Because there's not the stability that used to be. People like me who have been in the business--I've been in the business twenty-seven years and at CBS for twenty-one. That kind of tenure doesn't exist anymore. Story_ID: 10833 Speaker 1: Tell me about some of your volunteer activities. Speaker 2: Okay, yeah. I'm involved in a lot of things. I'm on-I recently joined two boards this year. One is for an organization-a nonprofit called WINGS. And it sands for Women in Need Growing Stronger. And its to address the issues of domestic violence. I just also joined another organization called Hands of Hope. And they're doing some phenomenal work. They're based in Barrington, Illinois. And they're helping the first lady of Uganda, Janet Museveni to educate young women about abstinence. Because aids has wiped out really several generations there. A lot of children have been orphaned by AIDS--the AIDS epidemic. And so they're working to try to correct that-that problem that they have there. And to try to ad comfort and security for the kids who re up and coming. And they go and travel there and provide them with supplies and-hospital supplies and things like that. Aid. And also with the--with CHASI [Children's Home and Aid Society of Illinois]. They work with DCFS [Department of Children and Family Services] when children have to be removed, unfortunately from homes where they are subjected to abuse or violence. So those are three boards that's I'm members--that I'm a member of. And then I do a lot of work speaking the American Heart Association, American Cancer Society and other groups like that. March of Dimes I've done work with. Speaker 1: I'm sure you-I'm sure you get a lot of requests to speak (unclear). Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. All the time. I've always been the girl that just could not say no. you know, 'cause I didn't want people to think that, you know, I was above doing all kinds of work. But it takes its toll. So I'm now learning to be more discriminating about what I choose to do and what I take a pass on. Speaker 1: Those sound like two serious projects-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --That you're volunteering a lot of time for. Story_ID: 10834 Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community? Speaker 2: Well my hope is that we regain the kind of cohesion as a community that we once had back in the 60s [1960s] and the early 70s [1970s]. And I remember when we all thought black was beautiful. And we were all wearing afros and using Afro-Sheen and all that. I remember as a kid seeing the kind of unity that when one fell, we all fell. When one stood, we all stood and I don't see that kind of cohesion any more. I would like to see us not hate on each and love each other. And to try to help each other. I'm a firm believer that, God gives all of us a gift. And that you don't really need to be jealous of anybody else because we can all work together. And what is for you, is for you. Whatever God has planned for you is for you. And so I think we need to be more cognizant of the need to pull up the next person behind us and to mentor. And to not say, "Well I've got mine. You get yours," 'cause we are a community. And we are responsible for each other. So I'm very concerned about that. I'm also concerned about a lack of dedication and commitment to education among black young men, who we are losing to gangs and drugs. And that's painful 'cause we need them,ou know, they represent our future. And I'm concerned that maybe they aren't being mentored. That we're losing them when they're in the third grade. That they're not being parented correctly. And there are so many of us who don't adopt. And there are children who are, you know, passed infancy that may not be as attractive to a couple who want to adopt a baby. We need to be loving each other more. And that's what I'd like to see. I'd like to see us go back to the church. Which it was always the cornerstone of the black community. And some of us have strayed away from that. Or even--or some of us go as a matter of convenience. you know, what I call selective religiosity. You know, "I'll take that from the Bible and I'll hold on to that. But the rest of this stuff, you know, it's not for me." We need to get real with one another and that concerns me. Story_ID: 10835 Speaker 1: Now you're, you know, fairly young by The HistoryMakers's standards. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) (laughing). Speaker 1: But you've certainly made your mark. What do you see as your legacy at this point? Oh wow! That's a deep question. My legacy. I hope that thus far-'Cause I--there's still a lot more to come-That I have left a legacy of hope. That I have left a legacy and proof of what tenacity and determination, discipline and commitment will do and faith in God. Without-I couldn't've done any of this without faith in God. And that is something my parents put in me. "That only what you do for Christ will last," and that's carried me. Through all of the hardships that I've been through in my career, what has sustained me is that I have a knowledge in my spirit that my boss is really God. And so whatever is done to me or said to me is inconsequential. Because my focus in on him and him alone. And so I hope that if young women and young men are looking at my example, that they have to understand that whatever you compromise to get, you're gonna ultimately lose. So don't ever compromise. I would hope that I've left a legacy of integrity. Because I've always tried to walk in integrity and with a great sense of purpose. I have a very strong work ethic. And I hope that other young women and young men will say, "She made it. Yes, she had some tears to cry. Yeah, she was discouraged and she was said--she was told no, you aren't gonna make it. You know, along the way. But look at what determination and discipline did for her." And you can do it too. Story_ID: 10836 Speaker 1: Are there any things that you would do differently or anything that you regret? Speaker 2: You know, that's an interesting question. Because after I came through all the contract talks I asked myself that. And I really don't have any regrets. I would have done everything the same way. The only regret I might have--and thank God I'm young enough to still--to correct this. But I never really learned to play hard. I've worked hard all my life. And I remember my dad said to me one day--my father named me Felicia, it means happiness and he calls me Lisa. He says, "Lisa, what do you do for fun?" And I was stymied. This is the girl that is never lost for an answer, you know. And I couldn't think of anything, because I'm constantly working. All my vacations I'm working, I'm writing, I'm doing something. I'm always preoccupied. But when I sit down and relax, I'm nervous. I look at my watch. Because surely there's something else I'm supposed to be doing. So the only regret I have is that I never really learned to play hard. And so now I'm having to really make an effort to give myself time to go see a play at a theater. To go spend quality time with my girlfriends and not look at my watch and say, "I gotta be somewhere else." You know, it's hard to date with the schedule that I have. Nobody ever gets to see you. 'Cause you can't come out at night (laughs). You have to go to sleep like a kid, you know. In the summer where people are barbecuing, on a week-day or whatever, you're in bed by 7:00, 7:30 [p.m.], you better be. Otherwise you won't be fresh for your job. So I think in terms of--I mean I gave my job my life. I mean my--I'm sorry. I gave my life my job. My--(laughs) I'm sorry. I--can I do that again? I've given my whole life to my job. Dedicated to that job. Wanting to be up on everything. I remember when I first started working morning drive, I'd go home and I wouldn't take a nap. And I'd stay up through 11:00 to watch 'Nightline' 'cause I was scared I was gonna miss something. Because the pressure on me being the first woman was very, very difficult. I couldn't miss. I couldn't misstep. Because if I made a mistake and I messed up, not only was I hurting myself, but I represented all African Americans male or female. And I represented all women. Black, white and everything in-between. So I could not fail. What do you do with that kind of pressure at twenty-seven years old. That was a lot of pressure, alot of pressure. Spent a lot of time in prayer. Spent a lot of time going home, you know, talking to my parents. College professors. It was very lonely, you know, 'cause you didn't have time for anything else. Speaker 1: Well let me risk saying that I don't think that people realized that you were that young when you were on the air. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah. Speaker 1: You didn't--you didn't sound like you were so fresh. And you were a rookie--. Speaker 2: Do you know-- Speaker 1: (unclear) Speaker 2: Exactly. I was a rookie. Well considering. I mean I had worked at four other radio stations and Channel 2 before coming to BBM radio. And that was--I had more experience, more stations behind me than people who were ten fifteen years older than me. But I came on board wearing braces at twenty-four. And it really made me work hard. Because I was afraid that my diction or my enunciation would be a problem. So it made me work even harder. You know. And I told I used to have a lisp when I was a child. So I had a lot that I had to work up towards. You know, and a lot to prove. So by twenty-seven I was named on morning drive. And oh my God, the pressure was-I felt like I was carrying the weight of the world on my shoulder. I never let anybody see me sweat though, you know, I'd go home and cry. But I would never let anybody see me sweat. Speaker 1: So your parents are your sisters are really proud of you? Speaker 2: Yeah, they are. They're my biggest cheerleaders, they are. Story_ID: 10837 Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: I would like to be remembered as a woman who loved God. A woman who was committed to serving him through her work. A woman who was the best friend you could ever have. A kind daughter and a lover of people. One who respected herself, and therefore respected others. And wanted to see the best come out in people. A person that always wanted to believe the best in people. Story_ID: 10838 Speaker 1: This was about 1989, 1990. I had a friend who worked for him in New York [City, New York]. And she asked if I'd like to see the 'Cosby Show' being taped. And I said, "yes." And I went. And he allowed us to come in his office after the show and take pictures. Speaker 2: [Felicia Middlebrooks with Bill Cosby after a taping of 'The Cosby Show,' New York, New York, ca. 1990. From the collection of Felicia Middlebrooks] Story_ID: 10839 Speaker 1: The picture below that is my mother [Geraldine Middlebrooks] and father [Raymond Middlebrooks], 1994. Lovely couple. And all the pictures of my parents--I just want to emphasize that they are such a team. And I got a chance to see what love looks like. You know, by their example. Gosh I love that picture. Isn't that cool! Speaker 2: [Felicia Middlebrooks's parents, Raymond (left) and Geraldine (right) Middlebrooks, 1994. From the collection of Felicia Middlebrooks] Story_ID: 10840 Speaker 1: I used to be on the board of Starlight-the Starlight Foundation, which grants wishes to dying children. And I would serve as MC [mistress of ceremony] every year. This was 1993, I believe. 1993. And that is Emma Samms-What is-Emma Samms the actress "S-A-M-M-S" and John Moschitta [Jr.]. He's the guy that you remember from the Federal Express commercials. He speaks real fast. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And he was the auctioneer. Speaker 2: Okay (laughing), perfect (unclear). Okay. Speaker 1: And that was taken prior to the ball. Speaker 2: [Felicia Middlebrooks with other celebrities before a Starlight Foundation ball, 1993. From left to right: Emma Samms, actress and founder of the Starlight Foundation; Felicia Middlebrooks; and John Moschitta, Jr.. From the collection of Felicia Middlebrooks] Story_ID: 10841 Speaker 1: That's me in the fifth grade. I was eleven. Speaker 2: [Felicia Middlebrooks's fifth grade school portrait, Ivanhoe Elementary School, Gary, Indiana, ca. 1968. From the collection of Felicia Middlebrooks] Story_ID: 10842 Speaker 1: That is a picture of Purdue University Black Voices of Inspiration [West Lafayette, Indiana]. And I was a soloist often. And there I am right there. Speaker 2: In the middle row? Speaker 1: In the middle row to the right. Speaker 2: You were a soloist in the choir? Speaker 1: Yeah. I've always sung in churches. I'm always in the church choir except now. I'm not. Speaker 2: [Felicia Middlebrooks (middle row, second from right) in Black Voices of Inspiration, a Purdue University choir, West Lafayette, Indiana, 1970s. From the collection of Felicia Middlebrooks] Story_ID: 10843 Speaker 1: High school band. I didn't make first chair. Darn it! I played the flute. And that was me after the parade downtown. Westside Senior High school [Gary, Indiana]. The Cougars. Go you Westside Cougars! Speaker 2: [Felicia Middlebrooks in her West Side High School band uniform after a parade, Gary, Indiana, 1970s. From the collection of Felicia Middlebrooks] Story_ID: 10844 Speaker 1: Yeah, I was in the seventh grade. Speaker 2: [Felicia Middlebrooks's seventh grade school portrait, Thomas A. Edison Middle School, Gary, Indiana, ca. 1970. From the collection of Felicia Middlebrooks] Story_ID: 10845 Speaker 1: I was a freshman in high school [West Side High School, Gary, Indiana]. And very shy and went to the masquerade party at high-at our high school. We lived a block from the school. And I went as Wonder Woman. And my dad [Raymond Middlebrooks] loaned me an extension cord. A clear extension cord is my lasso (laughing). Speaker 2: [Felicia Middlebrooks dresses as Wonder Woman for a high school masquerade party, Gary, Indiana, ca. 1971. From the collection of Felicia Middlebrooks] Story_ID: 10846 Speaker 1: Sunday afternoon in June of 1975, the baccalaureate. Speaker 2: [Felicia Middlebrooks with her parents, Raymond (right) and Geraldine (left) Middlebrooks, upon her high school graduation, West Side High School, Gary, Indiana, 1975. From the collection of Felicia Middlebrooks] Story_ID: 10847 Speaker 1: My dad [Raymond Middlebrooks] taught himself to play the piano. And, you know, when you're a kid you never understand how-what your parents are trying to give you is culture. And I took piano lessons from grade school until I was seventeen. And I began to hate it at seventeen. And what did I do? I got grown and bought myself a baby grand. So my dad who's a real sentimental guy wanted us to take a picture with him. The baby sister is missing from this picture. But that's my beach house. Speaker 2: Okay. And then left to write which would be bottom to top--. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) That's Cassandra, Cass-Mrs. Cassandra Smith, that's me, and that's Mrs. Ronda Cast "C-A-S-T". Speaker 2: And then your dad's seated. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) And then my dad is seated. Mm-hm. Speaker 2: Okay what year would we put for this? Speaker 1: Oh this would be 1998. Speaker 2: [Felicia Middlebrooks with her sisters and father at her Miller Beach home, Gary, Indiana, 1998. From left to right: Cassandra Smith; Felicia Middlebrooks; Rhonda Cast; seated, Raymond Middlebrooks. From the collection of Felicia Middlebrooks] Story_ID: 10848 Speaker 1: That's me working at WLTH in Gary [Indiana]. My first radio job. And I was conducting an interview. Speaker 2: [Felicia Middlebrooks conducts an interview at WLTH-AM, Gary, Indiana, late 1970s. From the collection of Felicia Middlebrooks] Story_ID: 10849 Speaker 1: That picture is when I first joined WBBM [780 AM, Chicago, Illinois]. I was twenty-four--twenty-five--twenty-five on that shot. Speaker 2: [Felicia Middlebrooks early in her tenure at WBBM-780AM, Chicago, Illinois, 1982 . From the collection of Felicia Middlebrooks] Story_ID: 10850 Speaker 1: This is a picture of me and Robert Mondovi last year. He is the king of the vineyard, Mondovi Wines. One of the nicest men you ever wanna meet. And I met him-This was an offshoot of my company Saltshaker Productions. I created some radio features and one is about wine. And so I began to get connected to Chicago's wine communities to go to tastings and such. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And I was invited to meet Mr. Mondovi. Speaker 2: [Felicia Middlebrooks (left) with winemaker, Robert Mondovi (right), at a wine tasting event, not dated, from the collection of Felicia Middlebrooks] Story_ID: 10851 Speaker 1: Top picture was taken in about I would say 1988. This was taken at a March of Dimes walkathon. 'Cause I do a lot of extra curricular work for the station. And they let me take a marked car, a news car, and let everybody look in side it and see it. And see how e put a story together inside a car. And that man's name is Larry (thinking) What is his last name? I can't think of the last name. but he was with the bank that sponsored the walk. And they asked me to come over. Speaker 2: [Felicia Middlebrooks (left), shown with unidentified man (right), represents WBBM-780AM, Chicago, Illinois, at a March of Dimes fundraiser, 1988. From the collection of Felicia Middlebrooks] Story_ID: 10852 Speaker 1: The bottom picture is the event that I-that my company gave-Saltshaker Productions gave in 2000. Hollywood comes to Chicago 2000. And that's Harold Ramis the director autographing a screenplay of 'Caddyshack'. And the woman on the left is Maura Smith "M-A-U-R-A" Smith. And I gave her that as a surprise. Because she was the first person to register for the event. And I wanted to acknowledge her as having faith in what I was trying to do. So Harold Ramos was the guest that evening. And he sat there for almost three hours answering questions from people and giving advice. Speaker 2: [Felicia Middlebrooks welcomes guests to a Saltshaker Productions event, Chicago, Illinois, 2000. From left to right: Maura Smith; Harold Ramis; Felicia Middlebrooks. From the collection of Felicia Middlebrooks] Story_ID: 10853 Speaker 1: This is a picture shot in the front of the Middlebrooks home. You know Larry look on the back of it and see what it says. My mom might have written. 'Cause she's real thorough. Did she write on the back of that? Speaker 2: No. Our house it says. Speaker 1: Our house. Yeah. That's our front yard of the house I grew up in. My parents still live there. That's me on the left. I guess I was about nine. That's my cousin Reggie Rembert-Reginald Rembert who was visiting us from Cleveland [Ohio] and my younger sister Cassandra. So I think I was about-You know what? I was about ten on that picture. And she had to be eight. Speaker 2: [Felicia Middlebrooks (left) with her cousin, Reginald Rembert (center), and sister, Cassandra Smith (right), outside of her childhood home, Gary, Indiana, ca. 1967. From the collection of Felicia Middlebrooks] Story_ID: 10854 Speaker 1: This is little me and my big sister Rhonda. I was an infant obviously. Is there something on the back of that picture? Did she write on the back of that picture? Speaker 2: Let me see. Yeah there is. Hold on a minute. Speaker 1: "1541 Kentucky Street. Rhonda was four, Felicia was six months old." Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: That was the first home that they moved to coming from the South. (laughing) Speaker 2: [Felicia Middlebrooks at six months (left) and her older sister, Rhonda (right), four years old, Gary, Indiana, 1957. From the collection of Felicia Middlebrooks] Story_ID: 10855 Speaker 1: That's Larry Lujack on the left, me in the center and John Hultman, my former co-anchor [from WBBM-AM 780] on the right at a Windy awards-and that's W-I-N-D-Y [Chicago Advertising Federation's] Windy Awards luncheon. Where they would grant award to advertising companies when they wrote commercials. They'd compete for awards. And this was the dream of my life. Because I grew up loving Larry Lujack. While my sisters listened to R&B [Rhythm & Blues] I was listening to WLS. And I never dreamed that I would one day be in Chicago radio. My sisters would call me the white girl. Speaker 2: [Felicia Middlebrooks (center) with Chicago radio personalities Larry Lujack (left) and John Hultman (right) at the Chicago Advertising Federation's Windy Awards luncheon, Chicago, Illinois, not dated, from the collection of Felicia Middlebrooks] Story_ID: 10856 Speaker 1: That is a WBBM [-AM 780] Christmas parade carriage. And that's when I was being acclimated. They were starting to groom me. I had just come on board as a full-time person. This was-this had to be-no I was still a freelancer. This was 1983. December of 1983. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And York Furrier loaned us fur coats (laughing). Speaker 2: [Felicia Middlebrooks (right), Sue Casorino (center) and an unidentified man (left) represent WBBM AM-780 in a Christmas parade, Chicago, Illinois, 1983. From the collection of Felicia Middlebrooks] Story_ID: 10857 Speaker 1: This was a picture of three-two of my reporter colleagues. And the man on the left is Cosmo--is the late Cosmo Currier. That wasn't his real name. He named himself that. He recently--he died last year. He was a well known newsman in Northwest Indiana. And he taught me the ropes. He is how I learned--he taught me how to interview. He went out with me on my first story. And I never will forget. It was a political story. And it was some big political meeting, in a smoke filled auditorium that was owned by the Veterans of Foreign Wars, it was a VFW post. And it was cigar smoke and cigarette smoke, and I was so scared I was trembling. And he went with me to interview a city councilman. And he kind of nudged me in the back. "Come on now. Come on now. Be strong. Go and ask him a question." So the woman above him in the blue is Carmen McCollum, M-c-C-O-L-L-U-M. She's now a reporter at the 'Hammond Times' [sic. Northwest Indiana Times, Munster, Indiana]. And Claudette Jernigan is with the hat. And she's now a full-time school teacher. But they were both reporters with me. And Cosmo-we had worked real hard on some new project. And he took us to lunch as a treat. Speaker 2: Spell Jernigan and-- Speaker 1: Jernigan is J-E-R-N-I-G-A-N Claudette common spelling. Speaker 2: Okay. And did we spell Mr. Currier. Speaker 1: Currier. C-O-S-M-O Cosmo Currier C-U-R-R-I-E-R. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: It was just a handle he gave himself. Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Speaker 1: [Felicia Middlebrooks (bottom, right) at lunch with her mentor, Cosmo Currier (bottom left), and two reporter colleagues, Carmen McCollum (top, left), and Claudette Jernigan (top, right), Indiana, not dated, from the collection of Felicia Middlebrooks] Story_ID: 10858 Speaker 1: That's another shot of the, the --yeah. The Christmas parade. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I thought I was kind of cute that day with my loaned jacket. Speaker 2: [Felicia Middlebrooks (left), Sue Casorino (center) and an unidentified man (right) represent WBBM AM-780 in a Christmas parade, Chicago, Illinois, 1983. From the collection of Felicia Middlebrooks] Story_ID: 10859 Speaker 1: The bottom picture I believe was taken in the early '90s [1990s]. I think about '92 [1992]. And that's John Hultman, my former co-anchor and myself. And we're both Purdue [University, West Lafayette, Indiana ] grads by the way. Speaker 2: Oh really. Speaker 1: And I brought you the cover of N'Digo [Magazine] too. And I had some other things. I didn't know if you could use them. Speaker 2: Okay. For our caption editors please spell Hultman. Speaker 1: Hultman is "H-U-L-T-M-A-N". John common spelling. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And that's our studio, that's our anchor studio where we work today. Speaker 2: Okay. Next. Speaker 1: John and I were together fourteen years. Bless his heart. Speaker 2: [Felicia Middlebrooks (right) with John Hultman (left), her former co-anchor, in the WBBM AM-780 studio, Chicago, Illinois, ca. 1992. From the collection of Felicia Middlebrooks] Story_ID: 10860 Speaker 1: That's my mom [Geraldine Middlebrooks]. And she was pregnant with me. I think she was four or five months pregnant with me. And she was making dinner. Speaker 2: [Felicia Middlebrooks's mother while pregnant, 1956. From the collection of Felicia Middlebrooks] Story_ID: 10861 Speaker 1: Oh my God! This is so precious. My parents were big on outings. And they used to take us to the beach sometimes. And we'd always take pictures. So the first little girl is Cassandra, my little sister, she's two years younger than me. And that's me in the middle. And Rhonda, my big sister, who is four years older than me. And little Aniki, my baby sister did not exist at that point. Speaker 2: Wow. Speaker 1: Do you know my little sister, the first one has a daughter who looks just like that. Speaker 2: Sure, yeah Speaker 1: We bring pictures all the time. "You look just like your mommy." "I do?" and she's shocked when she see the pictures. It's amazing. Speaker 2: [Felicia Middlebrooks (center) with her sisters, Cassandra Smith (left) and Rhonda Cast (right), on a family outing, early 1960s. From the collection of Felicia Middlebrooks] Story_ID: 10862 Speaker 1: This is my sixth birthday party. And you see I had to squeeze to get in. My mom [Geraldine Middlebrooks] is trying to tell me to get in the picture. That's my mom above me on the right. Birthdays are a big deal in my family. even today. Do you see the clock on the wall. Does that date that or what? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Oh yeah, the sunburst clock. Speaker 2: Yeah. You remember that (laughs). Speaker 1: We bought one for our parents for Christmas Speaker 2: Aww, you did? (simultaneous) Well you were in vogue. Speaker 1: We were so proud-- Speaker 2: Philodendron in the corner. Well alrighty now. Speaker 1: The other woman. Is she a neighbor or a relative or--? Speaker 2: She's--the little girl with the pigtails below that other woman that's her mom. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Her name is Angela Best. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And her mom's name was Annabel. And she had come over to help my mom give the party. Speaker 1: [Felicia Middlebrooks (sixth from right) with her mother, Geraldine Middlebrooks (right), her friend, Angela Best (third from left), and her friend's mother, Annabel Best (fourth from left), at her sixth birthday party, Gary, Indiana, 1963. From the collection of Felicia Middlebrooks] Story_ID: 10863 Speaker 1: Do you guys remember the dolls Chatty Cathy and Tiny Chatty brother. Well those were our presents. Would you look on the back of that? She may have written something. Speaker 2: Yeah she did. She wrote 1950-I don't know. Speaker 1: My God. It has to be [19]50 something. 'cause--. Speaker 2: Oh that's the address. Speaker 1: Oh. 1950 Kentucky Street. Yeah. Speaker 2: Christmas. Speaker 1: Oh okay. She didn't say the year? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Well I was about six years old in this picture. And my sister and I were doing a show and tell. You can see the lovely aluminum tree in the back. It had that rotating color wheel, you know, for effect (laughs). Speaker 2: [Felicia Middlebrooks (left) and her sister, Cassandra Smith (right, with their Christmas presents, ca. 1963. From the collection of Felicia Middlebrooks] Story_ID: 10864 Speaker 1: Continuation of the party. That's the after set. Look at the curtain. Is that dated or what? Cool curtains man. I'm sitting on the couch by myself. Oh with a little boy over there. By the lamp. That's me. Speaker 2: And you said you were shy. Speaker 1: I didn't know any better then. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Believe me. I had zero boyfriends. Speaker 2: [Felicia Middlebrooks (back, left) at her sixth birthday party, Gary, Indiana, 1963. From the collection of Felicia Middlebrooks] Story_ID: 10865 Speaker 1: That was my twelfth birthday party. And we were around the dining room about to--you see the party has mostly girls. There's one boy there. Speaker 2: [Felicia Middlebrooks's twelfth birthday party, Gary, Indiana, 1969. From the collection of Felicia Middlebrooks] Story_ID: 10866 Speaker 1: That's in my parent's foyer and I was about thirteen or fourteen. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And that was Memorial Day. That was one of those skorts. You take off the skirt part and there's shorts (laughs). Oh I love that picture. [Felicia Middlebrooks on Memorial Day, Gary, Indiana, 1970. From the collection of Felicia Middlebrooks] Story_ID: 10867 Speaker 1: Easter, yeah. Easter Sunday. I guess I was about thirteen. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: We were always decked out--the hats. You see the formal gloves. And my mother is giving my sister the finishing touches. My mother is in the door making sure everything is prim and proper. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And then the one in the middle is Cassandra, the sister under me. She's two years younger and then me. Speaker 2: That's great. Speaker 1: Decked out for Easter Sunday. Speaker 2: [Felicia Middlebrooks, her sisters and her mother on Easter Sunday, Gary, Indiana, 1970 . From left to right: mother, Geraldine Middlebrooks; sister, Rhonda Cast; sister, Cassandra Smith; and Felicia Middlebrooks. From the collection of Felicia Middlebrooks] Story_ID: 10868 Speaker 1: The lower one is my maternal grandmother Sarah Rembert and her oldest daughter Annie Bell. Both are deceased now. And that picture was taken on my grandmother's porch. We used to call her 'Mamo'. And that was in Birmingham, Alabama. Speaker 2: [Felicia Middlebrooks's maternal grandmother, Sarah Rembert (below), and aunt, Annie Bell (above), Birmingham, Alabama, not dated, from the collection of Felicia Middlebrooks] Story_ID: 10869 Speaker 1: The top one is Dan Rather and me in our newsroom on one of his visits in 1997. Speaker 2: [Felicia Middlebrooks (right) and Dan Rather (left) in the WBBM AM-780 newsroom, Chicago, Illinois, 1997. From the collection of Felicia Middlebrooks] Story_ID: 10870 Speaker 1: I sat there with him. He interviewed me. I said, "Mr. [Tony] Bennett--." And I did my homework 'cause I think it's disrespectful to interview an author and not read their book 'cause it takes-It's hard to write a book. And he had written a book. And I studied him and I did my homework. And I was telling him what his name meant and all that. He really was fascinated that I took the time. And I so loved him. And I took him into the newsroom. I didn't have to say, "Hey everybody, here's Tony Bennett." I said, "Look who's here everybody!" And they all stood up and clapped . It was so cool. And he sang our jingle, (singing) "WBBM." It was really cool. Speaker 2: Wow!. Speaker 1: I still have it on tape. Speaker 2: Wow! Speaker 1: So if he ever passes, you know, I've got him secured. Speaker 2: Okay. And what year was this? Speaker 1: This was 2000. Speaker 2: This was one of the best interviews I've ever had. The three best interviews of my career have been former President Jimmy Carter , Tony Bennett and Patti Labelle. The three absolute best interviews. Speaker 1: Hmm. He's got a mystique doesn't he? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: [Felicia Middlebrooks (left) with guest Tony Bennett (right), WBBM AM-780, Chicago, Illinois, 2000. From the collection of Felicia Middlebrooks] Story_ID: 10871 Speaker 1: I love this picture. Look on the back of it. Because she may have put what year it was. Speaker 2: She put the address always. Speaker 1: Okay, well because we had--. Speaker 2: Mm-hm. Speaker 1: We had three different homes when I-as I grew up. This is a picture. A family portrait. My mom on the left, me, my little sister Cassandra in my dad's lap and my older sister Rhonda who is four years older. And we used to have fun with her dress. That dress was baby blue on the bottom and deep royal blue on top. And we would sing that, 'She Wore Blue Velvet' (laughs) song. Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: Bobby Vinton every time she had that on. Speaker 2: [Felicia Middlebrooks's family portrait, Gary, Indiana, early 1960s. From left to right: mother, Geraldine Middlebrooks; Felicia Middlebrooks; sister, Cassandra Smith; father, Raymond Middlebrooks; sister, Rhonda Cast. From the collection of Felicia Middlebrooks] Story_ID: 10872 Speaker 1: That's me and Patti Labelle. I believe that was maybe 2000 as well. When she wrote her book, 'Don't Block the Blessings'. Phenomenal woman. She came down the hall and I was clapping. Walking to her. And she hugged me like she had known me all her life. Warm. Speaker 2: [Felicia Middlebrooks (right) with Patti Labelle (left), 2000. From the collection of Felicia Middlebrooks] Story_ID: 10873 Speaker 1: I believe this was 1989 in the city of Gary [Indiana]. I was given the key to the city by former Mayor Richard Hatcher. Richard Gordon Hatcher who was the first black mayor of Gary and only the second black mayor in a major city in the country. Speaker 2: Okay, great next. Speaker 1: I believe that was an NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] dinner. Speaker 2: [Felicia Middlebrooks is awarded the key to the city of Gary, Indiana by Mayor Richard Hatcher at an NAACP dinner, 1989. From the collection of Felicia Middlebrooks] Story_ID: 10874 Speaker 1: I was telling you guys that my mother and father are such a team. They're best friends. And this had to be taken in the late '70s [1970s]. Mid to late'70s [1970s]. This was my father's birthday. And my mom was giving him a ring--a topaz ring which was his birth stone November. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And he was surprised. Speaker 2: [Felicia Middlebrooks's mother, Geraldine Middlebrooks (left), presents her husband, Raymond Middlebrooks (right), with a birthday present, late 1970s. From the collection of Felicia Middlebrooks] Story_ID: 10875 Speaker 1: Oh I love that picture. Did it have anything on the back of it? Sorry about that. Okay. That's my fault. Birmingham Alabama. Speaker 2: What year? It doesn't say? Speaker 1: No, it doesn't have a year. Speaker 2: (unclear). That's in Bessemer, Alabama. Bessemer was where my paternal grandfather was living. And this picture is at my paternal grandfather's house. But it's with my mom [Geraldine Middlebrooks] and my sisters [Cassandra, Rhonda] and I and her father. And they were all visiting. So that's my sister Rhonda on the left, my grandfather Walter Rembert, my mom standing above him, my little sister Cassandra and myself on the right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: This was a Sunday afternoon I believe. Speaker 1: [Felicia Middlebrooks with her sisters, mother and grandfather, Bessemer, Alabama, early 1960s. From left to right: sister, Rhonda Cast; mother, Geraldine Middlebrooks; (seated) grandfather, Walter Rembert; sister, Cassandra Smith. From the collection of Felicia Middlebrooks] Story_ID: 10876 Speaker 1: That's my sixth birthday party. I think you have a previous picture of that. But this is me actually standing in front of the cake this time. Instead of trying to muscle my way in (laughs). That boy next to me is-Let's see. Matthew on the left and Frankie Martin (laughs). Isn't that funny how when you're a kid everybody has a--I'm sure today he's Frank Martin. And my oldest sister [Rhonda] above me. Speaker 2: [Felicia Middlebrooks and friends at her sixth birthday party, 1963. From left to right: friend, Matthew; sister, Rhonda Cast; Felicia Middlebrooks; friend, Frankie Martin. From the collection of Felicia Middlebrooks] Story_ID: 10877 Speaker 1: That's Big Daddy. We called-that's my father's father. My paternal grandfather. And I told you all the story that he wanted grandsons. And he'd take us with him everywhere in the summers, when we'd go down to visit him. That's in Bessemer, Alabama at his home. He passed in 1985. And we called him Big Daddy. And that's my oldest sister on the left, my younger sister Cassandra standing below my grandfather. His name was--well we called him Big Daddy. But his name is Samuel Raymond Middlebrooks. And that's me on the right. I think he was getting ready to take us somewhere. Because we've got our purses. Speaker 2: Yeah. Okay. Next. Speaker 1: He'd always say, "Come on boys," (laughing). Speaker 2: [Felicia Middlebrooks with her sisters and her paternal grandfather, Bessemer, Alabama, early 1960s. From left to right: sister, Rhonda Cast; (above) grandfather, 'Big Daddy,' Samuel Raymond Middlebrooks; (below) sister, Cassandra Smith; Felicia Middlebrooks. From the collection of Felicia Middlebrooks] Story_ID: 10878 Speaker 1: That's my nurturing mom [Geraldine Middlebrooks] with her three girls [Rhonda Cast, Felicia Middlebrooks, Cassandra Smith]. Look the date is on there. February 1963. See I got good eyes. I could see that in this eye. There you go. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: There you go. Speaker 2: I can't believe (unclear). Speaker 1: (laughs) I didn't even realize they dated pictures back then. Speaker 2: Yeah, they did. Speaker 1: So, that's February of 1963. You can see the sectional covered plastic philodendron crawling the walls. And see we would often help my mom clean and I had long nails, always, had long nails and she would tell me that I could not polish the furniture cause I would scratch her wood. Speaker 2: [Felicia Middlebrooks's mother with her three daughters in the family home, Gary, Indiana, February 1963. From left to right: Felicia Middlebrooks; mother, Geraldine Middlebrooks; sister, Cassandra Smith; and sister, Rhonda Cast. From the collection of Felicia Middlebrooks] Story_ID: 10879 Speaker 1: We were on our way to Sunday school. And I believe I was about twelve. We were the coolest girls. Look at that. Go-go boots. Got fir muffs to warm our hands. Always in style. That was so cool. Speaker 2: [Felicia Middlebrooks and her sisters before Sunday School, Gary, Indiana, early 1960s. From left to right: Felicia Middlebrooks; sister, Rhonda Cast; sister Cassandra Smith. From the collection of Felicia Middlebrooks] Story_ID: 10880 Speaker 1: Steps of the library in Birmingham [Alabama]. Speaker 2: Yep. That's what it is. The front steps of the library in Birmingham. My parents are from Birmingham. They wanted to make sure that we saw, you know, a lot of historical things. And during those times, was when you still had fountains that said, "Colored" on them. You know. And I remember there was a carnival that we passed. And we begged our parents to take us. And they said, "No, you can't go. That's for white children." And I remember my feelings were so hurt. I didn't understand that coming from "up North". They always wanted to take us places and give us culture and, you know, so we could understand the rest of the world. I remember being taken to a Chinese restaurant as a kid trying to learn how to eat with chopsticks. Never made it. Speaker 1: [Felicia Middlebrooks with her mother and sisters on the steps of the library in Birmingham, Alabama, early 1960s. From left to right: mother, Geraldine Middlebrooks; sister, Cassandra Smith; sister, Rhonda Cast; Felicia Middlebrooks. From the collection of Felicia Middlebrooks] Story_ID: 10881 Speaker 1: That's me on a holiday with my mom [Geraldine Middlebrooks]. It must have been Memorial Day or something watching her barbecue. Speaker 2: [Felicia Middlebrooks (front) watches her mother, Geraldine Middlebrooks (behind), barbeque, Gary, Indiana, 1960s. From the collection of Felicia Middlebrooks] Story_ID: 10882 Speaker 1: That was taken in the late 80's [1980s]. Delta Sigma Theta [Sorority, Incorporated]. Some of my sorority sisters at Purdue [University, West Lafayette, Indiana] homecoming. Speaker 2: [Felicia Middlebrooks with her Delta Sigma Theta Sorority, Inc. sisters, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana, late 1980s. From the collection of Felicia Middlebrooks] Story_ID: 10883 Speaker 1: This is my senior high school picture June 1975. I look so serious don't I. I made that dress. I was trying to be a smarty pants. Speaker 2: I've always had a thing with the natural. Speaker 1: Yeah. Oh that was cool then. I got voted--I didn't win first place. But I won second place for best Afro. I know that will sound really crazy to you. Speaker 2: No, not at all. Speaker 1: You know, in high school they had best personality, best couple. And I go to the barbershop with my dad and get, you know, lined up and everything. Speaker 2: That's not a simple dress either. You've got so much (unclear) and everything. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) he noticed that. Speaker 2: It's not like you just (unclear). Speaker 1: Thank you darling! That was a two piece. Speaker 2: (laughing). Speaker 1: And it had a peplum and a long skirt. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: My mom gave me--hey had a sewing machine. One of those old black machines--. (Simultaneously) Sure. Speaker 2: And I inherited that. I mean they gave it to me. And I was trying to help myself--and like my dad, Jane of all trades could do some of everything. Speaker 1: [Felicia Middlebrooks's high school senior portrait, West Side High School, Gary, Indiana, 1975. From the collection of Felicia Middlebrooks] Story_ID: 10884 Speaker 1: My sisters and I got together as a gift to my parents. We went to Olan Mills (laughing). I was about twenty in that picture. Well I had to be older than that. Nicky is about five. That would make me-I had to be about twenty-three in that picture. So on the left is me seated. Above me in the blue dress is my oldest sister Ronda, my baby sister Aniki. That's "A-N-I-K-I" and my younger sister Cassandra in the pink. Speaker 2: [A portrait of Felicia Middlebrooks and her sisters, ca. 1980. From left to right: Felicia Middlebrooks; (below) sister, Aniki Coates; (above) sister, Rhonda Cast; sister, Cassandra Smith. From the collection of Felicia Middlebrooks] Story_ID: 10885 Speaker 1: That's my baby sister. And I put that picture out. Because she got missed in all the ones growing up. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: She was modeling at the time. I just love that picture. Speaker 2: (unclear) modeling. Speaker 1: No, she's married with two kiddies. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: She's skinny enough to continue to model and she's like a size nothing and a half. She's 5'11" a little taller than me. Speaker 2: [Felicia Middlebrooks's youngest sister, Aniki Coates, 1990s. From the collection of Felicia Middlebrooks] Story_ID: 10886 Speaker 1: The top picture is me at Purdue University in [West] Lafayette [Indiana]. And I went back for homecoming. I was twenty-one there. I wish I was as skinny. Man, oh youth! Whoever said youth is wasted on the young, we need to give them a Nobel Prize. Speaker 2: [Felicia Middlebrooks attends Homecoming at Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana, 1978. From the collection of Felicia Middlebrooks] Story_ID: 10887 Speaker 1: That picture is me taking pictures with other contestants at the VFW [Veterans of Foreign Wars] contest called--it was Voice of Democracy contest. And we had to write an essay explaining why we were proud to be an American. And you see I have my medals on my chest 'cause I was like beyond proud. Look at the plaid jacket on that kid. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Isn't that scary? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: And then we had to read them aloud and our families had dinner. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I won twice in two consecutive years. Speaker 2: [Felicia Middlebrooks (second from left) and other contestants at the Voice of Democracy contest, sponsored by the Veterans of Foreign Wars, 1970s. From the collection of Felicia Middlebrooks] Story_ID: 10888 Speaker 1: That's me emceeing the Starlight Foundation Ball. That had to be about '92 [1992]. Speaker 2: You (unclear) in that one. Speaker 1: I'm approximating. Hey now! Alrighty. I was trying to be cute that night in all my glitter. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Of course, it says it's at the Hyatt [hotel, Chicago, Illinois]. So you know that. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: [Felicia Middlebrooks emcees the Starlight Foundation's ball, ca. 1992. From the collection of Felicia Middlebrooks] Story_ID: 10889 Speaker 1: That's the cover of 'N'Digo' [magazine]. That, that was last year. Oh, that came out ok. Speaker 2: [Felicia Middlebrooks on the cover of Chicago, Illinois weekly 'N'Digo,' 2002. From the collection of Felicia Middlebrooks] Story_ID: 10890 Speaker 1: I believe this was 1988. And they were doing--there was some organization doing a feature on women in media. And we were asked to dress fancy in black. And everybody had to come up with some--something that would be fancy, demure, whatever in black. Speaker 2: [Felicia Middlebrooks in a portrait from a feature on women in media, ca. 1988. From the collection of Felicia Middlebrooks]..