 Story_ID: 197149 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe; I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Edgar Carey Lane. Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: My name is Dr. Roland, R-O-L-A-N-D, C. McConnell. Capital M-C small C big C-O-N-N-E-L-L. Speaker 1: Okay what does the C stand for in your mid--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Calhoun. Speaker 1: Calhoun? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: All right. And what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: My date is birth is March 10, 1910. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Amherst, Nova Scotia, Canada. Speaker 1: All right and sir, what is your occupation? Speaker 2: Retired professor, history, Morgan State University [Baltimore, Maryland], professor emeritus. Speaker 1: And what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is the 10th, is June 10, 2004. Speaker 1: All right and where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: You're at my residence, 2406 Congress Avenue, Baltimore, Maryland. Story_ID: 197150 Speaker 1: Okay. Before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask, sort of as a warm up. So the first question is sir, what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: Food? Chicken. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Two colors, red and black. Speaker 1: Okay, if you added green (chuckling) that would make a flag (laughing). Speaker 2: Okay, I'm gonna (unclear) (laughter)-- Speaker 1: All right do you have a--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: [Paul Laurence] Dunbar High School [later Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School, Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Christmastime. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: I don't' now, I did, I don't have a vacation, I have had, you wanna know where? Speaker 1: What was it? Speaker 2: The Caribbean area. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: When things are going fine and everything's all right I may say okay or okie dokie. Speaker 1: Okay, okie dokie (laughter). Speaker 2: Okie dokie (laughter). Speaker 1: All right. Story_ID: 197151 Speaker 1: Now I wanna ask you about your family history and I'm gonna ask you about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Thomas McConnell] side of the family. And let's start with your mother's side. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us first? Speaker 2: My mother, yes. Helen Viola McConnell, or do you want her married name or before she married? Speaker 1: Yeah, both actually. Speaker 2: Helen Viola Halfkenny McConnell. Speaker 1: Can you spell Halfkenny for us? Speaker 2: Yes. Capital H-A-L-F-K-E-N-N-Y. Speaker 1: Okay. That's sort of an unusual name. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: You know the origin of that name? Speaker 2: Somewhat we have traced it as far back as finding it in the, in the records in London, England and sometimes the name appears as Halfpenny, P-E-N-N-Y, and they say of course here in Canada Halfkenny. And my grandfather his name was Samuel Halfkenny, he was a stonemason mainly cultivating and cutting stones to be shipped various places in Nova Scotia and Canada and many of the buildings in Amherst [Canada] today were built by stones that were quarried by my grandfather Sam Halfkenny. Speaker 1: Okay, now what--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Go ahead. We can trace back Sam Halfkenny and the Halfkenny family at least to 1826, maybe even before that, we're still working on that, but 1826 that we're very definitely. Speaker 1: Okay and your, your mother's from Nova Scotia--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Where she was born. Do, do you know her--what is her date of birth, do you know? Speaker 2: It's on that paper, want me to get it or? Speaker 1: No, no, we just keep going. But she was--you were born in 1910. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: She was born what around 1880 or? Speaker 2: Mainly I think in the 1890s. Speaker 1: Eighteen-nineties [1890s]? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: All right, okay. Story_ID: 197152 Speaker 1: What can you tell us about your mother [Helen Halfkenny McConnell] about how she grew up; did she tell you how she grew up and what she did when she was young and--? Speaker 2: She seemed to have a very fine upbringing at home certainly involved in church work and she became, if you will, the clerk of the church where my father [Thomas McConnell] was a minister. And they fell in love and he married her, she was much younger than he was, and he remained in Canada a few more years after the marriage. And they was transferred to stateside, and he came back to this side and had churches in Long Island [New York] in Ohio and mainly West Virginia before he passed. Speaker 1: And your father was an--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: And A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] minister. He had gone to Morris Brown [College, Atlanta, Georgia] and had gone from there to Wilberforce [University, Wilberforce, Ohio] where he'd taken his degree and residence training. Speaker 1: Oh, okay waiting for me. Speaker 2: Pardon me? Speaker 1: You were waiting for me to ask a--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yes. Speaker 1: All right okay. Speaker 2: Okay where you wanna go from here? Speaker 1: So did your mother go to school in Amherst [Canada] and--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yes, yes she went to school in Amherst and the schools were able to teach sometimes what we would call vocational work. How to do hair so forth and so on and she also became interested in music and was playing for a short while some instruments for example the violin I know for a while. And that was about it before she came to this side. Speaker 1: Okay. Are there any stories about any of her ancestors that you, that you remember that's, that's been passed down through the family? Speaker 2: Well the, one story that I remember quite distinctly is that grandmother [Clarinda Halfkenny] used to permit Indians come to her house where they were given food. And they had many incidents where the Indians would taste their food and want to taste the food of the person next to them to see whether it was the same kind of food or not. But there was this relationship with the Indians, a very friendly one that I've heard them talk about from time to time. Speaker 1: Okay, now this is back in the eighteen, early 1800s? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Now what do you know about the origin of--or can you tell us were they a part of black migration to Canada after the Revolutionary War? Speaker 2: I have been unable to establish that, but I think that they were, but as you know there was a migration after the Revolutionary War and then there's one after the War of 1812. And I think they were involved in the first one, but I have not traced to find out definitely. Story_ID: 197153 Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: My father's full name was Reverend Thomas Benjamin McConnell. Speaker 1: Okay, and-- Speaker 2: And he was born in Kingstree, South Carolina. Speaker 1: Oh Kingstree? Speaker 2: Kingstree, right? Speaker 1: How, how do you spell that? Speaker 2: K-I-N-G-S-T-R-E-E, South Carolina. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Kingstree. Speaker 1: What can you tell us about--do you know his birth date? Speaker 2: We have it clear, he was born I think it was 1865, just as the Civil War ended. Speaker 1: Okay. And, now what can you tell us about his upbringing did he, did he talk about how he was brought up and? Speaker 2: I don't have much information on how he was raised; I did get a chance to meet his sisters too in what, in, in New York. And he was responsible for encouraging and helping the people in Canada to come to this side. My grandmother Clarinda Halfkenny came over with the family and they all went to West Virginia, place call Elkins [West Virginia] of, where my father had a church. And they came over and later on left there and came to Washington, D.C. where we all lived. My mother [Helen Halfkenny McConnell] gave idea very quickly to my father that he was doing quite nicely in being received and honored by different groups and whatnot, Masons and Shriners. And his church work was very active and was ready for the newspaper whatnot and have a very I would think fine life that he lived. And then mother told him one day she says, "Now Doc, I wanna tell you, that you're doing very well and I'm very happy for you." She says, "But if we remain here and live your sons are gone end up in coalmining," and there were three of--at that time two sons. And shortly after that, they arranged to move to Washington, D.C. where we were raised and everyone going. Yes I began in the grades in Washington, I think that's fifth, fifth grade and I was the oldest, and my other brother was just beginning school. And then later on the third brother was born in Washington. Speaker 1: Okay. Are there any stories from your father's side of the family that's been passed down through any, any of your relatives or grandparents or you know? Speaker 2: Well, there, there were these stories where he would tell them, so they said about the puncturing of the bear and other such stories that were quite delightful. I know in Elkins mother was very careful to see that we, the two boys particularly worked very hard in school and she gave us extra lessons at home. I remember the spelling bees that we used to have between my brother and myself and other people too, but my brother and myself mainly. And my father had a way of letting if me, I remember count the pennies from church and separate them put them over there so forth and so on. And we had a very delightful time in West Virginia except as I said before, matter of education and the future for the sons, and that was a motivating factor to move. Story_ID: 197154 Speaker 1: How were old were you when you moved from West Virginia? Speaker 2: I was in the fifth grade, my age I don't remember distinctly, but it must've been about I guess maybe twelve possibly; I'll have to go back and check that. Speaker 1: Can you tell what--do you rem--can you tell me what your earliest memory is from childhood. What's your earliest memory? Speaker 2: Well, I have memories they're somewhat faint though of attending school in Long Island [New York] and what would now be an integrated school, I was only black in the school. We were living in Roslyn [New York], Long Island and I was going to this school where I was the only black, I remember that. And the then I remember, I think I never having been able to talk about this you know or perhaps maybe get a truth about it. I know we used to have camp meetings, where we would go out as a church and stay overnight and have the services, and at one such service, I don't know whether in West Virginia or in southern Ohio, we had the Ku Klux Klan [KKK] come out and encircle the campsite. And my father [Thomas McConnell] very bravely went out did whatever he had to do, but nothing happened. Also I remember my father leaving for certain trips where he would go and marry people who were working on the roads, building the roads through West Virginia, and he would marry several couples in this way, besides his other work. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Oh, I, I think also that he had a number of church meetings in other little churches in the vicinity, but his, but his church was the main church, Riverside Methodist Church [ph.]. Speaker 1: Okay, Riverside Methodist Church, okay. Speaker 2: African Methodist [Episcopal, A.M.E.]. Speaker 1: This is in? Speaker 2: In Elkins, West Virginia. Speaker 1: Elkins, West Virginia. Story_ID: 197155 Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of your youth? Speaker 2: Sounds, I remember the ringing of the bells for church of course, I remember the parades in which you had the former soldiers marching. And also a small group of black soldiers out of World War I [WWI], I think, yeah, World War I, I remember the work at the [Paul Laurence] Dunbar High School [later Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School, Washington, D.C.], and other schools that involve the competition between the cadets. Dunbar had a Cadet Corps and I was in that, and I remember that quite distinctly, and of course the sound of the [U.S.] military of which attracted me very, very early. And I remained in, in this military frame of mind until I finished ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corp] at Howard Uni- at Howard University [Washington, D.C.]. Other sounds grew out of the hustle and bustle of the town of Washington, D.C. and the changeover from horse-drawn trucks to I think motorized fire trucks and whatnot. Also the changeover from various vehicles drawn by horses, for example the ice and whatnot, garbage and trash and whatnot, how now they were beginning to change over to vehicles that were now motorized and took care of these kinds of things. The smells were like most smells in some section of the city but on a whole it was very, I think, normal and quite satisfactory. I think the one, only one instance in Washington even, we had to change over, we had a lavatory, a toilet that was in the backyard. And of course this in time we got rid of and got regular plumbing in the house. Speaker 1: Okay, now when was when you got plumbing? Speaker 2: I would say the 1920s, if not earlier, 1920s, sometime in the early '20s [1920s], yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 197156 Speaker 1: How many brothers and sisters did you have--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I had two brothers and one was a lawyer by profession and made some contribution I think in the Brown [v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] decision. He went to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] and they were organizing their strategy and whatnot while he was there and involved--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)So he was there-- Speaker 2: All the students-- Speaker 1: So he was there when [HistoryMaker] Oliver [W.] Hill and-- Speaker 2: Yes, yes he knew them. Speaker 1: And Oscar Robinson-- Speaker 2: Right, right. Now my other brother, younger, he had a job in the, in NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration], in which he was a, I think had to do with cartography and, and administrative planning for the space age, each is deceased though. Speaker 1: Okay what are their names? Speaker 2: One was named Wendell Lavon McConnell, he was the lawyer and the other one was Julian Leo McConnell, he was the NASA person. Story_ID: 197157 Speaker 1: Now what kind of a little boy were you growing up? What did you like to do and--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I very early became interested in history and would make my best grades, my best marks in history. I was so good that when I went to school in Washington [D.C.] from West Virginia, the teacher sent for my mother [Helen Halfkenny McConnell] and she had went to school to see what the problem was. And the teacher explained to her that I was very, very good in history but was very poor in mathematics, and didn't know--did not know my fractions at all. And she said, but I would like to encourage you and I would like to plan to introduce you to a retired teacher who might teach him mathematics, in turn maybe performing certain duties around her house. And sure enough a lady named Miss Martin [ph.] permitted this and I used to clean out her coal stove, her ashes at least once a week. And in turn she taught, taught me basic mathematics, particularly fractions, and I did not, therefore, fail the grade and kept on going. And this also was a very significant aspect of my interest in history which began then and went on. I do recall also doing a project with a friend of mine named--classmate named Carl Shewmee [ph.] on the problem of the transfer of the Acadians from Nova Scotia down to Louisiana. If you remember the story of the Evangeline ['Evangeline, A Tale of Acadie,' Henry Wadsworth Longfellow] and they told about how the war of--the war [French and Indian War] had caused the British defense for the, these Acadians down to Louisiana. Course they're from Los Angeles [California] and so forth, and so I was quite aware of that. Story_ID: 197158 Speaker 1: What was the name of your school, the school that you attended? Speaker 2: [Paul Laurence] Dunbar High School [later, Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School] in Washington D.C., and and then--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: No, grade school, what grade school? So Garnet-Patterson [School, Washington, D.C.] is that what--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh, no, no, no. I, I attended Riverside School [Elkins, West Virginia] I think it was in. Speaker 1: In Elkins [West Virginia]. Speaker 2: Elkins. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Then we went to Washington and I attended the Garnet-Patterson School, Garnet, G-A-R-N-E-T dash, Patterson School. Speaker 1: What was the--did you notice a marked difference between the two schools and or? Speaker 2: You mean West Virginia? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yes, you seemly were required to be more strict or something in the schools in Washington that I found in West Virginia. I didn't seen to have to study as much except when my mother [Helen Halfkenny McConnell] encouraged me to do that's how it would be that in school but the schooling in Washington was superior to that in Elkins, at least for me. Speaker 1: Okay, so you were involved in history early on? Speaker 2: Oh yes. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Did you know the meaning of, of your name Roland when you were in school did you find out--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: No, I found out later on because what had happened in Canada they had recorded my name as Wrolland, W-R-O-L-L-A-N-D and, and when I came to Washington and to the stateside, they said, "That's a very odd name Wrolland, and your name should be Roland, R-O-L-A-N-D" and therefore, I began to drop that and became known as Roland, Roland C. McConnell. Then I found that of course as would, as you were talking that there was a man named Roland who was on in the Knights of the Round Table. Speaker 1: Okay, French knight. Speaker 2: Um-hm, right. Story_ID: 197159 Speaker 1: Who were some of your favorite teachers in school? Speaker 2: My favorite teachers in the grades was Miss Payne [ph.] who was the one introduced me to [Frederick] Douglass, Miss Perry [ph.] who insisted on pronouncing every word that came out of your mouth, and to be very distinct and to take your time and pronounce words proper, properly, Mrs. Perry. And then in high school [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School, later Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School, Washington, D.C.], I had teachers like a Mr. Bassett [ph.] who taught geometry was very good teacher, excellent teacher. And Mr. Saunders [ph.] who taught history and he encouraged me in history quite a bit I made my better grades in history as I said before. And then I had a woman named Simpson [ph.] who was one of the early African American Ph.D.s and who had written a book on Toussaint L'Ouverture I think, and we were learning to read this in French. And then I had a man named Mr. Hill [ph.] who taught me English and (unclear). And I shall not forget Eva Dykes most important because she taught me the evil of being a, what she call me, not a vandal; I'll find the word for you in a minute. But what had happened--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Hooligan maybe? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: A hooligan? Speaker 2: No, I'll tell you in a minute. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: What had happened we were using the book I think it's called the Twelfth Censures, the 'Twelve Centuries of English Prose and Poetry,' [Alphonso Gerald Newcomer] a very thick book quite voluminous and she made an assignment on one of the chapters either Beowulf or [Geoffrey] Chaucer or something for the next day. And I came to school and she called on me and I stood up and I had this page which I read and she took time out to explain to me that I had been guilty of vandalism. That you do not in any way damage books by taking out sheets of paper or parts of them made them up, so on and on. So this was a very good introduction that I received on the way you should regard books and to, and to this day, I'm very careful about books. Our preacher said at one time, he wanted us to outline a certain point in the Bible I said, I'm not gonna outline mine, he said why? I said I'm not gonna desecrate the Bible, I said I'll put in, in my mind where it will be but as far as drawing a line, and I haven't done it yet. My Bible still is clear of underlines and whatnot, but this is very, very important to me and stuck to me all the way down. I also had the experience of trying to be a actor Miss Europe, who was the sister of the Reese Europe who had the--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Oh James Reese [Europe]--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yes, yes. He was her sister, she was a teacher of music at Dunbar and she was giving a play I think annually and the play this year was called 'In Arcadia' and people, students were invited to try out for parts and I tried out. And there I learned very quickly (laughing) that I was not a musician and she let me know quickly that you want to do something else besides try to (laughing) make this play. And I was able to appreciate Miss Reese, Miss Europe, from that time on. Story_ID: 197160 Speaker 1: --Wendell Phillips. So I sometimes felt and thought that he [McConnell's father, Thomas McConnell] was giving, get, giving us these two if you will names for us to think about them historically and do something. Now Wendell [McConnell] went on and took law and as I said before was in the Brown [v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] case and of course I kept on with my history and trying to prove the prejudices in its effect on America and on the black people especially on account of Calhoun. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But that's a theory, I couldn't prove that. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Now--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: So John C. Calhoun was from South Carolina. Speaker 1: That's right, that's right. So I never say Roland Calhoun McConnell, just Roland C. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But, but you ask me, you ask--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Calhoun, right. Speaker 2: John C. Calhoun, I don't think--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: There was a meaner--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: --senator than John C. Calhoun. Speaker 1: That's right, that's right. Speaker 2: That was that guy that beat up Charles Sumner with the cane. Speaker 1: Yeah, Yeah. Speaker 2: Preston Brooks. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: He was really a mean fellow wasn't he?--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Story_ID: 197161 Speaker 1: You attended [Paul Laurence] Dunbar High School [later Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School, Washington, D.C.], right? Speaker 2: Yeah, Washington [D.C.], yeah, right, in Washington, D.C., yeah. Speaker 1: Was it a fairly new high school when you attended it? Because I wanted to--[Paul Laurence] Dunbar died, I think about the year you were born, I believe. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Nineteen eleven [1911] or '12 [1912]. Speaker 2: Dunbar was a modern school, I would say that it equaled a white higher [ph.] school. Now when it was built I'm afraid I can't tell you that, I was there in 19--I finished Dunbar High School in 1927, my four years. I was there from 1923 through '7 [1927], right, for four, five. But when Dunbar was built, I cannot tell you, and they built of course a new Dunbar since then, they have a new Dunbar now. But you have to check it. Speaker 1: Now who was at Dunbar when you were there, are any--were there any teachers--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: The principal was a man named [Walter L.] and he was very stern principal, I can see him now making an announcement in the auditorium for all the students and he would end up by saying something like and if this is not done it will be very embarrassing to you. Or it will be very embarrassing to this school, but more so to you. And that kind of kept us kind of straight. His sister was a woman named Brooks [ph.] and she was outstanding too, and her brother was very active in the ASALH, Association for the Study of African American Life and History [formerly Association for the Study of Negro Life and History (ASNLH)]. As a matter of fact he was the editor for years for the Negro History Bulletin [later Black History Bulletin]. Speaker 1: And her--his name was Brooks? Speaker 2: Brooks, yes, quite a family of scholars in Washington. Speaker 1: And the, the sister is the one that wrote the book on Toussaint L'Ouverture [translation of 'Toussaint L'Ouverture, General en Chef de L'Armee de Saint-Domingue; surnomme le premier des noirs' by Gragnon-Lacoste] is that the one or was that somebody else? Speaker 2: No that, no that was [Georgiana] Simpson, Dr. Simpson. Speaker 1: Oh Simpson, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Another lady too that was very active and helped to develop us quite a bit was a woman named [Anna Julia] Cooper, C-O-O-P-E-R. She was a Latin scholar and after she retired from the public school system she help to found Frelinghuysen University [Washington, D.C.], private school there in Baltimore [Maryland]--in Washington. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Was Coop--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Named, named after [Frederick Theodore] Frelinghuysen the abolitionist. Speaker 1: What was the name, I'm sorry, what was the name? Speaker 2: Her name was Cooper. Speaker 1: And the and the school was? Speaker 2: Frelinghuysen. Speaker 1: Frelinghuysen? Speaker 2: Un-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Un-huh. Speaker 1: Oh an abolitionist named Frelinghuysen. Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: Who else--any of this--would, would we know the names of any of the students that went to school with you in those days? Speaker 2: Well, these students were in attendance the future Robert [C.] Weaver, Dr. Weaver who went on to get his Ph.D. at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. And became I think head of the Department of Economic [sic. U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development]--well today we would call it I think it was a--in the field of economics, I wouldn't probably call, call it that name. Speaker 1: Could it been the [U.S.] Department of Transportation. Speaker 2: Yeah, but he was in--was involved in--anyway Dr. Weaver was one another man was Harold [O.] Lewis who became a teacher at Howard University [Washington, D.C.]. Another person was Willisson [H.] Lofton who became a teacher at Howard University and a lady named, what was her name? She did a book on the Black woman, Sadie Daniels [sic, Dr. Sadie Iola Daniel]; Sadie Daniels who did a book ['Women Builders,' Sadie Iola Daniel] on the Black woman for the Association for the Association for the Study of Afro American Life and History. And these were all people who taught while there, they were classmates or more or less in Dunbar High School at the same that that I was. Story_ID: 197162 Speaker 1: Okay. Now what sort of activities were you involved in in high school [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School, later Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School, Washington, D.C.], did you get involved in extracurricular activities and that sort of thing? Speaker 2: No, and yes. I wanted to be a swimmer and I think was required I don't know and I went down to take swimming and I was making a lot of noise. And I think perhaps maybe the way I should not be acting, so a teacher named Pernahuse [ph.] sent me out. He said, "Don't come back," so I never did learn to swim at Dunbar High School, now I did participate of course in the Cadet Corps which of course I think is ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] nowadays. And for helping myself to get money or needs for lunch and whatnot, I used to clean up the cafeteria, I'd go around and where people had left trays, and plates and whatnot, I would collect them and give them, take them to the kitchen where they were supposed to be taken care of. And for this I would get a meal anything I wanted to eat, so I went through high school for at least two or three years like that. Not that I was (laughter) needed to, because I would've, could've carried lunch but this was a better way. Speaker 1: Okay, all right now did you make good grades in school, did you--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yes, I made pretty good grades, I made pretty good grades on the whole and went back to see Saun- Saunders [ph.], he wondered what I was doing in college [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] and I told him history major. He said that's fine, he said you always were pretty good in history, and yes I made all right. Now, in English, I had another experience, Mr. Hill [ph.] who was teach--a very fine teacher, one time caught me napping, I'd just come from the cafeteria, where I'd eaten this heavy lunch (laughter)and I caught me napping. And he threw an eraser down there (laughter) woke me up, but that was the only time I (laughter) ever had that experience, I stayed awake from, from that time on. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Un-huh. Speaker 1: All right. Now any, any other outstanding experiences from high school now, did, did you swim when you were? Speaker 2: No, I never did learn to swim, I was a member of the (unclear) no, they called the Rex Club, remember the Rex Club? And we carried the young lady to the dance we would have every year, the Rex Club would have a dance, and I was courting, and carried a young lady to that. Incidentally, my experience with long pants comes up (laughter) at that time. I, I had been invited to the dance and took a young lady parents were big shot and whatnot so the next day I didn't get home on time. And my mother [Helen Halfkenny McConnell] wanted to know where I was, what happened, and I told her I had walked the young lady home and talked to her after walking her home. She said, "Where were you talking to her?" I said, "Right there at her gate, I didn't go in the yard but just stopped and talk to her." She said, "She didn't invite you in?" I said, "No," she said, "her parents didn't?" I said, "No," she said, "well now listen you oughtn't to do those kinds of things unless you're invited." And she said, "I'm gonna take your long pants off of you" so I (laughter) the next three days back in short pants, but I finally was able to overcome that and went back into my long pants. But that was interesting though, to have my long pants taken off because I had held this girl up and talking to her after school (laughter). Speaker 1: I don't think--what young people don't understand that tradition probably now--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh no. Speaker 1: 'Cause you didn't get long pants until you got a certain age, right? Speaker 2: That's right, that's right, that's right, it meant a whole lot. Speaker 1: How old were you when you got to wear long pants? Speaker 2: I was in my teens I know, I don't know the exact age, but in my teens. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 197163 Speaker 1: When you were getting ready to graduate [from Paul Laurence Dunbar High School, later Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School, Washington, D.C.] did you know what you wanted to do next, did you--where you wanted to go to school or--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: That was very interesting, my father [Thomas McConnell] died in 1927, and that left mother [Helen Halfkenny McConnell] to make decisions et cetera concerning our education. And she decided that we should all go to college and she also had urged us very strongly--I was the first one to take a pre-med course. Which I tried and did not succeed in, I got knocked out in Science Hall [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]. And then my second brother [Wendell McConnell] came along and she encouraged him go to Howard [University] and become a doctor, you'll enjoy life so forth and so on. And he got knocked out, he ended up in law school and my third brother [Julian McConnell] he was the only one. He was able to go to Science Hall do well in the sciences and he became a major in psychology. And mother was always a little displeased, no, never was as happy as she might've been if she had three doctors or at least maybe some doctors. But I insured her I was gonna do good and she was proud of me, and I made her proud of me because I got my Ph.D. And my other brother he went to law school and he was able to impress her too, but that is of interest of we all ended up other than in medicine. But she would like to have had one of us to at least to take medicine. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 197164 Speaker 1: Now what was Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] like when you got to Howard in, in 1927, right? Speaker 2: Yes. It was a, in my eyes, a great, great school and new experience and we were able to take courses and to have experiences that I hadn't even imagined before. I seen from my major, history and I had some very, very outstanding teachers. If you recall, we had the period of time when [President] Mordecai Johnson was coming into this picture. He was the first African American president that and building up the school he begin inviting outstanding African American Ph.D.s all over the country. So that I had a chance to have a man named Abe Harris [Abram Lincoln Harris] in economics who's very, very good. I had Charles [H.] Wesley, he been there before--he was there before--Charles Wesley headed the Department of History. Harold [O.] Lewis whom he called to teach there and a man named Williams [ph.] in teaching German as well as a dean, what's that dean's name? It was a dean, whose name I forget now who's also a German scholar and I was exposed to these kinds of teachers and they were very, very good. For example, Abe Harris had his, had us reading 'Das Kapital' [Karl Marx] in the German and that was very, very enriching. And Dr. Wesley he had us read several books in historiography that had not been translated from the German whatnot, so I had a very enriching experience. I also had a man named Kelly Miller who was the--an older teacher and would be teaching what now is sociology. He preceded [E. Franklin] Frazier, by that time; he was teaching what might be called in the broad sociology or some aspects of it. And he would bring to class every day at least every week I know, I think every day, the newest releases of the census. And we be go over and study these particularly part that has to do with the African American. And in, in this way I had a very fine exposure to the thinking of men like Kelly Miller and others too. And also I had Hansberry who was teaching his African history and--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: This is William Leo Hansberry? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, right. And who was beginning to find himself and the making of a person and I had him as a teacher also. Speaker 1: Usually one of the first African history professors or African studies--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --teachers. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: In the United States actually. Speaker 2: Oh, yes, yes, yes, yes. Speaker 1: Yeah, Charles Wesley was chairman of the department? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: He went on to become the president of--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Wilberforce [University, Wilberforce, Ohio]. Speaker 1: --Wilberforce. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: He was a partner of Cart, Carter G. Woodson? Speaker 2: Yes, well now Dr. Wesley introduced me to Carter Woodson, one time he told me after graduate class that he said, "McConnell, I want you to see me after class," and I did. He said, "I want you to go down and meet Carter G. Woodson," he said, "I'll arrange and tell him that you're coming down, when can you go?" And of course I was able to arrange to go very soon and I went down and met Carter G. Woodson and we had a nice long chat. And Carter Woodson game me a book which he autographed, and I still have it around here now. It was the outline of the Negro Core [ph.]--a bibliographical piece and from that time on I became concerned and interested in the society [ASNLH, Association for the Study of Negro Life and History formerly, Association for the Study of African American Life and History (ASALH)]. And has remained, remained a member of it ever since becoming, becoming a life member, and coming right down to the present time. Speaker 1: So that's in 19, that's in the '20s [1920s]--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Twenty-seven [1927]. Speaker 1: Twenty-seven [1927]? Speaker 2: Wait let me see. Speaker 1: That was year it started? Speaker 2: No, '27 [1927] about 1930 maybe '31 [1931]. I got my A.M. in '33 [1933]. I guess between about 1930 I would say, roughly speaking. Speaker 1: All right, oh do you have any stories about Carter G. Woodson or Wesley or Harry or the rest of them? Speaker 2: Oh yes, they are very rich in their history, Dr. Wesley encouraged me and Dr. Woodson he was always full of, I would say sense of humor. If you knew how to take him and when you saw him, for example, when I mentioned to him that he was in a wonderful job and I wonder who would fill his shoes. He says I do have a pretty, pretty big foot (laughter) that kind of thing. And Dr. Woodson was very nice and I worked with him and right down to the present time have I kept interest and an association up with the Association for the Study of Afro American Life and History [ASALH]. Story_ID: 197165 Speaker 1: How was your social life on the campus? Did you have a good time at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.]? Speaker 2: Yes, my brother [Wendell McConnell] and I, the second brother and I were given a Model T Ford by our uncle, which we in turn sold and bought a used two-door. No, was it two-door, what you call those kinds of cars? Speaker 1: Sedan or? Speaker 2: No it was, that one seater, you had, you had a Ford one seater there and--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: Not the--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: And you can roll the top back. Speaker 1: A convertible? Speaker 2: Yeah, it was convert--well it wasn't a convertible but--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: It's a Ford? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: It's either Model A or Model T I guess, right? Speaker 2: Well now we had, we had the Model--which one did you crank up? Speaker 1: It's the what? Speaker 2: Which one did you crank? Speaker 1: Crank, oh. Speaker 2: Model A or T? Speaker 1: I think the T. Speaker 2: Okay, well we, then this is a Model A then and so we had a car that we would ride around the campus in and this was more or less attractive to many people. And we were able to have quite a bit of a social life built around that car, we worked in town at night, I ran an elevator. And we had pretty good social life, we--I remember quite distinctly the outstanding dance that we had the first one, every dance I think each year at Howard and we had one and we invited Lunceford, I forget is his last, first name to furnish the music. And--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Jimmie Lunceford. Speaker 2: Jimmie Lunceford, which he did. And the dining room was decorated very beautifully and we went in the hole and we had to go over to see Dean [Lucy Diggs] Slowe and arrange to pay this debt off, I forget how it was paid off. But we were somewhat embarrassed because we spent more money than we should have on this dance. But we had a good time socially at Howard on the whole. Story_ID: 197166 Speaker 1: Now when you were young, did you spend a lot of time in church with your, in your father's [Thomas McConnell] churches? Speaker 2: No I was a member mainly of Metropolitan A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] Church [Washington, D.C.] and that's a large church on M Street near 16th, it's there still now. And it was a church where Frederick Douglass had his funeral and it's a very, it's a very historic church. And we belong there, joined there Metropolitan A.M.E. Church and we were all--my mother's [Helen Halfkenny McConnell] buried from there, yes, yes. Story_ID: 197167 Speaker 1: Now you went to graduate school at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] too, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So you just continued on in the history department--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right, right, right. Speaker 1: Okay. What did you write your thesis on? Speaker 2: I wrote my thesis on the reopening of the African slave trade to America, the U.S.A. What had happened [W.E.B.] Du Bois, he ran his work on the 'Black Reconstruction [in America'], has in there a section on this effort on the part of the South to reopen the slave trade and develop of I think first in the, and I worked on that. Oh by the way, few books, I don't know any books that mention it. But it was very significant because during the [President Abraham] Lincoln administration, a slave trader was hanged and I think his name was Captain [Nathaniel] Gordon, I think. But he was hanged during the Lincoln administration, but no one brings it out. Speaker 1: He was hanged because he was trade--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Probably yeah, piracy, he, he was in violation of closing of the slave trade. The slave trade was officially closed I think, what in 18- I forget the date right now. But it was officially closed and attempts were made some successfully to smuggle slaves in and he was caught smuggling. Speaker 1: Now have you ever heard of The Traveler [sic. The Wanderer], it's a ship that--a slave ship that--it's supposed, some say was the last slave ship that. Speaker 2: I've heard of it but I don't know much about it. Speaker 1: Yeah, but-(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I've heard of it. Speaker 1: Jekyll Island, Georgia. Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I. Speaker 1: Yeah, it's a story about that. Speaker 2: Un-huh. Speaker 1: I don't know the full story but that--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Was supposed to be the last--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Ships brought--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Brought over you know from Africa--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So now, now the slave trade now, it officially--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Was closed. Speaker 1: Closed in, in what year? Speaker 2: I was trying to recall, in early 19th century there, 18-- I, I do forget. Speaker 1: I think it was in 1830s [sic. 1807]. Speaker 2: Yeah in 1830s, in 1830s, right. But as we said before, that there was this attempt to smuggle and smugglers were quite in many cases successful. Yeah the [U.S.] Navy played a very important part in suppressing the slave trade and capturing slave traders who were in violation. Speaker 1: Okay. So your concentration was 19th century then, right, did you really con--did you concentrate on the 19th century when you were--as a historian? Speaker 2: I would--19th century, yes, I think that's a good statement, 19th century mainly. Story_ID: 197168 Speaker 1: Now you went on to earn a Ph.D. at New York University [NYU, New York, New York], right? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Now, tell us about that; why did you choose to go to New York University? Speaker 2: I was teaching at North Carolina and had brought out a little pamphlet while teaching Negro history and the dean saw it and encouraged me. He said would you like to apply for a scholarship, I said yes, and I was able to apply for a scholarship while teaching in North Carolina. And this scholarship with the education board enabled me to go to NYU and finish up. Speaker 1: Were you--what school were you teaching at in North Carolina? Speaker 2: Elizabeth City State Teachers College [later Elizabeth City State University, Elizabeth City, North Carolina], uh-huh. I was revered there for a little short while and left and went into the [National] Archives [later National Archives and Records Administration, NARA, Washington, D.C.] and [U.S.] Armed Services and then out of the Armed Services back to the archives and then from the archives teach, teach over here. Speaker 1: Okay. What did you do in the--this is World War II [WWII], right, you were in the service? Speaker 2: Yes and I wasn't in the service as such it's a long story. I was down at Camp Lee [sic. Fort Lee, Virginia] and when we had the basic training completed, I was asked by the officer who examined me could I see without my eyeglasses. And he found out that I could not, he said you, you'd be a hazard in combat zone and I see here where you were working in the Quartermaster Corps before you came into the [U.S.] Army. He said would you go back into some kind of war-related work if we discharge you, I said yes. So they discharged me honorably and I got a job in the archives where I left--where I worked in the, the records of the Quartermaster Corps. And I stayed there until the war was over and meanwhile I have worked on my Ph.D. and got that in 1945. And came over here to Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland] I think that same year--well 1948 anyway, came, came to Morgan. Speaker 1: And did you teach--when you were working on your, your master's degree, did you teach at Morgan then or did you do any teaching at Morgan in those days? Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: Did you work in the public schools or something or when--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. So okay, so you, you didn't really work at all during the time that you were going to school, graduate school? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Now did you get married around this time or? Speaker 2: Yeah, I got married in, oh boy my first wife [Isabel McConnell], in the 1930s I think it was. And we were married forty-two years and then I; she died--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Did you meet her at Morgan or did you--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I met her at the [U.S.] War Department, Washington [D.C.], War she was working at the Pentagon [Washington, D.C.] and had very important position at the Pentagon. And stayed there until near retirement when she decided to move over here with me and I had bought this land, built this house. And she came over planning to get a job here, but the job here did not pay as much so she kept on commuting until she retired. Story_ID: 197169 Speaker 1: Yeah, I was gonna ask you about the National Archives [later, National Archives and Records Administration, Washington, D.C.], the archive job. Now what did you discover at the archives? Speaker 2: I discovered and wrote about records in the archives that pertain to the African American and there one or two publications around that indicate that the place is just full of original records on and about the African American. All of the personal papers of the soldiers from every war all about the migrations from the South to the North. All about the labor movement in, in the North all about the, even the lynching and so for and so on. There isn't a subject that you can imagine that doesn't have some work in the archives that would of course explain the truth and the foundations and the real history of that event. This is very, very important because many people do not and I insisted that my students become exposed, as much as I possibly could, to the records in the archives. And even today students will come up and tell me I remember working with you and having to go to the archives. But the archives became a byway and a very important path and role to a full and fruitful knowledge of the African American. Speaker 1: So it's sort of fortunate--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: You know assignment for you--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh yes, yes, yes. It was it was. I was in charge of the records of the Quartermaster Corps which was in the [U.S.] War Department, but quite apart from that I had the whole archives to explore, fall back on, and I wrote some pieces on that. Speaker 1: Now the Quartermaster Corps in the [U.S.] Army from what I understand, correct me if I'm wrong, has tra--has been a traditional home of black soldiers. Speaker 2: It may have been. Speaker 1: Because I know my father was in World War II [WWII], he was in the Quartermaster Corps. Speaker 2: Quartermaster Corps. Speaker 1: And quite a few black soldiers, in fact they tried to pigeonhole you in the Quartermaster Corps so you could--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right. --be involved in mess, service and all--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: Yes, yeah, yeah, yes. Speaker 2: --that sort of thing. Speaker 1: Right service, and that's right, you're right about that, right, Quartermaster Corps. Speaker 2: So you're sitting right on top of the--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --records of. Speaker 1: But I of course I was able to use the--all the records of the archives. As a matter of fact, I have one or two pieces of there, over there I think on the records in the archives that pertain to North Carolina that's all black and white. And then records in the archive that pertain to African Americans and publications I found. Speaker 2: So they had the fox in the chicken house--(simultaneous). Speaker 1: That's right (laughter) right, right, right. But although they were back in those days prejudiced, we never did sit down for a meal together just the whites would and the blacks. Yet when it came to the use of the records and whatnot we had full use, right. Speaker 2: Okay. Now so how, how long did you work in the archives? Speaker 1: About three years, three years, three years, and then I left and went to teaching and they wanted me to stay at the archives. They were beginning to open up and I think elevating blacks to new positions, there was a black man in charge of the [Franklin D. Roosevelt] Library [later Franklin D. Roosevelt Presidential Library and Museum] of, [President] Franklin [Delano] Roosevelt in Hyde Park [New York]. And there was another guy at the archives named [Harold T.] Pinkett who was I would think he was next to the head archivist almost, he's way up there. Speaker 2: There been articles--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: About him. Speaker 1: Is that so, yeah. Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Walter Hill [Jr.] showed us--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Oh yes, okay. Speaker 2: That material last summer--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: The article he--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: He's getting you know they, they're trying to write biography of him now and that sort of thing. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, good, good. Back in the old days it was (laughter) different. Yeah we had to overcome. But he and I would have lunch together always, him and I. Story_ID: 197170 Speaker 1: You were teaching school in North Carolina after you left the [National] Archives [later National Archives and Records Administration, Washington, D.C.], you went back to North Carolina to teach? Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: Did you? Speaker 2: After the archives, Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland]. Speaker 1: You back--oh you went to Morgan? Speaker 2: Yeah, and remained there ever since. I have nostalgia, something caused me to just to wanna teach at Morgan I hadn't heard too much about it but something drew me. And I went over to Morgan and became very happy satisfied with my work here, and remained here ever since. Now there's some interesting events, for example, I have been invited to teach at other places but decided I wanted to stay at Morgan, which I did. And help stayed there and help to develop the department to the point now where is now giving a Ph.D. in history. And over the years and you see my work and the work of Quarles and other people too developing at Morgan. It makes you feel very good. Speaker 1: You, you taught with Benjamin Quarles? Speaker 2: Yes, Quarles was there. Speaker 1: Prolific writer. Speaker 2: Yes, great scholar, great scholar. Speaker 1: And what can you tell us about him, you have any personal reflections of him that you can share? Speaker 2: Very outstanding historian and very livable man, a man who spent his lifetime and his career in trying to advance the history of the African American. And I think this is a rather successful all in all, very outstanding, very outstanding indeed. Story_ID: 197171 Speaker 1: When you went to New York University [New York, New York] how did you--when did you decide to go work, work on your Ph.D.? Speaker 2: I had this grant from North Carolina, this financial grant that was given me and I went there. Speaker 1: So did you move to New York [New York] and, and go to school? Speaker 2: For yeah, for a short while, yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Now you studied under Dr.-- Speaker 2: Dr., Dr. Ralph Betts Flanders. Speaker 1: Now what was it like at the university, were there other blacks students there too or? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA CONVERSATION) Speaker 1: We were talking about New York University; I was asking you about the atmosphere there and, were they, were they pretty receptive to you? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, very receptive, yep. Had some outstanding teachers there a man in sociology I'm trying to think of his name, oh. Speaker 1: There are, I know there are quite a few, quite a few Jewish historians in New York that were--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --that, that were trying to get into--they were getting into black history--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh they were? Speaker 1: --slavery Herbert Aptheker--(simultaneous). Speaker 2: Yeah, Aptheker, yeah. Speaker 1: Did you, did you ever meet him? Speaker 2: Yeah, I met him at the archives. Speaker 1: Okay. Aptheker and Ira Berlin, I guess. Speaker 2: Berlin I had met since. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Seem to be a lot, lot of Jewish historians involved in black--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --history. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Do, do you have any idea what--do you have an explanation for that or? Speaker 2: Well it was a very ripe field and of course it gave them an opportunity to establish themselves as scholars and also help the Civil Rights Movement. Speaker 1: Is the--yeah, the idea of working on a Ph.D. to do some, something original that hadn't been worked on before, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And so that's a field really hadn't really only been--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --Touched. Speaker 2: That's, right, that's right, that's right, that's right. Speaker 1: There's a theory--now I know I heard Philip Foner expound this theory that you know the American history up to a certain point was taught principally by and dominated by southern historians and you know, you know [President] Woodrow Wilson (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: The president--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --was a historian. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: And they, they basically told this story of the you know Lost Cause--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: --of the South. Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: Do you have any comments about that? Speaker 2: I think that's--they did the field of history great harm in not presenting it correctly the way it should be. An in trying to always, if you will, show that the [Civil] War is run by the South so forth and so on. And what we have was history distorted; we didn't have any history as such. And we're still trying to make corrections and I think we're making some headway, some progress. We still have to keep our eyes open though and still have to keep on working. Because they are very quick to reverse or change or accept this point of view and so forth and so on. Story_ID: 197172 Speaker 1: As you were changed by the experience at the National Archives [later National Archives and Records Administration, Washington, D.C.], were you changed by the experience at New York University [NYU, New York, New York]? Speaker 2: Not really, maybe by the archives more than anything else. I soon found out that the archives--that there were Ph.D.s a dime a dozen. And not only that though, they were calling each other by their first name, and of course I come on this too. So when I came over to Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland], and begin calling people by their first name, instead of Dr. so and so, Dr. so and so, and they begin now wait a minute now, wait a minute now, wait a minute now, I said what's wrong? And then they begin to explain that I had to work so hard for my doctor's degree that I want to be called Dr. (laughter). So of course I was able to change and make that kind of adjustment, but that, that was of interest to me. The man at NYU, Ralph Betts Flanders, was very interesting in that he knew so much about the history of the black people. And it was he who sent me down to the Afro American library and records and whatnot to use in do my dissertation. He wanted me to know, he says, "Now you ever heard of a man named Murphy and the Afro American newspaper?" I said I heard of the paper, he said, "Well then you haven't heard of the name Murphy?" I said, "No." So he gave me a letter introducing me to the Afro American people and that's where I got my entrance into that very, very valuable and significant family, as far as history is concerned of our group. That was very enriching, very good. Speaker 1: But here before, you, you knew of the paper but--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, but just didn't pay no attention to it. I didn't know anything about the movements and whatnot, what was being planned and what was the ambitions so forth and so on. The Barron case [Barron v. Baltimore, 1833] was on its way up, coming up hadn't come up yet. Speaker 1: So this kind, this sort of changed your--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh yes. Speaker 1: --perspective on. Speaker 2: That's right, that's right, that's right, that's right. Speaker 1: So did--was it surprising to you that other--that, that a white man in New York would think history is being made in Baltimore [Maryland] by black people? Speaker 2: Yes, it was a surprise, yeah, yep, yep. Story_ID: 197173 Speaker 1: My thesis was on the Negro in North Carolina since 19-- I think hundred [1900] to 19-- I think '50 [1950] or 1940, the census years and yes. Speaker 2: Did you write any about Livingstone College [Salisbury, North Carolina] at all? Speaker 1: I included some a section, I think my dissertation I can give you a copy of my abstract. They have a chapter in there on the cultural aspects in North Carolina during this period. And I think Livingstone is mentioned that a great school and still is and it's still going on. But the Trents were very active at that time Bill Trent [William J. Trent] who was part of the New Deal Black Cabinet [Federal Council of Negro Affairs] as they call it under [President Franklin Delano] Roosevelt. Speaker 2: Okay, so, so when you--when did you achieve your Ph.D.? Speaker 1: Nineteen forty-five [1945] and went over to Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland] in '48 [1948]. Oh I yeah, come back. Dr. [Dwight O.W.] Holmes had become the president of Morgan; he succeeded the last white president a man named [John Oakley] Spencer. And Dr. Holmes was trying to attract as Mordecai Johnson done before, all of the able-bodied and minded black Ph.D.s who were getting their degrees and among people invited over, I was invited too. But I did not at that time give it any consideration, because I was very happy in the [National] Archives [later National Archives and Records Administration, Washington, D.C.], and he wrote me again. And once more I decided not to bother with it, so my wife [Isabel McConnell] and I talked about a third time when he invited me. And said we'll put down a figure that we know he cannot match and say we'll come for that, and oddly enough (laughter) the figure was one that he matched. So I came on over to Morgan and remained ever since, and had a very endearing reception and a very endearing career at Morgan, as far as students are concerned, as far as faculty is concerned and whatnot. Speaker 2: Morgan State has--now Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] was always seen as of black educational powerhouse--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: On a level, but Morgan State started to develop a--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: --a reputation--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: That's right, that's right. Speaker 2: And you're a part of this--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yes, yes. Speaker 2: --reputation--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Of Morgan State. Speaker 1: Yes, yes. Speaker 2: Who was some of the other professors on campus that let's see you and Dr. [Benjamin] Quarles and--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Dr. Quarles, [HistoryMaker] Dr. Sandye [Jean] McIntyre [III], Dr. Barbara Gill, Dr. [Ernestine] Walker, Ernestine and I forget his first name, Alexander Walker, among other people. And of course Dr. [Nathan] Carter, his music whatnot came. Speaker 2: Okay so there's a little renaissance going on here. Speaker 1: Yes, yes, yes, precisely. Speaker 2: Dr. [Richard] McKinney ended up there. Speaker 1: Yes, Dr. McKinney, right, right, right. Dr. George Spaulding that was very good to see the, the Department of Chemistry pass from a man who was I think had two degrees in chemistry and science, but not his Ph.D. And they trained a young man named Spaulding to go on and get his Ph.D., which he did at the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. And he came back and became the departmental head, first black Ph.D. at Morgan in chemistry. Others followed in physics, a guy named [HistoryMaker Julius] Taylor and all well, all around. Story_ID: 197174 Speaker 1: You've done some writing yourself, and some interesting writing, and you have one work I know that is singular in the area it covers. And I don't think anybody else covers the area and that's the book you wrote on the black militias--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --in Louisiana. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And tell us a little bit about that, how, how it was conceived and why you took, took it on as a project. Speaker 2: Well the story of the black militia grew out of my interest in the Louisiana historic archives. I found out that you had quite a few records over there on black soldiers and my interest became involved in the Corps d'Afrique and (unclear). And in tracing the Corps d'Afrique, it was--I found out that you had a group of soldiers in the beginning of the French colony which colony was about to be wiped out by the Natchez Indians and the whites appealed and the black volunteered to also help to put down the Natchez Indians. And from this evolved later on the Corps of men of colors they called themselves that came down to the Civil War and participated there in companies. And they did not have always their same officers because of prejudice and whatnot. But as the war went on, you had more blacks coming into the service and these black troops later on were the basis of what was organized as the first Negro soldiers in the United States Army the 9th and 10th Calvary and the 23rd and 24th Regiment. And they came down and they were taken into the service and come down to the present time--well until after I think they came down to the World War II [WWII] I'd say. And then begin to disbanded and become part of the, the larger unit when they, when they begin to integrate. Speaker 1: Okay, so, go ahead, I don't wanna stop you. Speaker 2: Where I was already done. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, I already stopped. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Now those, those were, well those same soldiers at the end of the Civil War were transferred to the West and became very active as the, as the troops that had guarded and help to build the railroads and the transportation to the west. And to protect the people as they were settling, if you will, in various towns and cities along the railroad. Speaker 1: Yeah, the 9th and 10th Calvary? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Right? Speaker 2: Right, and play a part in the Spanish American War. Speaker 1: Yeah. Now you said that their history goes all the way back to--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --Corps D'Afrique and--. Speaker 2: Well even before the---yes. And the Corps D'Afrique goes back even earlier to these few blacks who volunteered to fight the Natchez Indians when the colony was about to be wiped out. Speaker 1: And this in the, in the newly acquired Louisiana--(simultaneous)? Speaker 2: That's right, that's right, that's right. Speaker 1: And this will be around 1800? Speaker 2: Seventeen something. Speaker 1: Seven, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah very early. Story_ID: 197175 Speaker 1: 'Cause I've read that the first black troops that fought the Civil War actually were in Louisiana. But though they weren't official, they were volunteers that came to the aid of [Major General] Benjamin [F.] Butler. Speaker 2: That's right, that's right. Now at first they had offered the services to the Confederate side which had accepted it, but which left them when they marched the white Confederates out toward Shreveport [Louisiana] and left the blacks there. And then blacks went over north themselves as you said with Butler. Speaker 1: Right there was a Captain [Andre] Cailloux or something or Cal--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Cailloux yes, very important, yes. And they fought, you talked before about fighting and they fought there in one battle. Where they were slaughtered was terrible. But the significance was that they died with their heads and face toward the enemy. Speaker 1: They weren't running--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: And no, did not retreat. Speaker 1: I think Captain Cailloux--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Had had an arm blown off. Speaker 2: Yes, that's right, that's right, very important, very important. Speaker 1: This is history that--I think at that time I think it was John C. Fremont was down there--(simultaneous). Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: He was, he, he became a candidate--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --for president. Speaker 2: Yes, that's right, that's right, that's right. Speaker 1: He was advocating the use of black troops. Speaker 2: That's right, that's right, that's right. Speaker 1: [President Abraham] Lincoln would not do it until--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah until, until he had to. But he did come around to it. Speaker 1: Finally had--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: And very, and very important. And I think even today teachers should teach about the significance of the Emancipation Proclamation because that document, if you read it closely authorizes the use of black soldiers very, very important. If that time while they were using the service, but they, there's just not many teachers don't go into it, or point that out. Story_ID: 197176 Speaker 1: You've written about Isaiah Dorman. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: I know he was a black cowboy, right? Speaker 2: Yes, he was a scout for [George Armstrong] Custer and lost his life at the assassination--at the Custer massacre, he lost his life. Speaker 1: That's like 1876, I think. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, that's about right, that's right. Speaker 1: At Little Bighorn [Battle of the Little Bighorn]. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right. Speaker 1: But Dorman was--tell us a little bit about Dorman. Speaker 2: There's not much to be told about him accept he appears in the records, in the [National] Archives [later National Archives and Records Administration, Washington, D.C.] as a casualty and that he was a scout for the 7th Calvary. Try piece and put it together, not much more than that. Speaker 1: Okay, but, but I supposed at the time that you revealed this--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Or it was--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: Would've realized that he, that weren't any black scouts--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh, that's right, that's right, that's right, that's right. Speaker 1: I don't know, I think that you know with the culture, popular culture of western movies--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yes, yeah. Speaker 1: --during the, during the early part of this century--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: By going to the movies on Saturdays and watching westerns--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: No black cowboys--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: No blacks at all. Speaker 1: No blacks at all. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: And then to think that the scout for Custer you know--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right. Speaker 1: Was a black man. Speaker 2: That's right. And now of course they have blacks appearing in the moving pictures but the moving pictures are always aren't as liberal as they should be. They wanna still make you a buffoon or something, yep, yep. Story_ID: 197177 Speaker 1: You've written quite a bit. I don't know is there anything you wanna--else you wanna share with us historically--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: The last one we're gonna talk about is Morgan Park [Baltimore, Maryland] but I didn't want to talk about that--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --until we finish some of the others--(simultaneous). Speaker 2: Okay. I wrote a piece on the African American in colonial Florida and I wrote a piece on the Negroes here in Maryland, a short piece, that came in as a pamphlet. And I wrote a piece on the soldiers of Louisiana from the beginning to the Civil War which appeared in a book on blacks in Louisiana. And a article, an article along with my wife on the period of in a genealogical magazine. And that involves the not only the Civil War but particularly the War of the Revolution [Revolutionary War] and War of 1812. And more important, more significant the use of the musician, the musicians in the war, I did that. Speaker 1: What was the significance of the musicians in the war? Speaker 2: Well the musicians of course were very important in beating out the taps and other signals to operate the army. The charge, retreat and so forth and so on. And this came over from going right back to the beginning of the use of the [U.S.] military and the, the buglers and the drummers back in the colonial period. And they came right down to the present time, and blacks paid a very prominent part, as a matter of fact, they were encouraged more or less to participate as drummer boy or as a bugler in the service. Story_ID: 197178 Speaker 1: You said that one of your favorite periods of history is Reconstruction. Speaker 2: Yes, and the Civil War. Speaker 1: Yeah, why, well why Civil War and Reconstruction? I'm asking this question 'cause I guess I should but--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well the Civil War ended slavery. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And the Reconstruction period having number of outstanding of black congressmen who made contributions and these contributions have been now identified as being, if you will, forward moving ideas about democracy. Back in those days of course that is following Reconstruction; they were not accepted frown upon. And the black congressmen they were condemned and whatnot. And it's very, very unfair and I think that we are now beginning to see a re-recognition of this significance of the black congressmen and really I'm not so sure that I can (laughter) substantiate this but they had what would perhaps be part now of a black cabinet or black, if you will, group of blacks who were trying to look out for the welfare of the race. And I think that ought to be given credit for it, more credit than what have been given. Speaker 1: Okay, so am I getting this, if I'm getting this right here, saying that they had amongst themselves some sort of government of, I mean a second, I mean government for black peep, people you know in a sense of? Speaker 2: Well I don't know if they had a, let me see, I don't know whether they had a group of black congressmen who could be called a black what? Speaker 1: Caucus. Speaker 2: Black caucus or not but I think that, that, that easily could've been developed, but I haven't found any evidence of it actually existing. But I do know though that these congressmen were, in many cases, very well educated and made very significant contributions, and we ought to I think recognize them more. [W.E.B.] Du Bois of course does this in his 'Black Reconstruction [in America'] but in so doing some people condemned when criticizing for being a little bit too socialist Marxist whatnot, but he recognized that. Speaker 1: Yeah, seem like it would be nat- natural development. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: For them--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: To organize themselves. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah it would be, as we see now um-hum. Of course they played a very important part; Charles Sumner helped them in passing the first Civil Rights Act, 1866. And that became a very significant act and remained even with us after the Civil War, and during the time when the other civil rights case was found to be unconstitutional. Story_ID: 197179 Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite historical figure? Speaker 2: That's a hard question to answer; there's several. I certainly do feel that Charles Sumner and Thaddeus Stevens are to be remembered for their significant contributions, and there others. But I point those out, and then I put [President] Abraham Lincoln in as being very important. I still think Abraham Lincoln has to be reexamined and reevaluated and so forth and so on. Those would be my three or four that I think were outstanding, there were others. But these others sometimes who would betray themselves, for example, [President] Theodore Roosevelt who was very you would think pro black. Then he changed, attack them, Brownsville case [Brownsville Affair or Brownsville Raid] was a very bad case. And then there's [President] Woodrow Wilson with all his intelligence and a Ph.D. from Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey] and his training and background, Presbyterian minister's son. But yet he was very biased in his book or history books. And of course people like I forget the name now, but the man who wrote the book on, oh man, who was the basis of 'The Clansmen: [An Historical Romance of the Ku Klux Klan,' Thomas F. Dixon, Jr.] and these other cases. Speaker 1: Thomas Dixon? Speaker 2: Thomas Dixon, people like that, ought to definitely be criticized. And then there was man named, a man who wrote a book based on Thomas Dixon that became accepted as a historian. I think these people ought to be watched very closely and criticized very, very much indeed. Speaker 1: Who are some of the, the black figures from history that you really, that you, that you think have made a most significant contributions? Speaker 2: I think Benjamin Banneker should be remembered, I think, of course, Frederick Douglass, I think Harriet Tubman and the members of the various conferences that were held in the 1830s till the Civil War broke out in various parts of the northern states. You named some of the men who attended and who were very important, I think you named Mayor Delany--Major [Martin] Delany and there were some--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: [Henry Highland] Garnet, I guess. Speaker 2: Garnet, yes and there was a doctor too, [Robert] Purvis, Dr. Purvis, Purvis, um-hm. And then the people of Ohio, the Latimers and so forth and so on. Story_ID: 197180 Speaker 1: Now your latest work I believe is a book on your neighborhood [Morgan Park, Baltimore, Maryland]. Speaker 2: Oh yes. Speaker 1: All right and this is a distinguished neighborhood, can you tell us about this latest work? Speaker 2: This work grew out of the interest people had in the Morgan Park--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: I'm just giving it to you so you can (laughter). Speaker 2: And--(simultaneous--) Speaker 1: Now it's called, the history of? Speaker 2: Morgan Park ['The History of Morgan Park: a Baltimore Neighborhood, 1917-1999,' HistoryMaker Roland McConnell]. Morgan Park is a little community in the northeastern part of Baltimore [Maryland], just behind Morgan State University [Baltimore, Maryland]. Which was founded by the last white president [John Oakley] Spencer, who, who was instrumental in helping to move Morgan from downtown to the present site. And one of the very significant re- reasons was that they would have not only an opportunity for expand and build a great college and university, but they would also be able to attract teachers by having a place for them to live. And the land was acquired and bought and developed and ended up being, if you will, Morgan Park. Quite a bit entered into this while the process was going on. For example, as soon as they bought the land and begin to want to settle it, they were attacked by lawsuits. They had about three lawsuits, they tried to keep the blacks from settling here and particularly of having, if you will, homes of the kind that were described by Spencer. And they won the cases and they begin then to get money, they had fifty thousand dollars from [John D.] Rockefeller which they were able to match, and raise fifty thousand dollars more. And they moved up here where Morgan Park, where Morgan State University is now. Morgan Park developed as the community where the faculty members were going to live, the first faculty member to build a house, was a man named O'Connell, Xavier O'Connell. And not only did he build the house that's located on the corner of, of Montebello [Terrace] and Overland [Avenue] and it's still there. It's a white house trimmed in green and looks pretty good for its time and the period, being built in the 1920s. And this was the first house built by the first faculty member who came to Morgan for this purpose that is to say to offer his life and whatnot, Xavier O'Connell. The other houses were built by the company the Morris Plan Company [ph.] which built houses and shows a picture of a house here, this kind of a house, shingle house. And they were built by the company, that sold them in time to anybody who want to live here and had the money and who qualified by being with the--considered a worthwhile person. And would add to the, if you will, the building and the community, and this has followed ever since. There are about ninety-something houses up here now and these houses were built by, in many case, people who bought their houses already built, or bought the land and had the houses built. This house here, for example, was built likely in '58 [1958] and interesting example of a house where you bought the land and then built, if you will. And they're other houses that are around that more look still like this house somewhat that were built by the company. The Morgan Park Improvement Association became organized and it began to develop programs, plans for the development and future of the park. And that has continued down to the present time, the park is in the place where a number of outstanding people have lived, including [W.E.B.] Du Bois who had his fiftieth wedding anniversary celebrated here. And we have an invitation to that event in the book and also we have other people who built homes here and their children in many cases still live here-- Story_ID: 197181 Speaker 1: There were a number of other outstanding people who lived here [Morgan Park, Baltimore, Maryland] who are worth mentioning. One was a woman named Dr. Carroll [ph.], who was the first black to take a educational degree at the Ph.D. level or doctor of education level from the University of Maryland [College Park, Maryland]. She had gone to Chicago University [sic] beforehand where she had made well and was now, as I said before, a first graduate from the University Maryland at that degree. Another person was Dr. Goff [ph.], who was a psychiatrist and worked not only here at Morgan and the University Maryland but also at Hopkins [Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland] for a while. And of the men we have, we had men like Dr. [W.E.B.] Du Bois who while here was able to enable the listing of all the books and articles that he had published a bibliography of over two hundred pages. And we have other individuals here who you can check and see what they did in making contributions. The park had many outstanding developments; it had a Morgan Park Improvement Association that did a number of things. It helped to develop a annual garden tour when people are encouraged to improve their yards, clean up their yards and whatnot and to have them inspected by a person who is--well versed in agriculture and the developer of plants and trees and whatnot. And it also took part in the helping to develop the community associates, for example, the attempt on what was made to bring a highway all the way from Roland Park down to the block or two above here at Moravia Boulevard. And by working with community centers, community improvement organizations up and down, if you walk across Spring Lane we were able to prevent that. Also in building for the university, we've all--the Morgan Park Improvement Association and the park itself, has always being very helpful in developing programs and activities and the kinds of operations and kinds of needs that the need to be developed to help the community, and that's still going on today. The man next door for example, Mr. Bouzer [ph.] has been very, very active in helping the community to develop and he particularly was instrumental in having a series of walks, a two as a matter of fact. On the right hand side to prevent people having to leave the bridge and cross over and walk toward Hillen Road on the left hand side and then cross back over to the right hand side to get on the right side of the campus. This was eliminated by his persuasion and conference with the president who with him, were able to devise a walk that enables now walking right straight down on the right hand side all the way to Hillen Road. These kinds of things were the kinds of things that were being done, and are still being done, and this book ['The History of Morgan Park: a Baltimore Neighborhood, 1917-1999,' HistoryMaker Roland McConnell] of course records much of that. And it has pictures of the community of outstanding people in the community. Mrs. Allpur [ph.] for example and of course a picture of Morgan Park House. Story_ID: 197182 Speaker 1: In this neighborhood [Morgan Park, Baltimore, Maryland], there are quite a few Murphys who live over here. Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: Afro American Newspaper[s], [HistoryMaker Reverend] Frances Murphy [Draper]--(simultaneous). Speaker 2: Right, right. Dr. Carl Murphy built his house here in 1939 and it is the largest house in the park. It has a number of bay windows and, at the front and has also a name of five elms. Because when he first built here, he planted a tree for each of his daughters who later on of course grew here, went to school and so forth and so on. And the Murphy house is still now occupied by Frances Murphy, she's one of the daughters. A significance, I think, and we haven't gone into it the way we should of the part played by Carl Murphy in not only finding the Afro American newspaper and developing it to the point where it had thousands of subscribers up and down the East Coast. But also significant to me is the fact that roughly was able to send three of his daughters to first-class schools of journalism where they were taught how to operate a newspaper. And I think this being done before the 1940s by a man, a black man particularly is very significant and should be told about, I think, on, on a wider basis. Speaker 1: Particular because they were his daughters--(simultaneous). Speaker 2: That's right too, that's right. Speaker 1: Because they were wo- women. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right all that comes up. Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Dr. Richard [I.] McKinney lives in this neighborhood. Speaker 2: Oh yes, he lives right across the street. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Across the street from--he lives across the street almost from the first house. Speaker 1: Right, from the Murphys. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Well the Murphys' house next to him. Speaker 1: Yeah, next to him. Speaker 2: Is next to him, it's a large house. Speaker 1: This was, this is a very close knit community--(simultaneous). Speaker 2: Yes, very close knit. Speaker 1: So people who live here actually have an association where they sit down and meet--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --about--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh yes, they meet regularly fellow had a meeting last night. If he's--the man next door is the president and they drew up plans for the, the view of the gardens this Saturday and going to have a garden review. Speaker 1: Okay. We noticed when we're coming in here there was one gentleman on a riding mower who seemed to be cutting all the lawns. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: At the same time, he's under contract to cut them all or what? Speaker 2: Well I don't know, sometimes they do have a person in that wise and--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, he was going from lawn to lawn look like. Speaker 2: Okay and he could be on contract. And of course president's house is right located at the corner and his place always kept nice. And incidentally we have each year, a, a, picnic at the president's house in, around Labor Day. And at that time, we not only have food that's served prepared by the various members of the park on a voluntary basis, but also we have a short program in which we'll award scholarship to students who finished high school and who lived in Morgan Park and is sponsored by the income of this book ['The History of Morgan Park: a Baltimore Neighborhood, 1917-1999,' HistoryMaker Roland McConnell]. We do it every year. Story_ID: 197183 Speaker 1: Who were some of your students, at Morgan State [University, Baltimore, Maryland] that you're proud of? Can you remember some of your students when you--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: That's a very (laughter) difficult subject to--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Oh, I don't want to put you on the spot. Speaker 2: I'm, I'm proud of all of them. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Proud of all of them, and there's so many, it's very dangerous of--we had two to go to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], Bishop and [HistoryMaker Robert] Bell, those a chief lawyer, chief judge now of Baltimore [Maryland], oh no, of Maryland. And we also have a man who is the editor of Black Enterprise who's very outstanding. And there's just so very, very many, I just, I just kind--I would like to not to risk that question, there were so very many. Speaker 1: Take you off the hook then. Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: I'll take you off the hook on that. Speaker 2: Yeah, that, that's quite a--because there were so many students who were outstanding, male and female. And you could, you could leave them off, leave then out and would be, it wouldn't be fair. But I taught and was head of the Department [of History] of many, many, many, many, many, many many students who have done well, and of whom we're very proud. Story_ID: 197184 Speaker 1: Now we always ask this question. But what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today? Speaker 2: I would like to hope that the black community can recover and become communities of living well. Righteous programs and desires and worthwhile activities that will help the African American and the younger ones, particularly, to rise. And to get away from being victimized by narcotics and the abuse of other drugs, drugs and the proneness to resort to violence so quickly, I'd like them to get away from that. Now how, I don't know, that's the big question, but we need to rise above this, we need to become, if you will, a better population who would be rid of viciousness and violence and so forth. And would be based mainly on righteousness and better living, proper living be viable, the commandments and so forth and so on. That would be able to really free us and make us a better people, there's so much that we have to do ourselves. We can't depend upon everybody else to do things for us, and I'd like to see them get out of that idea and to actually do things for themselves, and set up programs and techniques and whatnot to accomplish this. Story_ID: 197185 Speaker 1: When you look back on the, on your activities what would you see as your legacy? Speaker 2: Well I've tried to teach African American history to all people, but particularly to my own people, as well as history in general. I'd like to think that I made some impression in that and also in the organizations which I belong to such as the--or what I'd work for. For example, the Maryland Commission of Afro American Life and History [sic. Maryland Commission on African American History and Culture], I help found and develop that. And the various programs at Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland] that I become involved in Phi Alpha Theta and so forth and so on. And the growth of this school as far as the advancement of the degree programs are concerned, the third degree the Ph.D. program is concerned. I'd like to think that all had--I all, that I had a part in the, in the making of those programs, and the bringing into fruition these kinds of plans and whatnot. Story_ID: 197186 Speaker 1: Tell us more about the--I was interested when you talked about the Maryland Commission for African American History [sic. Maryland Commission on African American History and Culture]. Speaker 2: Life and History, right. Speaker 1: Yes, how did that start, what--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: That, that organization was organized under Dr. [Benjamin] Quarles and myself, we made a study of the need and found out there was needed a, an organization that would afford itself to the study of Afro American life and history here in Maryland. And we went before the legislature [General Assembly of Maryland] and got it enacted and it's been going ever since. Its headquarters are in the Banneker-Douglass [Museum] building in Annapolis [Maryland] and it has there quite a collection on African American experience. The organization is still going on and has a, a number of meetings, I think every year conducive to the advancement of African American history and life, State of Maryland. Story_ID: 197187 Speaker 1: Is there any particular subject or area of African American history that you really would like to see students or researchers today, really get into and dig into? Speaker 2: Well I would like to see them get into the [National] Archives [and Records Administration] in (laughter) Washington [D.C.] and dig in there for the real facts concerning the African American experience. I would like to see them participate more in building up these various sites and monuments and other types of organizations that seemly, seemingly now are making money by pointing out that this is the site worthwhile seeing. Even the girls who were killed by bums, even that place now has been set aside in part as a place where this happened and you have to pay money to--well money's being made for these kinds of things. All of the various experiences that we had in so many cases now are being looked upon as being places of great interest and places of income. And some, sometimes I feel that the real reason and the real purpose the real thing is somewhat forgotten and neglected. I'd like to see us recover that. Speaker 1: Okay now what--(simultaneous--) Speaker 2: For example, in, in the case of the Brown [v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] case, right away they have always set aside the Brown school [Monroe Elementary School] as a historical marker and it's going to be, I think, a part of the program of the national historic sites. That's the school in Kansas; Topeka, Kansas. Story_ID: 197188 Speaker 1: What were the courses that you taught at Morgan State [University, Baltimore, Maryland] when you were there? Speaker 2: That's an interesting question. I came in and taught European history and world civilization and then I gradually got into American history. Finally Civil War and Reconstruction and of course African American history. [Benjamin] Quarles was the main man in African American history. But the students were left over who wanted to still take and have African American history and I taught that also at the same time he was without any conflict or problem. Speaker 1: Now did your, did your parents [Helen Halfkenny McConnell and Thomas McConnell] get a chance to see you become a successful teacher and what did they think? Speaker 2: My mother did and she was very happy about that, and others, and other members too of the family. Speaker 1: Is there, is there anything that you would do differently if you could do it again? Speaker 2: No, I don't think so, as far as I know. I think that would be about the same. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 197189 Speaker 1: And one last question. How would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: As one who tried to enlighten people and advance the humanity through history, through my career. And of course this involves my church work which I'm very involved in, formerly being an elder and holding all the offices in the church, and writing the history of the church down to well almost the present time. Speaker 1: Okay, well thank you. Speaker 2: Thank you. Speaker 1: All right. Story_ID: 197190 Speaker 1: First of all, this is your family, right? Speaker 2: Yeah this is my family, and this first picture is Yvonne [ph.] my niece and over here Olga [ph.], and over here my niece. And then there's my aunt, Eleanor Tibbs [ph.], and next to her is Helen [Halfkenny] McConnell, my mother, and next to her is my grandmother, Clarinda Halfkenny and next to her is Faye [ph.]. Speaker 1: Okay, let's go back over here. Speaker 2: Okay. The picture in the back is my niece from Kansas whose name I forget right now. And my wife Isabel [McConnell], her name was Bonnie, yeah Bonnie, first lady, second lady Isabel, third name mine, [HistoryMaker] Roland [McConnell], my brother's next to me in a uniform, I think, and then next to him is our other brother. Speaker 1: What were their names your brothers? Speaker 2: Oh, Wendell [McConnell]. Speaker 1: What's his name? Speaker 2: Wendell and this is Julian [McConnell]. Speaker 1: Okay. That's you and your wife? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: About what year was this taken? Speaker 2: Oh boy. Speaker 1: Dr. McConnell? Speaker 2: Yes, I see now. Speaker 1: About what year was this taken? Speaker 2: I would say 19, when did I, say 1950, I don't that's a good date though. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Could I look on a piece of paper there? Speaker 1: Here? Speaker 2: No, that's another one I think. No, I guess you better go ahead. That was taken--that's my picture and that's my new Pastor, Reverend Haggins, H-A-G-G-I-N-S, of the Trinity Presbyterian Church in Baltimore [Maryland]. Speaker 1: And that's taken this year, right? Speaker 2: That was taken this year, 19, I mean 2004. That's a picture of my reunion of the family in Amherst, Nova Scotia [Canada], and I'm sitting on the left hand side. I can't identify them all from here, it's rather small. That was taken I think in 19--when we were up there, 19 about '89 [1989], I think. Speaker 1: Nineteen ninety [1990]. Speaker 2: Nineteen ninety [1990]? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. Do you want me to--I'm sorry I can't--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: No, it's 1990. Speaker 2: I mean I can't make it out. Speaker 1: Try to tell us who they all are. Speaker 2: Okay, right, okay. Oh that was at Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland]'s commencement, May 19--May the 19, I think 19--(simultaneous). Speaker 1: That's June of 2004. Speaker 2: Oh June 2004? Speaker 1: No May, yeah, May 20 something to June 4th. That's the version (unclear). Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: It says May something of this year? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: May the what (unclear)? Speaker 1: May the 20th through June 4, that's the day the paper (unclear). Speaker 2: And what's the paper, what's the article say? Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: At the top. Speaker 1: Well see the top is just. Speaker 2: Okay. Now that's my wife's family. And that's just one of the reunions. Speaker 1: You're right here. Speaker 2: Right and my first [sic. second] wife is in the front, Catherine [McConnell] and her mother. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Is this the same thing that (unclear)-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: About what year is this one? Speaker 1: Oh boy. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: What year did we give for the? Speaker 2: The other one? Speaker 1: The other picture, we have a reunion every two years. Speaker 2: Oh, I, I don't know, I don't know what year. Speaker 1: Did we give a date for that? Speaker 2: Yeah, we did it was what in the '80s [1980s]? Speaker 1: Okay, we'll make this one. Speaker 2: In the '80s [1980s] too? Speaker 1: Nineteen-ninety [1990]. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. Speaker 1: Okay, can I show you some pictures that you haven't seen or do you think you have enough? Speaker 2: No, we have one more. Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: That's the Benjamin Banneker Center [sic. Banneker-Douglass Museum] in Annapolis [Maryland] and who that caricature is, is that Roland, is that me? I can't make that out. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): I think that's you. For the appreciation for your leadership, scholarship--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Okay. Now when we connect it up I can't go anywhere (unclear). Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Thurgood Marshall and--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: Who are all is--are you, you, you're not here. Speaker 2: No, no, no, I'm not a judge (laughing) Speaker 1: All right. That's the [U.S.] Supreme Court? That's interesting. Speaker 2: There's Marshall there. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's one you won't see anywhere, good to have it in the archives. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Can you describe this, this one for us? Speaker 2: No, other than the fact that I wanted to get Marshall with all the judges and I did that before he died, I don't know what had, I didn't (unclear) there one time. Speaker 1: This is, this is one where (unclear)? Speaker 2: Yeah, and [Benjamin] Ben Quarles. Speaker 1: And who else? Speaker 2: Ben Quarles. Speaker 1: Benjamin Quarles, okay, good. Speaker 2: Oh there was a, I don't think you need it though; it's a certificate not a picture. Speaker 1: Go, go ahead and describe this photo and what the circumstances were and what year of course. Speaker 2: I would say in the 1950s and simply the picture of a meeting. Speaker 1: A meeting did you say? Speaker 2: A meeting of, there's a teacher there, a teacher and these people over here are faculties. Speaker 1: And this is Roland McConnell, right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Just, just say your name into the mic. Speaker 2: Roland McConnell and a teacher, Mrs. Henderson [ph.], Benjamin Quarles, these names I forget. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And Tim Stevens, Tim Stevens [ph.]. That is the picture of Bishop Young [ph.], is the bishop there? Reverend Showell, Dr. McConnell, this is a man that was the [U.S.] Congressman from what, California I forget his name. Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Augustus F. ["Gus"] Hawkins. Speaker 2: Okay, Hawkins, right. Speaker 1: Augustus F. Hawkins. Speaker 2: And this lady over here is. Speaker 1: She's pretty, I know that. Speaker 2: Is that Mrs. Distance [ph.], no, no, Dates? Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Jannette [L.] Dates? Speaker 2: I think. Speaker 1: Oh okay from Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], Mrs. Jannette Dates, yeah okay. Speaker 2: I think. Speaker 1: Is that her? Speaker 2: I think I don't know now. Speaker 1: I never met her in person, I've seen a photo in the office but she wasn't that young when I saw it. Speaker 2: I'm not sure; you better not put that down. Speaker 1: Is that her show, is that her television show? Speaker 2: I don't think so, I don't know. Speaker 1: Okay, yeah that's Augustus F. Hawkins. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Now who are these people? Speaker 2: That's the dean of the College, Dean Delaney [ph.]. Speaker 1: Which one is he? Speaker 2: To the left. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And this is book where I'm exchanging or showing the president. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): This is McConnell? Speaker 2: Um-hm, and this of Dr. Martin Jenkins. Speaker 1: Are you all in the history department here, no? Speaker 2: No, Jenkins of course is head of the whole school, the president. And Delaney is the dean of the College of Liberal Arts. Speaker 1: So is he any relation to the famous Delaneys? Speaker 2: I don't know, I don't know. Speaker 1: What was his first name, do you know? Speaker 2: No, I have to look it up. Martin Jenkins, Roland McConnell, Delaney, Delaney, Delaney. Martin Delaney, I don't know. Dean Delaney, just say. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Dr. McConnell and President Jenkins. Speaker 1: I'm glad you, you remembered those--..