 Story_ID: 69266 Speaker 1: Yes, my name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for the HistoryMakers, our videographer is Scott Stearns, observing is Gilbert Mason, Jr. Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: I'm Gilbert R. Mason, Sr. G-I-L-B-E-R-T, Gilbert, R-for Rutledge, R-U-T-L-E-D-G-E, Mason, M-A-S-O-N. Speaker 1: And what is your date and place of birth? Speaker 2: Beg your pardon? Speaker 1: What is the date of your birth and the place of your birth? Speaker 2: Oh, my birthday is October 7, 1928. Speaker 1: And before we--oh. What is today's date? Speaker 2: What? Speaker 1: What is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is November 11, 2002, my brother's birthday or would have been. Speaker 1: Okay. And where are we at the present time? Where are we right now, where are we? Speaker 2: We're at Ohr-O'Keefe Musuem [of Art] in Biloxi, Mississippi. Story_ID: 69267 Speaker 1: Thank you. Before we get into depth, there are five People Magazine-ish type questions we are always supposed to ask and they just require a brief answer. The first one is what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: My favorite food is a pork chops-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --And collard greens and okra with a little fatback thrown in. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I like pineapple cream pies. Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Yes, blue. Blue is my favorite color. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: No, I don't have a favorite time of the year. I take each time--each part of the--and having lived in Washington, D.C., the winters were very severe and the summers were very hot and muggy, but I enjoyed each season and even Mississippi, it was dry and hot in the summer, but I always had something to do and so I enjoyed the year-round really, so I don't have a favorite season. Speaker 1: Okay. Now do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Yes. I like Nassau [Bahamas] and Hawaii. Speaker 1: Okay. Now-- Speaker 2: In the United States, I like the Washington, D.C., Silver Spring [Maryland], Mulberry, area. Speaker 1: --Okay. Now do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Yes. I always would say and if you give me a chance to think it's, "well now let me see the other end" that'd give you sort of a breather to get your stuff together. Speaker 1: Okay. All right now-- Speaker 2: I also like the one by--in Shakespeare, "If it is done, when it is done, it was will well, it was done quickly." Speaker 1: --Can you say that again, slower for us? Speaker 2: If it is done, when it is done, it'd be well, if it were done quickly. Story_ID: 69268 Speaker 1: Okay. Sir, can you give us the names of your parents and when they were born, and can you spell their names for us? Speaker 2: Give you the names of the what? Speaker 1: Your parents. Speaker 2: My parents, all right. My father was named Willie Atwood Mason, the son of Walter Harrison Mason and Effie Charlotte. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Walter Harrison Mason was the son of Suzanna Mason who was the daughter of Harrison Mason, sometimes called Harrison Mason Bersol(ph). And Effie, Walter's wife was the daughter of Ginny Brown, who--she got to be a Brown after the war was over and her mother who was a slave and had had Ginny was a--married a Reverend Brown. Speaker 1: Now the war you're talking about is the Civil War? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Civil War. See Ginny's father is said to have been white. She looked like--(unclear) name, (unclear) Sandridge(ph). Story_ID: 69269 Speaker 1: On my mother's side, her name was Eileen Jackson Mason, the daughter of Mary William and Kelvin Agustus Jackson. Kelvin's father was Kelvin Agustus Jackson the first and his father is said to have been an Confederate general from the Aberdeen County area. Speaker 2: Do you know what general he was? Speaker 1: Well they said that he was William Wirt Adams, my aunt says this. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And his mother was Eliza, she was a slave, so we don't have a last name for her. But she had two more boys name Charlie and Will and a half-sister named Delia Bell. Delia eventually married a Miller and they settled in the Phoenix area near Yazoo City. Speaker 2: In Mississippi, right? Speaker 1: In Mississippi, yeah. Story_ID: 69270 Speaker 1: My great-great-grandfather has records that he was with the 11th Color Louisiana Infantry during the Civil War. Speaker 2: That's your great-great-grandfather? Speaker 1: My great-great-grandfather, Harrison. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And I had great-great-uncle, Baxter Moton who was with Grant the first time he came to Vicksburg [Mississippi] who married a lady named Martha, whose mother was stolen from Madagascar, Paralie was her name, and she had three girls, one was named Sofie and one was named Elizabeth who was my great-great-grandmother and we're going to her birth--her knee (ph) baby's birthday--102nd birthday on the 25th of November. And the other girl was Martha, who married Baxter Moton. And they also settled in the Phoenix area, Phoenix, Mississippi. Speaker 2: And now you have a--there's a great-great...yeah, great-great gra-- Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA INTERRUPTION) Speaker 2: Yeah, we were talking about your great-great-grandfather-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Harrison Mason. Harrison Mason married Chaney(ph) Giles, G-I-L-E-S, and they have four boys and one girl. Now the second boy was named Henry. Henry married the oldest girl, Trotter girl, and my great--my grandfather married the second girl, Effie. So here's an uncle marrying one sister and a nephew marrying the other. They had one girl, Suzanna Mason who had two boys, Walter and Abraham. And Walter had my father. Story_ID: 69271 Speaker 1: Okay, now. Tell me now you think that Harrison Mason [paternal great-great grandfather] was related to, or came off the plantation of George Mason? Speaker 2: Yeah, we are researching that now through the fork-in-the road information. That's where two streets--roads came together or come together in Vicksburg, which is a place auctioning slaves like the (unclear) in New Orleans [Louisiana]. And the slaves from Virginia and Pennsylvania came down the Washington Road and those from the New Orleans area came up the Liberty Road, these two, Liberty and Washington (unclear) the fork of the road in Vicksburg [Mississippi]. And we had got recent information that that were 33,000 slaves on record who came through the fork-of-the-road and my nephew is heading up that way now to get--have access on website to see if he can get Harrison's--see whether his name is on any of those roads. Story_ID: 69272 Speaker 1: Okay, now do you know what your ancestors did for a living? Speaker 2: Yes. Harrison Mason, my [paternal] great-great-grandfather was a farmer and when the war was over, he signed a slave--former slave owner's contract on August the fifth in 1865, which mean that Bursoll got two years out of him, but in exchange for the corn and clothing and health, he was to work 365 days a year except--364 days except Christmas. But when he had finished laying by, that is, finish the crops, he could hire himself out to any other planter, which he did. And in his will he shows where he bought 360 acres for himself. And he had to hire out all the people in his family, there were twenty-one with extended family. So the slave contract all filed in the Department of Archives in History in Jackson [Mississippi]. He was given, this thing about forty acres and a mule, that was from Thaddeus Stevens, Senator from Pennsylania, but Bursoll did give him a garden patch where he could plant a truck--foods for the family to work his own. So as I said, he was a farmer. And on my mother's side-- Speaker 1: Well, just back to him for a second. He lived to be 98, you said? Speaker 2: --But what? Speaker 1: You said your great-great grandfather lived to be 98? Speaker 2: Was a--he was a farmer. Speaker 1: Yeah, he lived to be 98 years old? Speaker 2: He was 98 years old. Speaker 1: Okay. So he died in 1890, you said before? Speaker 2: Eighteen ninety, in December, 1890. Speaker 1: Okay. Worked a long--hard-working man, I suppose. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 69273 Speaker 1: Okay, go ahead, I'm sorry. Speaker 2: Now, on my mother's [Eileen Jackson Mason] side, the--my great-great-grandfather [William Wirt Adams] was said to have been--he started off as a brigadier general, but at the end of the war, he was a major general in the Confederate States of America Army. He as a--the historians called him a ubiquitous calvaryman, that he was everywhere. As a matter of fact you remember when Grant [General Ulysses S. Grant] first was in Jackson [Mississippi] and he started back towards Vicksburg [Mississippi] to join Jims Johnston, he ran into this calvaryman, and he was delayed and had to go down towards Raymond in order to give--allow Johnston and the other general, Sherman [General William Tecumseh Sherman], to come intercede for him. So and then-- Speaker 1: Now what was this grandfather's name again? What was this name? Speaker 2: William Wirt Adam. And then when Van Doyle was coming down from Grenada and got as far as Yazoo City, there was William Wirt Adams again with his calvary. Camp Van Doren you know is near--somewhere allegedly the slaughter occurred. So he was a--he was a calvaryman and I understand later on a realtor that he had extensive holdings and my second cousin, who was the granddaughter of his brother, his son's brother, said that you know these are slave owners apparently trying to look out for some of their slaves, particularly, when there might have been some blood relations in it. And it is said that he offered money to the black family who lived up by Yazoo City [Mississippi], and he had a white family down in Natchez [Mississippi]. I used to visit the black family up in Yazoo City. My grandfather and my great-grandfather [Kelvin Augustus Jackson I], as I say were farmers. My great-great grandfather was a soldier. Story_ID: 69274 Speaker 1: Okay. Now your--tell me about your father [Willie Atwood Mason]. What did he do for a living and-- Speaker 2: My daddy was-- Speaker 1: --Where was he raised? Speaker 2: --Was born in West Hines County. Speaker 1: Mississippi? Speaker 2: Mississippi. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: All this 360 acres that his grandfather [Harrison Mason] bought was money that he earned in his spare time. He didn't have a spare time, but after he laid by. And he was a barber in Rural Hines County. He went to school called Orange Hill School up to the fourth grade, and he moved to Jackson where my daddy continued to farm his father's [Walter Harrison Mason] farm and then he moved to Jackson [Mississippi] and extended his (unclear) activity, his barber. As a matter of fact he was in three places on Farish Street, one was the first barber shop he worked was 609 North Farish, the second place he barbered was at Connex Barber Shop, and then he moved on towards Alamo Theater near the Collins Funeral Home at 405 North Farris Street, across the street from Home Dining Room. And the last place when they built a new Alamo Theater, he rented a room in the back part or side of the Alamo Theater on Hamilton Street, where he worked until he died. Story_ID: 69275 Speaker 1: Okay. Now what about your mother [Eileen Jackson Mason], tell us about your mother? Speaker 2: Oh, my mother? Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: My mother's and her mother were housewives and her mother [Mary William] farmed with her first husband [Kelvin Augustus Jackson II] and with her second husband, she also farmed. His name was--Her second husband's name Sam Evans. Now her mother was named Elizabeth. She was the daughter of a Paralee who was stolen from Madagascar and brought to America as a slave. Paralee married Winbush, I forget his first name. Speaker 1: How do spell her name? Speaker 2: P-A-R-A-L-E-E. Speaker 1: And let me just say-- Speaker 2: That's a very common name among African American. Speaker 1: --Let me just say this. This is something that I hadn't heard about until maybe a couple of years ago, about black people coming from Madagascar-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: --And there seems to be not that (unclear), you know, in this area. Speaker 2: Yeah. The language is French. And I suppose when they were stealing people from Africa, the east coast and Africa, they got everything that they could in hand to slave holders. Speaker 1: Madagascar (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Anyway, as I say, she had three daughters, Sophie, Elizabeth, my great-great aunt grandmother and Martha who married one of--Baxter Moton, who was a ci--soldier with Grant--the first time Grant [General Ulysses S. Grant] came back towards Vicksburg [Mississippi]. Speaker 1: Yes, sir, but can you tell me about what your mother did, I mean, what was she. She was raised here-- Speaker 2: My mother was raised early in the Yazoo County and she moved onto Hines County-- Speaker 1: Okay. Now-- Speaker 2: --Where she met my father [Willie Atwood Mason]. Story_ID: 69276 Speaker 1: Yes, now do they have a story about how they met? Speaker 2: No. But we had a reunion in Bolton two months ago and everyone said that their mother told them be careful who you married around there, you might be marrying your cousin. But they were not--they were not cousins. She [mother, Eileen Jackson Mason] was a Jackson and he [father, Willie Atwood Mason] was a Mason. Speaker 1: Okay. So when did they meet? How old were they when they met, or do you know? Speaker 2: She was sixteen when they were married and he's six years older than she was. Speaker 1: Okay, so he was twenty-two, I guess, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. So they settled around-- Speaker 2: They stayed in Hines County out on the farm for a while at Orange Hill, that's the name of a locale and a church, which is still standing and it was near a place called Cox's Ferry. Story_ID: 69277 Speaker 1: We visited Cox's Ferry at a family reunion two months ago. Speaker 2: How do you spell Cox's Ferry? Speaker 1: C-O-X, Cox. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. Speaker 1: Ferry, F-E-R-R-Y, yeah. Now my grandmother's [Effie Charlotte] mother was Ginny, she was a Brown afterwards and her father was a white man, Haston(ph) Sanders at Cox's Ferry. So after staying back at Hines County for a while, my father [Willie Atwood Mason] and mother [Eileen Jackson Mason] moved to Jackson [Mississippi] and stayed at 113 Riggins Alley, which is on the corner of Blue and Riggins Alley where I was born. And after one year he decided to try to better himself, and he moved out in West Jackson, seven streets below south of Jackson State [University, Jackson, Mississippi] on--it was called Johnson Street then, but the name was later changed to Booker Street at 1306, this 13 keeps coming up. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: The house cost $1200 and he saved every receipt, stuck it above the fire place, and he saved every receipt that he had paid on that house. It wasn't but $1200 but he paid it out by the time I was--1945, the time that I went to college, he had paid the house off. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So, as I say he was a barber and my mother was a housewife. Story_ID: 69278 Speaker 1: Now can you reflect back on your childhood? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Tell us about some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up on Booker Street in Jackson [Mississippi]? Speaker 2: Well, I don't remember the smells on Riggins Alley, but I remember--I just don't remember, but when we moved out on Booker Street near Jackson State [University, Jackson, Mississippi], it was a new subdivision, and I remember the bricks that were used for foundation was left in the sand and my brother and I used to play pushing the bricks as if they were cars up under the house and around the house and next door the lady had a cow, her name was Mrs. Etta Brown. So we used to call Miss Brown's cow, no reflection on the milk now, but Miss Brown's cow. But she would take the cow down to the woods and tether the cow and let the cow feed and go back in the evening and sometime I would go with her. She never gotten my name right. Until I moved away, I was still Gillip, "Gillip", so that's some of the sound. And I remember the sound when she was chewing, you know she's chewing and put the salt in it and say come butter, come butter, come butter, she had a rhythm to it. And of course I have a distant cousin who lived back of me who had hogs and when he killed hogs, of course, he passed chitlins out and hocks, sidings and shoulders and ham, and my family was counted in that number who got some so I used to smell the chitlin and the ham, the cured ham and the fresh ham. I also remember that one block from my house there was a black florist which was something unheard of back in those days, but he had a full array of flowers as if you wanted to have them even sent off. But I saw these and smelled those. Story_ID: 69279 Speaker 1: And of course we lived near a stream which was a swimming hole. I thought I had learned the mechanism of swim on dry land and then a guy name Hock, my brother was there, threw me in the water, so I took off swimming. I comforted because my brother was an excellent swimmer. Speaker 2: (Unclear) outside of the water-- Speaker 1: So I--I studied the mechanism of swimming. And I believe you can learn the mechanism and then put it into effect when you get in, just like when you hold a dog over a tub of water, he will start moving his legs if you remember that. So I swam and became an excellent swimmer. Some of the sounds, everything in Jackson [Mississippi] was segregated but there was an area about four blocks from my house on the Terry Road, across the street from the Battlefield Park, I used to ask my mama [Eileen Jackson Mason], I said why the guns are pointing west, he said well that's the way--that's the way the union army came from Vicksburg [Mississippi] to Jackson and they had line up to defend Jackson but across the street from Jackson there was a club called As Redwood Inn and they had a little combo every Sunday evening, black man, who played Dixieland jazz and every kind of other kind jazz, so we used to, my brother and I and my friends one street over, we used to go and sit on the hills and listen to them play. Of course we couldn't even go to the window to get food, but we heard the Dixieland Jazz. Those are some of the sights, like I say. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 69280 Speaker 1: Now what kind of a little boy were you when you were coming up, what were you interested in? Speaker 2: If they ever use the term, I would have been probably an attention deficit hyperactive child. I was into everything, good or bad, mostly good, and I was very, I think alert. At least they say I was alert, all my teachers did. And a good deal of my time it was in art. We, where the Masons are endowed with ability to draw. My brother was an excellent artist and Gilbert, Jr. is not too bad a painter. And I carried on and having joined the Boy Scouts at twelve, you had to be twelve years old then to join the Boy Scouts, I kept busy studying architectural, art and botany, zoology, chemistry, and in architecture, I had to learn the orders of architecture and draw and preserve the proportions. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I went to Sunday school, I went Boy Scout meetings, I went to BTU. Speaker 1: That's the Baptist Training Union, right? Speaker 2: It used to be BYPU [Baptist Young Peoples Union], but then they changed to BTU, the Baptist Training Union. Speaker 1: Can we pause right here, we have to change tapes. Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: We have to pause here to change tapes. Story_ID: 69281 Speaker 1: We have to start again. He didn't have the-- Speaker 2: She died in 1925. Speaker 1: This is Harrison Mason, your great-grandfather? Speaker 2: My great-great grand--yeah. Speaker 1: He had one girl? Speaker 2: One girl, four boys. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Suzanna married Nathaniel Mason. Well Nathaniel was raised by Harrison Mason because he was supposed to have been the child of a white woman on a plantation and a slave and they sent her up to Vicksburg [Mississippi] where she had the boy rather than abort. And brought him back to Harrison [Mason] who raised her--raised him. But he met some unforeseen--unfortunate because his death certificate shows that he died at age thirty-four. We don't have a picture of him, but my aunt, my father's [William Atwood Mason] oldest sister who was born in 1902 said he was a handsome, well proportioned, intelligent young man. Well you can look at me and you can see evidence of that. Speaker 1: Yes, sir. Go ahead. Speaker 2: So, Suzanna after Harrison Mason died in 1890, she carried on the farm, the 360 acres, she and her boys and a couple of brothers. One brother left and went up to Northern Mississippi to with the enterprise. And the first Bishop of a Church of God in Christ was named Charles Harrison Mason. So you see we have--we spread out all over the place. Story_ID: 69282 Speaker 1: Now we were talking about your childhood before we-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: --We took the break. So (unclear) little boy (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: The other thing there was, as I say, a new subdivision. The south part of Jackson ended two streets below Booker Street, three, I should say because the next street down was Tops, the next one would be Hare, who was named after a dentist in Jackson, a black dentist. And Dansby who was dean of Jackson State [University, Jackson, Mississippi] for many, many years when it was called Jackson College, before it became a state college. And after you got passed Dansby, you in the county, a rural area. So some of the things that I remember was the hay fields, and there would be hay stacks that my brother and I used to jump up on and slide down. They didn't roll the hay like they do now, they used to put it in haystacks. So we played in the haystacks and jumped off of them, jumped up in em. Also, growing up I had two dogs just about all the time. And our dogs and I used to go walking in the woods or just playing around, laying out in the sun and meditating. Story_ID: 69283 Speaker 1: Also near where we lived, that was a slaughter bin, you know what a slaughter bin is. And they would put some of-- Speaker 2: What is it, because some people watching this is not going to know what a slaughter bin is. What is a slaughter bin? Speaker 1: A slaughter bin is where you methodically slaughter animals, cows, hogs. They act as wholesalers to some of the grocery stores and my dogs and I would go and we'd lay out in the field and these buzzards, the vultures would circle over. I didn't know that I was watching them, but also I know now they were watching me too. Because they would swarm down on carcasses at time, and so I soon got over that though after I realized what was going on. Story_ID: 69284 Speaker 1: Now that part of Mississippi was ideal for studies. When I was working on the Merit Badge of Astronomy, there was a vacant field next door, and I remember my daddy [Willie Atwood Mason] coming out one night and he saw me lying flat on my back looking up. I said well I'm working on the Merit Badge on stars, daddy. He said well that's okay, I just don't want you laying out here letting something happen to you. But you had clear nights. There were not the smog out in that part of Jackson [Mississippi], clear, crisp air. So I'd lay out in the field and watch the stars and name the constellation. Story_ID: 69285 Speaker 1: Now when did you join the Boy Scouts? Speaker 2: When did I join what? Speaker 1: The Boy Scouts? Speaker 2: I joined the Boy Scouts in 1940. I could barely wait till October. So I started meeting with the guys in the troop that I was gon join even though I wasn't a scout. So as soon as I got to be twelve, I joined the Boy Scouts and the following summer, I went to--after May 12, I went to Boy Scout camp and I was a tenderfoot and passed my second class at the camp. It was at that time--it was just (unclear) Jackson got his first two star scouts, black star scouts, Lawrence Jones, he's a professor, and Luther Hill. Luther later on went to the navey and Jones became an artist and with a shop, but they were the first two star scouts in Jackson and I was the second class at that time. By the next summer, I was first class. And two follows went in, Joseph Debrow (ph.) and I became the first two black Eagle Scouts in Jackson, Mississippi and the second two in the whole state. The first black Eagle Scout was Charles Harrison who's from Vicksburg, brother to Dr. Robert Harrison who was the first black named to the Institution of Higher Learning by Governor Waller, William Waller. It had been said that no black boy would ever make Eagle Scout. But they got two. I had some good friends in my troop, but they were not ambitious enough to advance, and we--Joe needed the merit badge in the camping and I needed in camping, and I needed the merit badge in life saving in order to become Eagle. We had already qualified. So Joe and I made a pact, we said we would camp out together, to get our forty days and forty nights, which we did. But then we came up with summer camp again in '43' (1943) and we had held there was not a single black senior life saver in Jackson. So my scout master, Mr. James A. White and Joe's scout master, Mr. George Cypers, got the council, the Jackson area council, to loan us some white senior life savers who came down--see the merit badge said you must prepare for at least a week before taking a test you know. They trained us and we got in condition, and four of the boys were my troop and Joe and I passed the test. That completed our troop camping, and I remember one thing we had to do, we--in the merit badge for camping, you got to make a raft. So Joe and I was trying to find the right type of wood, he said cotton wood and I said dogwood and we ended up using dogwood to make the raft. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We passed the test-- Speaker 1: --Did you-- Speaker 2: --So in July of 1943, we became Mississippi's second black Eagle Scouts. Story_ID: 69286 Speaker 1: Joe wanted to be a professional soldier and I wanted to be a doctor. So he was appointed to West Point [United States Military Academy, West Point, New York], but unfortunately when flying to West Point he was in a decompressed DC3 and start having these pains and well you just about (unclear) what happened. Anyway, since he couldn't go to West Point, he went back to California and got him a PhD in biophysics and worked for a while, taught for a while, now he has a construction company, not just building houses, but building neighborhoods, building cities, in Southern California and in Central America. He is the founder of the Association of Black Constructors, that's where he met Benny Thompson. Incidentally, Benny's aunt married Suzanna's [Mason] other boy. So Benny and I are by marriage--Benny comes from the second district in Mississippi. Story_ID: 69287 Speaker 1: Okay. Tell me about school now-- Speaker 2: School, all right. Speaker 1: --Where did you go to school and how did you like school? Speaker 2: I started at--I started at Premo(ph). This was at the so-called Jim Hill School, period. Named after the first black secretary of state in Mississippi in Reconstruction time. You went to the Premo(ph) and then you--some people had to go to first grade, but I never went to--I went to the Premo and they skipped me from the first grade and I ended up the next year in the second grade. And I found that my brother had paved a way--and the teachers liked fellows and girls who can draw, cause they always want you to draw something. And I--my brother had tipped me off who was tough even though he was six years older then I and who liked for you to draw, so I went in drawing, partner. And I was a good student. I remember I would stay up late at night and one night I was keeping up so much noise he said, Gilbert, you making more noise than a fire engine. I said okay, Dad. We had kerosene lamps, so my study place was at the kitchen table. At any rate it was a piece of cake and I was an outstanding student. I started playing a little basketball at the seventh and eighth and ninth grade, but I didn't know I was nearsighted at that time. Story_ID: 69288 Speaker 1: So Jim Hill [High School, Jackson, Mississippi] was the old school and it housed elementary and the secondary middle school. So the City of Jackson [Mississippi] said we better build another school, another Jim Hill. So two blocks from Jackson State [University, Jackson, Mississippi], they built a new Jim Hill. And I was transferred from the old Jim Hill to the new Jim Hill up the street from Jackson State. They had every--I mean it was a modern school, cafeteria, bathroom, desks, the lighting and heating and plenty room for outdoor activities. So you had a choice in Jackson, if you were in the ninth grade you could stay in Jim Hill or you could go transfer to the one black high school, Lanier High School [Jackson, Mississippi]. So I elected to stay at the new Jim Hill. Story_ID: 69289 Speaker 1: Now who is Jim Hill? Speaker 2: Jim Hill [James Hill] was the first black secretary of state in Mississippi. Speaker 1: Okay. Now who is Lanier? Speaker 2: Lanier was an educator. He was very fair-skinned, but he was an educator. He was like Smith Robertson. Smith Robbertson School where my brother first went to school in Jackson [Mississippi] was named after, also an educator. And it was the very first public school in Mississippi. Smith Robertson, on Bloom-- Speaker 1: The first public school? Speaker 2: The first public school. Speaker 1: Created after reconstruction? Speaker 2: Now close to Smith Robertson was schools in Yazoo County [Mississippi]. Congressman Espis'(ph) grandfather and my great-aunt, Delia Bell, Jackson Middle, Delia Bell's mother was raped by an overseer when she went down to the water to get water for the slaves, he caught her down there and raped her and Delia Bell was blond and blue-eyed as white as a diamond. At any rate, see the secretary of state was Jim Hill, the secretary of education to Mississippi was [Thomas] Cardozo who was also the first black superintendent of education. The lieutenant governor was A.K. Davis [Alexander K. Davis], the governor was appointed, Adelbert Ames, but he got in trouble or embezzlement or whatever, so he had to resign. And people forget the fact that a lieutenant governor, if the governor resigns then the lieutenant governor becomes governor. So really instead of P.B.S. Pinchback being the first black governor, Adele--A.K. Davis was really the first black governor in the south. See everybody says Pinchback was--Pinchback was elected, this fellow was elected as lieutenant governor, but he got in trouble too and had to resign or be impeached. Story_ID: 69290 Speaker 1: Anyway we're back in school. And when I got promoted to the eighth grade the teachers wanted me to skip from the seventh to the ninth, but my daddy [Willie Atwood Mason] said no, you need to stay with your age, in other words stay with your peers. He didn't use the words peers, but he wanted me to stay--well you know those guys who were doing the same thing I was doing you know. So I went on to the ninth grade and stayed at the new Jim Hill [Jim Hill High School, Jackson, Mississippi] before I went to the new--the Lanier High School [Jackson, Mississippi]. All right, we're about 1944 now. So that was the year after we made Eagle Scout cause they didn't have a suitable Boy Scout counselor so the counselors asked Joe Debrow and me to serve as camp directors, which we did but my principal told me say you got so many units there's no point in you coming here and going to the 11th grade. I said well I want to go to Boy Scout Camp. He said well you go to Boy Scout Camp and when you come out of Boy Scout Camp, come onto summer school. And he said I'm going to make an exception. They usually--Jim Lanier wouldn't let you take physics and chemistry together. So they let me have physics and chemistry together that summer, and second year algebra. So I went from the tenth grade to the twelfth grade. Story_ID: 69291 Speaker 1: The other thing I wanted to say this is behalf of the teachers in public school and at Jackson College, before I got chemistry at Lanier [Lanier High School, Jackson, Mississippi] the professor of chemistry Mr. Price, at Jackson College, taught me chemistry in the evening. I'd leave Jim Hill [High School, Jackson, Mississippi] and go by Jackson College [Jackson, Mississippi], meanwhile I was working on merit badges zoology, I'd go by in the evening (unclear) one of the teachers in biology would take time and wait to teach me and when I worked on botany, this professor of Botany would come out on Jackson and we'd take field trips. So there was a time I could name every plant by its Latin name. You know I had a fresh mind, wasn't much on my mind so I could put a lot of stuff on it. So you know on manual arts the professor would come out and teach me manual arts, shop, in other words, J.Y. Woodard. He just happened to be an Alpha [member of Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity]. He didn't know what I was going to be. So in the meantime, the principal says graduation has come, but we don't have a seal for Lanier High School and it was founded in 1925 and they didn't have a seal. So on the diploma they would put the seal of the State of Mississippi. So I said let me put my mind to this. So if you look at the diploma now, I designed that and drew the seal and my professor, I.S. Saunders, he was exuberant. And the superintendent, Kirby Walker, said this boy has potential. I said, yeah, I want to be a doctor I don't want to be an artist. So those are landmark things. Story_ID: 69292 Speaker 1: My brother was a great football player, four letter man, played end. Speaker 2: He's your older brother or younger brother? Speaker 1: Yeah, the only brother I have. Speaker 2: Yeah, alright. Speaker 1: I played end too but I played loose end. Speaker 2: Meaning that you didn't, you weren't-- Speaker 1: Well, recently you saw a special, the life and death of Jim Crow? And one person they talk about was Grand Master Dobbs [John Wesley Dobbs, Grand Master of Prince Hall Masons] and in one of the pictures where he had Grand Master Dobbs standing, the young man in front of him was Ben Allen Blackburn, who married Dobbs' oldest daughter and to his right was Millicent, she's a Jordan now, but she--she married a fellow named Jordan who was late coming to Tennessee State [University, Nashville Mississippi]. He was in the war. But he finally got in Meharry [Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee], and then on his left side was a knee baby as they--as we call it named Mattie Wildom. Geechie, she was a soprano. And to her left was June, the baby girl, I don't know what June did. But you see how that black life intermingles. Now here's Ben Allen Blackburn who was my coach in high school and taught physical education, and we come up here, I had no idea that he was active in civil rights with his father-in-law, but my line coach was John Bates, graduated from West Virginia State who married Gladys Noble who filed a lawsuit through NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] in the '40s' (1940s) to equalize pay for black teachers and white teachers. They had a hard time, but they got equal pay. I remember when teachers in Mississippi were getting forty dollars a month. Speaker 2: This was in the-- Speaker 1: --Yeah, but they got it equalized cause they had a hard time, you know. Even the superintendent, but they were fairly independent people, ended up here on a (unclear). Gladys was a Nobel and as you know Edmond Noel was one-time Governor, State of Mississippi. But they moved--it got so tough, they moved to Denver. She was a graduate of Alcorn and he was a graduate of West Virginia State. And she had a brother A.J., Jr. who went to Alcorn, pre-dental course and went to Meharry and got his dental degree. John C. was the baby, we started school together. Story_ID: 69293 Speaker 1: --Now you went school-- Speaker 2: But when I went from tenth to twelfth, I left a lot of my classmates. Speaker 1: --Sir, you played football and went to school with Lerone Bennett [HM], I believe? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Tell us about that? Speaker 2: Bennett was a good quarterback and he was a smart guy. He wanted to be an author or writer all of his life. So when he was in high school he used to throw papers for the Jackson Advocates. The editor was Percy Greene. I'm gon leave that alone. Anyway Lerone was editor and chief of the Maroon and White, our school paper. I happened to be the artist for--I was art editor. I did the calligraphy for--at any rate Bennett got a Pepsi Cola Scholarship to Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] and I got the W. H. Lanier Scholarship to Tennessee State [University, Nashville, Tennessee] it's just mine just paid for books, but his Pepsi Cola Scholarship was sort of like a Merit Scholarship. Speaker 1: Okay. So it was a national-- Speaker 2: I guess you know he was the classmate in college with Martin Luther King [Jr.]. Story_ID: 69294 Speaker 1: So we had to use second hand Bunsen burners, second-hand flask and (unclear) and second-class tables that were handed down from the white schools, Central High [Jackson, Mississippi], and we had to use the towels that they had used and jerseys and helmets and shoes. We got to be experts on putting cleats in and reconditioning shoes. Speaker 2: --Because when cleats would wear out you just have to buy other cleats and screw them on? Speaker 1: Yeah, but we had to screw them on tight. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But we made the most of it. Story_ID: 69295 Speaker 1: Okay, now tell me about Tennessee State [University, Nashville, Tennessee]? Speaker 2: First of all I had always wanted to go to Howard University [Washington, D.C.]. So I wrote for a booklet at Howard and they sent it back, it was $750 a year. See I had, on my daddy's [Willie Atwood Mason] side, my daddy's mother, Effie [Effie Charlotte], had a brother name Stance. We called him Stance the one, who went to this one-room school, Orange Hill out at Bolton, Mississippi to the fifth grade, went to Tougaloo [Tougaloo College, Tougaloo, Mississippi]. Tougaloo had a prep school then and in 1909, he got a BA [bachelor of arts] and then he got to Washington, D.C. where Ginny [Brown] was and the baby boy and then went on to Howard University and got a law degree in 1912, practiced law and then real estate, so sometimes adversity calls forth the better part of you. So the-- Speaker 1: So you're at Tennessee State? Speaker 2: I was at Tennessee State. Speaker 1: Now (unclear)-- Speaker 2: So I wanted to go to Howard. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: But I thought $750 was just too much. So I said, I had a professor who taught accounting who graduated from Tennessee State, he was a Sigma, but that's all right. So I said, man, I said I needed a catalogue from Tennessee State and they sent me then. And I wrote Tennessee State or he called em and they sent me one and they had an excellent curriculum so my principal was an Alpha, says you can get preparation for pre-med at Tennessee State as well as Howard. I said but it's kind of late, so the same man who called to get my bulletin called the president who was from Kenton, Mississippi, W.H. Davis, said that--he said I think you could use this young man, he shows promise. So they sent me the application, I mailed it back to them the next day and they said come on, it's $328 a quarter. You see if you add it up it still was more than Howard. Well it was--it was just a little bit more. So I went on to Tennessee State and I'm glad I did. Story_ID: 69296 Speaker 1: Okay, go ahead, at Tennessee State. Speaker 2: Okay. Every summer I went to Chicago [Illinois] to earn money to go back to Tennessee State [University, Nashville, Tennessee]. So after my freshman year, I started working in the cafeteria, start taking up cleaning in the dormitory and start doing research for the New York Research Foundation. So-- Speaker 1: Now what was the New York Research Foundation--? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: --What was that? What was the New York Research Foundation? Speaker 2: It's a firm that sponsored research of use and development of new chemicals. And they use our project--Dr. Hill was a key teens, these are unsaturated adult triple bond instead of double bond C with each other. I had mercaptopurine which eventually became the drug you use in urinary tract infection that turn your urine red. And one other part was the TV--Tennessee Valley Authority on development of ways to preserve fruits. That was a Doris Simmons project okay. Story_ID: 69297 Speaker 1: So I made good grades. The first quarter I think I had three "As" and two "Bs", the second quarter I had all "As" and they said that that was the first time that had happened with a male student in twenty-five years. Eventually I was on the swimming team, my freshman year, but I couldn't go the second time because I had quantitative analysis. So I was on the swimming team one year and I finished with honors. I had applied to Meharry [Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] and Howard [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.] my junior, but they wouldn't take anymore junior year. So I graduated with honors in 1949 and I had applied to Howard University Med School, Howard University Dental School and Meharry Medical School. Then I went to Washington--well, the important thing is I met my wife at Tennessee. She was a freshman pre-social work, majored in psychology. So I never forgot her and she transferred to Howard her sophomore year because Howard's curriculum was stronger than Tennessee State in pre-social work. So that fitted me just right, she was up there and I'd been admitted to the dental school and had been admitted to Meharry so I--naturally I chose Howard for med school, so then I was admitted to med school. So I had to call Meharry and tell them I wasn't coming. And my deposit for dental school with on. I was an honor student at Howard University too. I finished in the top thirteen of--and I worked at the post office at Howard at Christmas and early part of summer I worked for the Bureau of Census every summer beginning in '49' (1949), and I worked at the hotels washing dishes my freshman year, twenty-six dollars a week and two meals. I worked at the (unclear) Smith, which is two blocks from the white house and then I started working at the showroom which still exists. Then my senior year when my wife was carrying Dr. Junior, I started to work at the St. Elizabeth Hospital, the federal hospital. The pay was better and experience was good. But after I found that even in mental illness racial--racism exist because there was some mentally ill patients who just wouldn't believe that I was a doctor or going to be one. But we got along well. Then Gilbert, Jr. was born and I used to study, have him on my chest and I put my book on back of him. So we went through medical school together. Story_ID: 69298 Speaker 1: He was right there when you studied? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: He was right there with you as you studied? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I finished in June of '54' (1954) and I got an internship at Homer G. Phillips Hospital [St. Louis, Missouri], which was a city hospital. They say if you make it to Homer G., you gonna make it. I got a (unclear) last week from a nurse who was on pediatrics when I was there to let me know they're gonna open Homer Phillips again as a modified nursing home where you have your own suite. I hope they can make it. So St. Louis [Missouri] was segregated like Mississippi. However I had some aggressive professor, for example Barnes Hospital, was--there were no black doctors there. But I had an aggressive ophthalmologist teacher and when he went to continue an education, he would take his interns and his residents. First place I ever--first time I ever had escargot. So Professor Venerable [ph.] and I would take us but there were certain hotels that wouldn't let Indians, black folks and poor white folks attend. The Chase was one and the Park Plaza was the other. So they wouldn't let the Jews come, so the Jews got together and bought the Park Plaza and The Chase; we started going then. So I jumped out of the frying pan as the St. Louis to come back to Mississippi. Story_ID: 69299 Speaker 1: And it was just as segregated when I came back in '55' (1955) as it was when I left in '45' (1945). And I made application to what was called the New Biloxi Hospital [currently Biloxi Regional Medical Center, Biloxi, Mississippi]. No black had ever had full privileges. There was a lady doctor here who had courtesy staff membership but she couldn't actually have a membership. But I was allowed to do whatever I was big enough to do. And at Phillips [Homer G. Phillips Hospital, St. Louis, Missouri] you learn to do a whole lot of things you guess you big enough to do. So I wired teeth, I set fractures, I operated for ectopic pregnancies and (unclear), I treated most of the medical problems, but I couldn't join the Coast County Medical Society which is white. Speaker 2: Now, what was that again, the- what county? Speaker 1: Huh? Speaker 2: What's the name of the county? Speaker 1: The what? Speaker 2: The county? Speaker 1: Coast County's Medical Society. Speaker 2: You said it so fast, I'm sorry. Speaker 1: Yeah, the Coast County. As a matter of fact, women, white or black, could not join the Coast County. So I applied and to the Mississippi State and then in 1963, Dr. Robert Smith of Jackson [Mississippi] picketed the AMA [American Medical Association] National Hotels in Atlanta [Georgia], and he had applied to Jackson and he and Dr. A.B. Britton. So unknown to me Dr. Love on the Gulf Coast had applied. So the other fellow didn't want to be embarrassed by going to meetings because they wouldn't seat you, but it didn't embarrass me, so I went anyway, if they had a meeting, I went. And one I went to where they served the dinner, you know then they continued education and the speaker says I'm not gon speak to an integrated audience as long as he's in here. Then five white doctors said if he can't stay we're not going to stay and they walked out. Dr. Frank Grish, Dr. Martinellis, he's a radiologist, Dr. Charles Floyd, surgeon, and I know I was going to leave somebody out. But anyway in 1966, that was after that letter, Dr. Love, Modest Love, he's an elderly and I were admitted to the Coast County's Medical Society. That mean we were admitted then to the Mississippi State [Medical Association]. In the meantime, since we couldn't join the Coast Counties we supported a black organization of physician, dentists and pharmacists from Florida, Alabama and Mississippi, called it Gulf Coast Medical Association of which I became secretary eventually. But we had some good scientific programs because we had some board certified surgeons and one or two certified interns in the hospital. I didn't get--I wasn't bothered with segregation except I had only one nurse that I know who--who didn't want to take orders from me, but all the nurses didn't seem to make any difference. Story_ID: 69300 Speaker 1: Now tell me this. This is a question I have. Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: This is a question I have that comes to mind I think other people might have the same question? Speaker 2: What? Speaker 1: When you came back to Mississippi-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --And experienced all this segregation and racial prejudice, did you ever think about migrating to the north or going someplace else? Speaker 2: I sure did. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: As a matter of I applied for reciprocity for Ohio and well I took Junior [Gilbert Mason, Jr.] and my wife we went up to the Elyria-Lorain [Ohio] area, that's where I would have located. Speaker 1: Up near Cleveland [Ohio], yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. But the challenge was well this is my home, and I said we gonna go back home, you know. So I maintained my reciprocity with Ohio up until about three years ago. And that was a bit hard at the time and there re-registration fee was pretty steep. At any rate, yes, I was prepared to go to Ohio and I had a classmate who wanted me to come to Barberton [Ohio]. And there were two physicians from Elyria and one was name Bristol, first name, last name was Miles like the--just like the drug company, and he called and set me up at Sandusky [Ohio] for a physician who was practicing from a wheel chair with Parkinson (unclear). He said, you come up here we guarantee you seventy-five thousand dollars the first year. I said yeah, but in Mississippi, I can't get seventy-five thousand dollars, but my family's there, we got roots. And when I came back there was a seventy-seven year old doctor there. He said you gon stay, I said yeah. I said I'm gon stay and I'm gon help desegregate the school. He said when do you think this gon take place, I said seven years from now. So Gilbert Junior-- Speaker 1: This is what year? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: Oh, I'm sorry, what year was this? Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-five [1955]. Speaker 1: Okay, so you predicted then that you could desegregate it in seven years? Speaker 2: I said--he said you gon leave if you don't desegregate it? I said, no. He said well you might as well leave though, cause it ain't gon happen. Anyway we started to petition the school board beginning in 1959. We petitioned them in writing, by telegram and by first-hand eye-to-eye, eye-to-eye confrontation. Story_ID: 69301 Speaker 1: Now, were you involved with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] at that time? Speaker 2: I belonged to the Gulf Port branch, we didn't have a Biloxi [Mississippi] branch. Speaker 1: Okay. So when did you join the NAACP down here? Speaker 2: In 1955. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-five. So we started petitioning them in '59' (1959) though. So at the same time Medgar Evers start petitioning the Jackson School and Winson Hudson petition in Leake County and then the courts, since then, we decided we better file, so we filed a suit and the federal courts conjoined, consolidated the three locations. But Biloxi goes to school in August so we went to school before anyone else in Mississippi. And there was no problem. It was so-called freedom of choice one grade at a time the first year. The second year you supposed to do one grade from the bottom and one grade from the top, so the second year it was the first grade and the twelfth grade. We had some--I remember once my wife went up to pick Gilbert Junior up and you would think that somebody was coming up with the plague or the anthrax. People started jumping in the cars, the teachers and other parents getting out of the way, Mrs. Mason done come up here, cause she conducted herself well. At any rate-- Speaker 1: Now that was a-- Speaker 2: --They were just afraid of her. Speaker 1: (Unclear). Story_ID: 69302 Speaker 1: Now what--is there something different about the Gulf than the rest of Mississippi because I don't think that happens in another State? Speaker 2: Yes. It was not as different as I thought it was compared--you know I thought it was a very soporific, quiet and peaceful on the Gulf Coast. But now in '61' (1961) we're trying to desegregate, and we are aware now that we can't use the sand beach, so in May of '59' (1959), Gilbert Junior, three of my neighbors and one graduate recently from Xavier University [Cincinnati, Ohio] and the three children's father and two of my Boy Scouts. I'd been thinking about going because people had been going there from the VA and Gulf Port so this Thursday evening I said we would get out of school and the two Boy Scouts said wait until we get out of school in which we did. And Murray said he had to go in Orleans and pick up something, so when he got back we went on down to the beach. And by--an automobile accident happened and brought the police to the scene and they walked out there and said ya'll can't swim out here. I said why not, he said because it's private property. I said it can't be private property with all this sand and waste can and county equipment. At any rate he said if you come down to police headquarter, we'll tell you, we'll show it to you on the books. So I went and the chief of police just cursed me--well you come back tomorrow and the Mayor will show you on to the books. So we went back the next day, Murray and I, the young man from Xavier, and got cursed out again. He said you go back down there we gonna--you trying to get that NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] down here, that's what you trying to do. You go back down again we gon leave you down there, it's gon be some of your own people. At any rate the president of Gulf Port branch [NAACP] was a Dr. Dunn, and I asked him, I said, do you have a local attorney down here that we might be able to do some research. He said yeah and he introduced me to Knox Walker a white attorney. And Knox went back to the Board of Supervisors' minutes to 1922, and we got minutes of every meeting they had. And I took his research and sent it up to the dean of the law school at Howard University [Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 1: Who was that dean? Speaker 2: At that time Hamilton Houston, Charles Hamilton Houston. Speaker 1: Charles Houston, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, he was the dean then but I had met the secretary, James Nabrit, when I was getting into medical school. So by this time he was passing out and Nabrit became dean of the law school. And he says I'm going to be in Louisiana in November. In the meantime we's tried to negotiate with the supervisor and chief of police and they weren't having nothing. So I drafted a resolution petitioning them to keep the hoodlums from bothering us, that didn't do any good. Matter of fact the president of the board says there could be bloodshed if you go back down there. I said, yeah, white folks bleed too. At any rate we didn't get anywhere. So I met with Dean Nabrit [James M. Nabrit] over in Louisiana and I had drawn a red line where the sand beach was, twenty-six miles. He said well the information you sent me there's no reason why black folks can't go down on the beach. And that's all I wanted to hear. Story_ID: 69303 Speaker 1: So we formed an organization called the Gulf Coast Civic Action Committee because the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] was--we didn't have one and it looked like Gulf Port had a lot of inertia. At any rate we drew all the communities together and we decided that on Easter Sunday, 1960, we would all go in Biloxi [Mississippi], go in Gulf Port [Mississippi], Long Beach [Mississippi], all the cities along the coast. And just so happen on April 17th the only person who showed up at Biloxi was me, was I, I guess that's the question. Speaker 2: What happened to the rest of them? Speaker 1: Huh? Speaker 2: What happened to the rest of them? Speaker 1: Do what? Speaker 2: What happened to the rest of the people? Speaker 1: I don't know. Dr. Dunn and his family went in Gulf Port and they were asked off, but I was arrested off. I was the only ever one arrested. And the next day the students from the black high school were knocking on my office door. Said doctor if you organize us we'll go back next Sunday. In the meantime my trial was set for Wednesday and you would have been proud of the support we had from black folks, some white folks too. Whites were on one side, blacks were on the other, but the black folks filled that courthouse up. And the judge was smart enough to say I'll take this case under advisement. Story_ID: 69304 Speaker 1: So the students, I organized them and the next Sunday, April the 24th, we called it bloody Sunday. They were waiting for us. They got ready too, with pipes and chains and baseball bats and cue sticks. So when we went down there, they had walkie talkies. We organized it at my office and we left from there. Anyway they were waiting for us. Now we thought the sheriff, we helped to elect him, was going protect us. And they the guys stand up there with their hands on their hips. And they met us with baseball bats and what have you. I wasn't supposed to drive my car down there, but I had drove it, and there were two young men, Gilmore Fielder and Joe Lundburger, they had 'em down on neutral ground beating them up and had cue sticks, so I jumped out of the car and took the cue stick from 'em and I beat one with the cue sticks and the other one grabbed me and I bit him. I said Lord, I'm glad it wasn't much AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] back in those days. So some of us--the undertaker whose place we have went to another section of the beach and they were beating him up so bad and Mrs. McDaniels fell across him and said "Please don't kill my husband." And big mama who's married to the barber, she's about 300 pounds, she said "You want to beat on somebody, beat on me." At any rate the future undertaker, Galloway, they broke his knees by hitting him across the knees with the cue sticks. And we had a guy who owned a cleaner name Brown, they beat him across the head, you'll see some of those pictures in archives. Anyway they arrested Gilmore Fielder and me and Joe Lundburger. And I told 'em, I said the guy's name was deputy sheriff, I said, I ain't got time to be arrested. I said I'll come back and give myself us as soon as I sew these people up. So I went on and took care of them and gave them lock jaw (unclear) and then I went on down gave myself up. He said well he said he was coming back. So they took me and fingerprinted me. And by that time my wife and Christopher Rosato was a friend of mine were there with my bail money. So then we had to work to get the other people out. This is the 24th now, of April, Bloody Sunday. Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: How many people went to the beach that Sunday? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: How many people went to the beach that Sunday, how many black folks (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, I'll say about 200 in all places. Speaker 1: And how many whites were there with-- Speaker 2: Oh, they outnumbered us three to one. All right. So--and the students were there. And it was so many of my Boy Scouts out there, I saw one report says that a Boy Scouts who--Dr. Mason led the Boy Scout troupe down there for an activity, that isn't so. It just happened to be (unclear) Carney and his brother--Carney. I told Carney, I said, I see they said something else other than (unclear) run over the railroad track. The only way he could get off of the beach was go on the railroad track and run down the railroad track, but at that time I went before a justice of the peace and he found us guilty. Gilmore Fielder and I posted a bond too, it wasn't much. Okay. And so we gon' negotiate again and try to see what happens. And Felix went before the Governor, that's a different story. Speaker 1: Was that Felix Lundburger? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: Was that Mr. Lundburger? Speaker 2: No. Lundburger and I were together. Lundburger and Gilmore Fielder. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Anyway-- Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: --We talked to the Board of Supervisors and what have you. Story_ID: 69305 Speaker 1: And we (unclear) along, and by this time Medgar [Evers] has gotten in to show his face and he showed his face. That's what we--he was coming down for the beach and for the schools. And you see that letter where it says, "conduct unbecoming a physician." Speaker 2: Now you received a letter from the-- Speaker 1: The Coast County, yeah. Speaker 2: --The Coast Medical Association [Coast County Medical Society]? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Right. And what did it say? Speaker 1: They had those (unclear). But staff wanted to put me off of staff but again that's--one of these doctors says that he's only exercising his civil rights. Speaker 2: Well let's explain what the letter said first? Speaker 1: Huh. Speaker 2: You got a letter from the Coast Medical Association. Speaker 1: Yeah, and I wasn't even a member. Speaker 2: And they admonished you for conduct--unprofessional conduct? Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: But they wouldn't allow you to be a member because you were black, right? Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: So how could they chastise you for unprofessional conduct (laughter)? Speaker 1: Man, this is Mississippi. You can get anything going wrong in Mississippi. Speaker 2: I see. Story_ID: 69306 Speaker 1: At any rate, we did everything, we talked to em, I went over a state trying to raise money until June of 1963. I was furthering the branch then, we organized our own branch. And I said well we got to have a different strategy. Instead of coming up through the federal courts. See the justice had filed a lawsuit on our behalf on the affidavits that we had gotten by April the 17th. So the suit was filed on April 17, 1960, that's first. So they were moving too slow and then they would make a motion, we'd make a motion. NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] tried to move to intercede, but they wouldn't--the judge wouldn't let us intervene. And he was allowing the defendants all type of strategies. So I said let's go up through the State court, we can't get up to the Supreme Court through the federal court. So then we planned a strategy to go back in June of '63' (1963). So Medgar [Evers] was going to be with us this time, but he was assassinated on the 12th of June. He was at our house the Sunday before he was assassinated. At any rate we went again. Story_ID: 69307 Speaker 1: Well let's not go--I want to just pause a little bit here. Speaker 2: What you say? Speaker 1: How did people feel about that? Speaker 2: About? Speaker 1: Medgar Evers was the--he was the State-- Speaker 2: Field Director. Speaker 1: --Field Director for Mississippi. Speaker 2: He was a loveable person. If you'd a met him, you would hold him harmless from your standpoint. You couldn't blame him. He not only talked a good game, but he walked a good game. First thing he ask you are you ready to vote. And if you said no, well I be by to take you myself. Are you a member of NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], said no, well give me a three dollar membership. You see you could be a member for three dollars back then. Story_ID: 72211 Speaker 1: Dr. Mason can you explain the nature of the beach in terms of it being federal property, I think that that has something to do with your case right, the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --Case which was federal property. And how did it become federal property? Speaker 2: By no objections from any property owner; there are 1200 owners along the beach (unclear). Nobody objected to it. They just--I understand the supervisor just announced we're going to pump some sand in to establish a sand beach, there were no objections so it is by default. In 1923 a guy name Henrisy (ph.) said well you can't take my property, so he built a cabin in front of his house and Harrison County took his cabin down. They said it's for the public benefit we use this beach. So after they put the sand beach in with federal money and there were no objections so they did not execute any eminent domain, they just said we're gonna bogard it. Speaker 1: Oaky, so the beach was created with federal money (unclear)? Speaker 2: Created with federal money, yes. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Speaker 2: Involving a corps of engineers too. Speaker 1: So it really didn't belong to the state as such? Speaker 2: The state's ownership begins at the mean high water mark and extends out seven miles--twelve miles, it was a twelve-mile limit, that's all the international water. So the thing that we showed that the county had equipment--heavy equipment, that there was garbage cans that says Harrison County out on the sand beach, so consequently, it was taken to be so, and it was so. Story_ID: 72212 Speaker 1: The federal government (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)Public property, right, public property? Speaker 1: --The fifth court of appeals went through the state route, we lost to the city, we lost in the county, the day that we lost in the county was the day that Kennedy [President John F. Kennedy] was assassinated. But we went through chancery and lost that and then we went to Mississippi State and lost that and then we went to Court of Appeals and we didn't lose that, so they appealed and then we appealed to the Supreme Court and nine years later the Supreme Court ruled that we're not trespassers that we were the public and we were entitled to use the beach as any other citizen. As a matter of fact they use the language that it should be maintained for the public use in perpetuity, and they must assure that there should no obstructions to ingress or egress to the sand beach. Speaker 2: Now what year did that ruling come up? Speaker 1: Sixty-nine, (1969). Speaker 2: Sixty-nine (1969). Speaker 1: It started with (unclear) going back to '60' (1960). There was so many appeals in the federal court, Judge Myers just allowed it, and then finally we got Judge Cox who was supposed to have been a bad--when the Fifth Court of Appeals sent it back to him and they appealed to the--and then the Fifth ruled in our favor and then they appealed and then the writ of certiorari, we went on up to the Supreme Court, where the Supreme Court says we were not trespassing, that we had a right to use it. And that was the language for 1963 too, even there were only seventy-two people arrested that Sunday in June after Medgar [Evers] was assassinated, all seventy-two of us appealed. Story_ID: 72213 Speaker 1: Now later on you were a consultant to a movie called Ghost of Mississippi about the assassination of Medgar Evers, right? Speaker 2: Huh. Speaker 1: Can you tell me about that? Speaker 2: About what? Speaker 1: When you were a consultant to the movie-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: --The Ghost of Mississippi about Medgar Evers assassination? Speaker 2: That was a, I think America, including this project in becoming more and more conscious--conscientious that we need to know about our heritage, and our heritage is not all peaceful and soporific. Some of our heritage is what we have suffered is indelibly imprinted on us and it--sometimes it stimulates us to react in a positive manner, other times it makes some people give up. Story_ID: 72214 Speaker 1: But by '63' (1963) we say we had changed mayors and we had put on a roll and additional 10,000 black voters. So the authority here hopes and so we got some protection, in which nobody attacked us even though (unclear) in '63' (1963), but we all had to go to jail. And we asked NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] to send us some money but it didn't come until late so Dr. Tate, a dentist, a black dentist and Elder Nash put their property up so we would bail out on property bond. But eventually we got $10,000 from the national office and we didn't use it, we put it in savings. And eventually we turned it back to the national office, particularly after Natchez Branch lost to the merchants about illegal boycott, you see. Story_ID: 72215 Speaker 1: Now in the meantime we are up to '63' (1963) and '64' (1964) and here and we have the congress acted on an equal opportunity act entitled whatever it is for public accommodations. So now we're big boys in the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] Biloxi Branch and we organized ourselves into different committee, the entertainment committee, the food committee and any other recreation committee. And immediately following when brother Johnson [President Lyndon B. Johnson] signed the bill [Civil Rights Act of 1964], the Sunday after he signed it, we went to this all-white theater the Singer and was served, even though we were harassed with ice and bottle beer rolled on our face. And we went to some elaborate eating houses, the Longfellow House, for example, in Pascagoula [Mississippi]. Pascagoula had a branch but Biloxi was a trigger for ourselves to desegregate anything that needed to be desegregated. So the same thing happened--Derrick Bell was coming to town so we put him up at the Buena Vista Hotel, the first black and then Constance Motley was coming to town so we set her up in the Emerald Beach, shortly thereafter Gloster Kerr(ph) and Roy and Bob Carter, said we'll test it for you and (unclear) Kaplan who was the president. So about time they got here, we had already tested other places and schools were going along pretty well in desegregating fairly well. The streetcars, black folks had virtually stopped riding them anyway. But little places like the Dairy Queen, our Youth branch desegregated the Dairy Queen. And... Speaker 2: How long did it take to desegregate Biloxi [Mississippi]? Speaker 1: Once we got started in '59' (1959), we did something every year. The junior colleges were not having any--didn't have any black folks, so I personally met with the president and I had some good friends on the junior college board, one was a physician who said if he goes, we going. So we got at the dentist Dr. Tate's wife hired at the junior college and wherever you know even trying on clothes but they seemed to welcome us then you know because when they find out we spend money, but we had some opposition. There was a family who owned several theaters where we couldn't go. So some of us had friends and officers on the base [Keesler Air Force Base] who would take their families including Medgar [Evers] to movies and to the office club and you know these people objected to it and complained to the general and to the mayor that we were taking business from them. We just didn't pay em any mind, we kept on going. I remember when Al Hibbler came here. You remember Al Hibbler (unclear) young man? Speaker 2: No, who was he. Tell us? Speaker 1: What? He was a great singer. He's blind and he appeared at the Officer's Club. And one when Medgar [Evers] was down here so we took Medgar out and Al Hibbler, and when we came back we had a black club called the Blue Note. So we went by the Blue Note after we leave the club to have repasses. Medgar came, he wasn't a drinker, but he came to listen to the music. So and we were buying as many cars as they were buying. So at the dealership, dealers were very courteous and respecting that dollar. Story_ID: 72216 Speaker 1: So you think that--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: (Unclear) We still had two Boy Scout Camps, and the classifications that--we were called districts, where the white boys were called divisions. No, we were called divisions and the white boys were called districts. For example, it was a coastal division of which I was president from '60' (1960) to '65' (1965) and the white folks called that a Biloxi Bay District. And after I went to be--I had been selected to be scout master at the 1960 Jamboree at Colorado Springs, but when I led the way then in April, the white folks put enough pressure on the council to tell me for them--to come and tell me I couldn't go. So I went anyway, just on my own. But here's a scholar was trained--I had trained with the troop, the troop was made up of boys in Biloxi [Mississippi], few from New Orleans [Louisiana] and then some from Mobile [Alabama] and they said I couldn't go. Anyway I went on my own and I took the boys some ice tea and then ice, it was hot weather out there. We had two camps, the black Boy Scout Camp was called Camp Ottowa. It didn't mean anything, it's just one of the Boy Scouts who had gone overseas. We said what you wanna name this new camp and he said Ottawa, that sound like an Indian name. So the white boys went to Camp Tiak, and we didn't go to Tiak, but then we in the '70s' (1970s) now and Gilbert Junior is just making Eagle, I think he went--before he went to college. But we went from Camp Ottawa to Camp Tiak and won everything up there, cause see we slept on the ground, but at Tiak they had them sleeping in cabins on springs. Shoot, we showed them how to make fire and keep a camp clean. Story_ID: 72217 Speaker 1: And I took, well, later on, I took a group to Philmount Scout Ranch in Northern New Mexico, black boys. Speaker 2: Phill--what's it called again? Speaker 1: Huh? Speaker 2: What's it called again? Speaker 1: What you call it? Speaker 2: Yeah, what was the name of that ranch? Speaker 1: It was Philmount. Speaker 2: Oh, Philmount, okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. It was named after Phillips 66 Petroleum. He donated 127,000 of fertile land to the Boy Scouts of America. So we went. We drove my old Buick and the Council let us have a '39' (1939) Chevrolet and that Chevrolet kept up with that '59' (1959) Buick. We ran into some segregation along the Bay. The guy said one place--we were in Dallas-Fort Worth [Texas], and we went to get some food and said Doctor, we can't let you come in because you knew we'd have to let them come in, pointing to the Mexicans. I said that's okay, man, we'll come to the window, we invented the drive-up window. I said you fix us something and we'll sit under the shade tree out here, which we did. Story_ID: 72218 Speaker 1: That's really something, that's a strange story. They--hm. Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah, school is doing fine now. Also we petitioned the city [Biloxi, Mississippi] for black policemen. And initially, we got only two, but boy they cleaned up Main Street. Main Street was bad drag you know the fast street down here. Bernard Seymour (ph) and Al Jones--Al used to be a former Boy Scout. And the next time we got--no, no, it was Seymour and Teashell. The next group was Al Hamilton and Busquito (ph.). Busquito was my neighbor. See if Medgar [Evers] had done like we had told him to do, he'd probably be alive. My people said we going, we don't care whether you're going, we're going protect you. I said make rounds, and the one big guy on this side and one big guy on the side, with his heat on his side. I make a house call they trailing me. Medgar said you know he knew he was in danger but he didn't want anybody to protect him. I wasn't afraid but I was cautious, I was aware. Speaker 1: So did you-- Speaker 2: So we got policeman. And the sheriff had already had one or two black people on their force since 19, I guess, '56' (1956), '57' (1957). But we got more blacks on the sheriff's department. Speaker 1: --Now tell me-- Speaker 2: And we got some blacks clerks in the sheriff's office in the city hall. Some votes count, man. Speaker 1: --All of these things you had to fight for, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: They just didn't give them up, right? You had to fight for all of it. Story_ID: 72219 Speaker 1: Tell me now how is the State of Mississippi on a state-wide level? There are so many famous Mississippians involved in the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] in those days in the '60s' (1960s), there's yourself, there's Amzie Moore and-- Speaker 2: Well, when you go to State Conference-- Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: --There's this place on the agenda for Branch complaints and they're not quite as many as there were in the '60s' (1960s), but still virtually every branch has their plate, our branch now is on police brutality. We're getting some police brutality on black citizens, and job discrimination, we're still getting complaints of job discrimination. Our president now James Crowell is doing a good job. I was president for 33 years. But we're investigating job discrimination, even at the--a lot of them from the casino. Speaker 1: Now that's big down here now even in 2002-- Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: --The casinos are real big. Speaker 2: Yeah, big employment. Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Story_ID: 72220 Speaker 1: So, tell me now, I think you were around when COFO [Council of Federated Organizations] was formed too, back in '60' (1960)-- Speaker 2: Coburt? Speaker 1: --COFO. Speaker 2: Oh, COFO, yeah. Speaker 1: That was formed you said at Dooky Chase Restaurant in New Orleans [Louisiana]? Speaker 2: Dooky Chase on the second floor, in Dooky Chase. Speaker 1: Okay when was that? Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-three [1963]. Speaker 1: Okay. And what was the idea behind COFO? Speaker 2: We found that somebody said divide and to conquer. That we were fighting each other, the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] was said not to like SNCC [Student Non-Violent Coordinating Committee] and SNCC says that NAACP is old and SNCC is too slow. So we figured we could come together and also consolidate some of the kids from the Northeast and East and Midwest and get a better job done. See up until that time NAACP was footing just about all the Civil Rights bills and did for a long time after that. But then SNCC started raising--and those young people were bold enough and ingenious enough to create new ideas. They came in and organized freedom schools and taught people how to read and write and to vote and ordinary hygiene. We even had some--one Thanksgiving, Dick Gregory [HM] sent three ice box truckloads of turkeys to the Gulf Coast. So people (unclear) our branch was adopted by the Long Island [New York] branch, and they sent us clothes, a copying machine-- Speaker 1: Mimeograph machine? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, mimeograph machine. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And they gave us comfort and consolation. So the idea of COFO was a joint effort, I thought it was good. It was good. Story_ID: 72221 Speaker 1: Who were some of the-- Speaker 2: Huh. Speaker 1: --Go ahead. Speaker 2: Out of COFO [Council of Federated Organizations] of course the Freedom Democratic Party evolved. And it gave us a basis for parliamentary expertise. I was parliamentarian from 1962 until '74' (1974). I went to--you see where how many democratic executive--national conventions I attended. Sixty-eight (1968) to '72' (1972) with McGovern, '72' (1972) with McGovern, '76' (1976) was with-- Speaker 1: Carter, yeah, Jimmy Carter. Speaker 2: Yeah, Carter. And '70' (1970), let's see '72' (1972) was McGovern-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --In Florida. And we learned the wherewithal like the politician that we had been confronted with all these years. And plus it gave us a lot of contact. Story_ID: 72222 Speaker 1: In '72' (1972) the Congress passed an act, Secondary Education Act [The Elementary and Secondary Education Act, 1965] to help school to enhance desegregation smoothly, and Biloxi [Mississippi] has always had good program writers. So President Nixon named Jack Young president of the Jackson branch and lawyer and me president of the Biloxi branch to the--and Allen Fielder from Meridian to this committee. Someone asked Nixon why he appoint these presidents of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], he said because they good men. And we got to know each other. Speaker 2: Now what was Nixon like? Speaker 1: Huh? Speaker 2: What was he like? Speaker 1: What was he like? Speaker 2: Yeah, what was he like? Speaker 1: Well, I never been to the Watergate before, but we had a chance to go to Watergate together, to go to New Orleans [Louisiana] and frolic a little bit, Atlanta [Georgia] and frolic a little bit, you know, I find years ago you could get more done sometimes sitting round having a high ball than you could with the highfalutin parliamentary procedure. You know you're soft and enjoy yourself. I remember in '68' (1968), I stayed with the regulars and we--there was a mayor of Logtown [Mississippi] and a mayor of--was it Logtown, it wasn't Logtwon, Lumberton [Mississippi], Bobby Galloway. So they assigned Bobby and me for the same motel room. And I stayed up most of the night educating him, and he said he never enjoyed something all of his life. He learned a lot of stuff, you know I think talk here or there and pulled in all tangents. So he was just grateful to have--then we went back home and Head Start was coming up. Well Head had come up three years before that. We went to the White House with Lyndon [B. Johnson] then and he needed a contractor, and we made contact with a contractor, Francis Collin, and he said he had never sat down and talked to a black man face-to-face until he sat down and talked to me. I was chairman of the Community Action Agency, and we got turnkey, you know, that National Conference of Negro Women built 200 homes for the lower and moderate income, self-help. And then we got fire codes to teach them how to be homeowners. And that shows you're rubbing shoulders side to side. And by that time we started getting appointed to other committees. Story_ID: 72223 Speaker 1: I remember we're at ad-hoc committee to try to bring the National Football League to Biloxi [Mississippi] to practice and go to the super bowl you know at super bowl time. So five of us went--six, seven. Seven went, five blacks and two whites--five whites and two blacks. And somehow they had already set up for practice in Louisiana, but that was--I had never had Italian food. So two of the guys, one was a mayor who put me in jail, took us to an Italian, you know I had spaghetti and tamales, but I mean this was a seven-course meal, man, including wine. And we had a chance to socialize and reminisce. So like the cabinet committee, this ad-hoc committee was worth forming. Story_ID: 72224 Speaker 1: Did you-- Speaker 2: We had never had a black on the coliseum commission. There had just built a new Hilton Hotel here. So one night the mayor of Biloxi [Mississippi], the director of a regional, southern regional council, Mr. R.W. Harper and Dr. Mason sat in a room and we decided who was going to be on the next commission. And O'Keefe was the mayor then. In between R.W. Harper and the four of us, by the next morning, it was decided that I was going to be appointed. So [Jeremiah] O'Keefe then called the mayor for (unclear), Gulf Port [Mississippi] and Long Beach [Mississippi], see one commission is appointed by the governor--or mayors along the coast. And I went on to cause him (unclear) in '76' (1976) and was elected chairman pro tempore. Had one guy who was appointed by the governor who was a racists with one of the (unclear). Same guy who had the truck that picked us up in '63' (1963) and carried us to Gulf Port. They got me out but they took the rest of them. And one of my friends used to call us and say they put us in that 18 wheeler. It wasn't really an eighteen wheeler but she died then suddenly last year. And I had said I was going to call a meeting of those who had gone in but I can't find those notes, those who went in '63' (1963). I had a list of those who went. Jack Greenburg sent me a copy of the writ--Writ of Certiorari with all of the plaintiffs. But when you appeal through a Writ of--you see we were the defendants first then when you file a writ, you become the--you become the plaintiff, you're no longer the defendant. Story_ID: 69322 Speaker 1: --I need to ask you here as we close out and one is tell me about the coffee incident? Speaker 2: All right. The hospital is located on the back bay, at that time it was called Howard Memorial [Howard Memorial Hospital, currently Biloxi Regional Medical Center]. And nobody, no man of color or woman of color could eat in the cafeteria. They had a little room over the side where African American would go to eat. So as you know I was doing full practice and I had done a delivery during the night time and this was about seven o'clock, so I went down to the cafeteria to eat breakfast and as I was sitting there some little dude, white dude tipped up behind me and poured hot coffee on me. And I thought maybe it was an accident, I said man did you intend to do that? He said yeah I intended to do it. And I gave him a left cross that really made him slide across the floor. They arrested me of course, cause that was a set up because we were one week away from desegregating the school, they wanted to make me--make us look bad. But they arrested me for that. And again my wife came down and bailed me out. So that was also the (unclear) pros--it wasn't processed you know wouldn't involve her with it because they knew that that was a set-up. Story_ID: 69323 Speaker 1: All right, I've always since finishing medical school, believed in continuing medical education. In 1970 there were no African American members of the American Academy of Family Practice. So strange enough I got one person who was a strong Republican and segregationist, you have to have two members vouch for you and the other person--physician had finished Cornell, he's a Mississippian, but I got the two to vouch for me and I had enough continuing medical education to join. You have to have fifty hours every year for three years. And then in 1970 that was invented, out of Kentucky, the American Board of Family Physicians. Again, I had enough continuing education to qualify to sit for the examination. You must sit for--then it was two days and you must produce suitable office records. So I took it and became the first black diplomat and the second diplomat on the Gulf Coast. The first diplomat, Bob Smith in Jackson [Mississippi] took it. But he said he took it. At any rate you're required to take the exam every five years--every six years. So I've taken it every five since 1970 and passed it. I'm certified through 2004. I doubt if I'll take it again. But it makes you study. Also I was--at vote count, I was appointed to the Mississippi State Board of Health by one governor and couldn't get sent the confirmation from him, so we filed suit against him, against the Board of Health and against the AMA who fought us. But then through our stance, the Mississippi Legislature changed and separated the Board of Health from the Board of Medical Licensure. And we got another new governor who appointed me and Matt Payne as the first blacks to sit on the Licensure Board, which I sat on there from 1970 to 1980. And now I see we got two new black members on the Licensure Board, and one new black on the Board of Health. So we're making some progress. Story_ID: 69324 Speaker 1: Tell me about school desegregation. I know you're involved in tutoring, you and your wife tutor people who were-- Speaker 2: My wife was a social worker, masters in social work. We were involved in a school--the suit was filed in our name for Gilbert R. Mason, Jr. There were about ten other children or families involved and that's to say the first year is grade one, the second year was grade one and grade twelve and supposedly it was going to come down until they met, but they wishey, washed around Gilbert Junior, so he never got into a desegregated school until the seventh grade. There's no doubt where the money is, on better facilities, better paid teachers and a better source that entice teachers. We had some problems of junior high school that he attended to of getting (unclear) in the premium junior high school in Biloxi. We had trouble getting teachers at that school, black teachers. Speaker 1: Okay. Can you-- Speaker 2: But the extra-curricular activities at these schools was excellent. Speaker 1: --Okay. But black children didn't get a chance to-- Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: --Black children didn't get a chance to participate in those before-- Speaker 2: Yeah, black children participated in everything. Speaker 1: --Okay, after-- Speaker 2: Even though from the time that Gilbert Junior made a nice little honor society about ten years elapsed and they were the Reddick boys, they went to my Boy Scouts too. One is an Ob-gyn now and one is internal medicine, but they were the last shoot--I don't know of anybody who's (unclear) society since then. Speaker 1: GILBERT MASON JR.: There has been. Speaker 2: --So there's been some. Story_ID: 69325 Speaker 1: Tell me what are your hopes and concerns about the black community today? Speaker 2: What are what? Speaker 1: What are your hopes and concerns about the black community-- Speaker 2: My hope for the black community is that knowing that we ought to keep registering, that we keep conscious about the power of the vote and that we should educate them about the power of the vote and aid them in--because they're a lot of--through the casinos, there are a lot of infrastructure that we've been getting in our neighborhood that we hadn't been able to get before. So I'm hoping that our communities will continue to improve and that we will continue to educate--and I was glad to see Tulane [Tulane School of Continuing Studies, Mississippi Coast, Biloxi, Mississippi] come over here as another school, you know, secondary school. I think we have a greater diversification instead of just southern or junior colleges, so I was glad to see Tulane come over. Speaker 1: --Now, tell me-- Speaker 2: I think we're becoming more sophisticated healthwise, so if the Congress will come up, prescription is going to be the thing of the future, it doesn't need to be attended to. I don't think they gon bother social security per se. Story_ID: 69326 Speaker 1: How important has your family been--this is a question-- Speaker 2: Well you hear me going off on this direction and going direction, as I say, I can't discuss my life without including them. And I've been grateful and it's been very satisfactory. As I say I used to hold that little boy [Gilbert R. Mason, Jr.] on my chest, certainly with book, I've been so proud of him today as I am--I was back in 1954. Speaker 1: --And your wife? Speaker 2: Yeah. And my wife, you know I just misses her, I get depressed sometime. Everything beautiful I see her in it. I drive down the highway and look at the sand beach or I drive out North Biloxi and see the trees. I remember she asked me one day when we were in Virginia, say who planted those trees up there on the mountain? I said God did, baby. So everything I go, I see, I could smell a certain smell, a food or a perfume and if it's a nice thing, it reminds me of her. Speaker 1: --Okay, sir-- Speaker 2: I don't have anybody to talk to literally, but she was adroit at talking, of conversations, of ideas and she was curious, but didn't lose the innocence that young people--that young minds have. Story_ID: 69327 Speaker 1: Sir, what would you see as your legacy? Speaker 2: My what? Speaker 1: Legacy. Speaker 2: My lex? Speaker 1: Legacy. Speaker 2: In my life? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: That I didn't prepare for economic provisions, say for Gilbert, Jr. I did pretty good for a while and--but I'm happy, he got an education and I don't--didn't have the security, but he's got a genuine solid education. So I think economic security is a negative. I can't do anything cause I had a pacemaker put in in February. See I don't know anything but medicine, I can't nothing and I can't be an engineer, I can't go to Engels and be sander or a blaster, I can't be a fisherman, but I'll do to if I have to. You said should I diversify, no. I use my time preparing for my profession and hopefully the profession for other doctors and other African Americans. Speaker 1: Not everybody does that you know, but you seem to have really focused on trying to do something, not only for yourself, but for other people as well. Speaker 2: Yeah. I know that I have opened up the American Society and the hospitals along the coast. I was the first African American to go the hospital down here on sand beach, the Gulf Coast Community Hospital. Story_ID: 69328 Speaker 1: Tell me about your retirement? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: Tell me about your retirement? Speaker 2: My retirement? Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: It really is--I haven't gotten myself together as to what I'm gonna do in my retirement. I'm reading, and I got my eyes straightened out. I have a chance to read some of the classic literatures that I hadn't got around to, you start back in high school and college. And you read some of the journals that you didn't have time to during the act of practice. And I'm gon start back fishing sometime soon. We used to fish off the bridge when Gilbert, Jr. was little. It's still there, let the black folks use the bridge too like white folks. I never been shrimping--I never been crabbing so I'm gonna go crabbing you know. And I made a vow that I'm gon' eat out once a week and once a month I'm gon' take a short trip. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 69329 Speaker 1: Sir, I know you're active, you got a lot of things still to do, but how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Be what? Speaker 1: Be remembered? Speaker 2: Be what? Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered, sir? Speaker 2: Oh, cogito ergo sum, I think therefore I am, that's what I want to be remembered, is that what he thought. Speaker 1: Okay. Sounds good to me. Thank you very much, sir. Speaker 2: I am therefore--I think therefore I am, that's what that card says, and I believe it. Speaker 1: Okay. Is there anything else you'd like to say before we end this interview? Speaker 2: No, I just hope that I could be of service to mankind and I want to thank God for all that I have, even the hardships. As Paul said, as I diminished, he is increased, so if I could increase, the understanding and love of God, I'd like to do more in church, I'd like to get back in scouting, I'm on the executive committee, but that's not like hiking or cooking out. This executive committee meets four times a year in Hattiesburg [Mississippi] one, TR another, a golf course is three and I say that's about it. Story_ID: 69330 Speaker 1: This is my mother, Eileen Jackson Mason, born in rural (unclear) county, mother of three children. Willie Louis Mason, Rosie Marie Mason and Gilbert Rutledge Mason. Had a beautiful voice and she would tell stories like the first time I heard about the Titanic when she sang about the Titanic. The first time I heard about the great storm in northern Mississippi in 1928, she sang about the great storm in Tupelo [Mississippi]. Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER: Next? Speaker 1: That's my daddy, Willie Atwood Mason, son of Walter Harrison Mason and Effie Trotter, farmer, barber, wiseman. If he had my education, he'd be president. He's a barber and didn't stand for any nonsense in his shops. Speaker 2: You look like him. Speaker 1: He has some tremendous memory. When I got on the train in 1945, going to Chicago, he said be strong, steadfast and trust in God. Then he came to my graduation med school, he said I told you something on the rail road track in 1945. I said be strong, steadfast and trust in God. He says, I'll be darn, you got a memory like an elephant. I said I got that from you. Speaker 2: GILBERT MASON, JR.: Reunion picture. Your reunion picture from Tennessee State [University, Nashville, Tennessee]. Speaker 1: Where are you, is this you? Speaker 2: I'm trying to see. Speaker 1: Gilbert Mason, Jr.: You're in the center, you're in the center. Speaker 2: There you are right there. Speaker 1: That's the class of '49' (1949). Speaker 2: GILBERT MASON JR.: Right. That's your '89' (1989) reunion. Speaker 1: Yeah, I was president of all my classes at Tennessee State. Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER: Okay, Tennessee State in Nashville, okay. Speaker 1: We were the largest freshman class in the history of Tennessee State because all the veterans was just coming back. This is my original wade-in with Gilbert, Jr. when he was four years old and I was determined to find out what the status was when we went down in front of (unclear) and nobody said anything to us. And it would have been a sacrilege for them to say anything to order this young man off. So I was prepared to embarrass somebody in high places if they had asked him off. This is my senior year in medical school and that's my son, Gilbert, Jr. on whose back I rested my books and we were at 1315 Belmont Street a block where the riot took place on 14th Street when Martin Luther King was assassinated, but this is my senior year in medical school. Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER: Right, next? Speaker 1: This is my lovely wife. This was made after we got to Biloxi [Mississippi] and we lived at 742 Nixon Street, Apartment J, and we're sitting on a sofa talking trash. Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER: Okay, next? Speaker 1: We were walking down G Street in Washington, D.C. She's carrying the umbrella that--I was told that you couldn't try or buy things at Juniors Garfunkle an elegant department store. So I went in there, it was near Christmas, to buy something and the clerk showed me this umbrella that had an artificial reptile handled, so I bought it for her and she's carrying it there. We probably were going to shop somewhere again and I--that's a classical pop umbrella for me. Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER: Okay, next? Speaker 1: This was a Christmas party of Sigma Pi Phi, my brother and his wife came over-- Speaker 2: GILBERT MASON, JR.: No, that's not what that is, that's their wedding anniversary. Speaker 1: Huh? Speaker 2: GILBERT MASON, JR.: That's their wedding anniversary. Speaker 1: Oh, that's what it was, yeah, it looked like the balloons, yeah. Speaker 2: GILBERT MASON JR.: It's their wedding anniversary. Speaker 1: Their 50th, yeah. Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER: Say what it is, Dr. Mason. You say it on the microphone. Speaker 1: So he has his six children there and some of his grandchildren. Speaker 2: GILBERT MASON JR.: Repeat what it is please, Daddy. Say from the beginning what it is. Dad? Speaker 1: Huh? Speaker 2: GILBERT MASON JR.: Say from the very beginning what it is. Speaker 1: All right. This is a family I mean a wedding anniversary, that's number 50 for them. So he has his children and his grandchildren with him on that picture and I must be behind the camera. Speaker 2: That's it. Speaker 1: This is something that you never finish and that is completing charts. So I was working late one night and the executive secretary to the hospital had her camera and she just came by and took my picture. This is at Harlem Memorial Hospital, predecessor to Biloxi Regional Medical Center. Speaker 2: That picture was taken in your office. Speaker 1: Huh. Speaker 2: GILBERT MASON JR.: That picture was taken in your office. Speaker 1: No, I beg to differ with you. Speaker 2: GILBERT MASON JR.: When was it taken? Speaker 1: It was taken in the medical library. Speaker 2: GILBERT MASON JR.: What year? Speaker 1: Oh, let's see '84' (1984) or '85' (1985). It was made when I was president of staff. Speaker 2: GILBERT MASON JR.: That's right. Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER: Good, okay, next? Speaker 2: You heard me speak of Joseph Debrow, we were the first two black Eagle Scouts in Jackson and the second Eagle Scouts in the State of Mississippi. Joe is a biophysicist now and has his own company in California. Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER: Okay, next? Speaker 2: Our troop was sponsored by College Hill Baptist Church and his troop was sponsored by St. Mark United Methodist. Speaker 1: In Gulf Port? Speaker 2: No, in Jackson. This is my spouse and me. We went to Orly(ph) Mills to have that picture made. Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER: What year, Dr. Mason? Speaker 2: Let's see I got them Maxcolm X glasses on so that was about '92' (1992). Speaker 1: GILBERT MASON JR.: No, it was about '86' (1986) or '87' (1987). Speaker 2: I figured it was around there, and I can't read it. I don't have my glasses on. Speaker 1: It was '95' (1995)? Speaker 2: Eighty-eight (1988), it looks like, '88' (1988), yeah. Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER: Okay. Speaker 2: I can't see cause we had a set made like that at the Church. Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER: Okay. How about this one? Speaker 2: Oh, this was made in Chicago [Illinois] at Ragland's Studio in 1948. Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER: Okay, great. Next? Speaker 2: On the left is me, in the middle is my sister, Rosie and on the right is my brother, Woody Louis and in the background is my spouse in New Orleans [Louisiana]. Speaker 1: GILBERT MASON JR.: At your brother's house. Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: GILBERT MASON JR.: At your brother's house. Speaker 2: Yeah, at my buddy's house. That's in New Orleans, about '83' (1983). Now that's my son, Gilbert, Jr. in 1956 or there about at (unclear). The companion is that he's pointing to the sun. We were determined to test the use of the beach. We were not bothered by them. Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER: Okay, next? Speaker 2: This is a young lady right here from Alcorn whom I called in December of '83' (1983) to help me out because I didn't have help and she worked for me every year until I retired in March. She was a graduate of Alcorn [State University, Alcorn, Mississippi] and a graduate of the junior college with accounting major at the junior college and a bachelors in home economics from Alcorn. Speaker 1: What's her name? Speaker 2: Pearl Nell Bradford Hopkins. Speaker 1: Okay...