 Story_ID: 587542 Speaker 1: Today we're interviewing Jewell McCabe. Sorry. I'm Adrienne Jones, the interviewer. And the videographer is Neculai Burghe- Burghelea [Neculai Burghelea]? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): That's close enough. Speaker 1: And Adrienne, it's [HistoryMaker] Jewell Jackson McCabe. Speaker 2: Today we're interviewing Jewell Jackson McCabe. I apologize. Speaker 1: Don't apologize, it's just, I'm obsessed on that too (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Very good. I will correct it. Jewell Jackson McCabe. So I'm gonna start off by-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): And observing are the guests. Speaker 2: Oh, observing are-- Speaker 1: Emma. Speaker 2: Emma. Speaker 1: Sinatra. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Sinatra. Speaker 1: And Basha. Speaker 2: And Basha, the fabulous, the fabulous three. Story_ID: 587543 Speaker 1: Okay, so I'm gonna start off with four questions (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: Neculai [Neculai Burghelea], we haven't even started, and you're making this difficult. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION) Speaker 2: What's your favorite food? Speaker 1: Oh. Shellfish, lobster and clams and mussels, and I'm just--oh, please, give me a Maryland blue crab, and I can just take it apart. Speaker 2: Fantastic. What is your favorite time of year? Speaker 1: I've two actually: summer and fall. Speaker 2: Okay. What is your favorite vacation destination? Speaker 1: Well, my father's [HistoryMaker Hal Jackson] Charleston [South Carolina], St. James Islands [sic. James Island, South Carolina], and I really liked the French [French Riviera] and the Italian Riviera. Speaker 2: What is your favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 1: My f- ah, oh yeah, in order to be in the right place at the right time, one has to have the tenacity to be in the wrong place 90 percent of the time. Story_ID: 587544 Speaker 1: Can I ask you about your father? It would be fantastic if you could start by giving us his whole name, spelling any difficult parts, and telling us where he was--when he was born and where he was born. Speaker 2: Well, his name is Harold, H-A-R-O-L-D, Baron, B-A-R-O-N, Jackson [HistoryMaker Hal Jackson]. He was born in St. James Island [sic. James Island, South Carolina]. He's a Geechee boy from Charleston, South Carolina. Quite candidly, he was the family of the white banker who had the white family and the black family; that was his grandfather and grandmother [Estelle Baron Jackson]. And so his parents--his father [Eugene Jackson] ended up being the tailor in Charleston for the [U.S.] Navy, so they were considered wealthy. Speaker 1: And so can you tell us about your father's childhood? Speaker 2: Well, his (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did he share any tales with you? Speaker 2: --his childhood was I think somewhat tragic. And I think out of the tragedy and his innate qualities--he's a Scorpio by nature--he is tenacious, and he is driven. He is ambitious, and he's extraordinarily smart. He was a lefty, so he learned how to write with his right hand. But you know what they say about left handed people. He was the baby of six. He was the second boy. And he had sisters that were, in their era, women who became educators very early. We're a third generation college trained family. My Aunt Essie [Essie Jackson] is now deceased, but she was his older sister. She was the first black to graduate from the Boston Conservatory of Music [Boston Conservatory at Berklee, Boston, Massachusetts]. And my Aunt Alyce Cornish [Alyce Jackson Cornish], who we just celebrated her centennial celebration, her one hundredth birthday, she's written up in The Washington Post. And so they were--my Aunt Alyce was very interesting 'cause when I founded the Coalition of 100 Black Women [National Coalition of 100 Black Women], which we'll get to later, my--so many of the women from Washington, D.C. had been students of hers 'cause she was an elementary school teacher. Speaker 1: Who are now in New York [New York]? Speaker 2: Oh, they are all over. Speaker 1: Now, what do they say about left handed people? Speaker 2: That they're very bright. Speaker 1: Ah. Speaker 2: That they're very smart. Speaker 1: Okay. And let me ask you about your aunt who was at the Boston Conservatory of Music. What kind of music did she do? Speaker 2: Classical; she was a pianist. Speaker 1: Okay. And who, who--was there anyone interesting who went to the conservatory with her or during that time? Speaker 2: Quite candidly, I don't know. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But they had a very non-traditional, atypical educational experience. My father, in fact, his first year of prep school was in Vermont [Troy Conference Academy, Poultney, Vermont]. So, and you realize that, that he was born in 1915, so that they had had a true passion for education, for the arts, for really a wonderful global perspective. I mean one of the wonderful things, if you look around my apartment, you see various artifacts from Thailand and Bangkok [Thailand]. And I've been fortunate enough to travel to Germany and Russia and Ukraine. That wanderlust I got from them, on that side of the family. Story_ID: 587545 Speaker 1: Could we just go back again to your, your father's parents? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: I heard you explain who they were, but I'd like to just make sure that that's clear. So you said there was a union between whom, which created your father [HistoryMaker Hal Jackson], and who was the tailor in Charleston [South Carolina]? Speaker 2: Okay, well, my father's grandfather was white. My father's father [Eugene Jackson] was the tailor for the, the U--the U.S. Navy in that area. And so they had a tailor business. And his wife, my father's mother [Laura Rivers Jackson], her father was a minister. And (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Do you know their names? Speaker 2: James [James Rivers]. Speaker 1: Their last name is James? Speaker 2: James, yes [sic.]. Speaker 1: And so did your father's education and career path follow directly from a legacy perhaps that was left that he gained-- Speaker 2: A legacy from, from, from his, from his side of the family. And he married--you would say that my great-grandmother married up. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: If African Americans can be that reflective of economics in society. Speaker 1: And your father's parents-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --where were they from? Were they also born on James Island [South Carolina]? Speaker 2: Oh, that's what I was talking about, my father's parents. Speaker 1: And were they from South Carolina and the-- Speaker 2: Oh, they--Charleston. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Charleston. Speaker 1: And were your mother's people all also from Charleston? Speaker 2: They were actually from the St. James Island [sic.]. I just gave you misinformation. Speaker 1: Well, no, you were answering the vacation destination question also. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So I don't-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --I just don't want to merge them-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --all together. So just let me make sure I have exhausted any of tales that your father might have told you about his upbringing. Speaker 2: Just there was the, the sibling confusion with the older girls tended to travel a great deal and leave the boys at home. So there was a little bit of a, a period of time where my father ran away from home and traveled first to Washington, D.C. because there was--one of the sisters had moved there. And then when he became frustrated with that experience at the age of twelve, he ran away to New York City [New York, New York]. Speaker 1: At twelve? Speaker 2: Well, there used to be boys I understand at that time that, that lied about their age and joined the [U.S.] Army at fourteen. So it's-- Speaker 1: Oh, wow. Speaker 2: --it's, it's a different period in life. Speaker 1: And so your--you said that the girls left home, and the boys were the youngest? Speaker 2: That was after their parents died and they were left quite a bit of money. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And the boys were sort of left with people to manage them. And the older girls traveled. Actually, they passed as white, and they traveled Europe extensively for a few years. Speaker 1: And then one of the sisters went to Washington, D.C.-- Speaker 2: The oldest. Speaker 1: --where your father spent some-- Speaker 2: Oh, well, no, not the oldest, Aunt Alyce [Alyce Jackson Cornish], she was the second. Speaker 1: --where your father spent some time. Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly. Speaker 1: And did he do anything in particular while he was residing with her? Speaker 2: Well, after he--he really ran away, he was about between twelve and thirteen, but then he was back by the time he was fourteen. And you, you know, she had him in prep school [Troy Conference Academy, Poultney, Vermont] for a while. And then there was some financial problems, so she brought him back to D.C., and he ended up at Howard University [Washington, D.C.]. First he went to Dunbar High School [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School, Washington, D.C.], where he married the prettiest girl in, at Dunbar, who was my mother [Julia Hawkins Jackson] (laughter). Speaker 1: And what was the problem with the people that your father--what was his irritation sort of at being there, and what caused him to run away from there? Speaker 2: Well, I'm not really a psychiatrist. I can only go by family. According to my aunts, there were no problems. According to my father, they were too bossy-- Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: --and too controlling. Speaker 1: And so he had been to D.C. and to New York-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --but yet was returned whole, (laughter) in one piece by the time-- Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: --he was fourteen. Speaker 2: Yes, well, we had, we had--he had a--the oldest child was a brother who actually lived in New York and passed for white, and that was an era in which that was very common. Speaker 1: And did your father pass for white? Speaker 2: No, no (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. I didn't think so. Story_ID: 587546 Speaker 1: And so let's move forward a little bit to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]. So your father [HistoryMaker Hal Jackson] goes to Howard. And does he perhaps get into broadcasting there? Speaker 2: Oh, he flourishes at Howard. And in fact, my father started broadcasting before there was a minority portfolio. In 1935 he was broadcasting--it was amazing--hockey games, you know. And he was broadcasting not as an African American, but as a broadcaster. And he is entrepreneurial, and he is tenacious, and so he--I used to say, and I still say, that he could make a dollar out of a brick if he had to. So, around 1935, and remember he was born in 1915, so he's about twenty years old at that time, and he had wanted to have a radio program. So, at that time The Washington Post owned WINX, W-I-N-X [WINX Radio; WLXE Radio, Rockville, Maryland]. And my father went to them because he was getting such good response to his voice; he has a voice that many people today say is like a velvet, velvet voice. And he wanted to have a talk show, and they told him quote unquote: "No nigger will ever broadcast from our radio station." So, what my father did is, went back to the black business community, the undertakers, and the lawyers, and the doctors, and the merchants in the black community and raised money, and wrote commercials, and bought airtime on three different radio stations in three different cities in that area: Washington, D.C., in Virginia and in Maryland. Speaker 1: Okay. And you mentioned that he was covering hockey games in his broadcast. Did he do other sports, and did he do any music? And then you also mentioned (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, by the time-- Speaker 1: --his talk show-- Speaker 2: When he, when he, when he went back to WINX and he bought this time, he set up--he had a program where he interviewed people like Mrs. Bethune [Mary McLeod Bethune] and Charles, Dr. Charles Drew [Charles R. Drew]. And it was-- Speaker 1: Do you know the name of that program? Speaker 2: It was actually 'The House That Jack Built.' Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And he had a blend of talk and music. Speaker 1: What kind of music? Speaker 2: Well, jazz and, and popular music of the day. But the wonderful thing is he needed a theme song, so in 1937 he had met these two brothers. They were Turkish, and they, they were relegated to relate to the black community because of racism in America. But their father [Mehmet Munir Ertegun] was the ambassador to the United Nations [sic.] from Turkey, and it was Nesuhi [Nesuhi Ertegun] and Ahmet Ertegun. And they couldn't get published. One was a songwriter; the other wrote lyrics. So they wrote 'The House That Jack Built,' which some people know Aretha [Aretha Franklin] singing it. But from the very beginning, it was my father's theme song, and it launched Atlantic Records. Speaker 1: What do you mean by that, it launched Atlantic Records? It began (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They couldn't, Atlantic Records, the, the--that the Ertegun brothers couldn't get published, so the only exposure, the airtime that they could get was because-- Speaker 1: Was the song. Speaker 2: --this African American, this black man, he was probably known as a colored man then, and they were known as colored men too, was the air exposure. And up until Ahmet died last year, but every time I saw him, any time there was a public tribute to my dad, he always had in the apartment whatever the latest form of whether it was, you know, a 78 record [78 rpm record] or a 45 [45 rpm record], or you know, or a cassette, 8-track, and then it was a, a CD, he had it in platinum gold, 'The House That Jack Built.' That was his first record. Speaker 1: So are you saying that then they got picked up by Atlantic Records because they got this exposure or (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, they created Atlantic-- Speaker 1: They created Atlantic Records. Speaker 2: They created Atlantic Records-- Speaker 1: Okay. That's-- Speaker 2: --through that. Speaker 1: Okay, absolutely. Story_ID: 587547 Speaker 1: I wanted to know if your father's parents' parents were also from South Carolina. Do you know anything about them? Speaker 2: I would really be (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Do you have sense-- Speaker 2: --my father's parents [Laura Rivers Jackson and Eugene Jackson] were from Charleston [South Carolina]. Their parents were also from Charleston. Speaker 1: Do you know their names? Speaker 2: But on my--on his maternal side was the St. James Island [sic. James Island, South Carolina] and their--I really don't know their names. Speaker 1: Okay. Have I asked you--should we moved to your mom's childhood? Speaker 2: Yeah, we'll--yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, we've left your father [HistoryMaker Hal Jackson] at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] for a moment. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: And so now we're gonna talk a little bit about your mom. Can you tell us her name and where she was born and when? Speaker 2: Okay, she was born in Baltimore, Maryland. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And her mother was born in Anne Arundel County, Maryland. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And her mother was the daughter of a freed slave and the son of the wealthiest landowner in Anne Arundel County, who was of Italian descent. Speaker 1: Do you know his name? Speaker 2: I don't know his name. Speaker 1: Okay. And what's your mother's name? I want to make sure that you state that and spell it. Speaker 2: Okay, it's Julia Hawkins, Julia Omega Hawkins [Julia Hawkins Jackson]. Speaker 1: Okay, so go ahead. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Can you tell us about your mother's childhood, anything that you know about her-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: --youth? Speaker 2: --my--her, her mother, my grandmother, was one of thirteen, was the last of thirteen, and we called her the Duchess. And I smile a lot 'cause she was a Leo like I am, and so we had a lot of talks together. I literally had my grandmother until 1982 with me day and night. So I never ate a lunch away from home; it was always a hot meal. And I always had a perspective that was more mature than most because my grandmother and I talked as equals always. Speaker 1: What's your grandmother's name? Speaker 2: Ercer Ricks. Speaker 1: And what kind of things did you talk about? Speaker 2: Oh, we talked about everything, particularly, she would project. She would see something in the newspaper, and let's say Mrs. Bethune [Mary McLeod Bethune] was doing something. And she would say, "This, that's the kind of thing you're gonna be doing when you grow up." She would say to me--we would see programs on television and, and soap operas, and she'd say, "You'd never find yourself in those circumstance 'cause you always know that it's what's between your shoulder blades, not what's between your legs." Oh, yeah, we had very candid conversations, and I was a little girl. Speaker 1: And you said she was alive until 1982? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And when was your grandmother born? Speaker 2: No, that was my grandmother I'm (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I understand. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I just want for-- Speaker 2: Oh, oh-- Speaker 1: --someone who's watching-- Speaker 2: --oh, oh-- Speaker 1: --I want them to understand-- Speaker 2: --she was born in-- Speaker 1: --when she was born. Speaker 2: --in, she was born in 1999--I mean 1899. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Um-hm. Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And then, of course, she had your mother. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And you said, you said your mother's name earlier, but could you repeat that and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Julia Omega Hawkins. Speaker 1: And when was she born? Speaker 2: She was born in 1918. Story_ID: 587548 Speaker 1: Can you tell us a little bit about her youth? We ended up talking about your [maternal] grandmother [Ercer Ricks]. Speaker 2: Well, her youth ruth- youth was sort of rocky. My grandmother didn't stay with her first husband. My grandmother was very anti-authority. She would not tolerate racism. They had to move a few times because she had spoken up against white people who either wouldn't let her sit on a bus or you know, wouldn't let her--suggested that they should be in front of her in a line at a, at a, at a small grocery store. I remember hearing a story where she took her umbrella and started beating a white man over the head who stepped in front of her. And then I remember my mother [Julia Hawkins Jackson] (laughter) saying that she remember having to move. For about a month they went to visit a, another sister of hers. So my grandmother was very feisty. Speaker 1: And I take it your grandmother was not passing. Speaker 2: No, not passing. Speaker 1: And what kind of effect do you feel like your grandmother's--I'm gonna call it activism--had on your mother or her-- Speaker 2: Interesting. Speaker 1: --sense of-- Speaker 2: It's very in- Speaker 1: --herself? Speaker 2: It's extraordinarily interesting because I thought you were gonna ask me what effect it had on me. Speaker 1: No, not yet. Speaker 2: And I know it's very, very wise of you because my mother, I often say my mother and father [HistoryMaker Hal Jackson] gave me life, but my mother set me free. My mother was determined that I was not gonna be as passive as she was. Speaker 1: Interesting. And so she felt, as a result of your grandmother's influence perhaps, that she wasn't as-- Speaker 2: Well, she tended (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) bold as she might have-- Speaker 2: She tended to be quiet because my grandmother was always speaking up and, and stepping forward and-- Speaker 1: And so she's ducking her head and moving (laughter)-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) She's just sort of saying-- Speaker 1: --saying oh, Lord-- Speaker 2: Oh-- Speaker 1: --oh, Lord. Speaker 2: --no, no, here we go again, so-- Speaker 1: So perhaps your mother almost served you up to your grandmother, both with her own counsel and then in-- Speaker 2: In many ways-- Speaker 1: --maybe-- Speaker 2: --she did. Speaker 1: --promoting this relationship that you had directly with your grandmother. Speaker 2: No question. Speaker 1: And how was their relationship over time? I mean do you, do you have any sense of--you're saying your mother felt like she was less aggressive than her mother. How did they get along? Speaker 2: Well, they got along. It was oftentimes, and I--my brother [Harold B. Jackson, Jr.] went, went to prep school [Groton School, Groton, Massachusetts] when he was very young. And I have an older sister [Jane Jackson Harley] who we have the same father but a different mother [Claudia Parrat]. And she was, in fact, getting married as she was in college at Miner Teachers College [University of the District of Columbia] in Washington, D.C. when we moved to New York City [New York, New York]. So often it was--in the big house it was my grandmother and my mother and I. And I often felt like my mother and I were sisters, and (laughter) my, my grandmother was the mom. Speaker 1: I see. Story_ID: 587549 Speaker 1: Do you have any stories that your mother has told you about when she was growing up? You've told me about your [maternal] grandmother [Ercer Ricks] hitting the white man, but anything else that I don't wanna (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, my, my mother often grew up (laughter) with her cousins because my grandmother was always, you know, like, moving out for a while until they could move back into the house. And so, and the cousins were all boys. So she said that her entire life, really, until she married my dad [HistoryMaker Hal Jackson], and that--and she married him, she was not a college graduate, my mother. My mother graduated from Dunbar High School [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School, Washington, D.C.] and married my father, and he was five years--four years older than she, or ahead of her in school. Speaker 1: Four years. Speaker 2: And he was four years ahead of her academically. He was three years older than she, 'cause he-- Speaker 1: He's a senior (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) and his family-- Speaker 1: --and she's a freshman. Speaker 2: --also excelled. Well, he actually was at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] when she was a senior. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: Yeah. So, the que- the only thing I know was that the boys always fought off other boys. So she always--she had all these big brothers making sure that, you know, that Julia [Julia Hawkins Jackson], you know, was, was protected. Speaker 1: Between the shoulders and not the legs (laughter). Speaker 2: That's right, exactly; you've got it. Speaker 1: And can you tell me on, you know, your grand- on both your parents, were, did they have a strong connection to the church? What was their religious-- Speaker 2: I smile about that (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) background? Speaker 2: They were Methodists, very committed to the church. My father was actually a deacon at one point. But I smile because when I did start to (laughter)--found 100 Black Women [National Coalition of 100 Black Women], my mother, who was very passive, who believed in the traditions of the church in a very dignified, Protestant way, did not understand why when I went to the South I went to all the Holy Roller and all the Baptist churches. And I don't know if this is something sacrilegious or not, but I've probably joined almost every Christian church there is to join. Speaker 1: Oh, wow, okay. So we're gonna want to ask you some questions about that. Story_ID: 587550 Speaker 1: So, can you tell me about your parents meeting? You've told me that they were both, or at least went to the same high school (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't really-- Speaker 1: --which is Dunbar [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School, Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 2: That's interesting. I don't really know that story. I just know from somebody who is deceased now, who said to me recently--Sylvia Rhone, who actually had been at Atlantic Records before she ascended to her heights, her father, Bob Rhone [sic. James Rhone], was an attorney. And I went to visit him in an assisted living circumstance, as he, you know, rec- (unclear) recently, within the past five years. He's, he's since left us. But he--we were reminiscing and just talking, and he said, "You know, I just want you to know, Jewell [HistoryMaker Jewell Jackson McCabe], that your father [HistoryMaker Hal Jackson] married the prettiest girl at Dunbar. We were all vying for her affection." But he was the showoff because he owned the basketball team, and he was handling the, the--on the radio, and he did all the right things. He had the big car and-- Speaker 1: So, my understanding from earlier was that your father started the, doing the broadcasting once he got to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]. So this is when he's at Howard. She's now a senior of the high school-- Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: --that he attended. Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: And so he's getting a little bit more flare. Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: Is he playing basketball, or is he just broadcasting? Speaker 2: He's broadcasting. Speaker 1: Basketball and hockey-- Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: --doing some music-- Speaker 2: Oh, he's doing everything. Speaker 1: --and some talk radio. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: So he's a minor celebrity. Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: And your mom [Julia Hawkins Jackson] is kind of a quiet-- Speaker 2: Exactly. And everybody wanted to marry (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Beauty, quite a beauty. Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: And so how was that? They got married, perhaps what year? 'Cause there's-- Speaker 2: Well, quite candidly, my father had--he was of the generation that if there was a circumstance where someone was impregnated, you married. And so he had married my sister's mother [Claudia Parrat] for six months. Speaker 1: Okay. Start us from the beginning. So your father meets your, your family-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --your mother's family. He gets your mother's sister pregnant? Speaker 2: Oh, no, no, no, no. I said my sister, my older sister [Jane Jackson Harley]. I had mentioned that I have an older sister. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: And we don't have the same mother. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Right. No, this was a, a, a person-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --that he had dated-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and she got pregnant. And he married her, and they stayed married for six months in order to give (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What year? Let, let me make sure-- Speaker 2: --the baby-- Speaker 1: Let's, let's attach ourselves. Speaker 2: Let's see, I'm gonna have to guess. Speaker 1: That's fine. Speaker 2: Okay. She's nine years older than I am. I was born in 1945. That would make her 1936. Speaker 1: So your father gets married in 1936? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And is this--does he get married to someone who also attends Dunbar High School? Speaker 2: I don't know-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --where she attended. Speaker 1: Did he just-- Speaker 2: I don't know. Speaker 1: --married someone else-- Speaker 2: Actually, the interesting thing is I did know her later in life. I thought she was an aunt of mine. Story_ID: 587551 Speaker 1: --Read this to you. This is the introduction written by Ertegun (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 1: Are you ready? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Oh, okay, then-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Go ahead and read it. Speaker 1: Yeah, please. Please. Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: This is from 'The House That Jack Built' ['The House That Jack Built: My Life as a Trailblazer in Broadcasting and Entertainment,' Hal Jackson and James Haskins]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: This is a book about Harold Jackson [HistoryMaker Hal Jackson]. Speaker 2: Okay, and this is the introduction, written by Ahmet Ertegun. It says, "The Wa-" (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And he's the person from Atlantic Records? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Who's now dead. Speaker 1: Fantastic. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So your father basically generated Atlantic Records-- Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: --is what you're saying. Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: Just wanted-- Speaker 2: My father had the first-- Speaker 1: --to make that clear. Speaker 2: --the first--before there was the Nat King Cole's television program ['The Nat King Cole Show'] in 1954 my father had 'Frontiers of Faith' on NBC TV. It says: "The Washington, D.C. I came to in 1935 was a quiet, beautiful city. It was not only the capital of United States, but also the totally segregated capital of Jim Crow. My father [Mehmet Munir Ertegun] was the Turkish ambassador to the United States, and my brother Nesuhi [Nesuhi Ertegun] and I were avid jazz fans. We had Sunday lunches and fun sessions at the embassy for local musicians and members of touring orchestras, such as Duke Ellington, Benny Carter, Tommy Dorsey, and Count Basie; pianists, Meade Lux Lewis and Peter Johnson [Pete Johnson]; and blues singer Big Joe Turner. Some southern senators objected to all this, but my father supported us. Nesuhi and I made friends and some outstanding members of the black community: physicians like Dr. Thomas Williston [Thomas H. Williston]; the dean of the Howard University [Washington, D.C.] department of English literature; author Sterling Brown [Sterling A. Brown]; architect Granville Hurley [Granville Warner Hurley]; psychology [sic.] professor Eugene Holmes [Eugene C. Holmes]; actor Canada Lee; young pianist [HistoryMaker] Billy Taylor; Judge William Hastie [William H. Hastie]; among many others. We also organized Washington's first integrated concerts. We produced jazz concerts with black and white performers on stage and a black and white audience for the first time. But then I was also--made friends with people I met backstage at the Howard Theatre [Washington, D.C.] and at the many nightclubs and after hour places that flourished in those days. They included 'My Man Harvey,' a big numbers operator; blues singer Rubberlegs Williams; and Cab Calloway's sister, Blanche Calloway, who was the manager of the Crystal Caverns [Washington, D.C.], a basement nightclub featuring drummers Streamline Burrell and other members of the black D.C. demimonde. As those people shared one thing, they were not accepted in the white only establishments, including department stores, theaters, movie houses, restaurants, hotels, and restrooms. It is difficult today to realize how oppressive it was so recently. During the years of the Second World War [World War II, WWII], things began to loosen up a bit. While I was going to graduate school at Georgetown University [Washington, D.C.], I began to think earnestly about starting a record company. After two false starts, including an attempted partnership with Lionel Hampton--Atlantic Records might have been Hampt-Tone Records--I borrowed ten thousand dollars from my dentist. And with Herb [Herb Abramson] and Miriam Abramson as my partners, I started Atlantic Records. It was this atmosphere that I first met Harold Jackson. We started to release our first record in 1948, but getting played on radio was another matter. I had been going around to radio stations with not too much success. One of the people who was nice to me from the very beginning was Hal Jackson. He had a show on WUST [WUST Radio, Washington, D.C.], which had studios on U Street Northwest, in Washington's black ghetto. Hal was a natural winner. He was young and good looking with a wonderful bubbly personality. He had no complexities and treated everyone the same way, whether it was the owner of the station, or the waiter in the restaurant. And whether he was addressing black or white, he lived as if segregation did not exist, although he suffered immensely through it. Hal was always cheerful but in a real way, not put on. Most of all, not only was he very cordial towards me, but he helped me in my greatest hour of need. He broke my first record in Washington, D.C. One sure way--." You, you want me to? Speaker 1: No, we want you to finish. Speaker 2: "One sure way to get radio play was to make a record a disc jockey would agree to use as a theme song. So I wrote and recorded an instrument that called--that, that we called 'The Blues That Jack Built,' after Hal's show, 'The House That Jack Built.' It featured a young Washington saxophonist named Billy Williams, and thanks to Harold, it became something of a hit. I scattered and riffed along with my friend, Julio Mario Santo Domingo, who is now chairman of the giant brewery Bavaria [Bogota, Colombia], and Avianca [Avianca S.A.], the Colombian airline. The next time I saw Harold was at Turner's Arena, Washington's Madison Square Garden, where his professional basketball team [Washington Bears] coached by Red Auerbach--," my father owned the team-- Speaker 1: We're gonna ask you about that. Speaker 2: "--was playing a game. That's the first time I sat on a bench at a pro game. I couldn't believe that our Harold Jackson was the organizer of this great team. But Harold has a keen entrepreneur--was a keen entrepreneur who loved what he was doing. He dearly loved sports, music, and broadcasting, and it was not surprising that he became so successful in his career. I am proud to have been Harold Jackson's friend for so many years. And I want to take this opportunity to thank him once more for all the help he gave me when I started the smallest company in the United States and since. Love you, Harold. Ahmet Ertegun." Story_ID: 587552 Speaker 1: I've got to hear about your father [HistoryMaker Hal Jackson] marrying in--what did we say, it was 1938? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Tell us that story please. Speaker 2: Okay, well, it's, it's in that book ['The House That Jack Built: My Life as a Trailblazer in Broadcasting and Entertainment,' Hal Jackson and James Haskins]. I--what I know is that he had been dating, that the young woman [Claudia Parrat] got pregnant, that he married her. And reason why I say of that era, I have other friends that are about my age that have a similar circumstance; that you marry the woman because that's the proper thing to do, to give the child the name, but they never lived together. And he had the baby [Jane Jackson Harley]. I don't know the circumstances of why he had the baby, but he did. So my mother [Julia Hawkins Jackson] talked about stories of meeting him at the basketball games and that in his backpack, in his pack, he'd have this little baby, and that she had fallen in love with the baby, and then he fell in love with my mother, and then my mother married my father. Speaker 1: Now these are basketball games that are happening at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]? This is before he's actually got the, I think the, the [Washington Bears]-- Speaker 2: I would be guessing. I would assume. Speaker 1: Okay, so let's just talk a little bit about--let's just contextualize your father-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --at Howard. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: What's he doing there besides broadcasting? Is he in school? Is he majoring in anything (laughter)? Does he even need to (laughter)? Speaker 2: He had to be majoring in something. I would assume it was English or you know, whatever the (laughter), whatever the liberal arts curriculum was in, in his day (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And does he graduate from Howard? Speaker 2: He graduates from Howard, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, so your parents get married near--so, wait. He's not divorced yet? He's married this person. Speaker 2: Oh, he divorced, oh, after six months. Speaker 1: Okay, and so-- Speaker 2: I assume that he divorced after three months. I think it takes six months to get a divorce. Speaker 1: I see. And how--so, your parents marry in--circa 1939, 1940? Speaker 2: Something, something like that. Speaker 1: And, and so did they live together? What was their life-- Speaker 2: They, they-- Speaker 1: --like together? Speaker 2: --lived together. My father bought my grandmother's home from my grandmother [Ercer Ricks] and moved into a two family home in Washington, D.C., and, yeah. Speaker 1: You said you--he bought-- Speaker 2: He bought my mother's mother--in other words, the home that my-- Speaker 1: And is this the same two family house that they move into? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Got it. Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: And does your grandmother live there with them? Speaker 2: Oh yes (laughter). Speaker 1: How does that go? Speaker 2: I wasn't born until six years later, but what I hear-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --is actually (laughter) doesn't surprise me. My father took my grandmother to the ball games. I mean my, my father and my grandmother were very close friends, you know. And my mother was always like the little girl, if that makes sense, but it, it does to me, I mean my, my recollections of my mother being the best mom in the world, and my grandmother being one of my best elders, but always my grandmother, and always in charge. Speaker 1: And how long a period before you arrive on the scene? Speaker 2: Six years. Speaker 1: And where is your (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was born in 1945. Speaker 1: And where is your sister, who was in the backpack, once your father moves in? Speaker 2: Well, she was actually sort of--my mother made a conscious decision not to have her own children until this little girl had a sense of security. So you raise a good point about timing. I was born in 1945. My brother [Harold B. Jackson, Jr.] and I are six years apart. My brother is six years older than I am, which would have made him--his birth would have been December 27th, 1939. Speaker 1: Okay, I just want to make that clear. Story_ID: 587553 Speaker 1: So you have how many brothers and sisters? Speaker 2: I have one brother. Speaker 1: Okay, and is he the child of your, of, of your mother [Julia Hawkins Jackson] and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, so he's born first. Speaker 2: First. Speaker 1: And you said that the, your first sister [Jane Jackson Harley] was six years older, so are they born around the same time? Speaker 2: Well, no, she was nine years older. Speaker 1: Thank you. So she's born--he's born when she's about three? Speaker 2: I was saying that she--that she was born in 1936. Speaker 1: And then your brother was--can you tell us his name and when he was born? Speaker 2: Oh yes, Harold B. Jackson, Jr.-- Speaker 1: Fantastic. Speaker 2: (Laughter) The judge. Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Oh, a judge where? Speaker 2: Oh, in Milwaukee [Wisconsin]. He is now in private practice 'cause I think there's a little more money. He was, he was Seventh District Court judge [sic.]. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: And he went to--'cause my father [HistoryMaker Hal Jackson] and Adam Clayton Powell [Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.] were very close friends, so my brother was influenced by that. My brother went to Colgate University [Hamilton, New York] because, because Adam went to Colgate University. Speaker 1: I see. Okay, so your--everyone's living at your--now your father's--(unclear) your [maternal] grandmother's [Ercer Ricks] house [in Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: There's your older sister; she's nine years older. Then your brother comes along-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and then you. Story_ID: 587554 Speaker 1: What's your earliest memory? Speaker 2: One fleeting memory of the, the, of the old house--I don't know if it was the house--but living on East Capitol Street [Washington, D.C.]. I just remember having to take naps. I was about three, and I didn't like it. And I remember, I remember that. And then I remember meeting this man, and I didn't know--I was about three. I didn't--I could walk, but they carried me on a satin pillow. And they carried me on a satin pillow to the point that when this man entered the house, I got up from the pillow and walked over to him. His name was Dolly King [William "Dolly" King]. And he was a major in, in the old days of segregated ball. He was the pro basketball player. And he played for my father's team, which was the Washington Bears when they were in Washington [D.C.] and the Harlem Renaissance [New York Renaissance] when they were in New York [New York]. Speaker 1: Outstanding. I did not know that they moved to Harlem with him. So about what year did your (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, but they moved back and forth in, in the '30s [1930s]. Speaker 1: Ah, okay, so can we get a little information about your father's-- Speaker 2: That's written about-- Speaker 1: --sports teams? Speaker 2: --all these books on black hi- black, blacks in, in-- Speaker 1: Sports? Speaker 2: --in sports, yeah. Speaker 1: So how old is the team at the time when this star player visits? Speaker 2: Had to be '48 [1948]. Speaker 1: And how does your father [HistoryMaker Hal Jackson] create that? In the same way that he bought time (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Because that's the same period of time-- Speaker 1: --for the radio? Speaker 2: --that, that Ertegun [Ahmet Ertegun] is talking about being at the, at the (unclear)--at the basketball-- Speaker 1: At these games. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. So he's--the only college sports that your father was covering pretty much was hockey? Speaker 2: Probably. Speaker 1: And then-- Speaker 2: I, I really-- Speaker 1: Then he got into his own sports. Speaker 2: Yeah. I really would have to look at the book ['The House That Jack Built: My Life as a Trailblazer in Broadcasting and Entertainment,' Hal Jackson and James Haskins] for that-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --'cause I really--I'm not a sports person. Speaker 1: Okay, so we're back to your earliest memory. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And have we--have you told us that you--have you finished with the satin pillow (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But my next is when I'm five years old. Speaker 1: What happened then? Speaker 2: We moved to--which was a signature of my mother [Julia Hawkins Jackson] and my father. We always had to have the biggest house in the block and on the corner. And we tended, not in Washington, but we integrated neighborhoods. And it was in ref- in reflection, realized that it was a segregated circumstance. But my mother and [maternal] grandmother [Ercer Ricks] so protected me that I didn't have, I didn't have a clue about real racism until I was--until 1976, which is really phenomenal. Story_ID: 587555 Speaker 1: What did your mother [Julia Hawkins Jackson] do? Was she-- Speaker 2: Well, my mother (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) a homemaker? Speaker 2: --was a careerist. But when she had me, I was the last child and one who was, as my father [HistoryMaker Hal Jackson] said, when the first child [Jane Jackson Harley] was born, he didn't have a lot of money. By the time I was born, he did, and I always assumed that life was, was that way. And I can tell you that I wouldn't have had it any other way. I was reared with a great sense of discipline, but I was spoiled. Anybody that was carried around literally on a satin pillow was spoiled. And I think my sense of confidence and self has to do with the way I was reared and the way I was indulged. And I say that because today people think that if you overindulge a child, you can ruin a child. I was always punished severely, not physically, in ways that I think were a little dramatic. The reason why I live now an isolated life--I'm around lots and lots of people all the time, but I had monastic kind of punishment. Things were taken away from me, you know, I couldn't use the phone, both ways for a month, never a week. That's a lot for a child. Speaker 1: So what kind of things would you--well, what kind of offenses would you commit that would result in these-- Speaker 2: Draconian? Speaker 1: --monastic punishments? Speaker 2: It was really interesting. It had to do with things that now I know how brilliant they were, how smart they were. Speaker 1: Tell us about some of them. Speaker 2: I would at--the one that was most dramatic, I was thirteen. And I, at this point, when I moved into St. Albans [Queens, New York], we were the first black family. And my brother [Harold B. Jackson, Jr.] was away at Groton academy [Groton School, Groton, Massachusetts]. My sister [Jane Jackson Harley] had never left Washington, D.C.--she married a college boy, a Harley, Eugene Harley. I was ten years old. It was right after Brown versus Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954]. I wasn't aware of all of that, except that the schools were being integrated in St. Albans, which was all-white; mainly, the, the families of Exxon [Exxon Mobil Corporation] executives. And they were busing in black poor children from Jamaica--South Jamaica, Queens [New York]. And I was a tenacious, highly energetic child. And so all these girls, by the time I was twelve going on going, knew that I was Hal Jackson's daughter and that I could get them backstage at the Apollo Theater [New York, New York]. So we would have a car take us into the city, and we were supposed to watch one show and come home. Well, one particular time my mother wasn't with me. And I knew I was supposed to get a car and come home with my girlfriends. And we had called ourselves the, the Jamals [ph.]. We had these little capri pants, and we had made these little paisley print tops, and we had little white Js. And of course, I had manipulated that since my name was Jewell [HistoryMaker Jewell Jackson McCabe] so the J could double; you know, didn't, didn't hurt. And so the girls wanted to--we had seen [HistoryMaker] Smokey Robinson and probably Frankie Lymon. And you know, we just were, do whatever, and we had, you know, seats almost right, whatever. And then they kept saying, "Well, can't you take us backstage, can't you?" And I knew I wasn't supposed to. I knew that that was forbidden if my mother or father wasn't with me, but I'm a showoff, so we went backstage. And nothing happened bad to us, but things could have happened bad to us, and I got punished for a month. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: And my father punished me over the phone. My father managed me over the phone. I have a very strange relationship with the phone (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, I want to just take you back a little bit. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And you said your mother was a careerist? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So what kinds of things did she do? Speaker 2: She was what you would call an executive assistant today. Speaker 1: Okay, and who did she assist? Speaker 2: A girlfriend, Anne Roberts [Anne Mason Roberts], who was the deputy secretary of HUD [sic. deputy regional administrator, U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development], and her husband and my father were running buddies. Her, her husband, Stan Roberts [Stanley Roberts], was the first black journalist with the Courier [Pittsburgh Courier; New Pittsburgh Courier], which was a newspaper that was prominent, very prominent like the Chicago Tribune. Speaker 1: And when did your mom start doing that? Speaker 2: She started doing that when, when I was about six years old-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --for--until I turned thirteen. Story_ID: 587556 Speaker 1: Okay. So as a kid, since we're still in-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --you're still at home as a kid, who's, who else is coming to your house? I mean my understanding is that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Everybody. Speaker 1: --you said every- your father [HistoryMaker Hal Jackson] knows everybody. Speaker 2: Everybody. Speaker 1: Who's, who's, who's-- Speaker 2: Every- I mean, you know-- Speaker 1: --coming? First we had-- Speaker 2: --Nat King Coles coming to the house. Speaker 1: --the star basketball player [William "Dolly" King]. Speaker 2: The star basketball player who looked like--I mean he was like Jack and the Beanstalk. I mean I didn't, I don't even remember seeing his face he was so tall. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And he was my godfather. Speaker 1: And you're in, you're still in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] at his point. Speaker 2: I was still in D.C. Speaker 1: Who else is coming? Nat King Cole--just repeat that (laughter). Speaker 2: Nat King Cole, I know, Lena Horne, you name it, I mean anybody that was--any and everybody, I mean. Mrs. Bethune [Mary McLeod Bethune], my father raised eighty thousand dollars for the National Council of Negro Women. You know, Dr. Drew [Charles R. Drew]. But lots and lots of women, women who were, my mother [Julia Hawkins Jackson] always had around the kitchen table. So you know, I'm trying to think of who I didn't know. Pearl Bailey, you know. Speaker 1: And would your parents host these, all these people when they came home? Speaker 2: Weren't hosting (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Or was your father-- Speaker 2: They just were there. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: They would come by to talk. Remember, my father had something that is very common today for young African Americans. He had a radio program ['The House That Jack Built']. Back in the '40s [1940s] that wasn't common at all. He had the only vehicle. And in fact, [HistoryMaker] Berry Gordy, when my father came to New York [New York]--. See, Peter Straus' father, R. Nathan Straus [sic. Nathan Straus, Jr.], brought my father to broadcast live from Birdland in 1954 here in New York. And he was here, sort of between Washington, D.C. and New York for a year before we moved here. But my, but my dad, he was the only vehicle for politicians, for musicians. There weren't, there wasn't--by the time, the, the late '40s [1940s], let's say by '48 [1948], '49 [1949], there were a couple of other jocks [disc jockey], but not talk show hosts. Speaker 1: And was your father doing more than one show on more than one network in Washington, D.C.? Speaker 2: My father was doing two shows a day in Washington, three shows a day from three different cities, including Washington, Baltimore, Maryland, and in parts of Virginia. Speaker 1: So he was physically moving-- Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) from place to place. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So was he ever at home? Speaker 2: And the great story, the great story--no. The great story was in the summertime, because now we're so used to AC, you know, air conditioning, where he would have a block of ice, he said, and, and you know, and a fan on the block of ice, and, and, and that was the way it would go, yeah, I know. Speaker 1: So, how-- Speaker 2: So I said when my father managed me via phone is because my father wasn't home. Speaker 1: He was always at the radio station. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: But he was still the disciplinarian. Speaker 2: Oh, my god, yes. Speaker 1: And so would your mother say something like-- Speaker 2: My [maternal] grandmother [Ercer Ricks] would be, but my mother had a rule that my grandmother could not punish us. My mother made my father give us our marching orders. Speaker 1: And so she would say, "I'm gonna call your father?" Speaker 2: No, she would say, "When your daddy calls we'll talk." Yes, it was more frightening than if somebody yelled at you. Speaker 1: (Laughter) I bet. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Story_ID: 587557 Speaker 1: The first thing I asked you about your childhood was your earliest memory. Now as you-- Speaker 2: I have another one that-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --that's very, very important in terms of good parenting in particular, and I see it now. There were two points in my life: one was with my mother and one was with my second husband [Eugene L. McCabe] where I thought people--where I could not understand how they had such genius. And now, you know, at my age, I would have it if I saw a child that was bright eyed and had a lot of energy. I always thought that I was mad for dancing. I just assumed that I always wanted to dance. At three years old my mother enrolled me in dancing school. And we'd roll up the carpet, and we would do the jitterbug, and we'd do all this when I was--because they wouldn't allow you in dance school until you were three. But at three I started taking dancing three hours a day. By the time I was ready for high school--I went to the High School of Performing Arts [Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York]--I danced five hours a day. I had my academics, and then we went to Syvilla Fort's dance school [Syvilla Fort Studio of Theater Dance, New York, New York]. And Syvilla Fort had been a principal dancer with [HistoryMaker] Katherine Dunham. So I had all these chic people who were on Broadway who would come to just warm up or whatever every night. So I'd do my homework, and then I would watch these--and I would dance with them. And I just was too thrilled. Speaker 1: And what kind of music would you be dancing to? Speaker 2: Oh, Afro-Cuban. Speaker 1: This is-- Speaker 2: Jazz and Afro-Cuban. So, you know, people--I went through teen years where girls were quote unquote getting into trouble. And people reflected years later and said, "Well, Jewell [HistoryMaker Jewell Jackson McCabe], you're vivacious; you have this energy," whatever. And I would say, "Well, I just never got in trouble." I never thought about it when I was twenty or thirty, but then as I started to turn forty, I started to think about it. And I said, this quiet lady was so smart. She also did other things that were very, very interesting and very compelling. And, and she never forced herself, but she was always there. Now we were living in all-white neighborhoods, so when I became a Girl Scout--first I was a Brownie in Washington, D.C. Speaker 1: How old--when do you start the Brownies? Speaker 2: Brownies, I was like six, seven. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then when I was a Girl Scout-- Speaker 1: That's 1951, 1952. Speaker 2: And so by '55 [1955], we moved here. I was ten. I wanted to be a Girl Scout here. And so of course I qualified; I had been a Brownie. But my mother had gone, unbeknownst to me, and gone and taken whatever lessons you take to become an assistant Brown- Girl Scout coach. So I didn't realize that--you know, so, so that I wouldn't be subjected to anything untoward in this all-white situation. And then the other funny story is when I decided I was gonna get the swimming badge. And Andrew Jackson High School [Queens, New York], which is all black today and, and actually has I think--had now a succession of wonderful black women principals. But at that point Andrew Jackson in 1955 was an all-white school. And on Thursday night the pool was open for the girls to learn how to swim. And at that point we weren't using cream perms to straighten our hair, it was the hot comb. And so there was, there was little Jewell and dedicated Julia [Julia Hawkins Jackson], her mom, and hair was not gonna stop this show. So, the kind of commitment my mother showed was unbelievable, including being that shadow. She was not a backstage mother. But she'd pick me up, and, and I told you I loved shellfish, so we'd have the famous Howard Johnson fried clams and wonderful salad and--for dinner. And I'd have my homework done, and then I'd take dance some more until I was exhausted. And then I would be tucked in at about ten o'clock at night. Story_ID: 587558 Speaker 1: You're living in Washington, D.C., when you're (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 1: --about three? Speaker 2: I was actually born at home. Speaker 1: Oh, wow. Speaker 2: The gynecologist lived next door. Speaker 1: To your [maternal] grandmother's [Ercer Ricks]-- Speaker 2: Yes, well-- Speaker 1: --two family house-- Speaker 2: --to my father's [HistoryMaker Hal Jackson]. Speaker 1: --now your father's two family. Speaker 2: And his wife was named Jewell [ph.]. And this is my mother's [Julia Hawkins Jackson] folktale that when she was pregnant with my brother, she was worried all the time because it was Jane [Jane Jackson Harley], my sister's--she was afraid of rivalry and whatever and that she did not enjoy having the baby, him, my brother Jackie [Harold B. Jackson, Jr.] at the hospital. She felt that the environment was very cold and sterile, and so she asked to give birth at home. So with the physician living next door and his wife--and physicians in the black communities, like, you're talking about six degrees separa- it's like a half degree of separation. I don't remember--his name was Dr. Fred Woods [ph.]. This becomes for me prophetic later in life, 'cause I married a Fred Ward [Frederick Ward] later in life. And Jewell, according to my mother, had flaming red hair, had personality and was vivacious, defied all race lines, and my mother said, just kept her pregnancy, my mother's pregnancy, joyous, that she would borrow my father's Cadillac and drive to New York [New York]. And they would do matinee and a wonderful dinner, and stay over, and then drive back to Washington, D.C., and that they just did everything together, and they had such fun. And so I was born at home, August 2nd, 1945. Story_ID: 587559 Speaker 1: And did that go over well? Did your brother [Harold B. Jackson, Jr.]--I actually got stuck on your brother's birth. Did your brother's birth ultimately go over well with your older sister [Jane Jackson Harley]? Speaker 2: It's an interesting question because there's such--when you have a sister that's nine years older than you are, it's almost doesn't matter who the mother is. I always was the pest. You know, I was--I mean I can remember one time my father [HistoryMaker Hal Jackson] was featured in Ebony magazine. And they have pictures of little chubby Jewell [HistoryMaker Jewell Jackson McCabe] at five, you know, looking up at my sister getting dressed for her debutante, cotillion and you know. And I think that it was always, "Mom [Julia Hawkins Jackson], get Jewell out of here," you know, when the girls were--when she was sixteen and seventeen and eighteen. And I think I probably was a pest, you know. And my brother was al- to me my brother was never home. My brother was always in school, but I do remember fondly before he went to, he went to Groton academy [Groton School, Groton, Massachusetts]. And before he went, I remember he was a paper boy. And I looked forward--because the paper boys have to get up really early, and so it's dark out. And when he would come home--I loved 'Archie' and 'Jughead' comic books. And I am so sorry that we threw them away when we moved, 'cause I mean at the time I didn't care. I didn't think I would ever want them. But every time he came home he brought his little sister, you know, either one or two comic books. I remember that very fondly. Speaker 1: And was Groton academy a boarding school? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So at what age did your brother go away? Speaker 2: Oh, god, he was twelve. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 587560 Speaker 1: So you lived in Washington, D.C. from three to about five [years old]? Speaker 2: Three--well, from when I was, from when I was born. I was born in Washington, D.C. Speaker 1: Thank you. Speaker 2: Yes, until I was five. Speaker 1: And then you moved to New York [New York]. Speaker 2: Well, there--I moved--I lived in Washington for ten years. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We didn't move until 1955. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So we moved to 3664 Park Place, which was a bigger house-- Speaker 1: On the corner. Speaker 2: --on the corner from East Capitol Street when I was turning five years old. Speaker 1: Got it. Speaker 2: So it was from five to ten. Speaker 1: And then from five to ten when you were living on--your father [HistoryMaker Hal Jackson] was commuting-- Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) doing his radio show ['The House That Jack Built'] in more than one place? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And then tell me about when your fa- how the move to New York developed. Your father? Speaker 2: Well, knowing my mother [Julia Hawkins Jackson], she probably just said, now enough is enough with this weekend visit stuff and you know. But, but I can say this (unclear), I swear to you on everything important in the world that from the time I was conscious, I always felt that I was supposed to be in New York. I always thought I was a New Yorker. Speaker 1: So your father came to New York first and was commuting weekends. Speaker 2: (Nods head) But remember my father was commuting to New York since 1947 when he started the Harlem Renaissance basketball team [New York Renaissance], which was the Washington Bears. So during basketball season he was all over with--either Washington, D.C., or as my mother said, one time my father lost a job because (laughter) somebody called up looking for my dad. And my, my brother [Harold B. Jackson, Jr.]--I almost said my little brother, but I'm six years younger than he is--said, "My daddy's in the (unclear)," (laughter). Story_ID: 587561 Speaker 1: If your father [HistoryMaker Hal Jackson] was coming home on weekends once he moved to New York [New York], was he--was it essentially the same setup before he moved (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, absolutely. Speaker 1: Because he was so busy he basically was home on weekends. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: And so moving to New York just made it easier. Speaker 2: Sunday was the day you saw Daddy. Speaker 1: And what happened on Sundays? Speaker 2: Oh, god, what didn't happen? Oh, we ate from morning to night. Speaker 1: What did you eat? Speaker 2: Oh, please, we had breakfast that was, you know, my father li- loves grits. And we had this sort of schism in the family that me, my grandmother, and my mom [Julia Hawkins Jackson] liked potatoes, so we had mashed potatoes. And my sister [Jane Jackson Harley], and my brother [Harold B. Jackson, Jr.] and my father liked rice and grits, so we would have, you know, grits. And we would have crab--like a crabmeat casserole, and we would have all kinds of eggs, and fried chicken, and you name it. And we'd--it was a, a banquet throughout the day. Speaker 1: Who--okay, so it was an ongoing graze. Speaker 2: Oh, please. Speaker 1: Who was cooking this food? Speaker 2: Oh, my [maternal] grandmother, Ricksy [Ercer Ricks], and my mother. Well, my grandmother Ricksy could make the best biscuits in the world, just sit and talk to you with little jelly glass. And she'd take that, you know, flour and roll that dough out and talk and-- Speaker 1: And who did most of the cooking? Would your grandmother pretty much only cook on Sundays, or-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: --you know, who was (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was sort of-- Speaker 1: --during the week? Speaker 2: --raised like an only child. And so Fridays--in fact, I just did a project for a company that I consult for. I just did some focus groups on obesity and the unique relationship the African American community has with food. And my personal story was about Friday, because Friday became a holiday. And it was a holiday that extended through Sunday, which was Daddy's day. So, Friday was--everything was fried but the ice cream, I mean French fries, potato chips, chicken. Oh, it was just fun. And we, you know, my mother would make donuts, you know, the deep fried donuts. And, and we'd have the, the powdered sugar and oh, please. And the holidays, my mother would go all out with--just 'cause you always wanted the kids to come to me, and that's how she managed me a great deal. Speaker 1: So all your friends, the people hanging on the street-- Speaker 2: We were the clubhouse. Speaker 1: --they're at your house. Speaker 2: We were the--and remember-- Speaker 1: And did your-- Speaker 2: --my father-- Speaker 1: --father's friends-- Speaker 2: --was this big broadcaster, so we had a basement that had all kinds of speakers, and he had his own, you know, control room. And so it was music, ping pong table. You know, we would go, in summertime we'd go crabbing, you know, and just, you know, newspaper route, and oh, we just, we ate a lot and had a good time. Speaker 1: And so what's the most important holiday? I mean clearly all of them, but which holiday was the high holiday at-- Speaker 2: Christmas-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and my birthday. Speaker 1: (Laughter) And for your birthday, what kind of-- Speaker 2: Well, my birthday (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) what would that be like? Speaker 2: --it made it very difficult for my bir- for my first husband [Frederick Ward] because he did not understand that I was supposed to be awakened at like six A.M. with kisses, and hugs, and "Happy Birthday," and all kinds of treats throughout the day, you know. Speaker 1: And so tell us about a childhood birthday, where you were-- Speaker 2: Well, a child-- Speaker 1: --awakened at six. Speaker 2: Well, a childhood birthday was really, was really easy. It was whatever, you know, I wanted. My grandmother would take these apples and she would just scoop them out. But the way she scooped them, it was sort of like a, like a chunky kind of apple sauce. And she would put lots of brown sugar in them, right, and then you'd have butter, and it would be baked. And so we would start off with something like that, you know. And then if it--and remember, it's August, so it's hot so there's lot of watermelon 'cause Jewell [HistoryMaker Jewell Jackson McCabe] loved watermelon. And Jewell loves fish, so you know, we had fried porgies, and I would--and I, and I, and I couldn't say porgies well as a little, little one, so I would say pogies; I wanted pogies all the time. So it would be eating and seven layer cakes, coconuts cakes. But that's why, in fact, when I was in my forties and Betty Shabazz was a part of it and Marcia Gillespie [HistoryMaker Marcia Ann Gillespie], we had a gourmet club called the (Unclear). Speaker 1: And did you have any weight issues (laughter)? Speaker 2: Recently-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --but not then. Speaker 1: But not as a kid? Speaker 2: As a kid I didn't because I had--was dancing all the time. I don't ever remember overeating as a child. But I showed you a picture of me at ten. I had a pudgy stomach. I went to Lane Bryant, yeah. But, but as I went to the High School of Performing Arts [Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York], and all of the vanity that I do possess kicked in. No, I was--I'll never forget I bumped into a friend of my mom's relatively recently. And she said "Jewell, I never thought I'd see you over a size seven." But-- Speaker 1: "Thanks." Speaker 2: You know. Speaker 1: "Thank you," (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: Just say, "Thank you." Story_ID: 587562 Speaker 1: You've told us many answers to this, but if I could just ask, you know, what are the sights, and sounds, and smells of your childhood, let's say when you moved to St. Albans, Queens [New York]? Like what, what was the atmosphere around you like? Speaker 2: Well, everything was always lush and beautiful. And I hated gardening, and my mother [Julia Hawkins Jackson] lived to garden. So, if we had a heavy rain and those nasty, horrible long worms would come out of the ground, you know, my job--we always had a nursery that helped my mother actually landscape the, our area. But I had always chores because there was a great sense of discipline and responsibility. And I had a work ethic from the time I was a child. I think certain things are just a part of your energy. I am a lousy domestic. I can clean a kitchen very well. I can clean windows very well, but I don't like to go back and do it again, so that, you know, like, so if somebody uses a glass after I've washed it, I'm very annoyed. So, you know, so I'm not a good homemaker in that regard. But as a child, my gardening responsibilities were those daisies that would pop up that would, would ruin her green carpet. Speaker 1: So you would, so you would say that you had a sense of discipline from-- Speaker 2: Oh-- Speaker 1: --dancing daily, having specific chores-- Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: --having a rigorous response to things that you did that were not inside the circle. Speaker 2: And a wonderful example was I forged my working papers when I was fifteen because, not that I didn't already--I had a credit card to Lord and Taylor, but I was a clothes horse, you know. Well, the High School of Performing Arts [Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York] helped that too, but I also was just that conscious. My father's [HistoryMaker Hal Jackson] a bit of one also. And I wanted to work, and so at--be- I worked at Macy's [R.H. Macy and Company Store; Macy's Herald Square, New York, New York]. And I made the five look like an eight 'cause you had to be eighteen. And I would--my mother said the funniest thing is in--by this time, we lived in Lenox Terrace [New York, New York] when I was fifteen. And she said she could hear me singing coming down the hall with bags of clothes 'cause I had the discount, and I had all the money. Story_ID: 587563 Speaker 1: Tell me about your early schooling. So you said you started dancing at three, and you were going to dance classes. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And you continued those when you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) At the High School of Performing Arts [Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York]. Speaker 1: Well, wait. Before that, as a kid-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --you're dancing as a young child-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --to Afro-Cuban and so forth. Speaker 2: Oh, the basic discipline was ballet. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The Afro-Cuban was what I did after the High School of Performing Arts every day-- Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: --from the time I was in the ninth grade to the twelfth grade. Speaker 1: Ah, so take us back to the ballet for a bit. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So you start dancing at three. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Or you start dancing before that, but you can't get into the dance class at three. So where do you start your dance training? Speaker 2: Well, really it was with my mother [Julia Hawkins Jackson]. And my father [HistoryMaker Hal Jackson] always knew somebody that there was--oh, god, I cannot remember the wonderful woman's name that--. I actually danced with Maria Tallchief, who many people think was the first black in classical ballet, but, but she was known as an American Indian [Native American], not as an African American or colored or Negro, whatever. It was Doris, Doris Turner or Doris Brown [sic. HistoryMaker Doris Jones]. I'll have to find out for you--but, dance school [Jones-Haywood School of Ballet; Jones-Haywood Dance School, Washington, D.C.]. And Doris would come over and you know, whether my mother had the rug rolled up or whatever, and we would just be dancing whatever the popular dance was. Speaker 1: And then after you worked with her, did you go to any other dance schools while you were still living in the D.C. area [Washington, D.C.]? Speaker 2: No, in D.C. I went to, and that was whatever the dance school for all the children. That's, that was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Where you're going to. Speaker 2: --that was it. And many of those, in fact, had gone on to dance with, with Martha Graham [Martha Graham Dance Company] and Katherine Dunham [Katherine Dunham Company]. Speaker 1: Okay. Then when you moved to New York [New York], did you enter a dance school here? Speaker 2: Oh yes. Speaker 1: And where did you go? Speaker 2: I can't remember the name of the woman. It was somebody that operated a dance school at her home. But Gregory [Gregory Hines] and Maurice Hines [HistoryMaker Maurice Hines, Jr.] were there too. They were taking tap dancing. Speaker 1: Okay, and anyone else-- Speaker 2: That I can--? Well-- Speaker 1: --dancing with you (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) St., St. Albans [Queens, New York] at the time--. Nobody that, that was really famous. When I was in high school, though, there were people. Altivor- Altovise Gore [Altovise Davis] was ahead of me at the High School of Performing Arts, but she married Sammy Davis [Sammy Davis, Jr.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I had auditioned for 'Golden Boy' at that time. I think I was a, a junior in school. Story_ID: 587564 Speaker 1: Where did you go to elementary school? Speaker 2: I went to P.S. 136 [Roy Wilkins School] in Queens [New York]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --that's in St. Albans. And I'm trying to remember--Park View Elementary [Park View Elementary School] in Washington, D.C. Speaker 1: Okay, and did anybody who we might recognize go to Park View Elementary (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Everybody. Speaker 1: --with you? Speaker 2: But I can't-- Speaker 1: Who went there? Speaker 2: --tell you names. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I mean the, the, the middle class black community, we, you, you know, they, we all went-- Speaker 1: Went to Park-- Speaker 2: --to the same school, um-hm. Speaker 1: And then in--could you just repeat for us in St. Albans? Speaker 2: It was like when I went, my freshman year at Bard College [Annandale-on-Hudson, New York], there were 430 students in the entire school. It was an elite school based on the European form, somewhat like Antioch [Antioch College; Antioch University] but smaller. And I was a dance major there. But of the eight blacks, spread through-- Speaker 1: Through the four hundred. Speaker 2: There was three blacks in the freshman class, my freshman class, myself included. Of the eight, seven mother or father had gone to Dunbar [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School, Washington, D.C.] with my mother [Julia Hawkins Jackson] or father [HistoryMaker Hal Jackson]. Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: That's how tight----the Talented Tenth--of Du Bois' [W.E.B. Du Bois] Talented Tenth was. Speaker 1: So when you were in elementary school-- Speaker 2: So that was a metaphor pretty much for--. Yeah. Speaker 1: Metaphor for which? Speaker 2: For, that was a metaphor for elementary school. That if you--anybody that was going to not just survive, but be prosperous professionals were in school-- Speaker 1: Was in your elementary school. Speaker 2: --with me at that time. Speaker 1: Fantastic. And what kind of a student were you as an elementary school-- Speaker 2: Great question. Speaker 1: --student? Speaker 2: I excelled in, I mean excelled in subjects that I liked. Speaker 1: Okay. What subjects did you like? Speaker 2: Math, science. I was a C level student in English, and yet people hire me because I write well. Speaker 1: Well, you're good even when you're bad, apparently (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter). Speaker 1: So that--I don't doubt it. Story_ID: 587565 Speaker 1: Was dance your main hobby when you were--I want to ask you about your hobbies, but since I know that dance (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, god, yeah, now-- Speaker 1: --was a good thing-- Speaker 2: --you're gonna sound like somebo- that--now, now it sounds like you've interviewed somebody that you couldn't have interviewed because she's got dementia, because my mother [Julia Hawkins Jackson] used to fuss at me every day. Speaker 1: Why? Because: "Jewell [HistoryMaker Jewell Jackson McCabe], you must find a hobby." Speaker 1: And dance is not a hobby (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) "Or you will be--." No, she didn't see, she didn't see dance as a hobby. Speaker 1: I see. Okay, and so presumably, you had no hobbies. Speaker 2: Well, I think she's-- Speaker 1: Or as it was written. Speaker 2: Now I realize she's a little crazy because I did everything. Remember, I had been a Brownie. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So I learned how to do the whip stitch, and I had this little--what did you call those, not cheesecloth, these little plastic--what do you call that cloth, like, it's like a soft linoleum that kids make things out of? I learned how to whip stitch with, with yarn. I used to make potholders. I did all that foolishness at camp. Yeah, I wasn't, I wasn't mad for it. But I was the type of child, and I think that this is--the babies are up. I was the, the type of child that I had to master something. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So when I learned how to knit, my mother was a crocheter, and she would make each child--we each--and I fondly have the one that she made for me, you know, a wonderful throw, you know, from crocheting, and I learned how to knit. Well, I had to the--when I learned how to knit as a, as a, as a teenager, I didn't put it down 'til I'd finished a sweater. That's--I, I'm a little obsessive that way. Speaker 1: So a little, so kind of, you sort of one thing, one track at a time. Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: Again, it sounds like you're just very disciplined and (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Well, my father [HistoryMaker Hal Jackson], for example, when I learned--it was so cute. When I graduated eighth grade [at P.S. 136, Roy Wilkins School, Queens, New York], part of our home ec [home economics] responsibility was to make our graduation dress. And so I'd made my--oh, and it was adorable. I mean it was really adorable. It had a pink underlay, and then I had a white sort of piqueon top with, you know, eyelets. And he was so impressed that he went out and bought me a Singer sewing machine with all the attachments. And I, and I made a couple of slip dresses for the first month, and then I never picked it up again, you know. But they always encouraged anything that I did and did well. But my mother was obsessed that I didn't have a hobby. Story_ID: 587566 Speaker 1: Did you attend church while you were-- Speaker 2: Oh yes, always. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But then I started to use the church-- Speaker 1: And did your father [HistoryMaker Hal Jackson] (laughter)-- Speaker 2: --in devilish ways. Speaker 1: Since your father was home on Sunday, did he join you-- Speaker 2: Oh-- Speaker 1: --in church? Speaker 2: --he went to church with us all the time, in Washington [D.C.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: New York [New York] was a little different story because when we moved to New York, he lived in Harlem. He lived on Riverside Drive [sic.] in the Ivey Delph houses [Ivey Delph Apartments, New York, New York], which was something really in. But we lived in this house. So even though we (laughter) lived in New York, he was in Manhattan [New York], where all--you know, to me, to me one of the major shockers--it wasn't a disappointment, but it was--is the house that we moved to in New York was more rural to me than in Washington. And when I thought about moving to New York, I thought about Broadway and bright lights, and so I was too frustrated. But my father lived in Manhattan. Speaker 1: And would you go and visit him at the--every day (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, god, yes. Speaker 1: As much as you could possibly-- Speaker 2: Oh yes. Speaker 1: --get there. Speaker 2: And, and the woman who, who my father had--was real close to the Brown Bomber, you know, Joe Louis. So his ex-wife [HistoryMaker Rose Morgan] had the hairdresser shop, you know, which was a whole block on 145th Street. What the hell was it called? Rose Morgan's House of Beauty [New York, New York]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: And what was it like when you visited your father at the Ivey Delph? Speaker 2: It was always to me-- Speaker 1: I mean what kind of a place was that? Speaker 2: --so--super sophisticated, 'cause of, like the Rose Morgan House of Beauty, you know, it was the first time--'cause you remember, in Washington everything was segregated. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So you didn't--but I didn't know it. I thought that, I thought civility and good manners suggested that you never used a public restroom. I--you know and it, it still makes sense to me (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Unclear) think that perhaps your mother [Julia Hawkins Jackson]-- Speaker 2: It was my [maternal] grandmother [Ercer Ricks]-- Speaker 1: --managed? Speaker 2: --and that's a part of managing. It is amazing that it was impolite. And it's so clever the way they did it, because they didn't just do it in terms of public establishments, that it is impolite to use someone else's restroom. And so you always managed your bodily functions, and you always went to the bathroom before you left home. And it was, it was just something. The first time, and I was almost ten, the man that I told you that was--looked like a mountain, Dolly King [William "Dolly" King], his son, Michael [Michael C. King], who was younger than I, he had come to visit us one holiday. It was just before Christmas. And we all were given I think it was fifteen dollars, both of us, to shop at the five and ten. And I was older than Michael. Michael was like six years old maybe. I was going on ten. I go to the five and ten, and for the first time I experienced something that I don't know until fifteen years later made my mother cry. And it was that we got to the five and ten, and he was from New York, and he wanted a hot dog, so he went to the counter. And we weren't allowed to eat at the counter, and I didn't know that because we were, you know, prominent African American family of a, of a broadcaster and an owner of football [sic. basketball] teams, and my father actually owned a horse. And who would eat at a counter to begin with? But I ran up with him. And my mother took us away, and I didn't know she was upset until years later when we talked about it. But I remember the incident, so something did occur. And I think it was Michael crying 'cause he wanted to get a hot dog (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He never got that hot dog. Speaker 2: Exactly. Story_ID: 587567 Speaker 1: So what about junior high? Speaker 2: I didn't really have junior high because High School of Performing Arts [Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York], we started at, in, in the ninth grade. And I realize, and you're almost making me realize it, not only was I dancing all the time, but I went to school where there wasn't a lot of heterosexual communication, because Performing Arts didn't have a lot of--the dance department, in that day, you didn't have a lot of boys to begin with. Speaker 1: Well, can you tell us a little bit about getting into, getting, becoming aware of Performing Arts, and then did you need to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, I don't- Speaker 1: --do anything to qualify? Speaker 2: Oh, god, did I. Speaker 1: Sort of--really? Speaker 2: Oh, god, did I. Oh yeah, you had to audition. It was, it was rigorous. Speaker 1: Was it like 'Fame'? Speaker 2: It was just like 'Fame,' and in fact, it was more rigorous. It was the, the--in fact, the movie brought back--it was there that I experienced the most racist, painful experience. Speaker 1: You told me earlier that there was a moment at which you had sort of your first race moment, and it wasn't this-- Speaker 2: It was, I thought it was 1976. It wasn't. Speaker 1: I didn't think so. Speaker 2: It was nineteen sixty--I can tell you exactly when, 1963. Speaker 1: So why don't you tell us about that first and then tell us about-- Speaker 2: Seventy-six [1976]? Speaker 1: --the high school experience. Speaker 2: No, the high school experience was '63 [1963]. Speaker 1: Okay, so what happens there? Speaker 2: What happens there is this: it starts really in like 19--I think 1960. You'd go to the High School of Performing Arts, and all the young girls go in to class. You're fourteen years old, and you're all thin as a rail. And then you go away that summer, and you come back to school and you're fifteen. You got it. And just like with the Bolshoi [Bolshoi Ballet], every experience that we had was that of old world dance. And you, you don't think anything of it race wise until years later. But comments like this--you would first stand in front, and they'd inspect you. And we had Russian teachers. Oh yes, well, we had the best. And then they'd look at you from the side, and they'd look at you from the rear. Now you have to understand that there were three forces in my life in, at the High School of Performing Arts. One was an external force named [HistoryMaker] Arthur Mitchell, who was the protege of George Balanchine. And Arthur Mitchell was the premier black former student, alum, of the High School of Performing Arts. Story_ID: 587568 Speaker 1: Wait, you keep talking about (laughter)-- Speaker 2: What? Speaker 1: --interesting things, and then I have to take you back (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 1: --to the-- Speaker 2: Okay, I'll shut up. Speaker 1: --New York high school of the performing arts, where-- Speaker 2: No, but you know, you had asked, and I had, I had blocked that. I don't think I--I mean I, it obviously wasn't a big block, but I had, no, I, I had an experience that young people should have. I've thought about it. When it happened to me, I thought it should never happen to anybody. But-- Speaker 1: The audition process? Speaker 2: No, not the audition, no. I'll get to it-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --in my senior year. Speaker 1: So talk to us about getting into the New York School of Performing Arts, and then please talk to us about (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) When New York-- Speaker 1: --being there. Speaker 2: New York City [New York, New York] had a public education system that, that rivaled none in the country. And my brother [Harold B. Jackson, Jr.] and sister [Jane Jackson Harley] had both gone to prep school. And when I came to New York I had to have a paid tutor to keep up with Class 5-5. There was 5-1. And I don't think it was hierarchical in terms of academic. I think it was just the number of classes. But at the time, as a young child, I didn't know. When it came to specialized high schools, there was Brooklyn Tech [Brooklyn Technical High School, Brooklyn, New York], Bronx High School of Science [The Bronx High School of Science, Bronx, New York], High School of Performing Arts [Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York]. You fought like crazy to get into these schools. And you went through the audition process that was as rigorous as any Broadway play and/or dance company. And so you had to prepare two kinds of dances. Speaker 1: What kinds did you choose? Speaker 2: I chose ballet and modern dance. I don't really remember the music or anything now, but it was like three minutes. You were then put before a jury and questioned like Nuremberg. I mean it was, it was not--. And clearly there was racism in that, you know, I was the only--in that year--African American. No, there was a young man, John Parks. In fact, he married a student. When we were seniors John married a freshman named--not, not while they were in school, later--Katrina [Trina Parks], who was actually in one of those James Bond movies ['Diamonds Are Forever'] with an Afro. I can remember her dancing or whatever. And that was when, you know, that was during the era of 'Foxy Brown' and all those kind of movies (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And during-- Story_ID: 587569 Speaker 1: At that time, who were the dancers who you admired? Like who, you know, do you even, do you have (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Maya Plisetskaya was the dancer. Maya Plisetskaya would bring me to tears. I would have a meltdown when I would see her perform when the, when the Bolshoi [Bolshoi Ballet] was the Bolshoi; now it is not. But when it would come to New York [New York], and I was the kind of dancer, and as a child and as a teenager that--well, my mother [Julia Hawkins Jackson] would say when she first took me to a flamenco dance concert and she showed me in the ladies room, and I had had all these hard cherry candies. And I ended up throwing up 'cause I was busy--I had the castanets, and I was on my knee and jumping and you know. I had to be seven or eight then. And then if there was a dancer--Gus Solomon [HistoryMaker Gus Solomons jr], who danced with Merce Cunningham, that would just fill me in a way that is indescribable. I think younger people today, if they remember when [HistoryMaker] Judith Jamison danced, it was that kind of experience. But as a dancer, Maya Plisetskaya was, transformed herself into the swan. And when she was the swan in 'Swan Lake' [Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky] her arms were liquid; you saw no extensions better; you saw the strength of this woman, 'cause I always loved women dancers that were strong. I love--well, every woman that I like is strong in, in, in, in her presence. I'm trying to think of--obviously [HistoryMaker] Katherine Dunham. As I said Judy Jamison and every principal dancer with both Ailey [Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater] and, and with [HistoryMaker] Arthur Mitchell's Dance Theatre of Harlem. Story_ID: 587570 Speaker 1: Now once you're at the High School of Performing Arts [Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York], what--you know, how rigorous is that training? It's-- Speaker 2: It-- Speaker 1: --you said it was like 'Fame,' but-- Speaker 2: It was-- Speaker 1: --it continues-- Speaker 2: --it was no better training in the world. They scoured and, and they had expats from, from Russia. We had people who had danced with the Bolshoi [Bolshoi Ballet]. We had--all of our teachers had danced with--it was the Graham technique in terms of modern dance, had danced with Martha Graham. We on occasion would have a master class with her. It was disciplined, and it was wonderful. It was very, very rewarding. Speaker 1: And did--what kind of performances did you do? Speaker 2: We, our performances were that of--actual works from whether it be Merce or--Cunningham [Merce Cunningham], or it be mainly Martha Graham's body of work. What was the traumatic thing that happened to me was when I was a senior. And every year there was a concert, the lower school, you know, you know, middle, and then you're a junior and senior. And I had the highest grade in my class for dance. But because I didn't fit the role, I actually was the wardrobe mistress for my senior class. Speaker 1: What was the role? Speaker 2: Does it matter? Speaker 1: You don't remember? Speaker 2: Does it matter? Speaker 1: Amazing. Speaker 2: No, because it was-- Speaker 1: And so you were not-- Speaker 2: It-- Speaker 1: --in the performance-- Speaker 2: No, I wasn't. Speaker 1: --at all? Speaker 2: I wasn't. And I can tell you why. I was quite clear why. They wanted, the teachers, not--. One of the teachers, one of the older ones who really taught your freshman and sophomore year, adored me. But we had the head of the dance department, her name was Dr. Dyke [Marjorie Dyke], no pun intended. Speaker 1: Okay (laughter). Speaker 2: But you got it. Dr. Dyke is the one who had said when I came back from my f- from my first year that my frame was the frame to bear children. Speaker 1: And I wanted to just ask you to go back to that. Story_ID: 587571 Speaker 1: So you've got these Russian women [at the High School of Performing Arts; Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York] evaluating your African body, which has become (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Russian and American. Speaker 1: --buxom over the summer. Speaker 2: Good, good midwestern women who had danced for-- Speaker 1: Well, I'm putting them in the European parenthesis. Speaker 2: Yes, you've got it. Speaker 1: And I'm saying they're-- Speaker 2: You got it. Speaker 1: --they're now telling you that-- Speaker 2: You got it. Speaker 1: --your butt is too big. Speaker 2: And that was--in fact, I was on--Ted Koppel did a program about fifteen years ago. And I apologized later to some civil rights leaders. And, and now I take that apology back because we were asked during the--Koppel's show, if--what was our, our slave moment, what was our--and that was mine. Speaker 1: So tell us about it because we got cut off on the tape. That you returned from the summer-- Speaker 2: Okay, I'd been fourteen. We were all--and, and not just me, a lot of the, of-- Speaker 1: Of course. Speaker 2: --my white counterparts too; we had bosoms and hips and whatever. Now remember, I was no bigger than a size--I don't think I ever weighed more than--my heaviest was 118, and that wasn't when I was a sophomore, but I did have bosoms. And my sister [Jane Jackson Harley] used to tease me that I didn't have--I have them now, but I never had breasts like my mother [Julia Hawkins Jackson] and she. So they--she would swear that I was, had to be adopted; I wasn't really a part of that family. But, but I remember Dr. Dyke [Marjorie Dyke] saying, "She's got the carriage to carry babies," meaning this part of my hips. And even though I got these great marks and whatever--. And I was crushed, because I had to be wardrobe mistress to my senior class. And they were humiliated. But my father [HistoryMaker Hal Jackson], in a wonderful quote, when I was featured in 1983 and I had done, I was doing wonderful things with 100 Black Women [National Coalition of 100 Black Women], and people did not understand what he was talking about, but he says, "When you knock my daughter down, all she does is dust herself off and get back up." But that was a hell of a moment at seventeen. I had the grades. My, my colleagues were (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And so why do you think that they provide- they graded you in a qualif- quality manner? Speaker 2: Because-- Speaker 1: Why did that-- Speaker 2: --because I was good. They couldn't-- Speaker 1: Then why didn't they just? I see. They couldn't-- Speaker 2: They couldn't. But they could--I mean there just was an article last weekend in--I felt so sorry because we, we are revisiting it. We went through a period that was a little bit better. 'Cause I auditioned; they wanted me, and I got in it. I--my father was very proud of this. I had auditioned to be the first black at Radio City Music Hall [New York, New York]. Speaker 1: Oh, wow. Speaker 2: But I, but I didn't do it. I, but I, but I made the cut. And I also auditioned for--but I was too tall, and I understand that--for, for Sammy Davis [Sammy Davis, Jr.] with 'Golden Girls' [sic. 'Golden Boy']. What else did I audition for? And I was with Ailey [Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater] for, you know, one half a season, only because I was doing other things. It wasn't that I was asked to leave or anything, you know money and making money in my other kind of--whatever. But what they were doing was, in that period of time, and I just was at the end of it, the cusp, the end of it, was when they, they crushed your spirit. And I think I said at the top of our interview, that thank god I was loved the way I was loved; so thank god my mother told me I was beautiful, you know. I can remember being--I'm of the generation, 'cause I was born in 1945, where I mean Angelina Jolie wants these lips, has these lips. I can remember wishing that these were thin lips. I can remember when I--and my mother said to me, "There's gonna be somebody that's gonna love those lips," you know. And I know how privileged and lucky I am because the women that were born a generation before me and generations prior to didn't have the breakthrough era that I had, so. Story_ID: 587572 Speaker 1: You graduate from the School of Performing Arts [High School of Performing Arts; Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York]. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And you decide to go to Bard College [Annandale-on-Hudson, New York]. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Why (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Contrary to ev- my mother [Julia Hawkins Jackson] wanted me to go-- Speaker 1: How did you choose that? Speaker 2: --to Brandeis [Brandeis University, Waltham, Massachusetts]. Well, you have to understand that--you saw 'Fame.' We had a little clique. We all knew what the in school was for dancers or for people that were--'member this was the '60s [1960s], okay. And we were, I mean we--oh, please, you know, we were the Bleecker Street girls. We knew it all. We all wore black. You know, we thought we were super chic. We--and we were; we were cool, and Bard was the cool school. Speaker 1: And did you plan to be a dancer, like a, as a, as a career? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I planned nothing. I told (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So in high school, you just-- Speaker 2: --my mother that I was going to teach dance as therapy for, for emotionally disturbed children. Speaker 1: Okay, that's a high tech excuse. Where did you get (laughter)--I mean, you know, dance-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) Where I got that from? Speaker 1: --or I'm gonna work with children. Speaker 2: I got, I got that-- Speaker 1: And I'm gonna dance-- Speaker 2: --because when I went to-- Speaker 1: --to help emotion- Speaker 2: --I went to Bard, and we talked about jobs that I could have, and there was-- Speaker 1: Oh, I see. Speaker 2: --there was the Rhinebeck home for emotionally disturbed children [Rhinebeck, New York]. And they said, if you come, we would love to have you-- Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: --teach there 'cause that's a job you can have. Speaker 1: So when you're leaving high school you don't have dance as a career goal. Speaker 2: Oh, I, I-- Speaker 1: You're just going to college. Speaker 2: I'm just going to college. Honey, I'm just gonna just--. My mother's dream for me was to marry well in the black community and to serve fabulous dinners and be a Perle Mesta. Speaker 1: And what's a Perle Mesta? Speaker 2: Well, that, Perle Mesta was a social, like, like a social butterfly, but not a butterfly, like, a woman had the Sunday salons that had, like Brooke Astor, that had grand dinners where the intellectuals came together with, you know, with, with, with the high visibility marquee performers, artists. Story_ID: 587573 Speaker 1: And you're eighteen when you go to Bard [Bard College, Annandale-on-Hudson, New York]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And you get married a year later? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And, so how does your family feel about your first marriage? Who do you marry, and why? Is he also at Bard? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: What's happening with that marriage to Fred Ward [Frederick Ward]? Speaker 2: Fred Ward had graduated from Bard, but he couldn't ever leave Bard. He had a love affair with the bard. He was an English lit major. Remember I was a C student. And he was obsessed with 'King Lear' [William Shakespeare]. And he was obsessed with 'Hamlet' [William Shakespeare]. And there was a master writer, poet, Tony Hecht [Anthony Hecht] and a lot of the boys, and I can say that lovingly, that created something called the boob tube, which was what--the boob tube was in the Village [Greenwich Village, New York, New York]. It evolved into 'Saturday Night Live.' So Chevy Chase was at Bard, you know; it was--you, you know, Lane Sarasohn, who was one of the first writers, you know. Freddie was a writer--Fred Ward. So I hung around. And it was an all-white environment. Speaker 1: And just to clarify, what year is this? Speaker 2: This was '64 [1964] through '67 [1967]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. And we actually lived without a phone in the Village. Now, I'm smiling when you ask the question because my father [HistoryMaker Hal Jackson], from what I found out later, was having conniptions, I mean literally bouncing off the walls. Speaker 1: And why? Speaker 2: Because he believed in a certain kind of discipline and focus. This white boy, he did not know. They had run a Dun and Bradstreet on the family, so they knew that he was from a multimillionaire background. That didn't satisfy my mother [Julia Hawkins Jackson], but my mother, quiet spoken, put her iron fist down with my father, never--. And she was very smart because when you tell people not to do things, they tend to run towards. When I married, and I had a wonderful, wonderful, wonderful wedding and married at the Church of Our Saviour [New York, New York] on 38th [Street], that beautiful Catholic church. A wonderful reception. I didn't know that my parents didn't approve. I just thought that his parents didn't approve because it was an interracial marriage. And they had offered me, they had offered me 2 or $3 million not to marry. But I had never been poor, so that meant nothing to me. Speaker 1: Hello--what did you say? They off- his parents-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --offered you $2 million-- Speaker 2: Two or three. Speaker 1: --not to wed? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: How was that presented? Speaker 2: Oh, it was just his brother came into town, and his brother found a way to see me and made the offer. And when I didn't accept the offer, they made him sign over his trust fund to his brother. Speaker 1: Wow. And then what? Speaker 2: Well, nothing. We were happy. Speaker 1: No, I mean-- Speaker 2: We weren't interested in the money. Speaker 1: No, I mean go on with the tale of the wedding. Speaker 2: (Laughter) I mean you, as an older person, now you sit back and realize. But when you're nineteen, and he's twenty-four or five, and we're madly--we're talented. We weren't interested in their money. Speaker 1: So you get married. You're at the wedding. You don't know that your parents are not pleased, only his. Speaker 2: Well, my mother and father were this way: my mother and father were fearful because of society. It wasn't that they didn't like him. So I should be very clear about that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They were concerned that I was young and that I, you know, was I gonna finish school, not finish school? But they weren't worried about me in, in the context of his family thinking that he had lost his mind. It was very different. Story_ID: 587574 Speaker 1: And so during the marriage did you stay in school? Speaker 2: No, never had planned to. Speaker 1: I see. So you did not graduate from Bard [Bard College, Annandale-on-Hudson, New York]. Speaker 2: I did not graduate from Bard. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: However, when Bard came to me and asked me to join their board, and I swear to you on everything holy, I knew I hadn't graduated, but I didn't realize that I had only spent one year at Bard. Speaker 1: Only spent one year at Bard? Speaker 2: (Nods head). Speaker 1: And you did not graduate? Speaker 2: (Shakes head). Speaker 1: And you did not go to any other school? Speaker 2: (Shakes head) No other school. Speaker 1: You began your career-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --several years later. Speaker 2: And I have two honorary degrees. Speaker 1: Now how long--fantastic--how long were you married (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I have a friend that says, "Jewell's [HistoryMaker Jewell Jackson McCabe] mind is such, she learned more in one year than most of us in eight years of school, including postgraduate." Speaker 1: In eight years, okay (laughter). Speaker 2: And she, she meant-- Speaker 1: At the least the person wasn't undergraduate-- Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: --because my sister's generation, and she's just-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --graduated college-- Speaker 2: I'm the only-- Speaker 1: --and staying for eight years. Speaker 2: I'm the only one in my family that, that, that hasn't graduated from college. Speaker 1: Okay. So you--how long were you married to Mr. Ward [Frederick Ward]? Speaker 2: Three years. Speaker 1: And so you lived in the Village [Greenwich Village, New York, New York], and you have a-- Speaker 2: Fabulous life. Speaker 1: --fantastic time. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And so what-- Speaker 2: Well, I was always working. Speaker 1: Where were you working? Dancing? Speaker 2: No, I danced for a while. But I started--I can remember hearing Freddie talk to Bobby [ph.]--one of the guys who ended up being the head writer at 'Saturday Night Live.' He was out in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] at the time. And he said, "Well, Jewell started another job." I would go to work and work for a week. If I didn't like it, I just didn't go back. Speaker 1: What kind of jobs were you-- Speaker 2: I did everything. Speaker 1: --choosing and-- Speaker 2: I was a receptionist. I was a monitor board operator. I filed--I scored nursing papers, filed those. I did everything. Story_ID: 587575 Speaker 1: And one question that I want to ask sort of as an overarching question is, do you feel that your dance background has an impact in your life? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: And what is that-- Speaker 2: Dramatically. Speaker 1: --like, what is the thread that sort of-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: I mean I'm sure there's so much discipline involved, but what really sort of continues on past the literal dancing and the training? Speaker 2: Well, first of all, the mental and the physical feed each other in dramatic ways. So that just as it, everybody's health conscious now, and they say well, if you work out for an hour, you live longer, whatever. The more you work out, the more stimulated your brain is; the more you can retain, the smarter you are. The, you know, the thing that I used to find interesting in the mid-'70s [1970s] as the feminists would get together, usually we'd get together in these sort of rap sessions. We'd talk to each other, and the common thread for many of us, including Gloria Steinem, is that we had been major dancers in, in our life, and that we had strong fathers. That was, there were those two common threads. Not fathers that suppressed us, but there was sexism in that the fathers owned us and wanted nobody else to own us. Speaker 1: And how did that apply to your father? Speaker 2: Well, my father used to say things that were asides that I'd hear, or through discipline, but I understand that it has had a profound impact. Gene McCabe [Eugene L. McCabe] used to say when I would act up and he couldn't control an argument, and at the end of the argument if I had won it, he says, "You didn't win it 'cause I'm bigger than you are. And now I'm gonna go find [HistoryMaker] Hal Jackson and shake him," you know. I would hear my father talking to people, you know, "I don't want ever hear anybody--," he'd tell my mother [Julia Hawkins Jackson], "I don't want ever hear any boys say, 'That's my girlfriend.'" So it was all about ownership and management of self and independence. Speaker 1: And was he similar with your mother? Speaker 2: What do you mean? Speaker 1: I mean was he similarly con- was he controlling? Did he--it seems like, well, you're, you know, you're indicating that he wasn't home a lot. And I am digging, so you, you can tell me to get out. Speaker 2: No, I, I'm very candid. Speaker 1: But I'm just wondering in terms of their relationship, him being over the phone and then, you know, having these protective attitudes, how exactly did that work out? Speaker 2: Sh- he married a stereotypic American woman. He did not marry a stereotypic black woman. Speaker 1: Tell me a little more about that please. Speaker 2: The best contemporary illustration is the modern day workforce. Black women tend to have extraordinary success, like a Condoleezza Rice or a [HistoryMaker] Marian Wright Edelman, or tremendous conflict in the workforce with white sisters because black women have a leadership style that mirrors white males; doesn't mirror black males, mirrors white males. White women have a leadership style that mirrors black males; it's leadership through manipulation, through inference. It's a quiet leadership style, and it's just as effective. Speaker 1: And in which category did your mom fall? Speaker 2: A white woman. She, she managed through--she never, she, yeah, she never disciplined me. Speaker 1: Did she discipline him? Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: Can I ask in what kind of ways or? Speaker 2: You're asking for personal reasons now. Speaker 1: I'm just, I'm digging. Speaker 2: I know, you're interested (laughter). Speaker 1: You can, you can push me out (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I learned, I learned, quite candidly. And she didn't--I can remember sitting with her when I was about twenty-one years old. And my mother and father did not divorce until I was about that age. And I said to my mother, "I, I don't know how you--," you know, I said, "I would never have a husband that had other women in their life because I would just confront them." And my mother said one thing very quietly. She said, "Just remember, the one who rocks the boat gets kicked out the boat." Okay. So that didn't mean very much at twenty-one and feisty. Around about fifty-one, I understood. At sixty-one, I know. Story_ID: 587576 Speaker 1: Let's start talking about at least this part of your career that starts to show up on the, the timeline that we've put together (laughter) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter). Speaker 1: So you're working some different jobs, and you're stopping when you feel like it. Speaker 2: Oh, please, I was switchboard operator. They called it monitor board. You did these little things. I ruined an entire--I, I shut down a munitions plant on the Lower East Side [New York, New York] one time by accident 'cause I decided that I was going to clean (laughter) the, the little things with some Brillo. And I didn't--and I was nineteen, so I'm doing this, thinking I'm being clever in this warehouse kind of place. And then the whole phone system got screwed up one day. And the next day I was in, and I overheard--nobody knew it was me, but I just said, no, this is obviously not for me. (Laughter) I overheard the workmen who had (unclear)--they said, it was the most amazing confusion, you know. These were the, the guys who fixed the phone systems. They said it was as if a million little tiny wires had interconnected. And I realized, light bulb, Jewell [HistoryMaker Jewell Jackson McCabe], you had Brillo (laughter), and it had, it shifted down in this system, so I had screwed up the system. I went off to lunch and never came back. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 587577 Speaker 1: How did my career-- Speaker 2: According to my-- Speaker 1: How did my career kick off? Speaker 2: Right, according to my timeline, you leave Bard [Bard College, Annandale-on-Hudson, New York]. There's a large gap, and you become the New York Urban Coalition director for public affairs. Is that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh no, there's something happened before that. Speaker 2: Tell us what happened. Speaker 1: It was a spate--I--it's right now I have to pinch myself. But I have to go back to--I had said to you at the very beginning of the interview that there are things that Gene McCabe [Eugene L. McCabe] could tell me that now I could tell other people. There are things that I, I could see that my mother [Julia Hawkins Jackson] saw in me at three years old. I had an opportunity in one of the million jobs, right. I never used contacts, and I had parents that had all kinds of contacts. And I say that proudly, because when people started to discover that I was Hal's [HistoryMaker Hal Jackson] daughter, I was already somebody. He would, he had become my father. (Pause) I decided I was gonna go back to school. Speaker 2: You're married at this point-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --and living your-- Speaker 1: I'm married with Freddie [Frederick Ward]. Speaker 2: --Fred, okay. Speaker 1: I'm living in Kips Bay [Kips Bay Towers, New York, New York], the beautiful facility that's not so beautiful now, that I.M. Pei, the first, you know, housing that he had built. My daddy had gotten the apartment. Freddie and I are living there. (Laughter) 'Cause remember, Freddie had signed all of his trust fund over. Speaker 2: I see. Speaker 1: Okay, so he's a copy writer at one of the ad agencies or whatever, and I'm not working, working, not working, whatever. Speaker 2: And what year about are we? Speaker 1: Sixty-seven [1967]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Sixty-six [1966], '67 [1967], 'cause I met Gene in '67 [1967]. But yeah, as soon as I met Gene, I decided I was gonna marry him, so whatever. And I mean just-- Speaker 2: And that was the end of Fred Ward? Speaker 1: Yeah, pretty much. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, it was sort of a mutual kind of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You said you met Gene in '67 [1967]. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Where'd you meet him? Speaker 1: I'm gonna tell you. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: That where we're at, the job. Speaker 2: Ah. Speaker 1: My mother said to me--this is another turning point moment, her wisdom. I was offered--I was gonna go back to Hunter [Hunter College, New York, New York] at night, and I wanted a soft job. So, I was offered two jobs. Don't ask me why I was offered this one particular job, because back in 1966, to be offered a job at ten thousand dollars a year was a big deal. I was offered a job to be a community development--it was, you know, the whole anti-poverty, HARYOU-ACT [Harlem Youth Opportunities Unlimited-Associated Community Teams, New York, New York] period after, you know, Brown--after '64 [Civil Rights Act of 1964], '65 Voting Rights Act [Voting Rights Act of 1965]. There was a lot of legislation, you know, that Lyndon Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] had ushered through. And I said to my mother, "Well, you know, I can be the, the field officer for Harlem [New York, New York], central Harlem, you know, and you know, pays ten or twelve thousand a year," which was a big deal. And she said, "What else were you offered?" And I said, "Well, there's a receptionist job there." She said, "Where?" I said, "On the floor, you know, where the, the head of HRA, the commissioner of HRA sits." Speaker 2: What's the HRA? Speaker 1: That's the largest budget item in the city government. It's the Human Resources Administration [New York City Human Resources Administration/Department of Social Services]. Everything is under it, all of the poverty programs, all of the welfare programs, all of the children's services, foster care; everything. So, John Lindsay was I think, mayor at the time. And my mother said to me, and this is pure wisdom, pure wisdom, and also not being hungry, she said, "You take the receptionist job." I said, "Why would I take that job?" I said, "It pays like $4300 a year." She said, "Jewell [HistoryMaker Jewell Jackson McCabe], with your personality, if you take that job," and she said this, "forget school, you'll be offered anything you want." Story_ID: 587578 Speaker 1: I'm sitting there, and I'll never forget it. I mean now please, the Charles Jourdan thigh high boots--remember, this was the '60s [1960s], garter belts, wearing boots, the little angora miniskirts, we had the little Sassoon haircut. Oh, please, we thought we were so cute. And it didn't take six months, it was six weeks. Everybody wanted me to be their assistant. And every man that I worked for never wanted to go to meetings. And I got known to be the person that wrote in the most succinct way, because I think like a man. I write like a man. I'm to the point. I don't go around Robin Hood's barn. And so, the commissioner himself [Jack White] hired me, so I was chief of staff to the commissioner [of the Manpower and Career Development Agency]. Now, what you didn't ask, because you wouldn't know to ask, and I jumped something: how did I transition from dance to there? I was teaching during the summer of '65 [1965] and '66 [1966]. Monsignor Fox [Robert J. Fox] had, you know, had created a program called Summer in the City. And it was using art to reach children with problems, disproportionately black children. And so I taught dance to teen pregnant girls at St., at St. Charles Borromeo [Church of St. Charles Borromeo, New York, New York] up in 142nd Street, and in the South Bronx [Bronx, New York]. And a cute story was Freddie [Jackson McCabe's first husband, Frederick Ward] would pick me up in a little Stingray Tiger [sic. Sunbeam Tiger] that we had. And they saw me a whole year with this little white guy zipping up to Harlem [New York, New York], picking me up. (Laughter) And the girls at the end of the summer said--and I'll back up and tell you about the, the government and how I ended up working for the city. (Laughter) But they, they said--my name was Ward at the time, "Mrs. Ward [HistoryMaker Jewell Jackson McCabe], may we ask you a question?" This was the end of the summer. And I said, "Yeah." And I, and I, so open, I couldn't understand why they were being so reticent and so nervous and, about it. Well, to make a long story short, it took one of them sort of to--and then we're all sitting around. These are girls that are between the age of twelve and sixteen. They're all pregnant. They've got these bellies--I'm teaching them dance. I'm also trying to work with, with the monsignor to make sure that, you know, that they get resources and parenting training and everything. And they said, "Why don't you and your husband have sex?" Speaker 2: "'Cause clearly we did, and we're pregnant." Speaker 1: (Laughter) Exactly, and it was, I was, but it was so (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) And clearly there's-- Speaker 1: It stunned me. Speaker 2: --something happened here. Speaker 1: And I laughed. I said, "What makes you think that we, we don't have sex?" And they said, "You don't have a baby." And then I realized how--I don't have to say it. Speaker 2: Wow. Speaker 1: But back, to back up, what happened was, the city never paid you. And so they would send the mouth down to city hall [New York City Hall, New York, New York] from the South Bronx to get the checks or to rail at people. And that's when I--when they started to offer me jobs. Speaker 2: When you would be the representative-- Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: --to go downtown. Speaker 1: Exactly, after we hadn't been paid. We were working for six weeks and not get a paycheck out of the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now this, this summer is occurring, in terms of filling that gap-- Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: --you were discussing. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: This is happening after-- Speaker 1: Sixty-five [1965], '66 [1966]. Speaker 2: So is this before your run of jobs I like, jobs I don't like? Speaker 1: Oh no, that was after my jobs. Remember 'cause the summer program was only in the summer. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, I had other months to fill. Speaker 2: So you were (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 2: --working job-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --to job, ruining telephone systems-- Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: --and et cetera. Speaker 1: Right, right-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Fantastic. Story_ID: 587579 Speaker 1: So this is how you, you come simultaneously to decide that you're probably gonna do Hunter College [New York, New York] at night-- Speaker 2: Yes, exactly (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and that you'd like a new job. Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: And so you review these jobs with your mom [Julia Hawkins Jackson]. Speaker 2: Right, right. And then to quote (laughter), and to quote Gene McCabe [Jackson McCabe's second husband, Eugene L. McCabe]--we're sitting and we were having, I was drinking my one, my famous one screwdriver, which is the only thing I could handle. And he was drinking his Heinekens, and, and he would say, "I never met a woman like this before in my life." Now he was working at HRA [New York City Human Resources Administration/Department of Social Services]. That's how I met him. Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, I don't want to rush past that. So you--I don't even know necessarily how to segue from the (unclear)-- Speaker 2: How did I meet him? Speaker 1: Now we're back. You're getting--the commissioner [Jack White] has hired you. Do you meet him before that (unclear)? Speaker 2: I meet him before that. Speaker 1: Okay, so tell us-- Speaker 2: I meet him like that first week. Speaker 1: Okay, tell us about it. Speaker 2: It was too funny, be- because you have to understand my kind of personality then. I mean, like I met (laughter) somebody recently, this dean of students at Marquette [Marquette University, Milwaukee, Wisconsin]. And she said, "I hate to tell you this, but I'd loved to have known you when you were eighteen. What were you like?" And I, I think I was the exact same. I, only thing, I was a little friskier and a little more black and white about my answers to everything, and I was sure that I was right. I'm sitting at the reception desk, right. This is my first or second week at HRA, Human Resources Administration. And I see this brother come (laughter) get off the elevator. That's him up there (points), and we're with--it's a historic picture because that's Dr. Mamie [Mamie Phipps Clark] and Kenneth Clark, Brown versus Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954], you know, the, the black-white doll test that built the case for--whatever. And Gene McCabe, and I. Anyway-- Speaker 1: So, as Neculai [Neculai Burghelea] said, we're gonna have an opportunity to look at some pictures. Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: So, so Gene's got this bouncy Afro, right. I mean he's got so many inches it's insane. He's gorgeous. He's got like, Clark Gable eyes. He's 6'5". He's gorgeous in a Burberry raincoat. I see this brother get off the elevator, and I said (laughter)--and, and there was an older woman who worked in the mailroom, and she said she was walking by the desk, and she heard me say, "I'm a marry him." Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (Laughter) And the woman said, "But aren't you married?" I said, "Yeah, but I'm going to marry him." Now, the funny thing, and there are parts of my life that are--I had an assistant that used to say that it was like, it, it was like, mystical, because things that make no sense happen. I'm looking for this brother. And to make a long story short, his name is Eugene McCabe, but I don't know it's him because my sister-in-law is white, and her name is McCabe. So I assumed that Eugene McCabe was a white man because the position was that of comptroller, all right. So I--that, that became a, not an overt racist assumption, but mainly because my sister-in-law's name was McCabe. My brother-in-law, my sister Jane's [Jane Jackson Harley] husband's name was Eugene [Eugene Harley]. So when I saw Eugene McCabe, I said, well, I'd like to meet him because he's, he may be related to Rita [Rita McCabe (ph.)], that was my sister-in-law. And I said, isn't that funny that he's got the same name as my brother-in-law? Now remember, I said to you I married Fred Woo- Ward [Frederick Ward], and Jewell's [ph.] name--husband was Fred Woods [ph.]. So those kinds of things in my life have always been a little reinforcing of something that I believe in, that you, that you work hard and that you can affect certain things. But there is a destiny for people. And I don't think it's a destiny for all people, which is arrogant of me to say. But I really do believe that there's a destiny for some people. So I search out to meet this Gene McCabe, and lo and behold, it's this brother with this big bouncy Afro, this big, tall, gorgeous man. And I become his best friend, and I worked on being his best friend. And I found out everything there was to find out, and I found out that he had this girlfriend (laughter). So I decided to become his counselor. The rest is history. Story_ID: 587580 Speaker 1: (Laughter) I don't know if I should go to New York Urban [New York Urban Coalition], or if I should ask you about your career development, or if I should ask you how you got out of your first marriage [to Frederick Ward]. Speaker 2: Oh, my father [HistoryMaker Hal Jackson]. Speaker 1: What did he do? Speaker 2: Well, it was really interesting because Gene [Eugene L. McCabe] would meet my mother [Julia Hawkins Jackson]. And this is a male/female universal thing. This is universal, I think. I had a relationship with Gene McCabe. And every time he'd see my mother--he was famous for getting on his knee to my mother, saying, "I'm going to marry your daughter." And I thought it was sort of silly 'cause I'd already been married, and I was married. I mean marriage to me was a statutory act to protect the estates of wealthy men. And so, I wasn't anti-marriage; I knew it was a conventional state of being that I embraced. But if I tell you I love you, I don't tell you I love you because I've married you. I demonstrate my love by how I act, right? You know, watch what they do, not what they say. (Laughter) So, one day, Gene McCabe is with me and--at someplace that my father and somebody co-owned. It's over on the West Side [New York, New York]. It's, now I think it's, it's right on the corner on 64th Street. It's like a restaurant, but it was called something else. And my father bought it for a period of time. So he owned this little restaurant, and we were going over to see it. (Laughter) And men have a code with each other. And my father said something about, "When are you gonna make her an honest woman?" And he said some jive about, "Well, I gotta get a divorce." And my father called a lawyer. And we were on the plane within seventy-two hours to Haiti. And it was a little guy with a white suit on, Joe Papp [Joseph Papp], on the same plane getting a divorce. Speaker 1: And you can get them fast in Haiti. Speaker 2: Overnight. As long as you got somebody's John Hancock. Now getting his wife's John Hancock was another issue. He was married. She-- Speaker 1: I thought he had a girlfriend. Speaker 2: He did, but he also had a wife-- Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: --and a little boy. Speaker 1: Oh. So, you had two divorces in Haiti-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --that weekend? Speaker 2: How did you know about the other one? Speaker 1: Well, I'm just asking (laughter). Speaker 2: Oh yeah, oh yeah. I bought that in Haiti, by the way, at, at--I bought that--the second divorce. And I paid sixty time--million-- Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: --times more to get it through customs than I paid (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, I got more information than I anticipated just then, because what I meant is that he and you got divorced in Haiti that one time. What you're telling me now-- Speaker 2: Is that other divorce-- Speaker 1: --(laughter) is that twice you went on down-- Speaker 2: And I got rid of him in '82 [1982] (laughter). Speaker 1: --to Haiti. Speaker 2: No, that's recorded? Speaker 1: Very good. Speaker 2: Oh, my lord. I didn't--no, 'cause he was a great man. Speaker 1: Well, you said you had a continuing relationship. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: It was just not a-- Speaker 2: Yeah, we had-- Speaker 1: --marriage one. Speaker 2: Quite honestly, we had about six months of rancor, and then we were like brother and--we were closer than brother and sister. We, we were, we truly always loved each other. And we had what is essential for any relationship, is truly shared values. Story_ID: 587581 Speaker 1: Okay, I'm gonna have to start to ask you now about how you-- Speaker 2: Thank god (laughter). Speaker 1: --began your career. I'm gonna stop digging around in your drawers. And we can--so tell me--you started working for the commissioner [Jack White]? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And how (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I doubled my salary almost every-- Speaker 1: Overnight. Speaker 2: --month. Speaker 1: Wow. How'd you do that? Speaker 2: That's what Gene [Jackson McCabe's second husband, Eugene L. McCabe]--that's when I took you to that little bar where we were sitting. I was having my whatever. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: And he was telling his male friends--I love to be around men all the time. So, and in fact, I really did not have serious girlfriend until, I mean a girlfriend, until 1984. I had--because at the High School of Performing Arts [Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York], we didn't really have a social life like in a regular col- high school. And then in college [Bard College, Annandale-on-Hudson, New York] it was, you know, I hung around with all the guys, you know, kind of thing. And I like the way men think. I like the way they play with each other, and I just like being around them. And he used to say, "This woman, if not every month, every six weeks, she's doubled her salary." And I did for almost two years. It was ridiculous. Speaker 1: Working for the commissioner and then-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: --for someone else? Speaker 2: From the commissioner. Then I was hired away [from the Manpower and Career Development Agency] by somebody who knew the commissioner to, to, to be like a vice president of Mobilization for Youth, which is down in Alphabet City [New York, New York]. And then I was hired away by somebody who knew me from there to the Urban Coalition. I took Ramona Ripston's--no, Ramona--no, no, not, that's the wrong--there's two Ramonas. This was a Ramona--I can't think of her last name. She left--she was Jewish. She left her husband to--married a lawyer who was younger, moved to L.A. [Los Angeles, California] to head up the ACLU [American Civil Liberties Union]. Speaker 1: And what is the New York Urban Coalition? Speaker 2: New York Urban Coalition was the first portend of what has become a legislative partnership between the public sector and private sector. It was Andy Heiskell [Andrew Heiskell], who was the chair of Time Inc. At the time there was no merger between Time--Warner [Warner Communications, Inc.] and Time at that point, was the chairman of the board. The majority of the board were corporate executives. And it was all about getting jobs for minority youth, poor youth. It was targeted--it wasn't race based; it was economic based but disproportionately we were the-- Speaker 1: (Unclear) guy. Speaker 2: --whatever. Speaker 1: So what's the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So the Summer in the City, you know, jobs programs where we would have forty-five thousand job--summer jobs. We were the private sector part of that. Speaker 1: And what's the pol- Speaker 2: And an urb- and housing. We also, we had a public interest law firm within the Urban Coalition, so we helped people get their lights turned back on. We helped poor people with legal problems. Speaker 1: And what's the social and political atmosphere in New York [New York] at this time? Speaker 2: Very progressive. Speaker 1: Such that there's kind of program (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Very progressive. It was on the heels of the urban coalition movement, which started the National Urban Coalition by a Rothschild [Walter N. Rothschild, Jr.] and a Rockefeller [David Rockefeller]. It was on the heels of the Kerner Commission report, which I think Lindsay [John Lindsay] had chaired. And it basically said it's a separate, non-equal society. We gotta do something about it. So it was a very lush, exciting period of time. The Kerner Commission [National Advisory Commission on Civil Disorders] was 1968. Speaker 1: Thank you. Story_ID: 587582 Speaker 1: You become the New York Urban Coalition--are you automatically the director of public affairs (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no. No, no. I was hired to, for a single writing assignment. And you'll love this quote because you get--oh, all the children are out. For a single writing assignment. (Background noise) And it was-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Manny Diaz, who was the vice president of the Urban Coalition under Eu- Dr. Eugene Callender in--had hired me to write the narrative for his budget for the year. So it was a temporary hire that was going to take nine to ten months. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: While I was there, this woman, this blonde, wild, you know, with the great exotic office, a lot of energy, had started a program or gotten a program for Dr. Callender called 'Positively Black' on NBC, local, WNBC [WNBC-TV, New York, New York]. Ramona [Ramona Ripston] developed that program. She all of a sudden was gonna leave. Speaker 1: And go to L.A. [Los Angeles, California] and do the-- Speaker 2: And she had a staff of about twenty-five. No, no, she had a staff of about twelve or thirteen. I think at that point, I was about twenty-five, twenty-six years old. I remember I was younger than anybody that worked for me when I got her job. And Andy I. Heiskell [Andrew Heiskell]--she went to, to the chairman of the board and said she was leaving. And she was managing a, you know, three hundred thousand dollar budget, which was a lot back in 1970, '71 [1971]. And they--he said, "Who on the outside can we bring in? You know, who, who can we get?" And she said--and I never knew--I swear to you on everything holy--I never knew the woman knew I existed. I don't remember her ever speaking to me. I mean she was rushing, and she, you know, she--and at that point people really did dress really like, she dressed upscale, but you know, she had on fringe vests and you know, long tie dye this and the, you know, the, you know, the platinum blonde hair. She was blue eyed and you know, just out there, right, cowboy boots, you name it. And she said, "You have a young black woman on staff that if we really believe in the mission that we--that the coalition's about, you let me train her, because she would pick up the phone and call the president of the United States." Now, again, observation: I don't know what she had seen that would say that, but that's a bold statement. (Laughter) So, she blessed me. She took me behind closed doors. The one thing she told me to--there was only one thing I didn't do that she told me to do, and it was almost my undoing. Speaker 1: Doing what she said? Speaker 2: No, the one thing that she told me. I did everything she told me to do. I listened to ev- (simultaneous) Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The one thing you did not do-- Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: --all, you almost (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Was, was almost my undoing. Speaker 1: Tell us about that. Speaker 2: Okay, it was about a year into the job. I had the, the job by then. Speaker 1: Got it. Speaker 2: And I'm knocking, and I'm just, please, I'm the youngest person, whatever. She had a fellow who happened to be homosexual, who had given up a major job on Madison Avenue. Now this--as an older person now, I understand right there the fact that he left Madison Avenue to take one fifth of his salary to work for a social service organization tells you something. What does it tell you? I'm not sure, but it tells you something. She had told me, this is a man, he's like--and now we'd say a computer, she would--said then a machine. And he was; he was extraordinary. He--she said, "You ask him to write a speech that sounds like Thurgood Marshall, he can do it in Thurgood's voice. You ask him to write a speech that sounds like Bella Abzug, he can do it in Bella's voice. You ask him to write a speech that sounds like, like William F. Buckley [William F. Buckley, Jr.], he has that voice." The man was genius at cadence, use of language. It was, it was like a mo- a mimic or something; I mean he could actually give you voice, okay. She said, "But, you have to manage him in--," what we call X management versus Y; Y is liberal, and I'm a liberal type. Speaker 1: Got it. Speaker 2: She said, "You have to keep your foot on his neck and keep him very tight." Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: "And keep him locked in his office." Story_ID: 587583 Speaker 1: Can we talk about the name of this man who--. Okay, very good. At any rate, you've got this employee [at the New York Urban Coalition] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) His first name is Spencer [ph.]. Speaker 1: --who's a fantastic speech writer. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And so you are not managing him in a-- Speaker 2: Well, what happened was, he and I had such--simpatico because the one thing that I had that Ramona [Ramona Ripston] didn't have--because the one thing that Ramona told me is: "Do not try to be me. Be the best Jewell [HistoryMaker Jewell Jackson McCabe] you can be. You've got all of the skill sets." And the chairman [Andrew Heiskell] ended up loving me, everybody did. I was prolific with work. I managed the lawyers with, with the public interest law unit. We had--Spencer's responsibility was newsletter, speechwriting, you know, public relations documents. He did not undo me. I allowed him to make a presentation though to the chairman and the board committee related to a gala event idea. And it was about as crazy as--that (laughter) it was like, it was so crazy that I didn't even know how to react to it. He basically had--remember, this was the, the '70s [1970s], and so fi- Studio 54 [New York, New York] was a big deal, right. He basically had lights and--. He, he, and he wanted to have policemen that were really dancers into the ballroom and stage this whole dram- it was so whacked and nutty (laughter) that it's like--let me just describe it this way. Another mentor of mine, Ruth Mueller Hill, who we'll talk about a bit when we talk about the founding of the National Coalition of 100 Black Women, used to say to me: "Always remember no one bright statement makes your career. No one dumb statement breaks your career." And I just use that as a metaphor for no one act of lunacy made or break my career because I had whatever. But then I had a difficult time because immediately when I saw the insanity, I'd never seen it before. I knew he was a little out there, you know, when we would joke, and he was a little flitty or you know, in, in terms of normal kind of--what I considered normal behavior. But then I tried to reel him in, and there was no reeling him in because I'd already given him too much rope. So he ended up having to get fired. Story_ID: 587584 Speaker 1: So bring us through some of what you're doing at the New York Urban Coalition and then-- Speaker 2: Well, I was the public affairs officer, so over, I sat over public relations, you know, meaning publicity, all the communications that were going out to community based organizations related to what we did, the liaison between the organization and the CEOs that were helping to develop the jobs, and also with the Neighborhood Youth Corps, which is--I had also been over Neighborhood Youth Corps. It was one of the positions that I had before I was hired away for Mobilization for Youth. Speaker 1: And I got to ask just for the contemporary viewer. You've said you have two honorary degrees. Clearly, the college graduation was not a factor in your future, rising career. You know, I don't know that that would be possible now. Speaker 2: Oh, it would be. I have an extraordinary intellect. I mean-- Speaker 1: No, no, not for you. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: I just mean-- Speaker 2: No, it would be possible now. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I mean, think about it. Bill Gates didn't graduate from college. Many of our greats didn't. I'm not sure that Steve Jobs did. I bet you if you trace those boys from YouTube, they didn't. Speaker 1: Because people are busy working or (unclear)-- Speaker 2: But, I suggest--I'm a major proponent of education, because those people that have a gift, and I know I was, I have a gift. I absorb like a sponge, you know, you know. I, I have one of those memories like Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton]. I mean I see a page and I can almost verbatim give it back to you. Those are gifts you--not everybody has that. And the other thing that was schooled for me, and the reason why I didn't realize that I'd only had, it was more than a year, but about a year and a half at Bard [Bard College, Annandale-on-Hudson, New York], right. Something that we didn't discuss was when we first moved here, I was with my father [HistoryMaker Hal Jackson] all the time when I wasn't in school. And I sat on his knee when he was across from Adam Clayton Powell [Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.]. I was with my mother [Julia Hawkins Jackson] all the time when I wasn't with my father and I wasn't in school, and she played bid whist and canasta, and she played bridge. And I was always around smart people. And unless you can--and I'm sure that when I talked about Bill Gates or talk about Steve Jobs or talk about Senator Simon [ph.], who didn't graduate from college, you know, and most of--our CEO that had an M.B.A. was Jim Robinson [James D. Robinson, III], back in 1977. And prior to that, the majority of CEOs had not been to college. Story_ID: 587585 Speaker 1: Just in the interest of having skipped over this important information that you're telling us now-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --talk to me about the kinds of activities that you were participating in with your father [HistoryMaker Hal Jackson]-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and then (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, you said you--we should talk about holidays-- Speaker 1: Yes, please. Speaker 2: --that kind of thing. Our sense, and it was very similar when Gene McCabe [Jackson McCabe's second husband, Eugene L. McCabe] and I were married, because Gene ended up being the president of a small teaching hospital [North General Hospital] in Central Harlem [sic. East Harlem, New York, New York], that I had a great deal to do in partnership with him, and him getting, and then having it rebuilt. When I say the same as every holiday, before we celebrated in my home--now, of course, Christmas, we had all the presents and all that kind of wonderful stuff, you know, great dollhouses and everything that a child could want. But we always--we was me and my dad and my brother [Harold B. Jackson, Jr.], but mainly me and my dad, we gave out all the turkeys and all the free food in the, in the poor community. You know, we, we, you know, we, we broadcast live, call it a remote, and then we distributed the, the food. We used to, we distributed the, the cans of cranberries and you know, sweet potato and all of those great things. And I always had a box of lollipops 'cause they were left over, you know, in, in, in my room. So every holiday was feeding the poor first, which for me was like fabulous. I can't, as a child, you couldn't have anything better. It was fun. My dad made it fun. People were happy. Oh, it was great. It was great (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And, and you said the, the rest of the time--although I'm gonna probably, when we come back, I'm gonna make sure that I have covered all these bases--but you said you spent other--if you weren't with your father, you were spending time with your mother [Julia Hawkins Jackson]. What kind of things were you doing? Well, you said she was playing cards. Speaker 2: Listening. Speaker 1: Got it. Speaker 2: Like, I was always like this (gesture). I was always thrilled. And I know my relationship with children now has a lot to do with who I am, but I have the greatest relationship with kids 'cause I don't talk to kids like they're kids. You know, if, if you were to ask me that, then I'd say then I'm not really a child's person. But all of my friends' kids, from the time they're little ones, love me, 'cause I talk to them as equals. I don't talk down to them. I don't expect them to be rocket scientists, you know, but, but, you know, I have a great relationship with kids. Story_ID: 587586 Speaker 1: And you said that your mom [Julia Hawkins Jackson] was an a- an executive assistant? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: And I'm assuming that the women around her were working women also (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) All professional women. Yeah. Speaker 1: What kind of jobs did these women have? Speaker 2: The most powerful jobs that black women had in the country. As I said, Deputy Anne Roberts [Anne Mason Roberts] was, was--my mother was her executive assistant. Anne Roberts was, was the highest ranking woman in government before there was a Patricia Roberts Harris as secretary of HUD. Speaker 1: And what was Anne Roberts' position? Speaker 2: Deputy--as I mentioned before, deputy secretary [sic. deputy regional administrator] to H-U-D, HUD, housing and urban development [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development]. Speaker 1: And, and what year was she there and the year-- Speaker 2: Oh-- Speaker 1: --of course your mom-- Speaker 2: --I'm guessing--god, when I was ten. I'd say from the time, '55 [1955] through the time I was thirteen, whatever that, that would be, thirteen. I was born in '45 [1945], so fif- '58 [1958]. Speaker 1: And did your mother--so once she was finished in that position, did your mother move to another position? Speaker 2: No, she came--she had a, a conscious dec- she made a conscious decision. She went to work when I was six. My mother really read Dr. Spock [Benjamin Spock]. I mean (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, she was-- Speaker 2: No, she was-- Speaker 1: --very specific about the-- Speaker 2: Oh, please-- Speaker 1: --timing. Speaker 2: --and you know. In fact, one of the--her most angst is with my brother [Harold B. Jackson, Jr.], and sister [Jane Jackson Harley], and their children, because she believed that you waited at least two years. Speaker 1: In between. Speaker 2: In between. And my nieces (laughter) and nephews are all like nine months and ten months apart. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So my mother felt that she had failed. Speaker 1: So that you didn't give the proper amount of attention-- Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: And, and development. And they say that a child is fully emotionally developed by the age of six. So at six she went to work, and then--and by that time I was in first grade. I had, you know, I had, had gone to preschool, nursery school, and I was in first grade [at Park View Elementary School, Washington, D.C.], and then she, by design, was going to come home when I was thirteen. And I may have been twelve when she actually quit her job because something happened (laughter). I remember distinctly, some boys came over. My [maternal] grandmother [Ercer Ricks] ta- and my mother caucused. And about a week later, my mother was home. Speaker 1: "I'm a homemaker." Speaker 2: Um-hm. Story_ID: 587587 Speaker 1: Your mother [Julia Hawkins Jackson] is very--I'm impressed by her-- Speaker 2: Yes, you should be. Speaker 1: --her subtlety-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --her fierce and aggre- Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: It's almost, I mean it's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, it was. Speaker 1: --it's a, it's termed-- Speaker 2: It was. Speaker 1: --aggressive subtlety, I mean just very deliberate and so quiet. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: I really--it--I can feel her-- Speaker 2: Yeah, absolutely. Speaker 1: --sort of just being in the area. Speaker 2: So you can imagine my-- Speaker 1: Just, just a keen sense of observation (laughter). Speaker 2: --my loneliness. And she did not die eighteen years ago. She had a massive stroke. And it was one where we didn't find her, because I was traveling so much. And I would call, and the line was busy, and my mother was known to stay on the phone. And the neighbor that had the key knew that she stayed on the phone and had just seen her, let's say that Friday night. And so by Saturday night, she pooh-poohed--the neighbor pooh-poohed my concern. And by Sunday we found her. If we had found her earlier, less damage I think would have occurred. But she has suffered what, according to her physician, is normal for her age and the fact that she had had a massive stroke, is a, there is a certain percentage of dementia each year, to the point that last year I wasn't sure she actually recognized me, but she does. And so I, I feel very comforted in that. But I miss her a great deal. Story_ID: 587588 Speaker 1: Her idea of herself as passive is really--I just don't know if that's accurate. Speaker 2: I think you may be right. Speaker 1: She's really-- Speaker 2: Well, I would s- I said to her (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And I understand what she meant-- Speaker 2: Well, she and I had a-- Speaker 1: --but still-- Speaker 2: --a little--she was being flip. I was getting an honorary degree at--it wasn't at Iona [Iona College, New Rochelle, New York]. It was at Tougaloo [Tougaloo College, Tougaloo, Mississippi]. And we were sitting under one of those big weeping willow things. And somebody said--and she was joking, but I sometimes will act like a brat, and she was my mother. And they said, "How did you--? Mrs. Jackson [Julia Hawkins Jackson], she's like dynamo," dah, dah, dah. And then she says, "You wanna know how I created this monster?" And I said, "You called me a monster! You called me a monster!" (Unclear). I often reminded her that she created me, and I remind people. So I'm a reflection of everything she ever wanted a woman to be. And if I ever allow myself to get down, which I rarely do, but I, you know, I'm human, I think this is not what Julia Jackson sacrificed for. Story_ID: 587589 Speaker 1: And you said that she never divorced? Speaker 2: Oh, they did divorce. Speaker 1: Okay, eventually. Speaker 2: They divorced (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But she just took her time? Speaker 2: --after I was twenty-one. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Oh, she didn't divorce him. He [Jackson McCabe's father, HistoryMaker Hal Jackson] divorced her. Speaker 1: Well, perhaps. I mean, she may have chosen that time-- Speaker 2: No, she didn't. Speaker 1: No? Speaker 2: 'Cause she--no, because she and I talked about it. And she said to me--because this is where you can have plans, and I've had plans like this in my life, so I'm smiling because there are--sometimes there are things in the stars that you just can't calculate. Her, what is it, don't ask, don't tell policy? This is a very patriarchal policy. Well, we live in a patriarchal society, right? There was somebody, a very smart woman, lovely woman, first black producer actually, had worked for Goodson and Todman [Mark Goodson and Bill Todman], became my father's good friend. And good friends can become lovers, who can become--whatever. And at a certain point (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Sounds like Mr. McCabe [Jackson McCabe's second husband, Eugene L. McCabe]-- Speaker 2: Hm? Speaker 1: --who was scouted for best friendship. Speaker 2: Um-hm, that's the best way to do it. And what my mother [Julia Hawkins Jackson] never, never calculated was that. Speaker 1: So it wasn't just something-- Speaker 2: Well, because with most women, make the terrible mistake--I mean if you have somebody like, in theory, Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton], who runs around, you know, you know, and is a drive by, you know, relationship, that's much better than somebody that seeks a relationship. That's the, the danger. Story_ID: 587590 Speaker 1: I've learned a lot from your family today (laughter). Speaker 2: There's other, one other thing I want to say about her--and I've tried to counsel other friends that have husbands that are in the public eye, and they have not listened to me, and they have made very bad mistakes. The one thing that I think--one of the many things that I think my mother [Julia Hawkins Jackson] should always be applauded for and exalted for is that she never used my brother [Harold B. Jackson, Jr.] or my sister [Jane Jackson Harley] or I, never, to get his attention. And they always--each one of us knew that if we were in trouble, we never had to hide one from the other for fear that one's feelings would be hurt. And I have counseled my friends that have unfortunately may be near divorce or whatever: do not put that burden on the children. Speaker 1: When you said hide, you, just now you said a sentence where you said you never had to hide from--one from the other. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So as a child you're saying--just if you could just flush that out a little bit. Speaker 2: Well, what I mean is today I see women who will use their children to get to the husbands. They'll use the children, you know-- Speaker 1: So, "You can't see your kids," or? Speaker 2: No, I don't mean just at that rancorous part. I mean even before it's over. I have a theory, whether it's not a studied theory, but I believe most relationships are over three years before people break up to begin with. And in that three year period where the wife is--it's usually the wife. It's not the husband, but we understand why. I'm not putting women down because of that. Where they use the kids to get the husband's attention, you know, where it's, "Oh, you've got to go see this play because Billy's in it," not because they want them--she wants him to see it. Or that, "Billy is at soccer, and you've got to do that." Or, "You've got to come home because of this." And the kids hear you lying. Or, Mom's crying. I have a particular friend where she was always crying, and she would have the son go seek the father out. Well, if the father's with another woman, then she's--. It's like, Gene McCabe [Jackson McCabe's second husband, Eugene L. McCabe], one of the great things in our relationship, he had been married before and had a son. And he said to me: "Until my son comes to me and wants to have a relationship with you, his mother is primary in his life, and I am primary in his life. And I don't want him ever to feel conflicted over that." Well, Gene's wisdom was the same wisdom that my mother had. He--my mother never talked bad about my father [HistoryMaker Hal Jackson]. I never, ever heard her talk bad about him. I, at eighteen, am the one that said, he has girlfriends, women that I thought were my aunts, wonderful aunts that treated me great (laughter), you know. Takes a very secure person and a person that puts, to me, their children first in that circumstance, not themselves first, if I'm being clear. Speaker 1: Very, very, very. Story_ID: 587591 Speaker 1: So you said one of the things that you did with your father [HistoryMaker Hal Jackson] was pre-holiday--needed, but gift giving. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: What are--you said you were on his knee when he spoke with Adam Clayton Powell [Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.]. Where would they be, at the station or-- Speaker 2: Yeah, usually at, would be, let's say we'd, we'd be at the station on 125th Street, when LIB [WLIB Radio, New York, New York] was 125th Street. Speaker 1: Where was LIB located on 125th Street? Speaker 2: Oh-- Speaker 1: Please-- Speaker 2: --it was-- Speaker 1: --point it out to us. Speaker 2: --it was between, I think between 7th [7th Avenue; Adam Clayton Powell Jr. Boulevard] and 8th [8th Avenue; Frederick Douglass Boulevard]. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: I'd have to find out the address. I mean I-- Speaker 1: No, no, just on a visual. I mean I can see the street. I'm, I'm on 7th at--the Adam Clayton Powell now that, which must not have been there, built, the state building [Harlem State Office Building; Adam Clayton Powell Jr. State Office Building, New York, New York]. Speaker 2: Oh-- Speaker 1: The Apollo [Apollo Theater, New York, New York]. Speaker 2: Oh, the state building wasn't built until, hell, I'm talking about when I was six 'til I was whenever (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, I understand. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I'm just geographically trying to place-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --someone who's watching on 125th Street, where WLIC [sic.] is. Where is it in relationship to the Apollo? Speaker 2: Right down the street-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, in an, in, in a, in an office building, not impressive. I mean, you know, there were call letters outside, you know, neon call letters. But, you know, I would go to the studio with him. I mean the romance and the sex appeal and the drama and all that is really being, you know, in front of the mic and with the people that were being interviewed. And so I would just sit and listen. And then we--you know, if I was with him, then he'd have dinner, you know, at the Red Rooster [Red Rooster Harlem, New York, New York] or you know, or Small's Paradise [New York, New York]. Are you kidding? I had great fun. Speaker 1: And so was there music at Small's Paradise and-- Speaker 2: Oh, sure. Speaker 1: What's the other, Red Rooster? Speaker 2: The Red Rooster, honey. Speaker 1: I don't think that's there. Is that there still (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, it's not there anymore. Speaker 1: Is Smalls there? Speaker 2: Neither one of--no, neither-- Speaker 1: No, gone. Speaker 2: --one of them are there anymore. Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: You know. And it was a great juke box. And they had, and then they served ham hocks, chitterlings, all the soul food, and it was real soul food; nothing was out of a can. Speaker 1: So you, so you were there perhaps for interviews of-- Speaker 2: Not interviews, just hanging out, just talking (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, no, I mean in the radio station-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah, oh-- Speaker 1: --back in the radio station. Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: You said he was doing everybody, so just-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --give us another list of names. Speaker 2: Oh, god, anybody that--by this time, he was not doing talk radio. By this time-- Speaker 1: What year? Speaker 2: When he came to New York [New York], he was doing--MCA [WMCA Radio, New York, New York] was, had been talk formatted. It was, it's talk formatted now. It was live from Birdland [New York, New York]. It was jazz. You know, then it was rhythm and blues and jazz and you know that, you know, rhythm and blues into rock and roll, rock and roll into--what is--the urban sound. It was black music. And remember, his, his ace boon coon was at, at--you know, there was an evolution from--my father took Screamin' Jay Hawkins into Carnegie Hall [New York, New York], first live rock show. Whatever--remember now, he, he--at that point, maybe there were twelve jocks throughout the country. He's in the number one market; he's in New York City. Story_ID: 587592 Speaker 1: And then he's doing lots--is it--I know that it's true, but he's doing lots of different kind of fundraising and-- Speaker 2: Oh, all the time (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) community development? Speaker 2: He was very charitable. He did, he did that damn telethon every year with Jerry Lewis [Jerry Lewis MDA Labor Day Telethon]. You know, he did, and then he did, you know-- Speaker 1: The-- Speaker 2: --the Palisades of music. Speaker 1: --March of Dimes [sic. Muscular Dystrophy Association]? The March of Dimes? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: When was the last time the March of Dimes came on? Speaker 2: I don't know. Speaker 1: I forgot that. They didn't even want it anymore (laughter). Speaker 2: Please, whatever Jerry Lewis--it was Jerry's kids. Speaker 1: Yes, yes. Speaker 2: Yes, please. Speaker 1: And what else? Speaker 2: Well, the National Council of Negro Women always, the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], you, you know, anything and everything, the Urban--he didn't do the Urban League [National Urban League]. I don't remember that ever. You know, he's the one that started the petition to get the signatures of, for Shirley Chisholm and John Conyers [HistoryMaker John Conyers, Jr.] for the Martin Luther King holiday [Martin Luther King Jr. Day]. And it was he on the airwaves. You know, there's a power of communications, which we, we sort of take for granted now because we're in this tech, you know, communication age. Speaker 1: And everybody has access, as here you've got a really-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --concentrated-- Speaker 2: Exactly, oh, a limited platform. Speaker 1: And he's at WLIC, but is he at-- Speaker 2: LIB [WLIB Radio, New York, New York]. Speaker 1: LIB. Speaker 2: WWRL--WL--W- what--WMCA [WMCA Radio, New York, New York]. Oh, please, he was on every local major in the city. Speaker 1: And is he still doing multiple shows perhaps in a day or multiple shows in a-- Speaker 2: Literally, I don't remember, but the answer would be yes. Whatever was legal, he could do. Speaker 1: Okay, and is he-- Speaker 2: And he did. Speaker 1: --and is he going-- Speaker 2: And he also had in 1954 'Frontiers of Faith,' which was a Sunday program. Speaker 1: What's happening on 'Frontiers of Faith'? Speaker 2: Religious talk-- Speaker 1: Gospel music. Speaker 2: --and--no, not classical, jazz, Billy, [HistoryMaker] Billy Taylor, people like that, Dizzy Gillespie, people like that. Speaker 1: And what was, what kind of talk you were about to say before I interrupted? Speaker 2: Religious usually, Sunday show, you know, and, and something about religion, contemporary. And remember, I'm nine years old, so I don't have full recall of-- Speaker 1: I understand. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And were you listening to the radio all the time at home? Did you just leave it on? Speaker 2: (Gesture). Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: Oops, you can see me. I listened a lot. But remember, I was dancing a lot. I was not a child that sat around. And by the time I came home, I was exhausted. Speaker 1: And he was on presumably all day. Speaker 2: And you, you have to understand that he was not--he was our daddy, and we loved him, and we were proud of him, and we bragged about him. But you know, we were not in awe of it-- Speaker 1: Absolutely. Speaker 2: --'cause we lived-- Speaker 1: He was daddy. Speaker 2: --and breathed it. Speaker 1: He was not [HistoryMaker] Hal Jackson. Speaker 2: He's daddy. Hal Jackson, please. You know, we had a, a rec room downstairs with, you know, one of the major--which gets to your point, what did she do and, and when and why. But when we moved to New York [New York], my mother [Julia Hawkins Jackson]--and when she packed, she threw away all of his records cleaning up, which was really terrible. Story_ID: 587593 Speaker 1: Okay, so now we're gonna get started. My name is Adrienne Jones, and I'm the interviewer. Neculai Burghelea is the videographer. And [HistoryMaker] Jewell Jackson McCabe is the HistoryMaker. It would be great if we could start by getting you to state and spell your name, including the names in the middle. Speaker 2: Jewell, J-E-W-E-L-L, middle name Jackson, J-A-C-K-S-O-N, last name McCabe, M, small C, capital C-A-B as in boy, E. Speaker 1: Excellent. Can we get your date of birth and the location of your birth? Speaker 2: August the 2nd, 1945, Washington, D.C. Speaker 1: And what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is June the 20th, 2007. Speaker 1: And if you could just tell us on camera the location of this interview, and it says the address (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We're on the Upper East Side of Manhattan [New York] on the thirty-second floor, overlooking the glorious, most important city in the world. Speaker 1: Excellent. What is your occupation? Speaker 2: I am a publicist and lobbyist by profession, a strategic planner currently, an advisor, and I do executive training and coaching for mainly global companies and some not-for-profits. Speaker 1: Excellent. Story_ID: 587594 Speaker 1: Now I'm gonna ask you five People magazine-ish type questions, and you'll just give me the first answer that comes into your head. What's your favorite food? Speaker 2: My favorite food is shellfish. I am in love with all shellfish, and the more colorful, I love mussels; I love clams; I love lobster; and Maryland blue crabs. My mother's [Julia Hawkins Jackson] born in Maryland, and I know how to eat a crab better than anybody you've ever met. Speaker 1: (Laughter) What's your favorite time of year? Speaker 2: I like--there are two periods: summer and fall. Speaker 1: What's your favorite color? Speaker 2: Favorite color: shades of orange and gold and the sun, yellows, and reds, and fire, persimmon, and all the wonderful colors of honey. Speaker 1: Excellent. What is your favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Well, I have two, you know, the wonderful islands off the coast of Charleston [South Carolina], St. James Island [sic. James Island, South Carolina]. And I love the Italian [Italian Riviera] and French Riviera. Speaker 1: Excellent. And what is your favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Well, my favorite phrase I will tell you, and the one that I'm most quoted on I'll tell you. My favorite motivator is: in order to be in the right place at the right time, one has to be in the wrong place 90 percent of the time, with the perseverance to keep going in order for that 10 percent to pay off. Now most people know me as an advocate for women and specifically women of color. And most noted is a New York Times [The New York Times] quote from October 26, 1981, that Nadine Brozan put in her wonderful article when we went national ['Coalition of Black Women Goes National'], and that is: "Behind every significant finding, every significant breakthrough, every significant event in American history goes a black woman or black women going unrecognized." Speaker 1: So that's more like two. Those are excellent quotes. Story_ID: 587595 Speaker 1: We're gonna start now by talking about your family. And perhaps we can get a little background on you, and then we can bring you forward to learn about the organization of 100 Black Women [Coalition of 100 Black Women; National Coalition of 100 Black Women] and what motivated you to begin and thrive in that organization. Please tell me about your mother. Tell me what her name was; where was she born; where did she grow up; and anything that you know about her background and her growing up. Speaker 2: Well, my mother's name is Julia Hawkins Jackson. She was born in Anne Arundel County, Maryland. She grew up in Baltimore, Maryland. Her, her grandmother was a freed slave who was married to the undocumented son of the land baron of Anne Arundel County. And all the white folks lived on one side of this particular road. And everybody else, meaning Indians [Native American] and any Negroes or coloreds or whatever they were called in, in the early 19--early 20th century, rather. My mother was born on the white side of the road into a family that was considered a prominent family at that time. Speaker 1: And who did your mother live with? Speaker 2: Her mother, Ercer Ricks. Speaker 1: And do you know any stories or info- just tales about (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, Ercer Ricks was-- Speaker 1: --when she was being raised? Speaker 2: --a spitfire. She was the youngest, as I am the youngest of the three children that my mother gave birth to. And I hesitated there because, quite honestly, my mother raised three of us, but my brother [Harold B. Jackson, Jr.] and I share the same mother and father [HistoryMaker Hal Jackson]. My sister [Jane Jackson Harley] is the product of an earlier marriage of my father [to Claudia Parrat]. But what--my mother came--grandmother came from a family of thirteen, and she was the youngest, as I am the youngest. She just happened to be born on August 6th, and I was born on August 2nd. So there are some similar traits and characteristics. And she was a bit of a spitfire. And in her era, 'cause she was born in 1899--August 6th, 1899, she was, never would kowtow to the white establishment because, in her mind, as she was the darkest of the thirteen children, and most of them could pass for white, and her father was, for all intents and purposes, a white man to her, she never thought that she had to proverbially sit in the back of the bus. So she used to get in a lot of trouble, to the point that they actually had to move a few times because she, one time in a restaurant when a white man walked ahead of her, she actually picked up a pitcher of water and hit him upside the head I think is the way you'd say it. Speaker 1: Wow. Story_ID: 587596 Speaker 1: And do you have any other antics of your [maternal] grandmother's [Ercer Ricks] perhaps before we (laughter)-- Speaker 2: Well, I would--I wouldn't refer them as antics. I would refer to them as demonstrations of a sense of self and independence. Speaker 1: Much better word. Speaker 2: She was my best friend. And really, for a period of time, both my mother [Julia Hawkins Jackson] and father [HistoryMaker Hal Jackson] worked their schedules so that I never ate lunch at school or outside of the home throughout my formative years, with the exception of high school [High School of Performing Arts; Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York] of course. But K through 9 [kindergarten to ninth grade], I had a warm lunch prepared by my grandmother, who, like I am with children, never talked down to me, always spoke to me as an adult, and I learned a great deal. And we talked an awful lot about young women and, and about gender equity. And she didn't call it that at that time. But she would read the paper, and she'd see prominent people like Walter White or prominent people like, you know, Thurgood Marshall. And she would say, "When you grow up, you're gonna travel with men like that because you're going to be like that." So, those kinds of images she put in her--in my head. And she would say things that were then considered a little progressive today. I think it's good, just common sense. She always reminded me because people always would tell me that I was cute and that, that, or you know, that I looked nice, or that I was pretty. And obviously my mother and father, and most black mothers and fathers, have to celebrate the beauty of their daughters because American society didn't. But, so I thought I was the cutest thing going, but she would always tell me, "It is not what ever--as you get older, Jewell [HistoryMaker Jewell Jackson McCabe], it's not what's between your legs; it's what's between your shoulder blades that's most important." And I think that that fingerprint was very much on me. She also told me that she thought that, like herself, that my mouth would get me in a lot of trouble one day. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Well, what kind of things did your mother--your grandmother say to get herself in trouble? You told us about actually hitting someone with a water pitcher. Speaker 2: Well, I can't (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did she-- Speaker 2: --literally tell you now in 2007, and she's been dead since 1982. Speaker 1: No, we were-- Speaker 2: And those wonderful talks that we had, I wish I could say they were yesterday. But we're talking about 1955 and through '82 [1982]. But basically, she thought as an independent person. Basically, she was very aggressive. And she never used religion as a, as a, an excuse not to be forthright. She never fell back on phrases that were really detractors from fact, and she was a highly religious woman. Speaker 1: Did you feel, do you think that most people tend to use sort of religious explanations for things? Speaker 2: I think in this country (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Could you give us a little of-- Speaker 2: --that we are founded by, you know, with a Protestant ethic, and I think, ergo, a strength and ergo many of our challenges. And so I think that, I mean, "Don't ask, don't tell," the famous Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] phrase about gays in the [U.S.] military is really the manner in which this patriarchy has dealt with all issues of class, race and gender. Story_ID: 587597 Speaker 1: So just to take us back a little bit-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: --can you tell us a couple of additional tales about your mother as she was growing up, anything that you might remember-- Speaker 2: Well, my mother was extraordinary (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) she or your [maternal] grandmother [Ercer Ricks] telling you? Speaker 2: My mother was, you know, she was the quintessential mother. I mean there is nobody that was more giving than my mother. I mean my mother was quite amazing, in that I thought, for example, I, I, you know, I now look at young women or young men and I can see bright eyes and a lot of energy. And, and you know, I can already tell that they're bright or, or that they, if not guided properly, if you don't put your arms around them and, and help them, that they could possibly be in mischief. I thought that I just naturally knew I was gonna be a dancer at three years old. And my mother used to indulge me by rolling up the carpet when, you know, nobody was home and putting on music. And we would do various kinds of dance and all until I was of the age, and it was actually three years old when I did start taking formal dance training at the Doris-Haywood dance school [sic. Jones-Haywood School of Ballet; Jones-Haywood Dance School, Washington, D.C.], [HistoryMaker] Doris Jones and Haywood [Claire Haywood], which produced some of our premier dancers. Speaker 1: I want you to tell me these things, but I also want to learn about your parents first and their upbringing. So-- Speaker 2: Well, my father was-- Speaker 1: Wait, wait, so let's talk about your mom. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And do you have any other tales--did she share any stories with you about growing up? Speaker 2: Well, her stories really were about the boys in the family because she had nothing; she had no other females to image, other than her aunts and her mother, because she had no sisters. She had a brother, but she had all of these cousins who protected her. My mother was very attractive, not just internally, as a sweet, loving, caring person. And anybody that knows Julia [Julia Hawkins Jackson] just adored Julia. But she's also quite good looking. She was a, a Lena Horne look alike, so that she was always trying to figure out how to have a date without all these cousins. And I think it really had a lot to do with how she married so young. She married at seventeen, because it was almost the first boyfriend that was smart enough to be able to manipulate and seduce the elder boys around her (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) A well guarded (laughter)-- Speaker 2: --which was my father, Harold B. Jackson [HistoryMaker Hal Jackson]. Story_ID: 587598 Speaker 1: When your grandmother was--when your mother [Julia Hawkins Jackson] was growing up, did she remain on that white side of town, or did she and your grandmother (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, she was born there. My grandmother [Ercer Ricks] was born there and grew up there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They moved. I just meant physically she was born there. That was really the birthplace of my mother, but it was the home of my grandmother. Speaker 1: And is that where your mother was raised? Speaker 2: No, my mo- mother was raised in Baltimore, Maryland. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes. And then at a certain point, my grandmother moved to Washington, D.C. and bought a home. And my mother went to Dunbar High School [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School, Washington, D.C.], and that's where she met my father [HistoryMaker Hal Jackson], 'cause everybody--I mean Dunbar was the prep school. Dunbar was the, the, the, the Choate [Choate School; Choate Rosemary Hall, Wallingford, Connecticut] of the--or the Groton academy [Groton School, Groton, Massachusetts]--for African Americans that were of the Talented Tenth in particular. Speaker 1: And besides your father, do you know anyone else who your mother and father went to school with at Dunbar? Speaker 2: I can't name anybody, but I can tell you this: when I was at Bard College [Annandale-on-Hudson, New York] my freshman year, it was only eight African Americans at the entire, of the four years there, you know, meaning freshman, sophomore, junior, senior. There was eight of us, and of that, seven had gone to--mothers or father had gone to Dunbar High School with my mother or father. So you can pretty much ID that anybody that became a history maker-- Speaker 1: Went to Dunbar. Speaker 2: --and lived in, in ways that you would want proudly to live had gone through the Dunbar High School experience. Story_ID: 587599 Speaker 1: Tell me about your father [HistoryMaker Hal Jackson]. What was his name? Where was he born? And where did he grow up? Speaker 2: Okay, my father's born in Charleston, South Carolina. My father grew up a, a little bit on the East Coast. He, he had gone to prep school in Vermont [Troy Conference Academy, Poultney, Vermont], and then there were money issues. He had come from a very wealthy family. And his older siblings, the two older sisters, they weren't the oldest. The oldest boy came to New York [New York] and just blended in to society as a white person and never to be seen again. My father was the youngest. My father was extraordinarily talented and ambitious. The, the elder sisters, my Aunt Essie [Essie Jackson], who recently died at ninety-eight years old, was the first black to graduate from Boston Conservatory of Music [Boston Conservatory at Berklee, Boston, Massachusetts]. My Aunt Alyce [Alyce Jackson Cornish], who is 103 years old now, integrated in the '50s [1950s], you know, the Episcopal church [St. Paul's Episcopal Church] in Washington, D.C., but she was a schoolteacher from the time she was eighteen. But those two had--they traveled the world prior to settling down to their professional careers. Speaker 1: And it sound like your father was--was he raised by your sisters? How exactly-- Speaker 2: He was raised-- Speaker 1: --was his-- Speaker 2: --by them, but he was rebellious. So he--for there was a period of time when he actually came to New York I think when he was about thirteen or fourteen years old. And he actually lived, as he describes it, in the subway, you know, got a job, used to share a suit with another guy so that they--one would go to work during the day, and the other would sleep and vice versa, and then ended up going back to Washington, D.C., finishing up at Howard, broadcasting in the '30s [1930s], Howard University, used to broadcast, in fact, hockey games-- Speaker 1: And so-- Speaker 2: --before there was an African American portfolio. Speaker 1: And where were your father's parents [Laura Rivers Jackson and Eugene Jackson]? Speaker 2: Where were they? Speaker 1: Yes. I mean how did your (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They died-- Speaker 1: --father become-- Speaker 2: --very young, very-- Speaker 1: --separated from your-- Speaker 2: --you know, I believe my grand- grandparents on my father's side died of yellow fever. But at--they were the tailors for the [U.S.] Navy. And they actually, my father actually doesn't, if he knows it, he doesn't speak the name of the white banker that was, that had fathered his father. Story_ID: 587600 Speaker 1: And what's your father's name? Speaker 2: Harold Baron Jackson. Most people know him as [HistoryMaker] Hal Jackson. Speaker 1: And what, what was his forte? Speaker 2: Well, broadcasting, he--entrepreneur. Some people see him as a disc jockey, but he was much broader than that. He's got a host of--because of the period and time in which he evolved, and he really was a major trailblazer and is considered the, you know, he is considered the dean of broadcasting. He is both inducted into the broadcast hall of fame [NAB Broadcasting Hall of Fame], he with Charles Grolt [ph.], and in the radio hall of fame [National Radio Hall of Fame, Chicago, Illinois]. And he started broadcasting in the mid-'30s [1930s]. Speaker 1: You said that he majored in broadcasting at Howard University [Washington, D.C.] and started-- Speaker 2: I don't think he majored in broadcasting. Speaker 1: But was doing a lot of broadcasting (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Exactly. Speaker 1: And starting out with sports, particularly hockey games. Speaker 2: Well, he owned the, the--at a certain point--the reason why it's very difficult, when you're dealing with a real American, who my father is, and in fact, a lot of the principles that I have is because he, you know, he, he very much under--is a student and a protege of, of inventing oneself. And so he, at one point, owned the Washington Bears that was also the Harlem Renaissance [New York Renaissance]. And any sports buffs, which I am not a sports buff, but I know what my father owned, was the basketball team, you know, in the '40s [1940s]. You know, my father owned race horses, and my father was the only, within our very, you know, Jack and Jill community [Jack and Jill of America, Inc.], that was an entrepreneur, that was a businessman, that was a man who was not in the so--Civil Rights Movement, but he was a voice of Civil Rights Movement by having the airwaves. Speaker 1: And what, what kinds of ways would you say that your father contributed to the Civil Rights Movement through his use of the airwaves? I know that this, his use was vast (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well frank- well, it, the use was exceptional because there was no competition, and he created the vehicle. I mean The Washington Post owned WINX, W-I-N-X [WINX Radio; WLXE Radio, Rockville, Maryland], and it was either 1935 or '37 [1937], which my father went to them and said that he had wanted very much to have a radio program which was gonna be all talk, interviewing history makers, interviewing people like Dr. Charles Drew [Charles R. Drew], people like Thurgood Marshall, people like Mary McLeod Bethune, people like Louis "Satchmo" Armstrong [Louis Armstrong], people like the Brown Bomber, Joe Louis. And he was told, "No nigger will ever broadcast from our radio station." So my father went and pooled his money and lobbied and pooled the money of the black community. I mean when we had segregation, all the, all of the, all of the shops were owned by blacks, all of the services like doctors and specifically dentists and doctors, and the funeral parlor owners, and real estate owners were black, in the main businessmen. You know, there were a few types that were journalists that inherited that great DNA from a, from an Ida B. Wells from the 19th century. But in basically communication, was very new. And he was hell bent on being a part of that, and in the vanguard of communication, and he, he did that. He broadcast, in fact, not just from WINX, but from three different radio stations daily, from three different cities. Now when you're in Washington, D.C., that's not so hard to, to hit Virginia and to hit Maryland, but it's still, you know, that kind of accomplishment. Story_ID: 587601 Speaker 1: So tell me about the meeting of your mother [Julia Hawkins Jackson] and your father. Speaker 2: I don't know anything about it other than high school [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School, Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 1: Well-- Speaker 2: I know that she probably, you know, like most high school girls--I mean he was a big deal, I mean, you know, and, and he's also a charmer. He's a very, very endearing person. You don't meet Hal [HistoryMaker Hal Jackson]--you don't meet him today, and he'll be ninety-two this year, and not fall in love with him. I mean he is the pied piper, so that owning a basketball team [Washington Bears], I'm sure my mother was at a basketball game. And I'm sure that somehow he had figured out how to get somebody to let her know that he owned the team. He wasn't just there. But he would never be bodacious like I am. Speaker 1: So your father was ahead of your mother at school? Speaker 2: Oh, four--oh yes. Speaker 1: And--four years (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He had actually graduated. Speaker 1: And your father was married prior to being married to your mother. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So when your parents met-- Speaker 2: It was a marriage of civility. His girlfriend [Claudia Parrat] had gotten pregnant. And in that era, you know, not that we don't do it today, but he married my sister's mother in order to give her his name. And I don't know the details, but he actually had the baby [McCabe's half-sister, Jane Jackson Harley] and used to carry her in a, in, in his athletic bag. So my mother, at seventeen, her heart of course melted and probably against protests from my grandmother [Ercer Ricks], knowing that seventeen was terribly young. But also my grandmother, knowing her, was very impressed with my father's accomplishments. Story_ID: 587602 Speaker 1: Tell us about your earliest memory from growing up. Speaker 2: Two things, both on East Capitol Street, before we moved. And I was born (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In Washington, D.C.? Speaker 2: --in a house on East Capitol Street in Washington, D.C. And my mother [Julia Hawkins Jackson] has this ability with, of, you know, and it's a very female leadership style. My leadership style is very, very male. But my mother could manage an entire home or, and I'll use the word, even though people may perceive it as pejorative, which I don't mean it that way, but it's very quiet, very sweet; it's very soft; it's very--a wonderful woman, could manage an entire household and a husband who was on the road 90 percent of the time through manipulation. I don't remember her raising her voice ever, quite candidly. But she had given birth to my brother [Harold B. Jackson, Jr.] at a hospital, and she didn't like the environment. And so since her gynecologist, her doctor, lived on the same block--I mean everybody that was somebody always--you know, there was a very small circle of the Talented Tenth. And so my father actually, the, the night I was born was actually playing either bid whist or poker with the doctor [Fred Woods (ph.)], who was the next door neighbor. And I do remember one very aggressive thing that my father told me my mother said, is after I, after I was born, and the doctor asked him to hold me by my feet while they were cutting the umbilical cord, and my mother looked up--and she had had natural childbirth because my mother was quite progressive, I think--and she looked at my father as he looked like he was about to faint, and she said, "[HistoryMaker] Hal Jackson, if you drop that baby, I will get out this bed and kill you." (Laughter) "Stand up," (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. So you said you had two earliest memories. Speaker 2: My [maternal] grandmother [Ercer Ricks] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So one was--yeah. Speaker 2: Both, both east--on East Capital Street. One was, I was very indulged, and so I was actually carried around on a satin pillow. And I know you say, what's up with that? I don't know, but it wasn't bad. I don't remember it, but I do remember getting up and walking, and it was no teetering or tottering. And I probably was standing, and they didn't even know it from time to time since they literally carried me. And I've got pictures of me on satin pillows. But my godfather, who was a major figure in New York [New York] and in Washington, D.C., Dolly King [William "Dolly" King], who had gone to St. John's University [sic. Long Island University, Brooklyn, New York] and was buddy-buddy with Red Auerbach, you know, who was at, you know, who was coaching my father's team [Washington Bears]. He was my godfather, and he was the big--I won't use the word 'cause it's not appropriate--in town, and he was about 6'5" or 6". And my mother said that, you know, she could remember, and I remember, this man who was draped in white cashmere wrap coat. And I couldn't even see his face. I just remember looking up and just looking up. But I stood up and walked for a guy. That was a memory. And the same period of time, I never liked to take naps. And my grandmother was a stern disciplinarian, as my mother was, but they never--they had a, they had an obsession. And I have to feel that my mother's obsession had to have come from things that she'd either heard or seen when she was younger, but they were never shared with me. But, A, you never hit a child, and A plus, you never smacked someone in the face. Those were no-nos. Those to her were the most degrading things you could ever do. But my punishment often as I was growing up in my adolescent years, I wished I had been spanked. It would have been easier than a month without phone privileges. Speaker 1: That was (laughter) what you-- Speaker 2: That was--a month to a child at eight or nine-- Speaker 1: A long time. Speaker 2: --years old. And I was punished like that. I never had--which is so interesting because my mother and I have a similar trait. We tend to do a lot of things that are over the top. If I'm serving dinner, it's gonna be more courses than anybody ever saw. It's gonna be lush. And as my mother said, you never want anybody to leave wanting. You always want to be gracious as a hostess. Story_ID: 587603 Speaker 1: So you've shared with us some of your earliest memories. Can you just tell us a little bit about your upbringing? I know you've lived in two pla- you lived in two places. So, if you could just tell us what it was like to be at your house, first in D.C. [Washington, D.C.], and then maybe a little bit about your actually moving to New York [New York] and what that was like. Speaker 2: Okay. Well, some of the fun stuff in Washington, by the time I, I was born, as my father [HistoryMaker Hal Jackson] often laughs and teases the other--my siblings [Jane Jackson Harley and Harold B. Jackson, Jr.], is that, "Jewell [HistoryMaker Jewell Jackson McCabe] spends ridiculously because she think--thinks we're rich." Because by the time I was born, he was making quite a bit of money for--in the context of African Americans and money, and--actually, in the context of others and money too. But he would tease, but he would always be lavishing me with gifts when he'd come back from New York or Chicago [Illinois], you know, or Atlanta [Georgia], wherever he was coming in from. And my mother [Julia Hawkins Jackson] said--she would laugh, and she sort of liked it, because she said all the other children were always, you know, trailing behind him, and he was always trailing behind me because I was so used to getting things, I would just take them and set them aside and move on. I was very strange with dolls, for example. I wanted every doll possible, but I never babied them. I never--whatever, so I'd end up sitting on them, and we'd have to take them to the doll hospital and have their heads put back on. I was lavished with a lot of things, but I had to work hard in terms of my chores. I had certain restrictions that other kids on the block didn't have, for example, and this is a way black families often protected you. And, and most people don't consider Washington, D.C. the South, but it was very much the South. And after all, we didn't have Brown versus Board of Education until 1954 [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954]. And it was 1955 when we moved to New York, and so everything was separate. But I didn't know that because we were told that it was good manners and social gracious not to use someone else's restroom, whether it be in somebody's home, or it be in a public forum, and a public forum wasn't even thought about. And I didn't realize until my mother was so sad over an incident that she and I talked about one--much later in life. When I was about eighteen we were remembering instances of racial humiliation. And she talked about Dolly King's son, my cousin, Michael [Michael C. King]. He wasn't my blood cousin, but we called him that. And Michael was about five years younger than I, and so he was about I'd say four years old one Christmas he was in Washington, D.C.--our families were sharing holiday together. And we were given about ten dollars each to go buy presents at the five and dime, and that's what we called it then. And you know, I was used to going, and we went in. And I remember my cousin, you know, ran up at a certain point. And he's four years old and could hardly get up on the stool at the soda fountain. And I remember my mother coming and getting us. And I just knew that you don't eat--you know, you wouldn't eat in a five and dime to begin with. I didn't know that we weren't allowed to. And apparently, this was very humiliating to her personally. And I do remember--coming home, I remember her being very tearful. And I thought it was just something, that maybe my mother and father had an argument, you know, and just, you know, blew it off that way. Washington was wonderful, but it wasn't fast and exciting enough for me. I think I was born wanting to live in New York City. Story_ID: 587604 Speaker 1: But when you were in Washington [D.C.]-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --who else was around in your neighborhood, and what kind of a space did you live in? Speaker 2: Well, people were around the--for example, the space that I lived in was the largest house on the block. My mother [Julia Hawkins Jackson]--that was part of her prerequisite. And so--I see your wrinkled brow (laughter). I know, it's sort of stunning to me too (laughter). But my mother was a woman who believed in station and status, but was also, and I must underscore this, because my father [HistoryMaker Hal Jackson] was a total person who always made us know that we were better than no one and that we were to be good, and open, and communicate. And he always made us know that there but by the grace of god, go thou, so we were always clear about that. But my mother's sense of social skills or her sense of good education, of prep schools, of finishing schools, of dance, for presentation, or music, all of those were very American and very much a part of her identity and one that my father supported handsomely. Story_ID: 587605 Speaker 1: And when you were in D.C. [Washington, D.C.], was your mother an entertainer? Did she host people at the hou- at the home when you had holidays? Were you guys (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. Speaker 1: --a centralized location? Speaker 2: My mother--my mother did have small social gatherings. My mother always had a wonderful support system of extraordinarily powerful women. My mother didn't have to work. And she worked as an executive associate for a very brief period of time. She worked for Anne Roberts [Anne Mason Roberts], who was one of the founders actually of the original chapter, of the Coalition of 100 Black Women [National Coalition of 100 Black Women]. Her husband, Stan Roberts [Stanley Roberts], was the first African American journalist with the Pittsburgh Courier [New Pittsburgh Courier]. And in fact, he moved to Washington, D.- Washington, D.C., and he and my father [HistoryMaker Hal Jackson] became good friends. He was print journalism, and my father was broadcast journalism. And they both migrated to New York [New York] together, so our families did many holidays and things together. So, after I was six years old, you know, and this is straight out of Spock [Benjamin Spock], my mother decided to go to work and had slated to stop working when I turned thirteen so that she would be home to help rear me in those challenging years. But something happened when I was about twelve, about to turn, turn thirteen. And I don't really remember what it was, other than there were boys at the house, and my [maternal] grandmother [Ercer Ricks] just, I remember her saying, "Julia [Julia Hawkins Jackson], it's time." And I didn't know what that meant, but I'd say about a week later my mother was be- was like--I can't call her a Cub Scout leader, even though she was that. But my mother was everybody's pal, and my house became the clubhouse. Story_ID: 587606 Speaker 1: So can you tell us about relocating from Washington, D.C.? How old were you? And then your move (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was-- Speaker 1: --to New York [New York], where you say was the place for you. Speaker 2: Okay, well, first of all, we--R. Peter Straus' father, Nathan Straus [Nathan Straus, Jr.], had brought my father [HistoryMaker Hal Jackson] from Washington, D.C., to broadcast live from Birdland [New York, New York] in the '50s [1950s]. And also my father hosted a Sunday program called 'Frontiers of Faith' on NBC television. And so, my father had a, a real New York apartment, and I thought I was moving to real New York. Speaker 1: Where was your father's real New York apartment? Speaker 2: The Ivey--it's called the Ivey Delph houses [Ivey Delph Apartments, New York, New York]. It's, you know-- Speaker 1: Where is it located? Speaker 2: That's on 146th [sic.] and Am- off of Amsterdam Avenue and you know, near the whole Strivers Row area and you know. And then so I, like, I'm excited because when we were moving, when the moving vans were bringing all of our stuff, I was ten years old. And you know, we'd get our hair done, you know, at Rose Morgan's [Rose Morgan House of Beauty, New York, New York]. And [HistoryMaker] Rose Morgan's--her, she had been married to the Brown Bomber, Joe Louis, and Rose--this was glamour. Everything was pink, and the sinks were black, and it was just so chic, and it was New York. And, oh, and on 7th Avenue [Adam Clayton Powell Jr. Boulevard] on Sundays, everybody was dressed so cool. And of course, my dad and Adam Clayton Powell [Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.] were like running buddies, and, and so I was always there. And then all of a sudden the house is ready for us to move, and as ten years old, I didn't have a clue. I'm not very good with geography right now--or direction, not so much geography. And so, here, we move to what was called then--it's not called it now; it's called Queens [New York], but it was called Long Island [New York]. And it was where all the Exxon [Exxon Mobil Corporation] executive lived in the '50s [1950s]. And we bought the f- we were the first blacks to buy the biggest house on the corner. My mother [Julia Hawkins Jackson] immediately had it painted one of my favorite colors, you know, seafood shell pink. You know, it wasn't loud; it was very whatever. And the landscaper came in, and of course, she was over the top with her landscaping and, and her, and just her eye for, for detail related to the outdoors in particular and presentation. And within six months there was there was nothing but for sale signs around. And the interesting thing is that my brother [Harold B. Jackson, Jr.], being the, the black man, along with my father, they weren't home. And my sister [Jane Jackson Harley] at that point was married and living in Washington, D.C. So the only people was my [maternal] grandmother [Ercer Ricks], and a ten year old black girl, and my mom in this two family gorgeous home. And I basically was isolated; didn't realize it because so much of my upbringing had been to protect me from racism, so that there were many things, from taking dance immediately--if you take dance three or four hours a day and then, you know, you know, you do have your schooling, and then you--so my days were full and exhaustive. I had one little white girlfriend. And I never thought about why she seemed to live three or four blocks away, why I wasn't friendly with the other kids. It didn't dawn on me because I was so protected. And as I said, I ate lunch. I thought it was because my grandmother cooks well and that they were just protecting me. I didn't know that they were protecting me from something insidious, which was occurring. It was P.S. 136 [Roy Wilkins School], in Queens, in St. Albans, and it was all white. This was 1955, and they were busing in black kids from South Jamaica [Queens, New York], and it was not a comfortable transition. So I, who will always want to be the hippest and baddest kid on the block, hung out with the tough girls from South Jamaica and got myself into a little trouble by the time I was in my seventh grade. So my eighth grade, which was my last grade before I went to the High School of Performing Arts [Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York], was a very lonely year 'cause I was on punishment for about a year 'cause I got into a fist fight in the seventh grade. Story_ID: 587607 Speaker 1: I was about to ask about some of the fun things perhaps that you did with some of your friends from Jamaica [Queens, New York]-- Speaker 2: The Jamals [ph.]. Speaker 1: --due to the fact that you had a little bit of access to entertainment-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --with your father. Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Would you tell us a little bit about perhaps going to the Apollo [Apollo Theater, New York, New York]? Speaker 2: Oh, sure, and that was before my eighth grade punishment. You have to understand, I was als- always involved in student government. That was important. And in the seventh grade [at P.S. 136, Roy Wilkins School, Queens, New York] you could only be--the highest office you could have was vice president, so I was vice president. Eighth grade, I was president, and my slogan was: "Be cool; vote for Jewell [HistoryMaker Jewell Jackson McCabe]." I had signs: "Don't be a fool; vote for Jewell." And the Jamals was a group that we had these little white, what they call capri pants, and we had made our own little tops out of this sort of--every color that's here in my apartment, this paisley with, with its honeys, and its yellows, and its oranges, and its, you know, and its rust tones, and then we had a white J. And of course, that was a little bit of cleverness, you know. Ahmad Jamal was popular, so we used the Jamals, but I liked it 'cause it was J for Jewell and J for Jackson. And I had certain curfew, and I had certain restrictions, that if my father was not with us, we could not go backstage at the Apollo. Well, you can't imagine, the Apollo was like Carnegie Hall [New York, New York] to the world for rhythm and blues, jazz. It was the forum for the best talent. And you know, obviously during the Harlem Renaissance period, way before I was born, the, you know, white folks went to hang out in Harlem [New York, New York], and that would be one of their spots. So, the Apollo was mythical. And I can remember we--very--I remember this dramatically because I could be, very easily be baited, so that we had watched Frankie Lymon and the Teenagers. And we drooled over Herman Santiago. Frankie was talented, but Herman was a doll. And then we had watched Smokey Robinson and The Miracles, and I mean Smokey [HistoryMaker Smokey Robinson] was a dream. And of course, then the girls, so the Jamals, our little club, wanted to go backstage. And I said no, we had to go home. And so they said, "But your father's [HistoryMaker] Hal Jackson, and you can do anything you want to do." And so I was nervous. I knew I was gonna get in trouble. I had no idea how much trouble I was gonna get in. I didn't have a clue how much trouble I was gonna get in, but I went backstage, and I timidly knocked on the backstage door. And when they opened--and I figured they're just gonna shoo us away. And I said I was Hal's daughter, and then we were treated royally. And yeah, we saw the guys with their do-rags on, and they were drinking their--you know, whatever wine they were drinking, whatever. And by the time I got home--and I was supposed to be home, you know, we're talking before dusk, right, and I got home, it was around midnight. And I have a very unique relationship with the phone because my father came through the phone, meaning he was on the road. And my mother [Julia Hawkins Jackson] would never yell at me. She just said, "Your father will be calling." And he verbally took me to a place that you don't ever want to go, and then I was punished, and I mean I was punished. And now I understand--I very much understand why, because you know, anything can happen today in the backstage of any theater with some young girls vulnerable. But you know, God was looking after us and you know, but I learned a lesson. Story_ID: 587608 Speaker 1: What were holidays like? You say your father [HistoryMaker Hal Jackson] was on the road a lot. Was there ever, were there particular days when he would be at home? Speaker 2: He was always at home--it was very southern, you know, very Americana, southern, Western correct. He was always home on Saturday night through Monday morning. And so Sunday was a, always, you know, treating the king to everything, so everybody was royalty, you know. And he, he loved you know his grits. And he and my sister, Jane [Jane Jackson Harley], and my brother [Harold B. Jackson, Jr.] were--well, my brother's pretty even. He liked grits, and he liked potatoes. But my mom [Julia Hawkins Jackson] and [maternal] grandmother [Ercer Ricks] and I used to say we, we were the mashed potato, you know, French fry folk. And my father was the, the grits, and cheese, and eggs, and stuff, you know. Speaker 1: So you would have big food on Sunday, and that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, my god, yes. Speaker 1: Was that all day? Speaker 2: Fried chicken, biscuits, you name it. But it started for me every Friday. My mother and grandmother entertained the, the community of my friends. And she--my mother, as I said, she's a quintessential mother. She figured out things that I can't believe this was from reading. I think this is just how sharp and how smart she was. She knew I loved to show off and dance, and so if we did--I mean we did Halloween. I don't remember going trick or treating ever because our--we had this great garden and great front porch, and she would hang, you know, all of the paraphernalia, whether it be the skeletons or the witches or whatever. And we'd have all the jack o'lanterns, which we'd all cut out, and we would go dunking for apples. And you know, god knows Kraft; we should own Kraft [Kraft Foods Inc.] stock 'cause she melted many a caramel to make those caramel apples. And it was always a party. And food, as in most African American homes, was a--very much a centerpiece in our lives. Speaker 1: So what were some of your favorites? You mentioned the potatoes, but just-- Speaker 2: Well, anything fried, short of ice cream. I mean, you know, I'm, I'm exaggerating. Speaker 1: And you said-- Speaker 2: There's only two things I don't like, and that's okra, and I don't care whether you super fry it and make it cool or not, there's just something about okra, it's not my thing; and believe it or not, beets, I'm not a beet person, but pretty much everything else. Speaker 1: Was good-- Speaker 2: In terms of those things that most people don't like, from a child, I loved spinach. I love food, you know. Speaker 1: So you said Fridays were for frying? Speaker 2: Well, Fridays were sort of like when I would come home from school, and this was in Washington, D.C., so obviously I was in elementary school, Park View Elementary [Park View Elementary School, Washington, D.C.] to be specific, you know, it was TV night, and it was popcorn, it was French fries. You know, and we're talking--I didn't have a store bought French fry. I don't make store bought French fries. Everything's done straight from scratch, right. Fried chicken was a staple. If it wi- wasn't a platter of fried chicken at our house, I wouldn't have recognized the house; it was just a given. Now you had two women that really weren't working, so that, you know, cooking was, was--and my grandmother would just sit and talk and basically tell you how to tie your shoes or just before she'd prepare to do my hair. Oh, that was another thing. But she could make biscuits right in front of you, the little, you know, those little jelly glasses with the little whatever. And she'd just--and today, I cook I think reasonably well. I actually had a, with other friends, a black gourmet club, but I was never a pastry person. But my grandmother could make biscuits. I mean one of the great delights for me was if I was ever ill, she would take an apple, and what she could do to an apple was just scary. I mean she'd take a spoon and scoop it out. It was applesauce by the time she finished with, you know, lacing it with, you know, lots of butter and brown sugar and you know. And once you, you got that, you know, everything was just hunky dory and comfortable. And she could make seven layer coconut cakes and you know. It was just the--and ambrosia to die for, because it was always fresh coconut and lots of oranges and apples and great things. Story_ID: 587609 Speaker 1: And as you got earl- older, especially in New York [New York], who else was coming around the house, perhaps on Sundays when your father [HistoryMaker Hal Jackson] was there? Speaker 2: Well, every entertainer or politician of note would just--. Remember, and it's so hard for your generation and any, anyone that was born from 1964 on, after the si- the voting rights [Voting Rights Act of 1965], Civil Rights Act [Civil Rights Act of 1964], it's hard to understand that--to see, whether it be my dad or you know, any entertainer on television, it was a, it was like a--wasn't like a national holiday. It was beyond that. It was everybody that was in earshot of the television, you know, would come and knock on the door. You just--Nat King Cole--I mean I can, I visually--I don't ever remember seeing Nat King Cole on television where we didn't have it seems like thirty or forty people hovered around staring, so that my father having access to three radio stations, was the man of the hour because this was a, this is modernity; this was, this was communication; this was information is power; this was distributing information about a community that had been cloaked after slavery and had been disempowered, you know, through the social justice system with Plessy versus Ferguson [Plessy v. Ferguson, 1896], separate and unequal--I, little paraphrase there. So, my father was a instrument and a vehicle. He also, being the great guy that he is, was a good friend. I mean he and [HistoryMaker] Berry Gordy--I mean, you know, when you talk about Hitsville [Hitsville U.S.A., Detroit, Michigan] and you talk about, you know, Motown [Motown Records], remember, major markets are critically important for entertainers, and my father was in the major market: New York City. Story_ID: 587610 Speaker 1: So just tell us where did you go to elementary school? You mentioned it earlier, but just-- Speaker 2: Park View Elementary School in Washington, D.C.; P.S. 136 [Roy Wilkins School] in New York City [Queens, New York]; the High School of Performing Arts [Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York] right off of Broadway. I was a happy camper (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So tell us a little bit about your, your transition between--what, you said P.S. 136? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And the New York School of Performing Arts. I mean we know that is not a school that you just-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --arrive and-- Speaker 2: And especially-- Speaker 1: --decide to attend. Speaker 2: --especially-- Speaker 1: How did you-- Speaker 2: --in 19-- Speaker 1: --how did you come to be there? Speaker 2: --nineteen fifty-nine [1959]. It had as much racism as humanly possible. And you know, I don't know if strings were pulled. I would suggest that they may have been. I clearly was talented, but I can't tell you that I was the only African American woman that was going in for her--ninth grade as a dance major. It's always curious in these schools when you see there's only one of us per class. And there was one boy, John Parks, and there was Jewell Jackson [HistoryMaker Jewell Jackson McCabe]. And we had to audition. And we were grilled. And 'Fame' is not an overstatement. It is truly a celebration of a great experience and a horrific experience for me. Speaker 1: What is 'Fame'? Could you just tell us, for anyone who might not know. Speaker 2: Oh, oh, 'Fame' was a movie in the '70s [1970s] that chronicled the High School of Performing Arts. Speaker 1: Nice. Speaker 2: And there was no exaggeration, you know (laughter). I was the funniest one at the High School of Performing Arts, in that--and I did this twice. I did this when I was in elementary school and also in high school. My mother [Julia Hawkins Jackson] had a rule that you weren't supposed to wear black until you were eighteen. Well, black was signature at the High School of Performing Arts. So I was famous for going to the candy store and going to the restroom and changing into my leotards and tights. And you know, and I had, you know, my cat eyed, black eyeliner and you know. Oh, please, you know, every, every stereotypic drama of that era, I was into it. Story_ID: 587611 Speaker 1: And what was the administration, at least in the dance program, at--you know, who was, who was instructing you in dance at the New York (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, the head of the dance department-- Speaker 1: --School of Performing Arts? Speaker 2: --and--was a woman named Dr. Dyke [Marjorie Dyke]. And--interesting name--and she didn't approve of African Americans. And when you're a youngster and your mother and--parents don't want to scar you, and I was fortunate not to be scarred until I was ready, and I then I was scar proof. I mean I've had painful experiences. Performing Arts was a painful experience. Some of us call it your slave moment. Well, my slave moment occurred at the High School of Performing Arts [Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York]. But other things had happened with young girls at PA, is what we called it, that were white that were also hideous. We, the first year, we were fourteen years old. And then we went away, and that summer many of us developed bosoms, and hips, and grew tall, and were ostracized. I actually wasn't ostracized from, for my body. My body really didn't develop until I was almost, in terms of the womanly curves that I proudly have, until--in fact, my sister [Jane Jackson Harley] used to tease my mother [Julia Hawkins Jackson] about my bosom, that, you know, that, that I wasn't really a Jackson, that I must have been found on a doorstep someplace. And I have friends of my mother's that would bump into me now, 'cause I'll, I'm constantly on a diet, and they'll say, "Jewell [HistoryMaker Jewell Jackson McCabe], when we knew you when you were fifteen, sixteen, seventeen, we never--if anybody ever thought that you would be more than a size six or seven, we would have argued them down." But I remember Dr. Dyke--we would actually be reviewed. Now it would be like, it just--we were taught as any great dance, taught the rudiments through ballet, and the Bolshoi school specifically. And we had the best teachers, both in ballet and modern dance. I chose modern dance because that was my spirit, to major in it. But you had to have the same number of hours at your freshman and sophomore year. A woman like Altovise Gore [Altovise Davis] that ended up marrying Sammy Davis, Jr., really chose ballet. And she had a stereotypic African body, with a high rear. I had a wide hip frame, according to Dr. Dyke. So we were now--Altovise was three or four--unfortunately, I think we're old enough now to admit it, that she was ahead of me in school. And we would be, every morning, looked at, just like they would refine--but in Russia they kicked them out--but you know, whether your knees were knocked or you know, there were people that had flat feet, for example. But when you're young enough, and you do certain exercises of pointing your toe, and that's too technical for this interview, you can work on that. There are various things you can work on. But to quote Dr. Dyke, "Jewell has the frame to bear children." So she had already stereotyped me in a mammy role, which I didn't know was a mammy role. I didn't know what she was talking about. But my senior year I understood because a Norman Walker was the teacher who had me sit out, and I basically staffed. Remember, the High School of Performing Arts is like real Broadway. It's like real theater-- Story_ID: 587612 Speaker 1: Can you finish telling us about your senior year performance at the New York School of Performing Arts-- Speaker 2: Well (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and how that went? Speaker 2: --when you are at a school like the School of Performing Arts and you are graded on your artistic forte, or (pronunciation) forte, you take pride in those grades, just as you do your academic grades. And usually your academic grades are rewarded by being accepted into particular colleges or universities and recognized in other ways. Well, one of the perks of the High School of Performing Arts [Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York] is that there were--your junior year, there is live performance in a theater as if you were at City Center [New York City Center, New York, New York] or Lincoln Center [Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts, New York, New York] or you know, The Kennedy Center [The John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts, Washington, D.C.]. And it was--and then you like that. In my senior year, I was not the number one in my class, but I was equal to number one. In other words, there were others that had A plus in modern dance besides me. And you know, and I never had a mark in my dance curriculum. And we took character dancing, which is character dancing, for the audience who may not know what that is, is really it is cultural dancing. So if you were doing Haitian dance, it would be character dancing. The character dancing at the High School of Performing Arts tended to deal with Western cultures, and particularly Eastern European cultures. So, you know, there was a certain kind of dance that you would learn in character dance, and that was taught. But basically, it was, majority of the time was ballet and modern dance, the Graham technique. Well, I was in the top of my class. I was--there were no grades higher than mine. But the piece that was choreographed--and this was the way that they used to keep blacks out. And in fact, recently there was an article in New York Times [The New York Times] a couple of weeks ago about why so few black ballerinas ['Where Are All the Black Swans?,' Gia Kourlas]. Well, the line is, and I say it's a line because with makeup you can do anything, is that just as you would be--have a paintbrush and you would be painting an arc, you wouldn't want a spot to pop out. You'd want it all to be even. So in theory, when you're dealing with an--you know, I do have a passion for 'Swan Lake' [Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky]. It, it, clearly, obviously, we know it's a classic, but my heart broke, and I used to sob when I would see--I was so filled when I would see Maya Plisetskaya perform, I mean because of the fluidity of her arms, because of--she became the swan. And, and it, it was that dramatic. But in theory, they would say the ballet corps, you could not have a spot here or there. The problem with that is that some of us were fair enough that, that from the stage you didn't see that. So then what was the excuse? Norman Walker had choreographed a delicious modern piece, and we all, when you're a dancer, learn, just like having understudy, the various roles. Story_ID: 587613 Speaker 1: You had the possible opportunity of dancing in a delicious piece. Speaker 2: Well, it was supposed to be--it was a given to dance. Whether you were gonna be the principal dancer was always up for grabs, because those--and I was in the category of principal dancer. So when you are--it's, it's like any dance troupe or group, you have principals, but you have understudies within the group. And you learn what the corps, what the corps does, and what the principal dancer does. And it depends on the circumstance and whatever. Most people know, most groups know, who the principal dancer is going to be. But when you're training for half the year for the big concert, which is sort of your, your coming out party, it's disturbing when you're told that you will be manning the dressing room, which is what my responsibility was, not just on opening night, but on concert night. Speaker 1: What did your parents [Julia Hawkins Jackson and HistoryMaker Hal Jackson] think about that? Speaker 2: I don't have a clue. If you are asking me did they make a big thing out of it (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, was there any comment really is what I'm asking. Speaker 2: They, they basically were supportive of me and said all the right things about me and said all of the things about the school, but we lived in a different era. We lived in an era where it was exceptional that there was a black at the High School of Performing Arts [Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York] in that graduating class. There were two, John Parks and myself. Speaker 1: And any, is there, is there-- Speaker 2: And they knew that it was painful. What it, what it was so important for me later, because I had to suppress a lot of that pain. But it was a great experience because it prepared me for life. If I had had it at thirteen or fourteen, it may have been crushing. At six or seven, which so many of our children have it before they're six, it would have destroyed them. And part of my passion and commitment to public service and for advocacy as it relates to race, and gender, and class, is because I know how privileged I was. I know how I was protected, that I don't have the chip on the shoulder. When I ran to be the first woman elected to be the president of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], and I remember crying, which is a rare experience, and saying to a friend of mine: "Maybe I shouldn't be the head of it. I don't hate white people." And she, nationalist that she is, said, "That's precisely why we need you." And so that experience at the High School of Performing Arts at seventeen years old was a very painful experience. But I had been so loved and so protected prior to that, yeah, I had problems. I was emotional about it, but it never stopped me from anything. Story_ID: 587614 Speaker 1: Who at that time were your dance influences? Speaker 2: Oh, [HistoryMaker] Arthur Mitchell, where you would cluster. It would be, you know, it would be a woman who I don't ever know how old Baayork Lee was. I mean, Baayork Lee was in 'Flower Drum Song' [Richard Rodgers and Oscar Hammerstein II], whatever. She looked really young, and she was in the class before Altovise Gore [Altovise Davis]. She too was, and, and she was a woman of color, so we all sort of hung together. She'd be called an Asian-Pacific Islander today, you know. Actually, I don't know whether she was Korean, Japanese, Chinese, what she was. She was mixed, that was clear. But the three of us, you know, I was, I was the, you know, the newbie. I was the, you know, the freshman, then the sophomore, whatever. But we would love to hang out at Capezios [Capezio Ballet Makers, Inc.] buying, you know, new ballet slippers and new leotards and tights and being--and in legwarmers, which all kids wear today. I mean we were so chic 'cause I--nobody but, but dancers had legwarmers 'cause, you know, I'm so arrogant I really know that dancers influence the way America dresses and a great deal anyway. But we would wait and to see Arthur Mitchell. And he was such an important guiding force. He would say, even for me, 'cause I was the only one that wanted, I, I chose to major in modern dance. And he would say to all of us, "Regardless of--they're gonna try to steer you away from ballet, but you take as much ballet--you learn it; you master it." And he, he never had bitterness. He never complained, but you just knew he was an advocate for those of us who were black that were at the High School of Performing Arts [Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York]. Story_ID: 587615 Speaker 1: And do you think that your training and dance has influenced your life? I mean you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, absolutely. Speaker 1: --obviously it was a big part of your bru- your-- Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: --being brought up, but I mean your political--your business-- Speaker 2: I think most women, and there are intersects with white women, that, because most of the experience for women of color, specifically African American women, are very different than the experiences of white women. But there are various intersects that help to build character and are sort of universal experiences. And one interesting, we used to, in the '70s [1970s], early '80s [1980s], have groups; we called them rap sessions. And myself, as a feminist, I would be sitting around a room with nine women, let's say. And I think in this particular one, Gloria Steinem was a part of. And one, the one thing that we shared--two things that we all shared in common was strong fathers that expected us to be independent; and we all had had dance training. Now I, dime store psychologist that I am, think that it has to do with the same basic tenets and the same basic rules of sports. If you're on a football field or a basketball court or a baseball diamond, or whatever you call a baseball field I guess--that's 'Fields of Dreams' [sic. 'Field of Dreams'], so it must be field. You know, to wear a uniform is synonymous with wearing a costume, to have star athletes, like having a principal dancer. Yet, to play in different positions is something that men learn through sports. And women, through dance, learn that ability to, to move out and master and command the stage and come back and blend in as a core. So it's good leadership training. And in fact, Carl McCall's daughter [Marci McCall] wanted to major in dance. This is years and years ago when Carl [HistoryMaker H. Carl McCall] and I used to talk a lot. And Carl who we know ran for governor for the State of New York and had, had many distinguished accomplishments in his career, you know, having been the United States ambassador, you know, and just wearing so many different hats, having been senior vice president of Citibank [Citibank, N.A.]. And of course he wanted his daughter to be of great scholarship. And I can't remember what of the seven sister schools [Seven Sisters] she was going to. But he was just so distressed one day. And we talked, and he said, "She wants to major in dance." And I said, "Well, guess what, buddy? That's what I majored in, and I'm reasonably intelligent, and some people think accomplished." And he laughed and he said, "That made me feel good, Jewell [HistoryMaker Jewell Jackson McCabe]." Story_ID: 587616 Speaker 1: I want to take you back a little bit before we talk about your college education because we spent a lot of time talking about growing up in your home and interacting with your mom [Julia Hawkins Jackson] and your [maternal] grandmother [Ercer Ricks], but only a little bit of time talking about your dad [HistoryMaker Hal Jackson]. You said he and Adam Clayton Powell [Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.] were close. When you spent time with your dad, what different types of things were you all doing? Where (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well-- Speaker 1: --where did you go? Speaker 2: --my father was, and my mother, but my father's life had many more facets and dimension than my mother. My mother sort of blended in to the facets and dimensions of my life and, and took a leadership role. In terms of my dad, I blended into his life. And so, you know, it was nothing for me to stay up until, you know, ten, eleven o'clock at night, you know, when I was nine years old sitting on my father's knee while we were at the Red Rooster [Red Rooster Harlem, New York, New York], and he and Adam Clayton Powell were strategizing or talking. And what--one of the wonderful things about being a young person, that you can become a sponge around smart people, and you learn. I mean that is the be- the best university I could ever go to or prep school was to be around watching my father talk and negotiate with [HistoryMaker] Berry Gordy or watching my father talk or you know. 'Cause my father used to be a, a messenger and a runner when he was, you know, a teenager with Thurgood Marshall when they weren't allowed, you know, to, to, to go beyond the steps of the state department [U.S. Department of State], you know, and, and the, and the halls of justice, the [U.S.] Supreme Court. So that one of the down sides of life produced a lot of positive in that the very small critical mass of achievers needed each other. You know, they would rally together, whether, whether you were talking about the Tuskegee Airmen that would meet together, you know, down in Tuskegee [Alabama] once a year. It wasn't just the Tuskegee Airmen. They would meet, but all of the doctors--I think Dr. Drew [Charles R. Drew] actually had his fatal car accident en route to a Tuskegee Airmen gathering. It was really sort of a think tank. It was, it was, it was a time when our, our great leaders from every discipline would just come together, network, share information, so that it was sort of the forerunner of other, hopefully, great think tanks that we will have in the future. But, and it wasn't formalized that way, but the annual gathering was. Story_ID: 587617 Speaker 1: And since we're talking about your father [HistoryMaker Hal Jackson] and Adam Clayton Powell [Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.] in particular, I'm wondering if you might want to talk now a little bit about how Adam Clayton Powell influenced you. Speaker 2: Well, Adam Clayton Powell--I mean, a lot of women will shake when I say this, even though I've got wonderful women that influenced me, including Jackie Kennedy [Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis]. But Adam Clayton Powell was my role model. He was my role model in every possible way. My brother [Harold B. Jackson, Jr.] may have gone to Colgate University [Hamilton, New York] because of Adam. And my brother, who is, you know, borderline genius and the first to do this, that, and the other, and--but I understood. And in fact, there was a wonderful article back in the '80s [1980s], and a young woman interviewed me, and I said--and then she asked me about my personal presentation that I was sort of known as a very stylish person. And I said well, you know, we blame that on three people. We blame that on Adam Clayton Powell that used to say you always have to--when you walk into an audience of black people, you'd better walk in right. You'd better take them over by visual sight. You've got to be sharp, and then you'd better be super sharp when you open your mouth. You'd better be over the top and bigger than life. And I always took that to heart. The other was much, much later in terms of--you didn't ask about this, but I mentioned Jackie O. Jackie Kennedy did some things that I then adopted as I became a so called fledgling leader. You know, Jackie didn't leave the house without trying on an outfit the night before and have herself photographed to know how she would look. Because when you are the focal point, that's political, and all things become political. So one makes their choices about their politics and their presentation. So Adam Powell, number one. And then people--I've given Gloria [Gloria Steinem] a stroke. You know, Gloria gave me freedom to wear lipstick and makeup and be somewhat of the femme fatale that most women have a little percentage of, if not 50 percent of. But Gloria basically said I can be an intellectual, and I can also be a sexual being, and so I give her credit. But my dad and Adam Powell, and I talked about my godfather [William "Dolly" King] and his wonderful white cashmere wrap coat, these men were dressers. And of course, my second husband, Gene McCabe [Eugene L. McCabe] was a style setter himself. So, I've had a, a lot of men teach me about different forms of communication. Story_ID: 587618 Speaker 1: So I'm gonna--we're jumping around a bit here, but if you could now tell us a little bit about what you--where--what you were thinking as you graduated from the New York School of Performing Arts [High School of Performing Arts; Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York]. You know, what did you have in mind for your future? What did you decide? What did you have in mind, and then what did you actually do? Speaker 2: I don't think I had anything in mind, except I wanted to dance. Speaker 1: So did you intend to make dance a career? Speaker 2: I had, I--yeah, but I had to fool my mother [Julia Hawkins Jackson]. So I told her something that I knew would sit with her really well, because she was of the generation that if you didn't have a career that she understood, you didn't have a career. So I told her that I wanted to teach dance to emotionally disturbed children. And it was very sophisticated, come out of a just turning eighteen year old's mouth. But while I had gone on campus visit--because my mother wanted me to go to Brandeis [Brandeis University, Waltham, Massachusetts], and then--I had the three Bs: it was Brandeis, Bennington [Bennington College, Bennington, Vermont], or Bard [Bard College, Annandale-on-Hudson, New York]. And I could major in dance at Bennington and at Bard. I could minor in dance at Brandeis. I was not interested, as a High School of Performing Arts--you know, we were, we weren't called hippies. We were out there. And neither one of those other schools--I mean Bennington was okay, but it was just, please, no. I had to go to Bard College, and I strategized. So, when I was there, we talked about what kinds of jobs were available, and there was the Rhinebeck home for emotionally disturbed children [Rhinebeck, New York]. And I was sort of promised that if I came, I could have an opportunity to teach dance to emotionally disturbed children, by the way, which was a profound experience for me. But anyway, that's the cloak that I used to explain to my mother why I wanted to major in dance. She knew I had majored in dance in high school. You have to also understand that the pressure wasn't on me because my sister [Jane Jackson Harley] had been an educator, as a teacher. She had really followed in my Aunt Alyce's [Alyce Jackson Cornish] footsteps. And my mother thought, for her generation, the greatest thing you could be is a teacher. And in fact, my sister had designed that, at the Stevens School [Stevens Elementary School] in Washington, D.C., that afterschool program that Amy Carter was a part of. So my sister had fulfilled the need for middle-class parents to have an educator in the family. And then my brother [Harold B. Jackson, Jr.], who, the judge, who had a very high IQ and graduated, you know, third, the top three in his class at Colgate [Colgate University, Hamilton, New York], and ended up being the youngest DA, district attorney, in Milwaukee [Wisconsin] and you know, was a circuit court judge, and then is now is into environmental law. So, by the time the third one came along, I could be, sort of be indulged as being the one who could be the creative one. And they were very proud of me, and I, and I pulled my weight. Story_ID: 587619 Speaker 1: And why Bard [Bard College, Annandale-on-Hudson, New York]? You know, today Bard is--I don't know as much about Bard as perhaps you did when you went, so-- Speaker 2: Well, I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) my un- Speaker 2: --you know, I, I'll tell you all the highfalutin things, and then I'll tell you the real reason. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But it had the sex appeal. I mean Bard was where--you know, I met Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture] at Bard because all of the dissidents would come to Bard. Bard had--you know, was a school without rules. It was based on the European form. Now I made some academic foolish mistakes. I took abnormal psychology before I took Psych 101, so obviously I had a lot of cramming I had to do (laughter) to, to get there. We did have counseling, but it was based on the European form. It was a very small school. The student body was 473 students. It was the most expensive school in America, therefore, you know that there were a lot of interesting people that I met, not people that were stereotypic Ken and Barbie types that you may meet at the Ivy Leagues, but artists, people who were writers. And the first, my first husband was, had majored in the bard [William Shakespeare] and had--in fact, I met, met him because he still had a, a, a love affair going on in his head with Tony Hecht [Anthony Hecht], who was a great poet of our day. And Tony Hecht was the head of the English lit [English literature] department at, at Bard College. Speaker 1: What's your first husband's name? Speaker 2: Fred Ward. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Frederick Ward. And the interesting thing is, I mean, people would come, you know, you know, whether it be Arlo Guthrie or you know, every kind of dissident, whether a performer or you know, would come to Bard and just hang out. So it was a cool, chic school. Speaker 1: Did you meet anyone who people might know about from their weekend television? Speaker 2: My god, you know, the, the creative--a lot of the creative; I won't say all of it--spirit of the boob tube, which evolved into 'Saturday Night Live,' came out of Bard. You know, whether--Blythe Danner, who is Gwyneth Paltrow's mom, was a junior when I was a freshman, and she was dating Chevy Chase. And Chevy Chase is sitting at--we would, had this bar that--we'd call it Down the Road, which is right around the corner. And he was busy telling me I was too young to even consider marrying, 'cause I was busy--fallen in love with Freddie. So, and I had people that were interesting suitors, people who were, were interested in, in me that I wasn't interested in because this very, very--people did not understand that I had people in my home that were big entertainers. So to tell me that a, a folk singer that is a major force in American history, quite candidly, had a thing for me meant nothing to me because I knew, you know, [HistoryMaker] Harry Belafonte (laughter). I knew Lena Horne. I knew various people, you know, so. Story_ID: 587620 Speaker 1: So how long did you stay at Bard [Bard College, Annandale-on-Hudson, New York], and did you major in dance there? Speaker 2: Majored in dance there. I cannot remember the teacher's name that was the head of the dance department. She was Argentinian. And I blew her mind only because Bar- Performing Arts [High School of Performing Arts; Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York] was so progressive. There's a, there is a way to write dance. It's called labanotation, which was very new. And I don't know if it is in existence today the way there was portend of its use. But just as you can write a music score, you can write through labanotation a dance score, right. And she was so impressed that I knew this as a freshman, and I'll never forget I think I really distressed her because I also was able to interpret verbally the, not just the spirit, but the style and the cadence of labanotation. And yet, when I stood up, 'cause I was nervous--I find it amusing now because I am actually paid as a public speaker (laughter) and a motivational speaker. But I was so nervous, I chopped it up so. She was so frustrated. And because she was Argentinian, she was fussing at me in Spanish, and I didn't have a clue. But we got better in personal presentation, verbal, oral presentation. Speaker 1: How--so did you stay there for four years? What did you-- Speaker 2: No, I dropped out. A lot of us--you know, this is the anti-war [Vietnam War] period, civil rights period, you know. A host of us dropped out to do other things. I dropped out to be married [to Frederick Ward] and live on Bleecker Street [New York, New York]. Story_ID: 587621 Speaker 1: And what kind of life did you have on Bleecker Street [New York, New York]? Did you work while--after you got married and moved downtown? Speaker 2: (Sigh) Well, I overheard Fred Ward [Frederick Ward] telling a friend of his who was out on the West Coast writing for movies at the time: "Well, yet again, Jewell [HistoryMaker Jewell Jackson McCabe] has yet another job," (laughter). I was famous for having a job for a week or three weeks or six weeks. Speaker 1: What kind of jobs, just a hodgepodge (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I had--everything, everything. I, I was a receptionist a lot. I actually did filing for national nurses association for nurses' tests. I remember getting lots of paper cuts (unclear). I think I literally brought down a, at least for forty-eight hours, a, an, a, it was a factory down on 16th Street. I don't want to be too specific 'cause I think--seven years has certainly passed, so I don't think I can be sued for it. But I was a--what you called a monitor board operator. So it was, that was more sophisticated than switchboard. You didn't plug in things, but you had these levers. And I was--I am very obsessed about presentation. And this was, you know, in a big factory, and they made munitions. And one day I came in and I, you know, I had brought in some Brillo with me, just to, to clean off that scummy stuff that gets on plastic if you don't clean it. And I came back to work the next day, and you know, these were places that really functioned twenty-four hours a day, and there were the, this whole battery of technicians. And I overheard one man say, "The phone system is totally out; it's crazy," he said. And as he was walking by my desk and I was about to go to lunch, he said, "It's as if a million tiny little wires had all interconnected." So I realized that my little Brillo cleaning had probably--those little fine Brillo wires had shifted down and interconnected the entire system. And I thought to myself--I called Freddie. I said, "I don't think I'm going back." So, that was one of my jobs. Story_ID: 587622 Speaker 1: Why don't you tell us a little bit about how you spent holidays with your father [HistoryMaker Hal Jackson]? Speaker 2: Well, holidays with Dad was the greatest time in the world. And it's not for the obvious reason, we got lots of presents and great things like that. We didn't celebrate really that part of it. We did that Christmas Eve. But on Christmas, for example, or Thanksgiving, my father would, he, he would always collect turkeys and food and, I mean way before you had, you know, Meals on Wheels and things like that. We would be giving out big frozen turkeys and you know, and all kinds of cans of pumpkin and, and you know, greens and all kinds of fixings for food for the, for holiday meal. And so part of my responsibility was to help to distribute the food. And I always--part of the perk of that was there's always this gigantic box of lollipops that I would end up with because my father always had more food than we had people to give it to. So, but, but I have a feeling he knew I liked the lollipops, and I sort of liked having that little stash to be able to show off with my friends. But holidays were very much--and when Gene McCabe [Jackson McCabe's second husband, Eugene L. McCabe] and I were married, we lived very similar, formal responsibility because he was president of North General Hospital [New York, New York]. And it is tradition that the president and his wife distribute to the children, in particular, toys, and to, to those who are less fortunate within the hospital environment, presents and other goodies, those kinds of things. Story_ID: 587623 Speaker 1: Once you had been--decided you were gonna wed [Frederick Ward], and you left Bard College [Annandale-on-Hudson, New York], and you started working sort of a hodgepodge of jobs, what (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well I also was auditioning. I had auditioned for-- Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: Oh, please, I had auditioned for 'Golden Girl' [sic. 'Golden Boy'] but I was too--. You know, but once you've had certain experiences at the High School of Performing Arts [Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York], you're prepared. So if you, you know, if you're not--and as I tell people in life, if--you have to be smart and analyze circumstance, and you got to play the hand that was dealt you. And you cannot allow yourself to be distracted from the mission by what does exist. Sexism exists; racism exists; classism exists, and there are ways to be advocates to change public policy or to make a statement. But when you're on your day to day careerist mission, you can't allow any of that to distract you. So, I can't remember what you asked me, but-- Speaker 1: Well, in what ways might you have been distracted, or how were you, in fact, not distracted by those things in terms of your careerism? Speaker 2: Well, arrogance. I never--so people, like when people asked me--most people did not know that I was [HistoryMaker] Hal Jackson's daughter when I was monitor board operator, when I was, you know, file clerk, when I--whatever, because--. Oh, I was telling you about auditioning for 'Golden Girl' and-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --I actually had danced with Ailey [Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater] for a part of a season. I ste- ended up steering myself away from dance 'cause it wasn't enough money, and there's--I was attracted to power and money, very much attracted to power and money. I never was deterred because--and I give my mother [Julia Hawkins Jackson] and father total credit for this. And I don't think those of us who are as lucky as some of us have been, regardless of how much money you have. If you are loved as a child and protected as a child, you see in self great things. You know, I didn't fantasize about--you know working as a receptionist was not a downer for me. Working as a monitor board operator is--because I, I never saw myself as (laughter), you know, getting gray hair and growing old as a monitor board operator, not that that's wrong for people that happened to be in that circumstance. But I wasn't deterred because in order to be in the right place at the right time, you have to be in the wrong place 90 percent of the time and have the perseverance to make it happen. And that was, that was the spirit that I had. Story_ID: 587624 Speaker 1: So you were spending some time working different jobs and auditioning, and you spent some time with Ailey [Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater]. You-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --tried out for some different jobs. You decided that dance-- Speaker 2: Then there was a turning point (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) didn't have enough money for you. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: How did you make a turn? Speaker 2: There was a turning point. And, and money became an issue because I worked in a program that--it was started by a minister--not a minister, priest, Monsignor Fox [Robert J. Fox], and he, he had designed Summer in the City. And his basic concept was that you reach those people that have the most serious problems and pathology through the arts. And so I was teaching at St. Charles Borromeo [Church of St. Charles Borromeo, New York, New York] and up in the South Bronx [Bronx, New York] pregnant teen girls. Really, some of them were tweens; they were twelve through about eighteen. And it's so funny because of my husband, Fred Ward [Frederick Ward], would pick me up in our little forest green--you know, you know, we had a top down Stingray Tiger [sic. Sunbeam Tiger], which is a little hip sports car. And after a while, the kids had real confidence in me--young women, we would have good conversations about life. And near the end of the summer--I taught for Summer in the City two summers in a row--one of them said very, very cautiously--my last name was Ward then, "Mrs. Ward [HistoryMaker Jewell Jackson McCabe], may we ask you a question?" And so they asked, and they said, "When are you and your husband gonna have sex?" And I laughed; I died, I died laughing. (Laughter) I said, "What do you mean?" And remember, these were teen pregnant girls that were poor, that were poorly educated, that were not loved the way I had been loved, that didn't have the protections that some of us take for granted. And they just assumed if I didn't have children, that we weren't having sex; it was as simple as that. And so we also had a good sex education lesson as a result of that. But how I ended up making--the last Summer in the City project, the city paid very well, but it paid very slowly. So we had been six weeks without being paid. And so all of the writers and you know, the actors and dancers that were teachers in Summer in the City, we got together. It was like, it was like organizing a union. And they asked mouth almighty to go down and represent them at city hall. So, I climbed those steps and didn't know where I was going. I mean I knew where city hall was, but you know. I got to some mayor's assistant, and I brought home the checks. Story_ID: 587625 Speaker 1: From that, a commissioner [Jack White] spotted me and offered me a job to be the head of what we called--it was a community development agency [Manpower and Career Development Agency], but to be a community development officer, which would have paid about 10,500 [dollars]. And back in--that was back in 1967. That was like mind blowing. And I was gonna go back to Hunter College [New York, New York] at night, not 'cause I was thirsting for anything, but to make my mother [Julia Hawkins Jackson] happy, who never said she was unhappy. But it was like, you asked what--there are certain conventional things you do, and I had this time on my hands. And at the time I was offered this job, I was telling my mother that I was also offered a job to be receptionist. I thought it was a hoot. I said and here they want me to be, you know, big time professional, you know, making, you know, over ten thousand dollars a year, which, you know, in today's economy would be like offering somebody seventy-five thousand dollars a year. And I--and my mother said, "Well, Jewell [HistoryMaker Jewell Jackson McCabe], you don't really need the money." I said, "Oh, I need money." She said, "But you're young." She said, "I'll make you a wager. You take that receptionist job. I guarantee you that with your personality you'll be able to write your ticket in six months." It was six weeks. And to quote Gene McCabe [Jackson McCabe's second husband, Eugene L. McCabe], who at that point was just a friend of mine, he would tell people, "I've never met anybody that doubled her salary every six months." And I did until it--I--for a very long time. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But my mother's wisdom was such--and this is just experience, and this is something that you cannot teach people. But I had trust and confidence in my mother. And I knew--there was some reason she knew that that field officer would have me pigeonholed, and people wouldn't see me. But the receptionist job was on the floor where Jule Sugarman sat, who was the head of the Human Resources Administration [New York City Human Resources Administration/Department of Social Services], which is the largest budget item in the city government of New York [New York]. So, all the welfare falls under it, all the community development agencies fell under it, you know, all of child services fell under it. So, all the movers and shakers, whether it be the private sector, public sector, union leaders, whatever, had to come through, and they would meet Jewell (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Jewell McCabe. Speaker 1: Well, it was Jew- it wasn't Jewell McCabe then. It was Jewell-- Speaker 2: Jewell Ward. Speaker 1: --Ward, and it was Jewell Jackson Ward then, miniskirts and all. That was the '60s [1960s]. Story_ID: 587626 Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit about the political climate of New York [New York]. And then I'd like to hear just a little bit more of a-- Speaker 2: Well, the political climate in New York was ripe. It was '67 [1967] into '68 [1968]. We had had riots, you know. We had had the assassination of Bobby Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy] and of Martin, Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], the Kerner Commission report. The Kerner Commission [National Advisory Commission on Civil Disorders] was chaired by John, very handsome, Lindsay [John Lindsay], our mayor. And so the outpouring of reform that was coming in the Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] years, because Johnson, as we know, you know, enacted much of and maybe more than Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] would have--we don't know--who was Aristotelian. He died tragically, being assassinated, so we don't know what John F. Kennedy would have been. But the spirit of John Kennedy was a--beyond a statement. It was a sea change in America that was fulfilled through voting rights, civil rights, '64 [1964], '65 [1965] acts, the TRiO programs came out in 1965. That's the Upward Bound and, and all the programs that helped poor. They were class based, so disproportionately affected black and Latino people. You know, you had, you know, the reform of, of the telecommunications act, hadn't been reformed since 1932 [sic. 1934]. All that happened between '64 [1964] and '67 [1967]. So there was this, this rush of new legislation that embodied the spirit of Kennedy, of equity, of opportunity. You see it in the movies that were produced in, in the '70s [1970s]. You know, you had the 'Foxy Brown' and all of the sort of B but fun movies, you know, running around. You had more integration of movies in that period of time than you see today. It's getting back to it a little bit, in pockets. But it was a flush time and a great opportunity for me. It was just prior to the early '80s [1980s] when legislation started to statutorily create a relationship between the public sector and the private sector. Story_ID: 587627 Speaker 1: Give us an idea of why working this relatively high profile receptionist position put you in a, in good stead to write your ticket, as your mother [Julia Hawkins Jackson] predicted. Speaker 2: Well, what happens is, and I try to tell this to all aspiring careerists: information is power. The basic information is knowing somebody's name, knowing who they are, how to contact them, and giving them the sense of that you want to serve. You know, this--I think one disservice that we, that we have as a society, and it's not major, but it is, this, this thing of mentoring, for example. Mentoring occurs when the chemistry is right. Other than that, you just have paired two people together that--it's like a bad marriage. So that, that, what happened for me was I was so young, so eager to please and to work hard, 'cause I love work. I mean, and--because I used to tell people that I have motivation to do good, but I also love the reward of a job well done. Now, see, people can say that is selfish. I don't think it's selfish at all. It is a reward that I give myself, that I feel a sense of satisfaction because something has been done well. And it could be something really simple, like making a good pot of coffee for the bosses, or writing a hell of a press release when they didn't know you could do that, and them falling on you to do it because while you were making the coffee and it's three o'clock in the morning--and I'm literally describing a scene that was in Hugh Carey's office. It's three o'clock in the morning. People like Felix Rohatyn and David Rockefeller and Jim Robinson [James D. Robinson, III], who was the young chairman of American Express [American Express Company], are strategizing how to keep the city afloat in 1975, from defaulting when, when President Ford [President Gerald Rudolph Ford, Jr.]--didn't literally, but the New York Post said that he said, "Drop dead, New York [New York]." And somebody needed a press release written. And guess what? I had--the C level student in English lit [English literature] had been hired in all these different jobs, not the monitor board jobs, but the jobs that came after the commissioner [Jack White] hired me away from being receptionist. I was hired job after job because of my writing ability. Story_ID: 587628 Speaker 1: What was your, a major break once you've been writing, can you tell us a few of the jobs that you got? Maybe this--you said you were hired away, and then you were hired away again (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, the synergy of what occurs when you've had--I, I gave you the foundation. I had wonderful parents [Julia Hawkins Jackson and HistoryMaker Hal Jackson] and [maternal] grandmother [Ercer Ricks] who loved me, protected me, but did not patronize me. If I was backstage of the Apollo [Apollo Theater, New York, New York] when I wasn't supposed to, I paid for it in ways that I still remember vividly. When I did decide that I wanted to work, I was rewarded for that. I had--dance is a wonderful experience because we're, we are mental and physical beings, and most of us don't have a balance in our lives. You know, it's sort of in, and chic, and now. And you know, we're, you know, obesity is a, is a real problem, and in the black community it's at epidemic proportions. But even before that, we were not--most people were not mental and physical beings. And the brightest men that I know, and a few women, and I say it just that way, work out as feverishly--and most of them have been in the [U.S. military] service, you know, and so they learn that. I mean, Gene McCabe [Jackson McCabe's second husband, Eugene L. McCabe] was so disciplined, and I was disciplined this way too, as a dancer. But Gene McCabe did a hundred pushups every day. And if he picked up a half a pound, he went on a liquid diet the next day. And he was, had been a Golden Glove and had been in the Marines [U.S. Marine Corps], but he also was an, a lead executive at Booz Allen [Booz Allen Hamilton Inc.] and, and was president of a small teaching hospital [North General Hospital, New York, New York]. See, we must be mental and physical beings, and I was fortunate to have that in life and to, and to make that flourish in my life. Speaker 1: So you started as a receptionist, and you got hired away through your writing ability. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Can you just give us a short list of--the types of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I went from--I got hired away by Jack White, who was commissioner of the entire agency [Manpower and Career Development Agency], to be his assistant. So, he was the type of executive that didn't like to go to meetings. And so I would go, and then I would have to debrief him with what is common for people now, with bullets, not sentences. Give me the headlines. Let me know succinctly. I don't--you know, and that's also this is a New York [New York] thing too. We don't have time for a lot of confusion and a lot of flowery stuff. I mean I probably could not write a wonderful short story or something poetic, but I can, I can be--I can drive a point, and so I got known. And at that time, candidly, there weren't that many--there wasn't the flood of women in the workplace the way--there was a lot of women like you and me in the workplace, but we didn't represent a lot, meaning, educated African American women, 'cause we know that that was a given that we were gonna work and have a career. But our white counterparts, especially for the Seven Sister schools, was a given that they were gonna go home, have babies and raise, you know, children with good manners and with good education. So, I wasn't bumping into myself a lot. I know now that my personality was helpful, my willingness. And when I see young people today, I used to think that my father and mother like--were like rocket scientists. They'd see somebody, and they'd say they're going places. You know, I know that's a cliche, and you've heard it before, but now I know. If I am in a room and I'm with three or four college seniors or I'm with graduate students, I can tell the ones that are gonna make it and the ones that aren't, you know, and I'm not a rocket scientist, so. Story_ID: 587629 Speaker 1: How did you become the director of public affairs at the New York Urban Coalition? Speaker 2: Oh, director of public affairs for--I was hired away from Jack White [at the Manpower and Career Development Agency] to head up what was a $350,000 program, which was a big program, of twenty-five staffers. I was the, the youngest of the staff that I ran. And I got there because of a woman named Ramona Ripston, who was director of the ACLU [American Civil Liberties Union] after she left being public affairs director at the New York Urban Coalition. And she had, in fact, worked with WNBC-TV [New York, New York] and developed 'Positively Black.' She'd done a lot of wonderful things. At that point, Andrew Heiskell, who was the CEO, chief executive officer, of Time Inc.--that was before the marriage with Steve Ross [Steven J. Ross], with Warner music and Warner movies [Warner Communications, Inc.]--Time, Time Inc., chairman, Andrew Heiskell, was the chair of the board of the New York Urban Coalition. And Ramona had--was go- working on a second or third marriage and had to move to L.A. [Los Angeles, California] and had gotten a job as director of the ACLU. And this is a very blonde, blue eyed stereotypic woman, you know, fringe vests and you know, tie dye skirts and you know, jewelry and just flamboyant and fabulous. I didn't know--I don't ever remember her speaking to me. I didn't know she knew me. I had been hired away from Jack White by a professor, former professor of history, Manny Diaz. He was vice president of the Urban Coalition. And Manny Diaz had asked me to write the narrative for his budget, for whatever his portfolio was. And it was a year's assignment. So that was sort of fun, and I was sort of taken aback. I didn't even know narratives went with the budget, but I understood what narrative was, and I understood how to write. So, I'm diving in. Meanwhile, Andy Heiskell, the chairman of Time Inc.--and I have to back up a minute. I mentioned the Kerner Commission [National Advisory Commission on Civil Disorders], 1968, after all the riots that had occurred. The urban coalition movement on a national level was a Rockefeller/Rothschild [David Rockefeller/Walter N. Rothschild, Jr.] initiative. And it really was the portend of the future of a mandated relationship between a public and private sector. So the private sector had really, really had jumped in to help with housing issues, employment issues, you know, job training issues. So that was the agenda, but it was dominated by the private sector as opposed to public dollars. Story_ID: 587630 Speaker 1: Ramona [Ramona Ripston] went to Andy [Andrew Heiskell], or Andy went to Ramona, and Andy said, "Who on the outside should we recruit to take your job?" Now her job was public affairs, so she handled the public relations, but she also handled a group of lawyers, so--human rights lawyers. So it was, in its own way, its own little unique law firm, not unlike ACLU [American Civil Liberties Union]. That's why she was prime, a candidate with capability and skillsets for that job in L.A. [Los Angeles, California]. Anyway, she said, "You have a young--," and now think back of me saying that I, at nineteen, walked up the steps of city hall [New York City Hall, New York, New York] and got our checks [for the Summer in the City program employees]. She said, "You have a young black woman that if we believe in what the Urban Coalition [New York Urban Coalition] stands for," which was access and opportunity, education, training, upward mobility for minorities, "you have a young black woman who would pick up the phone and call the president of the United States and not blink an eye. We need to train her." Well, this woman who had never spoken to me, me like saying that my mother [Julia Hawkins Jackson] or father [HistoryMaker Hal Jackson] or Gene McCabe [Jackson McCabe's second husband, Eugene L. McCabe] and I would see bright people--she saw in me something. And she closed the doors, and when she reopened those days three or four weeks later, I had the skillsets. I knew what to do. I made one mistake a couple of years into the job. Something she told me not to do, I did it, blew up in my face, so lessons learned. But Ramona was wonderful to do that. And I have bumped into her over the years. Now this was back in 1971 or so, so we know we're talking long time ago, and she still looks great. One of the most important things that she taught me, and there are women who have left such a signature, is, she said to me: "Don't try to fill my shoes. Don't try to become me. If you're the best you can be, you will create your own footprint." And it was so funny because I loved--she had a glass desk, and she had all this, you know, crates under it, and all this clever stuff. And I was busy trying to--I was trying, trying to be her. You know, I knew that I was already peppy, and, and you know, some people would call that dynamic, like she, but we were very different in style. And, but she gave me permission to be me. Speaker 2: Nice. Story_ID: 587631 Speaker 1: I know that it's not--that it--the time period during which you really started to focus on the New York coalition of 100 black women [Coalition of 100 Black Women] was during the same period. Is that true? Speaker 2: Yeah, but that was pretty much a parallel track. Speaker 1: So could you segue us into (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was never--I was never not around women of social conscience doing hands on work in the community. When I was a little girl my father--well, my father raised eighty thousand dollars when that would represent 8 million today for Mary McLeod Bethune. I always had the Anne Roberts [Anne Mason Roberts] of the world at the kitchen table, you know, the Patricia Roberts Harris as a young woman aspiring to be an Anne Roberts. But, and Pat Harris as we know was the secretary of the HEW [U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare; U.S. Department of Health and Human Services] under Jimmy Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.]. So there were always the entertainers, you know. You know, Pearl Bailey was so rich and so terrific and so fun. But there were the professional women that had come together in the late '60s [1960s], early '70s [1970s] out of just flat out wisdom and power, and they were just smart. The first head of the first Commission on the Status of Women [Women's Unit, Office of the Governor] was one of the founders of the founding chapter, [HistoryMaker] Evelyn Cunningham, a Republican who had worked for Nelson Rockefeller as his press person. And she was--you know, her fingerprints were on me. A dear friend of my mother's, Mary Burke Nicholas [Mary Burke Washington], was the second head of the Commission on the Status of Women from New York State in the Carey administration. And she was the single most important reason that I got the job to be press officer for the governor. My portfolio had to do with minorities and women for Hugh Carey, governor of, at that point, the largest state in the nation, most progressive in terms of, of policy. And what he did with that Commission on the Status of Women was he elevated it to cabinet status, which gave all of us who were direct line reports to Mary Burke Nicholas--she, if she had cabinet status, very few--I mean that that's like the president's cabinet. So, those situations helped position me into a historic situation, which so many people benefited from. You know, you can't as a marginalized segment of society rise really and break new ground unless the opportunity shows itself. And opportunity only shows itself when something disastrous is occurring. Story_ID: 587632 Speaker 1: So can you talk to us about how you be- became affiliated with the New York coalition of 100 black women [Coalition of 100 Black Women] at its start? Speaker 2: Well, with black women, if we look back to at least 19th century, before there were social programs mandated at the federal, state, or local level, it was freed slaves that started the public schools in 1848 here in New York City [New York, New York], black women. So the concept of working for a living and being what white America calls good volunteers, good volunteers, it's almost an alien expression, even though we've adopted it because we are well educated, civilized African Americans. But the sense of social responsibility was a given in your portfolio because earning money to do service--. I had to years ago--Stan Scott [Stanley Scott], who is now deceased, who had been an assistant to Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon], whose family owned the black newspaper in Atlanta [Atlanta Daily World], who was a great guiding force for me and empowered me in many way, as so many wonderful men have, along with so many wonderful women--I've got so many people to thank, it is scary. But Stan often, often reminded me of the fact that we work and do service; we work and do service; we work and do service. And that's actually how we, if you talk--and that's why a lot of our young people, African American young people, get in trouble in Corporate America, because as I have often said when I give speeches, that 90 percent of America's business is done around--breaking bread around the country club, around special, elite circumstance that they--whether it's playing golf or it's playing tennis, or whatever it may be, but it gives justification for networking and an informal way to do deals, the great deals. Well, in the African American community, our synergy's around the church. Our sense of philanthropy is of our service, and that is just part of the portfolio. Story_ID: 587633 Speaker 1: When I'm asked about the 100 Black Women [Coalition of 100 Black Women; National Coalition of 100 Black Women] it's amusing to me because we know that if you look back over history, there's always been an Ida B. Wells in the picture. You know, there were the great Candaces in the Bible, great warrior princesses, you know. You've got these images that are just--repeat themselves. The responsibility is from generation to generation to improve, to empower, to be as sophisticated because the challenges tend to be the same. But the mechanisms of society that have the issues of classism, racism, sexism, those change. So you've got to know the modern tools, whatever the rhetoric is of the industry. I mean we're in the telecommunications industry today, right. We're in instant information transfer today. So we've got to be as sophisticated in terms of dealing with the issues of suppression as we were after we were so called freed, so that if you look at a Frederick Douglass--and that's why my quote, to me, is very important, that behind every important initiative is a black woman or a group of black women going unrecognized. It was Ida B. Wells whose scholarship--and see, we have to take ownership over our gray matter. My problem with Louis Farrakhan [HistoryMaker Minister Louis Farrakhan]--I enjoy sitting next to him to discuss things, but you cannot have a Million Man March with 50 percent of your gray matter being because of--his religion, suggests that, that 50 percent of the gray matter be disempowered, disenfranchised, marginalized, ignored. You can't have that. So our history starts back--and I like to think about the chronicling, the journalism of Ida B. Wells, who did the research, that had the information, that helped to empower abolitionists but helped to empower the Frederick Douglasses of the world. And when she had to flee, before she went to Europe, when she had to flee Memphis [Tennessee], it was fifty thousand women that came together in New York State under the umbrella of the National Association of Colored Women's Clubs. So these were 19th century women. Josephine St. Pierre Ruffin, 1896, elected the head of. And then the continuum is, here you have--and these become metaphors because for every one name that I mention that has big aura and big marquee, there are smaller examples. When you look at my library and you, and you, and you look at the young women in the Civil Rights Movement of the '60s [1960s] and what they represented--and it has to be recorded, and it has to be respected--it was the elder middle-class black women that said we needed black men. They found Martin Lu- [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] he was talented, but they found him and empowered him. So we went from 1896 with Josephine St. Pierre Ruffin to twe- early 20th century. And then you had Ida still fighting in the Niagara Movement with W.E.B. Du Bois. But who's remembered? W.E.B. Du Bois, you know. So you have in 1913, you have this sort of plethora, this, this burst of--whether it be the AKAs [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] started, then the Deltas [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority, Inc.] started and the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] start, so you have these starts. But there are major, not better than the black men or the white men or the white women, but need to be recognized and need to be role models to inspire you, to inspire me, for us to understand that we have to raise the bar. Story_ID: 587634 Speaker 1: Around about 1935 [sic.] and you had Mrs. Bethune [Mary McLeod Bethune] with $1.50, it's a great story, right, starting Bethune-Cookman College [Daytona Literary and Industrial Training School for Negro Girls; Bethune-Cookman University, Daytona Beach, Florida]--the brilliance of Ma Bethune and her relationship with Eleanor Roosevelt and being part of Roosevelt's [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt] kitchen cabinet, and she understood that America responds to deep pockets, money. Even old line lineage was starting to erode or organized numbers. So she knew that education without organization (gesture)--. So she started Bethune-Cookman College and the National Council of Negro Women. So twenty-four women, back around 1969, 1970, to be specific--and my mother [Julia Hawkins Jackson] was a part of it; Anne Roberts [Anne Mason Roberts] was a part of it; the woman who had been the first woman, a small business owner of the, of the year by Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon], Ernesta Procope [HistoryMaker Ernesta G. Procope], who had moved from her little insurance office in Brooklyn [New York] to be the first black and the first woman to have an office on Wall Street, okay, these women were together. They were Republicans. They were Democrats. They were the highest ranked. Did that mean that they were the wealthiest? Not at the beginning, no, but they were achievers. Then there were lots of people like my mother, who were wives of important men. And so the, the texture and the character of the organization was that of equity and democracy mainly because of the wives, because they did not want to be so elite that they didn't allow others to emerge. But these women strategically--they were not creating a club. The coalition [Coalition of 100 Black Women; National Coalition of 100 Black Women] is not a club. And today we still, like any, just like acts of [U.S.] Congress that--public policy. We have to monitor them. We have to keep them alive. We have to keep them sharp. We have to refine them. But we, like I say, you know, whether you're a member of The Links [The Links, Incorporated], which I adore, or the Jack and Jill [Jack and Jill of America, Inc.], or any of that, a lot of people don't adore, that's--options. But the coalition was an advocacy group that--these women saw that the women's movement, modern day women's movement, was reemerging for equity. Story_ID: 587635 Speaker 1: And the points of total access, the points where there is this nexus, the points where there is this intersect is: we want equal pay for equal work. Who doesn't? And we still have disproportionate--. It blows my mind when I look at the numbers from when I was a really young woman in my twenties, 'cause I was introduced to the coalition movement when I was about twenty years old, and that's when it was founded, right. And child care was an issue. Well, now it's not, it's not so new, but it was, it was a reality. And this is where smart, careerist black women helped their white sisters who were well educated, but who never had to have a leadership style that was similar to men. Most black women have a very masculine leadership style, because they've had to, 'cause they've evolved. It's not that they are masculine. It is that we have had, we've got generations of careerists ahead of us. When I was in the governor's office [during the Hugh Carey administration], the women who had graduated from Wellesley [Wellesley College, Wellesley, Massachusetts] and Smith [Smith College, Northampton, Massachusetts] had--they didn't have heavy math-science at those colleges. Just like our black colleges [HBCUs], we didn't have--some of us didn't have libraries. So there was so much that women didn't have. And one very fatal mistake that less exposed, naive black women have, is they think that wealth with white women sets them free. All you do is, is read some of the tabloids and see what happens. They've got something on TV now--I haven't seen it--called the--it's not the 'Trophy Wife.' It's called the 'The Starter Wife' and--Debra Messing. And for me, thirty years ago I knew about starter wives because I would watch certain people who will go nameless. But when the wives went from thirty-nine to forty, they changed. Take heart, 'cause his name is on a lot of buildings around, around New York [New York], even a couple of planes. So, you have to respect that, but then these women knew that black women needed their own race, gender awareness and their history, so that when we're having a march to give reproductive health rights, we fought for it, we, the Coalition of 100 Black Women [National Coalition of 100 Black Women]. And it was because I was trained and honed by these women, and they allowed my--not just my energy--they allowed my creativity to overflow. Story_ID: 587636 Speaker 1: In 1992, when we had 750,000 women on the Mall [National Mall, Washington, D.C.], it was a woman that most people would think I wouldn't hang with, and she wouldn't hang with me. And we were like this (gesture), Byllye Avery, who had started, you know, the black women's health project [National Black Women's Health Project; Black Women's Health Imperative]. And she had come out of abject poverty, and she was such a force. She said on behalf of women of color, black and Latino women, "[HistoryMaker] Jewell Jackson McCabe should be our spokesperson." So that's why I was chosen to speak on behalf of women of color. And you can fast forward in 2004, March, same thing. And what we started in, in 1992 was to force the feminist movement, who has its race issues and has its class issues. And I can't whitewash that, no pun intended. There are some good single sisters in that movement. But basically, they marginalize our issues to be issues of poverty, and then they don't expand that, even the concept of marginalization in terms of embracing a broader policy. So the issue of choice, we forced the issue. We now call it reproductive health rights. That was women of color. And [HistoryMaker] Marcia Ann Gillespie, who was the publisher at that point--the editor and chief, rather, of Essence magazine and I--and Marcia's a much better writer than I, but I'm not bad--and we are the ones that developed the manifesto that is published in the feminist book, 'Our Body, Our Lives' [sic. 'Our Bodies, Ourselves']. And it was--made me proud to be able, in 2004, March, in Washington, D.C., before millions of women, to be able to say, thank you, our white sisters. We now are not talking about abortion. We are talking about reproductive health rights. Abortion is a part of it. Nobody wakes up in the morning and wants to have an abortion. It's the most insane thing in the world. And I'm still mad at all the movements for allowing the so called right to lifers to claim life. It's insane. But that's a whole other issue. The 100 Black Women was an experience, whether it had been a formal experience of a group called the 100 Black Women. By the way, our name is Coalition of 100 Black Women [National Coalition of 100 Black Women]. It was the 100 Black Men [100 Black Men of America, Inc.]. We said coalition because we wanted to be inclusive, and we wanted to have the leadership of women to be in this network, because we were conscious of power. We were not, and I mean no disrespect, but we were not--well, I won't go there. We, we were very much driven by having people that could influence. And so I basically took what was given me and expanded it because of the other synergies in my career. You asked, you know, about its evolution. It was just a part. Whether it had been the 100 Black Women or not. I would be doing volunteer work. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: And, I wouldn't have called it volunteer. I would have just been in the community, you know, I'd have been helping the schools. You know, we would be, we would be lobbying if the curriculum wasn't correct. Quality education is an issue, not access to education. This homeschooling has been a cop out, you know, and has been allowed to just seep into our, the fabric of our society, to a very detrimental end. So quality education is an issue, you know, reproductive health rights--access to. And the same numbers that I confronted in 1975, of black women dying at an 85 percent higher death rate from detectable breast cancer, that same statistic lives and breathes today. Inexcusable, inexcusable. So you could take that and other cancers and the issues of obesity and all of that, but the coalition was important because the women that put it together did not want to create a club. They wanted to continue to be club women, to play canasta, and play bid whist, and play bridge, and do what they do, and do spas, and, and you know, vacation together, and do what good club women do. And nobody puts the club women movement down because most of us are card carrying all of it, you know. And I never pledged because I was a, a '60s [1960s] kid, and '60s [1960s] kids didn't pledge for sororities or fraternities, but--short lived because I was--the AKAs [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] got to me before the Deltas [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority, Inc.]. The majority of my organization really are Deltas, but I am an honorary AKA. Story_ID: 587637 Speaker 1: So at the start, how did you start? What were some of your first issues? What did you-- Speaker 2: Now when you say me, are you talking about what (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, tell us-- Speaker 2: --my pride and joy-- Speaker 1: --well, tell us-- Speaker 2: --the founding of the 100 Black Women nationally [National Coalition of 100 Black Women], or? Speaker 1: No, no, I want to hear--we're, we're, we're still a small organization of twenty-four [Coalition of 100 Black Women]. Speaker 2: The metaphor that I use was an actual. You know, I did everything. If they were having meetings, I listened. They'd ask--and meetings were around issues, issues that were affecting the black community. Speaker 1: Like what? Speaker 2: Like a black man being incarcerated, and three weeks later they realize he's the commissioner of parks, and nobody knew it 'cause it, 'cause he had been beat up so bad and whatever, but his family couldn't find him. Black women being raped and abandoned and nobody reporting it. No, there is no AP [Associated Press] service in Harlem [New York, New York]; there, you know, and it's--still isn't today, but it's better today, much better. So, kids graduating fourth grade reading level in, and school--in areas that had more poverty, therefore they were paying less taxes. We know why, but that doesn't mean--I mean the greatness of America is that we have policies that are laws. And it's a--and, we have to adhere to those laws. And we've had people die to amend the [U.S.] Constitution to include women and minorities, actually black men first, but we won't go there. Speaker 1: And where were you meeting in the, at the beginning? Speaker 2: Where were we meeting? Well, we--they cleverly, they met, and they taught me things that I didn't know. We--Thursday nights were the meetings. I didn't know, and they would laugh and you know. And we were hard drinking group too, so we'd have, you know, vodkas and you know. And we weren't drinking wine so much then. I was--me, I could nurse one. Those, those of us know me well now, know that this was a long time ago, one little old screwdriver. But you know, we would sit up and talk about what we could do. Basically, our--their--our thrust was voter registration, and it was still a period of time when we didn't have people--. Today, you all take for granted having a David Dinkins [HistoryMaker David N. Dinkins], you know, or Coleman Young, you know, or Tom Bradley; you know, whether we're talking about being the first mayor, black mayor of New York [New York], or the first black mayor of Detroit [Michigan], or the first black mayor of Los Angeles [California], but those were major breakthroughs. So every time there was an opportunity to register people to vote, we had training sessions on the difference between being an appointed official like a Condoleezza Rice versus an elected office like a [HistoryMaker] Maxine Waters. You know, it takes different characteristic states, takes different kinds of strategy, takes different kinds of paying dues, impactful, empowerment, important. Story_ID: 587638 Speaker 1: So did you design the coalition [National Coalition of 100 Black Women] on the 100 Black Men [100 Black Men of America, Inc.], in terms of this idea of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) A little bit, a little bit-- Speaker 1: --of gaining a hundred members? Speaker 2: There nothing but synergy in everything I'm saying. To me 'cause you gotta win, win, win. Bruce Llewellyn [J. Bruce Llewellyn] was the head of the 100 Black Men, and he was a businessman, you know. And he had taken Key Foods [sic. FEDCO Foods Corporation] and he--a chain, and you know, now he's a big time bottler, you know, with Coca-Cola [The Coca-Cola Company, Atlanta]. But Bruce, I admired, and see, Bruce I was real comfortable with because Bruce family and my family knew each other. So, the same kind of circumstances that I don't find fault with, I try to penetrate, but others find fault with. I mean, a lot of people say, well, how did so and so--how did George 43 [President George Walker Bush] get to be so and so? Well, he was the son of George 41 [President George Herbert Walker Bush]; there's a clique, and whether it is a formal clique or informal clique. Well, the Llewellyns were a family that my family knew. And you know, Bruce was older by ten or twelve years, didn't matter. He was a role model. And you know, I wasn't so out of his world that I couldn't pick up the phone and say--not mentor me--I want to take--by this time I was president. But he was a businessman, and he saw Wall Street, and he saw L.A. [Los Angeles, California], and that was it. I mean, and I don't--I hope that that doesn't come across harsh, and I don't want it to come across. Bruce was more of a businessman than he was a politician. Now his cousin, Colin Powell [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell], was the politician, but he was an appointed Powell, right? (Unclear) C level student, out of the Bronx [New York]. So I talked to Bruce about setting up the coalition. Story_ID: 587639 Speaker 1: At the exact same time, I had had the fortunate circumstance--this was around 1979, '80 [1980]--where I had been a founding member of the New York City partnership [Partnership for New York City, New York, New York], which was this very elite group headed by David Rockefeller. It really superseded the chamber of commerce [Greater New York Chamber of Commerce]. Chamber of commerce in New York [New York] had fallen upon, not hard times financially, but it had--you know that commercial, Why You [ph.] commercial about the bankers? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: It had literally become the velvet rope, old white guys that were out of touch, and David understood. This was after we almost defaulted as a city in '73 [1973], and in '75 [1975] was the monumental period. And then in '78 [1978], David started to come together and say, we need an umbrella group that is a blend of leaders--opinion leaders, and corporate leaders, and appointed officials. And he created the New York City partnership. He was the first chair, then Jim Robinson [James D. Robinson, III], the chair of the, of the CEO of American Express [American Express Company], and Jim was phenomenal. I learned a great deal from him because he was the first CEO that had an M.B.A. So, so many of your generation, in particular, think that these M.B.A.s were just always there. But a lot of the men that I met, like Dick Shinn [Richard R. Shinn], had only gone to the eighth grade, the heads of these companies that made--nobody's made it better than that Oreo cookie, you know, or you know, at, or that Coke [Coca-Cola] formula, you know. I'm a Coke Zero fan, but you know. I understand that they really made that for the (air quotes) guys, so I don't know what that says. But, and we love water too. Of course, we've got Dasani and whatever. But I learned from these men, traveling with them. And I was young enough not to be--in fact, I had some white women say to me that were about my age and some a little bit older: "How could you be with a--," knowing that, in their head, they didn't have--I didn't have their status, meaning the chairman of MetLife [Metropolitan Life Insurance Company], Dick Shinn, and the chairman of Chase Manhattan [Chase Manhattan Bank; JPMorgan Chase and Co.]. Well, I'll take you back to, remember when I was the receptionist? I never saw myself as less than anybody when I was a receptionist. So, when you're just twenty, about to turn thirty, and you're with these guys that are close to, you know, one, the youngest is thirty-nine, the others are in their sixties, you know you're an apprentice. Don't want to use Trump's [President Donald John Trump] little--whatever, but that's what you are. And so I had the privilege of seeing how they function. And so I, and I had the voice of moral authority in the networking of the women that I was working with. And I had a sense--at that point, it wasn't about becoming a billionaire. It was a different era in the '70s [1970s] and the '80s [1980s]. In the black community it was really about elected and appointed, but mainly breakthroughs of elected office, you know, and getting people registered to vote. So we would have--what did we have? Something called, you know, come out for, you know, and get involved with--we did a play on VD, venereal disease, but it was voter demonstration, voter democracy, voter whatever, and you know, like, you know, we're spreading VD, you know, whatever, and then we spelled it out, that kind of thing. And we would park ourselves outside of grocery stores, and we would park ourselves outside of churches, and we would wait for events, and we would be--I mean Rachel Robinson was always at the front line of everything, and so we could register at the jazz festival. So we just registered. And then some of us, 'cause we're a tax exempt organization for certain things that we couldn't do, but we, as individuals, could do, so we raised a lot of money for politicians too. Story_ID: 587640 Speaker 1: By the end of the 1970s, you are becoming a national organization [National Coalition of 100 Black Women] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Another--another important thing that these women taught me that I was able to build on: there's so, there's such a largesse of opportunity that we just don't know about. So people can't, you can't even say that it's racism, 'cause ignorance is bliss. But I remember it was called--for me it was the rainbow books. The Green Book is the city [New York, New York] resource book and every commissioner, home number, phone number, every appointment; everything's in the Green Book, it's the resource book. But you see all the jobs. You see all the appointments that could be had. So it becomes a patronage awareness--trying to be diplomatic. The state, it's the red book, big, thick book. If only guys know about it, and only white guys know about-it's not that white guys are bad. Information is power. They have access to this information. So when you work on a political campaign, at end of the day, you're looking for appointment for yourself, somebody, your relatives, whatever. I mean, you know, the, the Daley family in Chicago [Illinois] becomes, you know, the, the stereotypic example, but that is the example, or Tammany Hall, whatever. Corruption is everywhere, 'cause corruption's in Corporate America, as we know from Enron [Enron Corporation] and whatever. You have to have safeguards to protect. But the system is a good system, and it's a system that gives people reward for hard work. So if you don't know, and we did, and these women showed me, and as the Blue Book is Washington, D.C. So what happened with me is synergy with the David Rockefeller, Dick Shinns [Richard R. Shinn]. These are power players that--I was written about in Savvy magazine once. They said the average white man would take him twenty-five years to get the rolodex that [HistoryMaker] Jewell Jackson McCabe has. So that was a resource. And people often wondered how I got some of the respect I got. Women start to respect other women when you can deliver for other women the way men can. If I can get you a job, you're gonna pay attention to me. If you need a job, your children need a job. So, that's sort of it. Story_ID: 587641 Speaker 1: I'd like you to discuss how your career, or how you've utilized your career in order to create the coalition and its, the progress that you have--I'm not asking it well. Speaker 2: No, so keep quiet. I'll do it. Because it's, it, because it's not--one didn't play off of the other. I am a product of experience and a sort of combustion that occurs. Speaker 1: Show us (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) When I was at the governor's off- when I was at the mayor's office [during John Lindsay's administration], it was because of my skillsets. But what I was covering was anti-poverty related stuff; it was HARYOU-ACT [Harlem Youth Opportunities Unlimited-Associated Community Teams, New York, New York] stuff; it was community development stuff. What was happening there was no equity for women. I was aware of it. The women in my mother's [Julia Hawkins Jackson] home are still the same women that were volunteering always in political campaigns from day one. From the time Adam [Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.] was first running, we all volunteered. That was a part of it. So we were a part of social change. We were not the part of creating wealth for social change. That, to me is the challenge for the national coalition [National Coalition of 100 Black Women] today. But at the period of time in the '70s [1970s], when we were just breaking through, we had just gotten through '64 [1964], '65 [1965]. Voting Rights Act was '65 [Voting Rights Act of 1965], so five years later the national co- New York coalition [Coalition of 100 Black Women] had started. So voter mobilization, voter education, voter--all of that's happening. Then I got hired away, right? I'm at the Urban Coalition [New York Urban Coalition], right, in the '70s [1970s], '71 [1971], '72 [1972]. I get hired away. Why? Because Percy Sutton and my father [HistoryMaker Hal Jackson] are good buddies. He's borough president, okay. Then you've got--what happens is, you've got HRA. The head of HRA, Dr. James Dumpson [HistoryMaker James Dumpson], used to have fried chicken at my mother's house, knew him well. Dumpson is the only head of HRA--the Human Resources Administration [New York City Human Resources Administration/Department of Social Services], I had mentioned Jule Sugarman before. In the '60s [1960s] I had been the receptionist. Well, this black man served three different mayors as the head of HRA, the largest budget item. And all of the offices are issues that disproportionately affect black people. So, when I talk about the compatibility, I'm being educated every day I go to work. I'm seeing contacts, or I'm seeing oppression, or I'm seeing opportunity, or I'm seeing people being dissed. Okay, so I can, I can then forge my agenda. Breakthrough agenda was in Hugh Carey's office. But before I got to Hugh Carey's office, I worked for the City of New York [New York]. I worked as the press officer for Special Services for Children [New York City Administration for Children's Services], Special Services for Children. That's because Percy Sutton said to Jim Dumpson, "We need somebody black in there 'cause the foster kids are disproportionately getting old and black. And so, we need Jewell [HistoryMaker Jewell Jackson McCabe]." But, by the way, Jewell couldn't handle it. Jewell was there for about a year. It was just too depressing. Story_ID: 587642 Speaker 1: From there, Hugh Carey gets elected. We done knocked the Republicans out of the statehouse [New York State Assembly]. Usually you had a Democrat in the city, right? Speaker 2: Yes ma'am. Speaker 1: Wagner, okay, Bob Wagner [Robert F. Wagner, Jr.]. Then you had a Republican, Nelson Rockefeller. Well, guess what? All of a sudden we got both, Democrat here, Democrat there, which also creates other dynamics, but that's not (laughter) a black problem. I then am selected, hand selected, to be the press officer for Hugh Carey. Excuse me, I'm in my twenties. So the--meteoric? No, I had worked hard. I had been working since I was fifteen, 'cause I told you once before I had forged my papers so I could buy more clothes. And my mother [Julia Hawkins Jackson] let me have--you know, I'd said I was what, eighteen when I was actually fifteen. And I went to Macy's [R.H. Macy and Company Store; Macy's Herald Square, New York, New York] during the holidays and spent all my money buying clothes. Everything had to be color coordinated. It was very cool. So here I was in Hugh Carey's office. Nineteen seventy-five [1975], city's about to default. Powers were taken away from A. Beame [Abraham D. Beame]. It was a sad time for A. Beame, but it was a point where the private sector stepped in. And people like Felix Rohatyn created the Emergency Financial Control Board, EFCB, right, and Big MAC, the Municipal Assistance Corporation. So then you started to have this synergy between the public sector and private sector. This was before 1983 when the first legislation came down that mandated--this was job training--mandated a partnership between the public sector and private sector. But it was too--every part of the public sector and private sector when the City of New York [New York] was about to default to come together and under self-interest. So I said to myself, how do we get in on the act? And if you could ask me what is an echo of the win-win design that I come up with because of what I have gotten from my mother and my father [HistoryMaker Hal Jackson] and the plethora of people who have touched my life, is how do you I make a consensus agenda with David Rockefeller, with Al Shanker [Albert Shanker], the head of the teachers union [United Federation of Teachers]? It was easy. If the city of the--defaulted, 65 percent of the city services affect black people, Latino people, poor people, more than wealthy people, who often have private carting services. They don't have to worry about public--that--who--kids are in private school. They don't have to worry about public schools. So, I then could talk to the governor, who basically said, "Jewell [HistoryMaker Jewell Jackson McCabe], you could sell the Brooklyn Bridge. You--I don't care if you're black or female." Okay, bad situation, opportunity time. Story_ID: 587643 Speaker 1: So what happened with me is, a fellow who worked as legal counsel--he was legislative--the assistant to Congressman Charles Rangel [HistoryMaker Charles B. Rangel], he and I sat down, and all we did is looked at zip codes at the U.S. Senate. Because at this point, Hugh Carey had put together all the captains of industry that were housed in New York [New York], that were headquartered in New York, and the heads of the unions, all of the big time leaders, and they were totally lily white males. And people like me and others that worked in the governor's office, part of our team was to show you what the bullet points were when you were lobbying. A lot of these guys had never hit the Hill [Capitol Hill, Washington, D.C.] before. So I said to the governor, because of a guy named George Dalley, okay, West Indian rooted, American black brother, who worked for Charlie Rangel. And he's--I said, "You tell me, like Arlen Specter, give me a senator who's got a large black constituency that we have to get a Republican swing vote." And we went in, Miss, and I'll tell you, the governor's head, they all were just blown away, because I took maybe twelve women. You know, Mary Nicholas [Mary Burke Washington] was at the head because she was our boss in the governor's office. She was cabinet level, and it was Mary Nicholas. Every member of, of the Coalition of 100 Black Women [National Coalition of 100 Black Women], and we hit the Hill, and we hit every senator with black districts. And guess what would happen? Because most of the time black people don't show up. Most people don't show up. But since we're only now 12 or 13 percent of the population, we, we are, we, we don't show up to, to our elected officials. You know that, that, that movie that Eddie Murphy had about going to Washington, D.C. ['The Distinguished Gentleman']? All the tricks that he pulled, you can pull because most of us don't read, don't show up, and don't follow up. Well, guess what? We were dressed really nicely. We'd walk into a senator's office that had a big black district. They assumed we were from the District. They didn't see--think some New York City slicker girls were down there. And we would say, we have people, relatives that we care about that need New York not to default, and we turned votes around. Now, do I have to explain to you why I was taken seriously? Speaker 2: Please explain to us why you were taken seriously. Speaker 1: Do I have to? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. So, that's how we ended up being respected, because we had turned votes just like the big boys had. Story_ID: 587644 Speaker 1: I was at that point not president of national [National Coalition of 100 Black Women]. I was the press officer for the governor [Hugh Carey], and for the Coalition of 100 Black Women. So I was still learning. By this time my rolodex--I had big time men who would take my call, not because it was cute, because what--most human beings don't wake up in the morning disliking anybody. They wake up in the morning with their own set of issues and their own agenda. And when they have something to get done, they call on the person that they know fast, not the person necessarily with the best skill sets, but the person that they've been down the road with before, that they've had experience with before, that they know that they can trust. So, that's how my volume of responsibility, and access, and leverage, all those things that are, that are seen as powerful, became a reality for me. Because I--they used to call me as the Frisbee catcher, because when I would be with the New York City partnership [Partnership for New York City, New York, New York]--and I was an underling, there's no question. I was the only woman as the--on the board at one point. Eventually, we'd gotten a part of The New York Times family, Ellen Sulzberger Straus, Peter Straus' wife, who was a major--she's the woman who I'll never forget the first time I gave a three minute public talk, and she gave me a half a glass of white wine. And I said, "I'll be drunk." And she said, "No, this will steady your nerves." You know, and I rehearsed on the toilet, and I rehearsed looking in the mirror, and I was so scared. And it was Ellen that basically threw me out of the nest. You know, so, you know, and I had had Mary Nicholas [Mary Burke Washington] who allowed me. You know what it's like to have a woman boss that allows you to--any boss. I won't just say a woman boss 'cause that's patronizing and dreadful what I just said--to have somebody that will delegate, allow you to flourish, help you with the proverbial eraser when you make a mistake, and not make you think that it's the end of the world, you know, and also let you know that just 'cause you have one bright idea today, does not make your career, (laughter) you know, and 'cause you screwed up one time, does not break your career, that it's, that it is continuity, it's consistency, it's courage, it's showing up, you know, and it's acknowledging what you know, sharing what you know, learning, and constantly learning. And I learned that from my father [HistoryMaker Hal Jackson], who will be ninety-two this year, who's constantly learning. Story_ID: 587645 Speaker 1: So what other kinds of positions, particularly in (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) After the governor's office? Speaker 1: --telecommunication, after the c- after the-- Speaker 2: Okay, af- Speaker 1: --governor's office. Speaker 2: The governor's office led me to--I was hired away by Jay Iselin [John Jay Iselin]. There was--the amusing--it's somewhat melancholy because of the circumstance. When, when Nelson Rockefeller died, many cultural institutions were dramatically affected. The SUNY System [State University of New York System] had an extraordinary progressive--this is back in 1978, '79 [1979]--telecommunication, broadcast studios. There were nine public television stations in the State of New York. They didn't have a funding formula from the state. They were personally bankrolled by Nelson Rockefeller, not each one totally, but from his, from his clique, but mainly from him. One of the more interesting fun stories is when Hugh Carey first got elected, and we moved into the MGM Building on 55th Street [New York, New York] because Hugh Carey was more of a downstate, meaning New York City of- based governor than an Albany [New York] based governor, as Mario Cuomo was. And there was a lot of civil servants who, lifetime civil servants that worked at the governor's office. And they really didn't like Hugh Carey, and I couldn't understand why. I mean he had given me this big job, and, and he liked me and whatever. I couldn't understand why he used to sing 'Danny Boy' when he got drunk, and he was close to you know, Adam Powell [Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.]. And he always talked to me about Adam 'cause he wanted to do (unclear) whatever. And he was, to me, put into place--and if you were talking--if Eliot Spitzer was right here, if, if, if Mario was right here, there is nothing progressive that any of them had done since the brilliance of Hugh Carey, you know, my carrot top governor. He will always be my governor, but--and both Spitzer and Mario are very bright men. But I'm talking about this State of New York being twenty years ahead of everybody, everybody. Speaker 1: What kind of things was Carey doing to make--to put New York twenty years ahead of everybody else? Speaker 2: The creation of the EFCB [Emergency Financial Control Board], the creation of MAC [Municipal Assistance Corporation], which I covered, with Felix [Felix Rohatyn], the relationship between the public sector and private sector. He would, if it wasn't voted by the state legislature in time, he would create an executive order, which, you know, which can stay in place until the public policy is actually written. We--he had elevated--cabinet level isn't, isn't just a status thing. It is about power. So he had given power to the women in the State of New York by elevating its commission to a cabinet level. When it came to the disabled, we were dealing with issues of access and you know, kneeling buses, and those kind of twenty year plans were under his watch. You know, this was, this was a progressive and is a progressive state. And that doesn't mean you don't have to monitor. That doesn't mean that you don't have to deal with the issues of redlining, you know, and deal with all those issues related to equity and access to housing. You know that New York twe- thirty years ago Jacob Javits [Jacob K. Javits], a great senator who I adored, I mean, you know, he said, "Jewell [HistoryMaker Jewell Jackson McCabe], health is a $40 billion business in the tri-state area." That was forty years ago. God knows what it is now. And healthcare is entry level access. Don't get me going on that. I'm annoyed with the labor unions 'cause, you know, hotel and tourism, manufacturing is out. It's offshore. There are ways--so there's a lot of work. I'm not saying that work doesn't need to be done. I'm saying that we had a brilliant governor who rose to the occasion in crisis and led. Story_ID: 587646 Speaker 1: And you know, and Bush 43 [President George Walker Bush], you can never sit comfortably, especially if we're going to adopt this global village concept, which all of the economy of America is based on. I mean 90 percent of Coca-Cola's [The Coca-Cola Company, Atlanta, Georgia] business is overseas. And Coke is typical. It's not atypical. And Coke is a good corporate citizen. But if you are talking about increasing market share, and now everybody from your babysitter to whatever has bought stock because, you know, we've now market it. So everybody wants market share to increase. So, you know, where you have white collar jobs being outsourced, not like a sprinkling. We--I'm talking, I've watched forty years of preparation of automation taking jobs, of manufacturing taking jobs, of now outsourcing--even tutorial of a hundred dollars a month, and you can have a one on one teacher from India, as long as you've got broadband, you know. And I don't have a problem with that. What I have a problem with is health is still an American industry. Yes, we've got great science universities in India. We have opportunities for educational excellence in other places. But in the main, the critical mass of the John Hopkins [The Johns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, Maryland] of the world or the MSKs, Memorial Sloan Ketterings [Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York] of the world are here. We've got job opportunities there where you can be illiterate and trained. You've got hotel and tourism, this whole immigration issue. You don't get benefits. It's easy for people to turn their back and hire undocumented aliens. So, the access that the poor that used to be a career access, you know, for all the immigrants through Ellis Island [New York, New York] and for a few of us, you know, descendants of slaves, doesn't exist the way it used to. That sea change has got to also occur in terms of our leaders, and I don't see it right now. And that's part of the role of 100 Black Women [National Coalition of 100 Black Women], is to make younger women understand that there's a vested interest in creating quality education, career access and opportunity. Story_ID: 587647 Speaker 1: So my job as press officer then ended up being the head of public affairs for Channel 13 [WNET-TV, New York, New York], the flagship station, one of the three of the public broadcasting system [Public Broadcasting Service]. And Nelson [Nelson Rockefeller] had died, and there was no funding formula. So Jay Iselin's assistant and I literally wrote the legislation for fifty cent per capita funding formula, which would result in, we're talking 18 million--you know, would result in $9 million for the nine public broadcasting stations, not to be divvied up equitably, but in terms of the formula. So that was part of the reason why I was hired away, is that I could get--and now this goes back to the coalition, and this is where the synergy is. I used to say I didn't care whether the--I want the--we call them executive assistants now. I was calling them secretaries then, and I still make the slipup. If the secretary to the governor is a black woman, I don't need the commissioner, who's a black woman. I need that secretary as a member of the 100 Black Women [Coalition of 100 Black Women]. If the head of IBM's [International Business Machines Corporation] secretary is a black woman, I don't need some senior--I'd love to have her 'cause I need her body; I need her energy; I need whatever rolodex she has. But I want the executive assistant or the secretary of every one of these captains of industry of every important elected official in a major market, whatever, because then I have information. I have access. You can get on the governor's calendar, right. You know what the priorities are. You got your own underground network of information, and those are the principles, by the way, that I designed for the establishment of chapters of 100 Black Women [National Coalition of 100 Black Women]. Story_ID: 587648 Speaker 1: So let's move into that. As you become president of the national-- Speaker 2: Well, I built--I was president while--I became president [of the Coalition of 100 Black Women] when I went to Channel 13 [WNET-TV, New York, New York] in 1977. And I was the only and first to serve two terms. And it was a historic election where the electorate, the group of the 890 members in the tri-state area voted to set the constitution aside to allow me to run again. Oh, I am a politician. So, that was an interesting--because it was supposed to be a anonymous vote, and then somebody from the floor suggested that it be a show of hands. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so, we were at the state office building [Harlem State Office Building; Adam Clayton Powell Jr. State Office Building, New York, New York], high drama. And I stood up. I didn't raise my hand to set the constitution aside. And then I did a slow 360 degree turn, and it was amazing to see the sea of women that voted to set aside the constitution. And then I announced that in my second term I was going to establish a national organization, because there had been literally a hue and cry from black women and white women for me to lead. And I had been given many great opportunities to be seen, to be heard, to create. But first I took some ideas from the New York City partnership [Partnership for New York City, New York, New York], as I told the women, after I had gone through agonizing at the local level, bylaws and constitution are only written to allow you to do things, not to enslave you. So I left public broadcasting because money became the third priority for me, and I incorporated in 1984 Jewell Jackson McCabe Associates [New York, New York]. But my priority was the National Coalition of 100 Black Women. And my first act in 1980, after I founded the organization with the help of a lot of great people--the major person was a woman named Ruth Mueller Hill, who had been executive director for Mary McLeod Bethune. She had also been of the first black head of the Mississippi public schools. She had also been an executive director of the YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association]. So she had that body of experience, and she was an octogenarian. And it was a fabulous sight. She couldn't travel with me all the time. But people couldn't understand how in twenty months--you know, and I'd throw out the figure because it's impressive. But the reason why it worked so well was because Ruth Mueller Hill had other Ruth Mueller Hills that would greet me. There are grand figures within our community that everybody shows up. So it was a combination of the old line hierarchy, and they all were in their seventies or eighties, and they were all beautiful, with silver hair and always dressed so well. And so they would--and I'd have them call the women together at their home. So you had women that didn't like each other that would come together. And basically I had a grid, and I'd learned this from watching Hugh Carey, from watching David Rockefeller, from watching Jim Robinson [James D. Robinson, III], and of course I had a brilliant husband named Gene McCabe [Jackson McCabe's second husband, Eugene L. McCabe] that was smarter than everybody. And my daddy [HistoryMaker Hal Jackson], his sen- his sense of what he taught me just before I launched the national, when somebody had the nerve to say to me, a black woman: "Jewell [HistoryMaker Jewell Jackson McCabe], you're gonna suffer from overexposure. You're too young to be doing so much so soon." And my father said, "Well you tell them, until you're on the front page of The New York Times, not just you, but black people, until you dominate--," at this point, we didn't have all this diversity and cable and all, "--the networks, or at least have a good percentage, you don't exist in America." 'Cause it's a reflection, obviously, the media of who we are, right? Story_ID: 587649 Speaker 1: The grid for me when I was going into a town, number one, Ruth Mueller Hill would call, you know, the elder stateswoman, who was usually either a Delta [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority, Inc.] or an AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.], who--but it didn't matter because she was the woman that everybody genuflected to. And I would look at the, the city and I'd say, "What is the revenue stream from the private sector?" Is it a real estate driven town? Is it a finance driven town? Is it, you know--does Procter and Gamble [Procter and Gamble Company, Cincinnati, Ohio] own the town? Does--is it a consumer product kind of town? And then I'd say, "Give me the highest ranking black woman there." Now at that point, honey, we didn't have titles. We were all secretaries at best. The rarity of the Claudine Malones [Claudine B. Malone], you know, MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] trained, MIT professor, you know, heads of--Claudine, I'd marvel at her successes. I mean back in the '80s [1980s] Claudine was the chair of audit committees when people didn't know what audit committees (unclear) corporations were. But I say that to say the critical mass of us were in the public sector as either teachers, educators, lawyers. We were not in the private sector. Listen, Ken Chenault [Kenneth Chenault] didn't get recruited. He was an arbitrage specialist but--until 1983. So when I'm talking organizing the 100 Black Women [National Coalition of 100 Black Women] around about 1979, 1980, we launched in 1981. From 1981, in ten months I organized twenty states, and I had launched with fifteen, including District of Columbia. So we were in thirty-four states and the District of Columbia, right? And in certain areas it just proliferated. We lost no one until second generation of presidents after me. And I made a commitment because part of my responsibility was to be a new face for a new generation. And succession planning had not been institutionalized in any of the civil rights organizations. And we were a gender driven civil rights organization [National Coalition of 100 Black Women]. We were good race women, and we're feminists, and it's a combined thing. It's not either/or, you know, when and where I enter, the whole race, so that the grid was I want somebody from the governor's office--in the founding group. And we basically said twenty-four because twenty-four had started the New York [Coalition of 100 Black Women]--. And I want somebody--I want not just somebody. So it was private sector, public sector. It was municipal, state and federal. And you say federal, how could you? Very easy, because you've got a congressional delegation. Therefore, there are people that are legislative aides that work for congressional delegation based in that city. Story_ID: 587650 Speaker 1: You're the founder of the National Coalition of 100 Black Women. You are an activist for blacks and women, which has largely directed your career choices. You are a mayoral gubernatorial and presidential appointee and a businesswoman in your own right and member of a number of boards. So we'd like to integrate info- your information so that we hit all of those areas of your personality. I'd like to start off by asking you about the National Coalition of 100 Black Women. Could you tell us a little bit about its ideology and how you facilitated the growth of the organization from a local New York coalition of black women [Coalition of 100 Black Women] into the National Coalition of 100 Black Women? Speaker 2: Well, I'd like to start with, basically, it was around my mother's [Julia Hawkins Jackson] kitchen table. Being around always as an observer from the time I was three years old, I would--from the time I could walk and I was able to sit and be a sponge, I always had women. Whether they were talking about their, their recipes or what events they were going to, I learned, and I heard, and I listened. And the women of my mother's generation, in particular, that were considered part of the Talented Tenth were raised, you know, second generation, some first generation, college trained. But it was a given that they would be careerists. And most of them were either Democrats or Republicans and especially of the Talented Tenth, because people like a Jewel Lafontant [HistoryMaker Jewel Lafontant-MANkarious], for example, who was the first African American woman to graduate from University of Chicago Law School [Chicago, Illinois], whose father [C. Francis Stradford] had actually started CORE [Congress of Racial Equality], it's sort of a synergy between your career, your sense of social responsibility. As I said earlier, when Josephine St. Pierre Ruffin was elected before fifty thousand women to start the National Association of Colored Women's Clubs, you know, in advocacy and, and really cloaking, and supporting, and celebrating, and also protecting Ida B. Wells' intellectual capability as a journalist, all of those social kinds of initiatives were a given that you were that sort of first, and your career grew out of that. So I am a continuation of that and a 20th century, now 21st century. So it was natural for me after Bard College [Annandale-on-Hudson, New York] at, at twenty-one or twenty-two years old to be sitting with the twenty-four founders. I was the only daughter that was of college age that was included in that wonderful cluster of very bright women, who, you know, who also taught me, you know, how to, how to, to per- that also taught me how to prepare myself, or as some of my mother's friends would say, "She's always well groomed." So I had a lot of that great sort of early 20th century sense of Edwardian upbringing as most people that come out of the W.E.B. Du Bois spring-well--wellspring of culture and tradition and sense of excellence. Story_ID: 587651 Speaker 1: I learned how to do things that--I was a dance major in college [Bard College, Annandale-on-Hudson, New York], so clearly I had basic intellect. And some people thought I was reasonably bright. But I learned how to do things hands on, and I think that that's the best way in many times. So I learned how to structure a press release. I learned how to, to get the names of the writers and the editors and how you distribute it. At that time, it was more paper than e-related stuff, but the basic tenets are still there; the basic ideas are still there. And I learned that you have to--I always say to clients, for example, what I learned as a social activist is that you need at least six actions even to get a no, meaning that you got to make a phone call; then, usually, a phone call is followed up with something in writing, and then you've got to make sure that that has been received. And then you've got to make sure that the comprehension is understood, that the messages are clear, and then you have to wait for a response. And then you have to meet with people, and then you have to discuss and make your case or pitch, depending upon whether it's the private sector, it's a pitch about some idea. Or if it's the public sector, it is making the case for public policy or change. So all of those basic skillsets and capabilities I learned from being around social activist women who were both Republican and Democrat, would put their politics, their, their--no, I won't say they put their politics outside the door. In fact, they didn't; they kept their politics intact. But their loyalties, ideological loyalty, was to build a back bench for the next generation of women like themselves. So when I look at a Mary Burke Nicholas [Mary Burke Washington], or I look at, you know, at a Constance Baker Motley, or I look at an [HistoryMaker] Evelyn Cunningham, or I look at an Ernesta Procope [HistoryMaker Ernesta G. Procope], or I look at women who were like my mother, Julia Hawkins Jackson, the wife of a man who had access to the airwaves, access to print media, like Anne Roberts [Anne Mason Roberts], who was the deputy secretary of HUD [sic. deputy regional administrator, U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development], the housing and urban development corporation, well, quite candidly, Anne Roberts, a founder of the twenty-four women in New York [Coalition of 100 Black Women], was my mother's best friend. So, you know, we ate dinner together. We vacationed together, my father and Stan Roberts [Stanley Roberts]. My father, [HistoryMaker] Hal Jackson, the broadcaster, journalist, and you know, sports commentator and Stan Roberts, the writer, journalist for the Pittsburgh Courier [New Pittsburgh Courier], they hung around together. And the, the synergy that occurred because there were so few of them in power positions or positions that would be--that would position others to make the great race breakthroughs of the 20th century, that sort of synergy rubbed off on me. Story_ID: 587652 Speaker 1: What were your major challenges and your major achievements as you were still a small organization, the New York coalition of black women [Coalition of 100 Black Women]? What kind of issues came up that you had to deal with? What were--we want to get just some feel for the day to day operations of-- Speaker 2: Well, first of all (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) the original group. Speaker 2: --the biggest challenge, and it's a, it's a challenge today, and it's a, it's the kind of experience that you have in a democracy. It is really, you know, you think once a law is written and a law is, gets through committee, both at the [U.S.] Senate side and the House [U.S. House of Representatives] side, you think that once it is, you know, voted into, into being that it exists. Well, it doesn't exist until it gets an appropriation that's approved, you know. And so the--once the appropriation, meaning the money is also approved along with the rule of whether it be affirmative action, or the rule about Title VII [Civil Rights Act of 1964, Title VII], about Title IX, about, you know whether it's women in sports, or whatever, until you get the appropriation, there's no muscle to it. But there's a lot of steps prior to that. So for me, if I'm understanding the question, which you may want to--you were asking me about the day to day obstacles or issues. For me, the biggest was from my generation, and I started to feel it and see it--. You see, the women who founded the coalition were good race women that reflected their heritage and legacy of women who understood that they would support men. Yet they knew in 1969, because the New York coalition was founded in 1970. They knew that the feminists, mainly East Coast driven people like Bella Abzug, of people like Gloria Steinem, of people like Betty Friedan, basically the Upper West Side [New York, New York] intellectual elite women, were starting to see the need to have a modern day suffragist movement, just as--and it was on the heels of the modern day Civil Rights Movement, so that they were working for empowerment. And the women who founded the New York coalition saw that there needed to be an edification, a training, a mentoring, a, a preparation of the next generation. And I just happened to be in the right place at the right time, and so their scholarship, their savvy, their strategic thinking, I witnessed because they understood that there would always be this conundrum between middle-class white women who were driving the women's movement, known as the feminist movement, and middle-class black women, even though there is a, some basic generic intersects if you're in a patriarchal society. But if you're also in a racist society, there, that one has a set of strengths and awareness and preparedness that is different from your general feminist. So that was really the reason that they came together as a continuum. Story_ID: 587653 Speaker 1: As I said, we went from 1896 with Josephine St. Pierre Ruffin, which was just organizing women in the club movement, you know. And then one wants to take advantage of the Nineteenth Amendment, which allows women to vote, right. And then you had Mrs. Bethune [Mary McLeod Bethune] with the National Council of Negro Women that understood, with Bethune-Cookman [Bethune-Cookman University, Daytona Beach, Florida] as a metaphor, that education without organized numbers--because remember, as I have said constantly, and my father [HistoryMaker Hal Jackson] reminded me, and many other great women have reminded me that America responds to organized numbers. And the labor movement used to be the pinnacle of that, not so much now, but it used to be, certainly special interest organized numbers, voting power, leverage. In terms of private sector, it's market share, represents numbers, buying power, right, so you--that or deep pockets. And deep pocket families, quite honestly, have gone through a major sea change. So those names that we used to know of and think of aren't necessarily the deep pockets (background noise) of the past. We have now the Bill Gates of the world; you know, we have the Warren Buffetts of the world, but we did have, you know, the great Andrew Carnegies of the world, and we had the Rockefellers and the Whitneys of the world, so that a lot of these lessons were lessons learned by a hierarchy that drives this great, and I do believe this, this great set of ideals that the founding fathers had in setting up a democracy that is market driven, where we, as African Americans, were totally shut out, was first, the first shut out. As you and all of our listeners and viewers know, is that we were punishable by death if we learned how to read and write under slavery, that we were legislated as defined, not as animals, but as three fifths human beings. So we were in this hideous place where you actually were punished by death if you learned how to read and write during slavery. So, what the problems of a New York [New York] based coalition is we're meeting first generation--you know, whites are not a monolithic block. So you're meeting first generation white educated or white post-secondary educated white ethnics that don't know about--they didn't read Alex Haley's 'Roots' ['Roots: The Saga of an American Family']. They don't have a clue. They just think that we were immigrants like they, and they don't know why we're behind the curve. Well, if you're punished by death to learn how to read, not until the--almost the late 19th century can we start to learn how to read, obviously we had some catch up. So first it was about basic education. Then it was about public policy and social change and, and social justice. Martin Luther King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] banner of social justice was evolving into, as he on the civil rights side. And Whitney Young on the organized civic side with the Urban League [National Urban League], understood that there had to be some synergies to create wealth for social change. Story_ID: 587654 Speaker 1: You've indicated in our conversation that much of your approach has to do with merging the public and the private. So I'd like to get a sense for how you came to codify that approach. And I'd like to talk about some of your career choices and how you selected them with regard to your being a social activist who's interested in merging the public and the private. Speaker 2: Well, you see, my ignorance was that I never saw myself as anything other than an achiever. So I patterned myself after achievers, so that part of the basic from Ben Franklin [Benjamin Franklin], you know, and [President] Thomas Jefferson, and [President] George Washington, good slave owners, but certainly good entrepreneurs, devotees, epicurean developers of taste and refinement. All of those men set a stage for every generation of, of leaders, public and private sector. So what I am doing is nothing but mirroring what they did; what usually you did as a, as a, a careerist ambitious male. And I don't want to make it anti-male, but we're just talking about reality--is that you graduated from college, you know, was an Ivy [Ivy League] school, because after all, Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] broke through on the backs of the Civil Rights Movement, by the way, poor white boys being able to ascend to the White House. And you could say well, Lincoln [President Abraham Lincoln] wasn't rich. But in, in the main, for the past, let's say close to a hundred years in our society, it has been of the power elite that emerges as the heads of corporations that have the cliques. The cliques are the schools. So if you only know and your network is all Ivies or all Seven Sister schools, it protects the lineage in a particular way. So, I always say that first generation white guys that are the first to graduate from college, like Bill Clinton, 'cause his mom [Virginia Clinton Kelley] was a single mom waitress, really were the beneficiaries first of the Civil Rights Movement and our breakthroughs. And that's okay, but it needs to be acknowledged and understood. But what you are asking me, which many people ask, as it is a new idea, it is not a new idea. It has been always used. I mean, when you had professional men who were heads of companies, they are the ones that are recruited to be your secretary of commerce. And so that they do--it's usually a lateral transfer back and forth. They make wealth. They learn certain managerial skills, certain leadership skills. They bring that to the public sector when they either run for [U.S.] Congress or [U.S.] Senate or they are appointed to be a secretary of commerce, or a secretary of the interior, or a secretary of the treasury, or a secretary of transportation. And then after they serve a term or two, then they go back to the private sector and make more money, sit on more corporate boards. So basically, I was not doing anything original. I was doing things that I observed because of the manner in which my father [HistoryMaker Hal Jackson] made me observe things. Story_ID: 587655 Speaker 1: So, I know that you were teaching--that one of--that you had a trajec- sort of an arc through New York local-- Speaker 2: Well, see, I see New York [New York] as a world city, so (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, through the world-- Speaker 2: So I-- Speaker 1: Okay, I'm just-- Speaker 2: --I just, you know, I'm just a little bit of-- Speaker 1: (Laughter) This is the world-- Speaker 2: --a New York chauvinist there. Speaker 1: Very good. I know that you were teaching dance to pregnant teens. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And that led to your working for the City of New York-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and ultimately to all the positions that you've had subsequently. And one of the first--not the first, but one of the first was being the director of public affairs at the New York Urban Coalition? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Can you tell us a little bit about that? Can you include a statement about the Give a Damn newsletter, which we haven't talked about at all? And could you tell us how that, how that was a choice made in alignment with your goals as a social activist? Speaker 2: Well, as I said, my, as my father [HistoryMaker Hal Jackson] always helped me see as a woman, as a young girl, as a daughter, that until you, meaning black people, not having murdered or slaughtered somebody, is on the front page of The New York Times in a regular way, where it isn't something that everybody has to go out and frame because it is so atypical, until we are immersed in those, at that point, those, those medium of news and journalism that really reflect America, until we were there, we hadn't made it. So my consciousness was always about not assimilation, ever, integration, yes. And integration and the--which most people of color don't understand if they are young, integration was considered a maverick idea. Integration in the early 20th century was the kind of thing that got people lynched. Integration was something that challenged the systems of Plessy versus Ferguson [Plessy v. Ferguson, 1896], so that I have always seen myself as--and it's always amazing to me, whether it be, you know, wealthy white women who I may vacation with or may shop or do lunch with, who are always challenging me and saying, "Well, you're not really black, Jewell [HistoryMaker Jewell Jackson McCabe]," or blacks who I will be lunching and vacationing with who will tell me--certain leaders, who will go nameless--that I think like an intellectual white woman. I am a--clearly a black woman, clearly rooted in all of the tradition of the African American experience. I also believe in scholarship, and I will not allow that to be taken by mainstream. I mean Toni Morrison says you cannot write a 'Beloved' or 'Jazz'; you can't write 'The Bluest Eye' until you know how to structure a sentence, how to think through and communicate. So that, that sense of excellence and that sense of competitiveness, and that sense of sharpening one's skills was a part of how I was brought up. What led me to teach dance to--whether it be emotionally disturbed children when I was at Bard College [Annandale-on-Hudson, New York] and at the Rhinebeck home for children [Rhinebeck, New York] and then later through the Summer in the City pro- program, developed by Monsignor Fox [Robert J. Fox], is that in my life, as in every other black family, at the time that I knew, politics was talked over the table every day. There was always a Hulan Jack that was running for--to be the first black elected as Manhattan borough president. There was always the, the, the image of--and this is before I was born--of having an Adam Clayton Powell [Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.] using the technique of paying the electric bill with pennies to, to, to get the attention of white folks to service the black community better. So that, that stuff was--it wasn't like set apart as something new. It just--you heard about it. You knew you were to be involved. So I was always involved in elections and campaigns. I sat at sixteen at the, you know, at the feet of, of Wagner [Robert F. Wagner, Jr.]. And Mayor Wagner, obviously his father [Robert F. Wagner] had been the great senator that, that really had led the fight against lynching. Well, that's all synergy with Ida B. Wells. And you know, so it's all--until we were free, how could we not have that as an integral part of our lives? Story_ID: 587656 Speaker 1: So how did some of your career choices expand your skills-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: --in this moment (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) quite candidly, it was one-- Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: --of the founders of the 100 Black Women [Coalition of 100 Black Women] who used the term to describe my skillsets, when we were working and I was serving these women, who said, "Jewell [HistoryMaker Jewell Jackson McCabe] is a natural communicator." Well, I knew what the word meant. And then later on, you know, it was the same woman who's called me a publicist to somebody. I didn't know what the hell a publicist was, and then it was the same woman later on, who clearly herself had had some communication background, that was identifying these disciplines that she saw that I had. I knew I was a writer, that people liked my writing. I do not talk about creative writing now; I'm talking about proposal writing; I'm talking about summation, debriefing; I'm talking about the proverbial, you know, what, what management consultants always live by, which are the headlines, the bullets. You know, I would do, I was doing top liners before I knew that, that that's what they were called. So I emerged once I was told I was a publicist and lobbyist, because I didn't realize that when you were making your case to get someone to vote for a particular bill, or to at least even making the case to a legislator, to draft legislation, I didn't know I was lobbying. But once I found out, then, hell, I registered, and I was a publicist and lobbyist. Story_ID: 587657 Speaker 1: And what did you write about in the Give a Damn newsletter [for the New York Urban Coalition]? Speaker 2: What did I write about in the Give a Damn newsletter? Well, first of all, the roots of Give a Damn, that was an advertising term that had come out of a major advertising firm, that--remember, as I had mentioned earlier, as we have talked about Rothschild [Walter N. Rothschild, Jr.] and Rockefeller [David Rockefeller], after, after the Kerner Commission [National Advisory Commission on Civil Disorders], which was set up in 1968, after the assassinations of both Bobby Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy] and Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], and the riots that swept our major urban centers, there was a Kerner Commission put together. And that commission basically said we are a separate and unequal society, and it suggested that the private sector and the public sector had to dive in and save our cities, educate our kids, give our kids--not unlike what we need to do with Al-Qaeda--give people something to hope for. You don't want to blow yourself up if there's a job opportunity. You don't want to blow yourself up if there's an intellectual opportunity to express yourself or creative opportunity, either public sector or private sector. But if you have so raped a people, if you have so taken away from a society that which fuels--you know, you don't need Aristotle. You know, or some of us will talk about Genesis and the Bible. You don't need to go back to those, those tomes of wisdom, those missives that direct us. All you have to do is wake up in the morning and know why you either have bright eyes or you're depressed. So, I don't know if that answers your question, but-- Speaker 1: Okay, we just wanted to know a little bit about the Give a Damn newsletter. You started out telling us it was the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, it's not just a Give a Damn newsletter. It is a vehicle. It was a vehicle, a print vehicle that I created to reflect the positive stories of young people getting jobs, of young people getting educations, of young people learning how to manage housing, of young people who had babies that were--I don't like the word illegitimate, so I'll say undocumented, of single moms having to learn how to manage an apartment, bas- basic cleanliness for civility. It was, it was housing management. It was we--the--it was a, it was a vehicle to be able--and it was designed for the, for the mainstream reader to understand the depth of pra- poverty. And you--many people remember the hideous pictures of, of a wonderful black woman, another woman who sat around my mother's [Julia Hawkins Jackson] kitchen table, secretary of HEW, health, education and welfare [U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare; U.S. Department of Health and Human Services], under Jim- in the Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] administration; a picture of Pat Harris [Patricia Roberts Harris] in the South Bronx [Bronx, New York], in the burned out South Bronx, showing him, you know, what--you know, in the, in the mid-'70s [1970s]--what that looked like and why there was, you know, whether you be on the Lower East Side or West Side, when you're talking about the Hell's Kitchen or you're talking about the Harlems [Harlem, New York, New York], or you're talking about gang infested areas, you've got to have jobs, opportunity, health and quality education. Speaker 1: Thank you. Story_ID: 587658 Speaker 1: So let's move forward in time a bit-- Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and let me ask you how did you become involved with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], and how did you decide that you were going to throw your hat in for the executive directorship? Speaker 2: Well, part of the goal of the founding chapter of the New York coalition [Coalition of 100 Black Women] was to develop a backbench of leadership and to take us into a new era. And so black women in the main have only been allowed to lead themselves. Those women of the late 19th century accepted that but wanted equity and met during the suffragist movement of that period with great racism, as we did also in the '60s [1960s], '70s [1970s], and '80s [1980s] and the modern day suffragist movement, feminist movement. But it was an evolution to get to the point because of the doors that were open by the modern day Civil Rights Movement, that women should be recognized in mainstream leadership roles, not as the ghost voice whispering in someone's ears, sitting against the wall at the board table but actually sitting at the board table. So that my evolution into running as a candidate was a given, because I had said at my inaugural address that part of my responsibility as a new leader is to A, I will serve for ten years. We should not stay as head of these organizations forever, that there needs to be golden parachutes and support systems to help people like Ella Baker, who didn't have help, to help people, you know, like Roy Wilkins, who ended up dying in office, so that it was not a punitive or judgmental position I was taking. Black people only had had a somewhat even playing field in social policy after '64 [1964], '65 [1965] voting rights [Voting Rights Act of 1965], Civil Rights Act [Civil Rights Act of 1964], so that it would be natural ten years after that for me to look at because of the relationships I had been given privilege to, not that I was smarter than anybody. But part of your education is this body of experience that is vast, so that when you look at Corporate America or any other civic organizations, whether it be United Way [United Way Worldwide] or an American Cancer Society, there are succession plans, whether it be an American Express [American Express Company], you know, or it be, you know, a Time Warner [Time Warner Inc.]. There are succession plans: that you build a backbench; that you give a set of bright people the opportunities to do--make lateral transfers within an institution; that they gain leadership skill, and they gain knowledge and a skill and information about particular disciplines. So I had said I would run. I made in my inaugural speech in 1981 that I would step down in ten years, and I did, much to the--being perplexed by everybody, because according to people, I was at the height of my game. But for me, if I was at the height of my game, then the next step as a race woman, looking at the African American community in terms of social activism, what we were deficient in, is recognition of women, not in these once a year as Women's Day at church, not in terms of, my mother cooks really well and she's the best thing, and whatever. Love and personal relationships we celebrate. The nurturing nature of African American women we celebrate in a pragmatic 20th century. We were facing the 21st century. It was time for us to be recognized for our scholarship and our ability. Story_ID: 587659 Speaker 1: So I, then, I didn't put my name in. It's an interesting story. Quite candidly, there had been scandal swirling around. I don't remember the detail of the scandal. But there was a scandal around the chairman of the board and scandal around the president of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. And so, Frank Thomas [HistoryMaker Franklin A. Thomas], who was the head of the Ford Foundation [New York, New York], the, you know, the granddaddy philanthropic established organiza- philanthropy. By the way, he being the first African American to have that position. And there's a, there's a role that the coalition played in that, and that when Frank Thomas was a young law student graduate, lawyer from Columbia University [Columbia Law School, New York, New York], when Anne Roberts [Anne Mason Roberts], a founder of the twenty-four women of the Coalition of 100 Black Women, the founding chapter, said she--she told the white people in the legal department of HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development]--she was the deputy secretary, regional [sic. deputy regional administrator], here in New York [New York]--find a smart black man to run this office, she handpicked Franklin Thomas. And Franklin Thomas was handpicked by Bobby Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy] to develop Bed-Stuy Restoration [Bedford-Stuyvesant Restoration Corporation, New York, New York], that Model Cities project. So Frank Thomas had been honed, not unlike I had been honed, a set of experiences. But Frank was the head of the Ford Foundation, and, and he was sensitive to certain kinds of things. So my talking about that is that his sensitivity and his sense of respect of the brand of the NAACP, he then went to McKinsey [McKinsey and Company], then he demanded that a partner, a black man, Jim Lowry [HistoryMaker James Lowry], design the--it, and it was a grading selection system, right, so there--it was like a RFP [request for proposal]; you know, names were supposed to be submitted. So five hundred names were submitted, and then there was a process--and I don't know what that process was--to cut it down to seventy-five, and seventy-five went to forty, and forty went to ten, and ten went to four, and I was on the short list of four. And four was supposed to go to a group that was made up, hand selected and agreed to by the statutory body within the NAACP, which as [HistoryMaker] Roger Wilkins said in op-ed piece was unmanageable to begin with because it was the size of a small state legislature, at time was sixty-eight members, you know. There was a voting bloc--very important for everybody to know--of thirty-four ministers, a voting bloc. And many of those ministers came from towns smaller than Hope, Arkansas. So the history of my involvement with that race is I thought that one of my colleagues and supporters, whether it be male, female, black, or white, had initially submitted my name. When I was called to say would I stay in the race, when it was cut from forty to ten, quite candidly, I didn't even know I was in the race 'cause you didn't have to make an oral presentation until you got down to the forty to the ten. And I don't know this young man's name, but I understand it was a young African American man from Wilberforce that--no, Wake Forest, forgive me, Wake Forest University [Winston-Salem, North Carolina] that submitted my name. And for the months of the, of the rigorous campaign, where I really did get in it, and I decided I wanted to--not only was I running, but I wanted to win it. First, when I got in it, I w-, I didn't, you know, I did really well because I didn't give a damn, so I--to paraphrase the great newsletter [Give a Damn]--I just figured I'm gonna go for broke, so whatever. But when history was told after I did not get it, after the Reverend Ben Chavis [HistoryMaker Benjamin F. Chavis, Jr.] got it, who was ranked number four numerically, according to the McKinsey developed selection principles, it was neck and neck with Reverend Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] and I. We were a few points--and then there was another fellow--I don't remember his name--who had been in grown, and he had been quite wonderful. Speaker 2: And where there any other women on that list of ten? I mean clearly we've got (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No. Story_ID: 587660 Speaker 1: And how did your running, how did that go over with the, with others, with the members of the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Most important-- Speaker 1: --NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and with the other people who were on the short list? Speaker 2: Most important to the, to the--most important to the question is, what did I bring to the table? And what I brought to the table, which was factual, is at that point at forty-seven years old, I was not a woman that was going to be distracted by marriage. I had been married for twenty years, yes, divorced [from Eugene L. McCabe]. Speaker 1: Thank you. Speaker 2: I was forty-seven. I was a woman who wasn't gonna be distracted by something that I think is a primary responsibility. I didn't raise children; I had no children. I was a woman who was sitting on, as the first African American, on the second only to Harvard [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts]--but later we overtook Harvard--the Wharton business school [Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. I was a woman who had organized thirty-seven chapters, thirty-four states, and the District of Columbia. I was a woman who had the endorsement of the head of the Deltas [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority, Inc.], and the AKAs [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.], and the National Negro Business of Professional Women's [sic. National Association of Negro Business and Professional Women's Clubs, Inc.]--, and The Links [The Links, Incorporated], and all the clubs. I was also a woman who had both Ken Chenault [Kenneth Chenault] and Dick Parsons [HistoryMaker Richard Parsons]--at that point neither were CEOs, but they were on the succession track--who had said they would help me. Because what had not been done as far as--you know, when Martin [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] gave his great speech there was three legs to that stool, and social justice was one, and elected and appointed politics was the other, and the third was wealth for social change. Well, that set of instruments had not been evolved yet from the NAACP. Now once could say, well, the Urban League [National Urban League] had a relationship. Well, the Urban League has its mission, and it is a critically important mission, but it is not the NAACP. It did not grow out of the Niagara Movement. It did not--you know, most people think the colored club, the national association of colored people that was about colored people. That was about people of color. Remember, Asians were here laying railroad tracks in the, you know, early to late 18--19th century, so that that great Niagara Movement, where there was an integrated force of black, W.E.B. Du Bois, black, Ida B. Wells, white leaders. All of that had been a part of a strategic plan, not necessarily all the elements anticipated, most evolving out of logic. And where I think the African American community and the communities of color--because ours becomes the metaphor experience for people who are not white. First is our challenge is to say as we are not monolithic as people of color. I mean you'd be in New York [New York], you know, we've got Dominicans; we've got Cubanos; we've Puerto Ricans; we've got--in Miami [Florida] you've got more Cubanos, you know, it--in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] you've got your Chicanos, your Mexican Americans. You probably could break it out into twenty different strains and at least nineteen or twenty-five with Asian Island Pacific people, whether you're talking about Indians being what we consider East Indian, or you're talking about, you know, Samoans in Hawaii, or you're talking about what most people think of Koreans, or Chinese, or Japanese. There are different cultures, but white efficiency--and I'm being polite--has made the white voice monolithic when you know that there are Jews, and Polish, and Irish, you know, and the heritage of Scottish, and you know, and that class is an intersect with culture that we never recognize. And that's what makes this whole great American experience of multiculturalism that is still evolving and is still a struggle, and will always be a struggle, because people tend to bond towards those who look most like themselves and that they're most comfortable with. But the challenge to America is to be able to integrate without assimilation. Story_ID: 587661 Speaker 1: How was your run perceived by those around you, whether in the public, on the short list-- Speaker 2: Well, let me first-- Speaker 1: --the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] at large (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 'Cause definition is always important to me. Speaker 1: Please provide us with a definition. Speaker 2: Those around me, those blacks that were race people, and when I say that, which is what is so perplexing to young black women, and I think my very arrogant, almost angry shorthand to people is: get over it. To black men that say you're not feminist, you know, and we have to come first: get over it. We've got to pay the bills the same. We, we want to raise healthy kids. We want to explore ourselves. We want--we in fact, out of the hideous nature of slavery, had more equity, gender equity. And soon as we got the breakthroughs of the '80s [1980s] and '90s [1990s] we have fallen back into an 'Ozzie and Harriet' ['The Adventures of Ozzie and Harriet'], let my wife buy the centerpieces for grand dinners. It, and it is, it is a step backward, where we, because of the ugliness and the necessity of survival of slavery, actually were ahead of everybody else in terms of equity, sharing the challenges always in relationships. So, when you say those around me, those black women around me who were good race women, meaning that--. Because I have this basic feeling, which really should be my best quote, that black people are only progressive, they're only bonded, they're only a monolithic voice about access and opportunity for black men. The issues of the environment are new and coming into it. The issues of equity and math/science for girls are sort of coming into it. But because mainstream society, in a two party system, with a few Independents, saw the Civil Rights Movement and the issues about slavery and the guilt out of slavery, that when you say black, assuming, or people of color, one assumes that one is progressive and liberal. We are the most conservative Americans in America. That's why the issue of the down low is so--you know, like, whatever--excuse me, white men live on the down low. We don't make--write books about it (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Write books about it (laughter), go on 'Oprah' ['The Oprah Winfrey Show']. Speaker 2: You know, we may, you know, we talk a little bit about Truman Capote. We may look to make, you know, some clever references to great writers out of the South and, and you know, whatever. But it's, it's sort of a given, and it's like we have some kind of deep dark secret. Some scientists, and this is much too abstract for this discussion, but some scientists suggest that they're not too sexist, that they're twelve, depending upon how much estrogen and how much testosterone you have. So, I mean, you know, that as we grow as a progressive thinking society, what I confronted was people who basically cloak themselves, not in a sinister way. But every time one is challenged to come out of their cocoon and show courage, and backbone, and strength, Jesus comes into it; religious comes into it. Are you being humble? No, I'm not being humble. It's not a part of my game. Now, it was a part of my [maternal] grandmother's [Ercer Ricks]. It's a part of my mother's [Julia Hawkins Jackson]. And I think I'm a respectful African American woman. Story_ID: 587662 Speaker 1: So were there any challenges once you had run for the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and were not appointed director (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Challenges, I, according to the (laughter), according to The New York Times, front page of the, of the Week in Review, according to--remember that all the journalists were all over it. I mean, numerically, I had, I had won the damn thing. Speaker 1: Yeah, weren't they reporting that you were the frontrunner? Speaker 2: Frontrunner, everybody thought it was slam dunk. Speaker 1: And so when the news comes down, what does the news media do with that, that you, the frontrunner, are not the winner? Speaker 2: (Background noise) They report it. Speaker 1: Okay, but you were expressing some--that, you know, being in the black community subsequent to this run and during this run became a bit challenging. I wanted you to talk about that a little bit. Speaker 2: Oh, it came more than a bit challenging. It was, it was reflective of that which I had read about, but it came to life. I mean Paula Giddings talked about it in 'When and Where I Enter' ['When and Where I Enter: The Impact of Black Women on Race and Sex in America'], which was published in 1984, about the impact of black women on race and sex in America. Other great writers, you know, Jean Noble, Dr. Jean Noble has written about it. I mean the eons and eons of scholarship, you know, whether it be Phillis Wheatley-- Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: --or whatever, what I experienced was naked hatred. I experienced--and that's an understatement, because it psychologically was too much of a threat for a conservative community that basically looked to women leaders if they allowed them even to lead themselves, to be neutered intellectuals. Kathy White [ph.], a black psychiatrist, had always told me that as, as long as you were--the term would be today obese--that you didn't wear makeup, that you had a, a, a, not even a neutral look, but a look to (unclear)--and we can look at leaders we have today, and you know that they have tried to make themselves look like mammies. It is by design so that there is a non-sexual threat, a non-intellectual threat, and to be able to negotiate all of the hatred. Speaker 1: Can you describe for us a couple of specific experiences? Speaker 2: Well, being--let me describe (laughter) after running a race and having--the race wasn't just about a resume. One had to lay out a strategic plan. One had to give speeches. You know, I--one had to be grilled. I remember one great moment with a, one of the board members of the nominating committee--election, selection committee, who had a Jheri curl and a, and a, and a medallion. And he said to me, as if I'm was supposed to be intimidated by this, he, he-- Speaker 1: Please continue. Speaker 2: He said to me, "Well, you're too middle class." And I said, "What does that mean?" And he said, "Well, you know, you, you're bougie." I said, "What does that mean?" I said, "There is no wealth within the black community that mirrors the wealth of the white community." There is no--yes, my family is third generation college trained. But if I am at all sensitive and understand that black woman in the ads, the public service television ads of the United Negro College Fund [UNCF] who is on her knees scrubbing floors to get her son through college, it is to live the American dream, which is a middle-class experience. What I found is that you're supposed to cow to that; that you're supposed to speak in a lingo called urbanomics or something--Ebonics; that you're supposed to be stereotypic. And I've chosen, not to be stereotypic but to be clear. Story_ID: 587663 Speaker 1: Do you think that if you had adjusted your ways or been more stereotypical, that you would have, you know, won the candidacy? Or-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --do you think that--okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think that I would have probably been asked--quite candidly, I would have been asked to be--they would have created a position. Because they realized--you realize that part of what I brought to the table was a, actually, a packet of support letters. It was an inch thick. But I had Coy Eklund, who had been the CEO, you know, of Equitable Life Assurance [Equitable Life Assurance Society of America; AXA Financial], who had, when I first met Coy, he was, had been the chairman of the--the corporate chairman of the Urban League [National Urban League] when Vernon Jordan [HistoryMaker Vernon E. Jordan, Jr.] was the president. And Coy said, "I will come out of--," he, he had people tell me: "Tell Jewell [HistoryMaker Jewell Jackson McCabe] to call me. I will come out of retirement and retire that NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] debt if she becomes--." I had David Rockefeller saying that whatever was needed, they would help. And at the helm was Dick Parsons [HistoryMaker Richard Parsons]. I also had [HistoryMaker] Julius Chambers, the former chief executive of the NAACP League Defense Fund [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.] who had clerked for Thurgood Marshall. So it wasn't about somebody that was not a race conscious woman, who had not paid her dues as a race conscious woman. I had just had the arrogance to suggest that the community embrace the other 50 percent of its gray matter. If I had acted less street smart--and this I got verbatim from some of the insiders after a distillation--I would have been hired to run it for maybe if Jesse [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] had been president or maybe if Chavis [HistoryMaker Benjamin F. Chavis, Jr.] was president, which (unclear)--whatever, because that's the role that women are supposed to play. Speaker 1: So you said you would have been hired to run it, and what would that position have been (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's--I cannot say that. You asked me what I thought. Speaker 1: No, no, I'm not saying-- Speaker 2: If I had been different. Speaker 1: --that you say that as a fact. But would that have involved a lesser title are you saying? And then-- Speaker 2: No, what it, what--no, Adrienne [Adrienne Jones], what it would have is what you asked me: if I had acted, if I had been different. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: If I had been a, what I call them--and they're wonderful women--if I had been a typical selfless woman without street smart. In fact, they would have preferred a middle-class woman without street smarts because then the shenanigans could've been run around the woman. Story_ID: 587664 Speaker 1: So we've talked a little bit about the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and your run for the executive directorship there and some of the gender tensions that arose out of that. Could you talk to us a little bit about the 1995 march on--Million Man March, I wanted to call it the March on Washington, which it is. Can you give us your opinion about that? Speaker 2: Well, it was such--the chronology flows out of the NAACP race. The man who inspired and collaborated with Louis Farrakhan [HistoryMaker Minister Louis Farrakhan] to lead the Million Man March was, in fact, Dr. Benjamin Chavis [HistoryMaker Benjamin F. Chavis, Jr.]. And Ben Chavis--and my life was in turmoil from the moment that he was elected because many people thought that he would not last. I had said, just knowing his background, and, and knew that he was too much of a, of a radical, nationalist, not that that isn't a part, elements of movement and awareness, but it's hard to lead an NAACP, which is really based in tenets of middle-class aspiration, of education, and work, and career, and political involvement. And, and you know, and you know, the NAACP's voter registration and mobilization machine is brilliant and had been honed over the years, but it was certainly a centrist voice--I'm talking about the NAACP. And so, I had predicted that Ben Chavis would last about six months. Well, three months--I think he was elected in April [sic.]. May, June they announced a great--a press conference with he and the--Minister Farrakhan. And here me clearly, I think that we need all kinds of leaders to deal with the class issues, the, the, the pathology within our community. There is no monolithic leader. However, you certainly don't invite in a constructive way to be the guest at the bastion of political power for black people--meaning in September when we have the Congressional Black Caucus--that you don't come in as the new head of the NAACP and demand that Farrakhan be center stage. It, it is, for me sort of like asking David Duke to come in and be center stage during the, the president's State of the Union address. It's just, you know, doesn't wash. And egoist that I am, I even think the million man thing came to be because Chavis was sick of me in his face, and I was the head of the 100 Black Women [National Coalition of 100 Black Women], so I think they went a million. Story_ID: 587665 Speaker 1: But what was for those people who wanted to know, those people that wanted to care, that didn't just want to lock step in a patronizing way--you know, I got criticized greatly, and I got threatened greatly. But here I was, a woman who sits on corporate boards, a woman who is very establishment, a woman who, you know, you know, lives and breathes this American dream, the challenges and all. You know, the Times [The New York Times] wrote about an op-ed piece ['Black Women Are Split over All-Male March on Washington,' Michel Marriott]: here was [HistoryMaker] Jewell Jackson McCabe and, and [HistoryMaker] Angela Davis, shoulder to shoulder. And Angela, who had been embraced and loved by, you know, every, every, every black bookstore in ghetto communities and radical communities, had posters of her and her--soon as she was against the Million Man March, she was starting to be threatened. She was trashed. And one would say to thinking, analytical people, thinking people, aware people, that these women are being consistent with their positions. That you would not ask a Democrat not to be for the proletariat. You would not ask a Democrat not to be for the unions. That is part of the ideology. You wouldn't ask a Democrat not to embrace jobs and job training. That is a given. So how can you ask a feminist, whether they be a moderate, in terms of other issues in their lives, or a radical, how could you ask us to be a part of something--not that it was new. If Josephine St. Pierre Ruffin and other women could organize fifty thousand women back in 1896, organizing large numbers wasn't the issue. If Dr. Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] could have millions of people in the '63 [1963] march [March on Washington], that was not new. Both in 1896 with the women, National Association of Colored Women's Clubs, and Dr. King, had a plan. He wrote out his plan. The Million Man March, led by a man, who, if anybody read Muhammad Speaks [Muslim Journal], the newspaper, you know that this symbol 19 that they keep talking about is, is like woman pregnant, woman behind, whatever--I mean, I am not a, a theologian, so I can't give you chapter, book and verse. But I know one thing. I know that you are--that you, as a Muslim woman, have to walk behind your man. I know that you, as a Muslim woman in the mosque, have to sit upstairs and separate. I know that. So how could I turn over the passions that I had had from a child, of watching the Adam Powells [Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.] of the world, the Hulan Jacks of the world, the David Dinkins [HistoryMaker David N. Dinkins], the Percy Suttons, the Hal Jacksons [HistoryMaker Hal Jackson] of the world who believed in equity, who believed in mainstream America? How could I have supported Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] for president and then support Louis Farrakhan [HistoryMaker Minister Louis Farrakhan], who is suggesting that 50 percent of the gray matter, 50 percent of the strategic thinking, 50 percent of our strength should stay at home? Now if one is talking about the need to educate, to create a healthy dialogue with responsibility as the underpinning of black men, I think that that's not done in a public forum. I think that's done in a family setting. And I think that's done with them as a focus, but as black women as an integral part of the dialogue. Story_ID: 587666 Speaker 1: You've been quoted as saying, "Behind every great man is a woman--," and further, that it has been your experience that behind every effort and achievement and social gain goes a black woman, or a group of women, that is unrecognized. Can you talk a little bit about how the National Coalition of 100 Black Women counters that trend or that-- Speaker 2: Well, the basis of the organization, I mean the tenets, were all, was always role modeling. It was always putting--it was, it was creating our own civil rights statement, not the civil rights statement that white America decides, which is always operation bootstrap. And then some of us have bought into it, and in fact, we use it to market ourselves. You know, if I hear another black person on television tell some tragic story, I mean, it almost becomes like crying wolf; nobody wants to hear it again. And I'm not suggesting that there are people that aren't downtrodden. I'm not suggesting that, but America doesn't define itself by Appalachia. And many leaders that come, that--you know, many of our great corporate leaders hadn't graduated from college, just graduated from eighth grade, and came out of Hell's Kitchen [New York, New York], a lot of those wonderful men that ended up heads of corporations. They don't define themselves by the least of their achievement, because they want respect. And so for us, the first thing that we did, when I was lucky enough to be the president of the founding chapter [Coalition of 100 Black Women], I bumped into a man who had taken on something that the, you know, the captains of industry, those--particularly those that came from families with great legacy wealth--a Rockefeller, Laurance [Laurance Rockefeller] had asked a young man named James Robinson [James D. Robinson, III] to head up the centennial drive [for Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia], which was gonna be about a year or so later. I had bumped into Mr. Robinson and met him when Ernesta Procope [HistoryMaker Ernesta G. Procope] had introduced me to him because she was opening her office from Brooklyn [New York] as a businesswoman. Speaker 1: And what year was that? Speaker 2: That would have been 1978. I could be off a year. It could have been '77 [1977]; it could have been '78 [1978]. It was in the, the, the '70s [1970s], because the centennial drive was in 1979. And Laurance Rockefeller had asked Mr. Robinson. And Robinson's family was an old line banking family. His great-great-grandfather had been the first mayor of Atlanta [Georgia] after the Civil War. There was, was correspondence during the various great Worlds Fairs, but--either correspondence between Booker T. Washington and the Robinson family or you know, other great leaders. And so Robinson had taken it on as raising money for a black school, which was important. It was part of the Atlanta complex [Atlanta University Center Consortium, Atlanta, Georgia]. But I had three sentences that made him prolific as a fundraiser, not that he didn't have the capabilities, but he saw a different vision. And that's why the synergy of male and female, and black and white, and old and young, intergenerational, the synergy. People who all talk and think in sameness may do well, but they don't do as well as the synergy of, of these different multifaceted strong suits. Story_ID: 587667 Speaker 1: And so what I said to Robinson [James D. Robinson, III] when I met him--and I was a young woman, and he was a young--I think thirty-nine years old, was the youngest CEO of a global company [American Express Company]. I said, "When you take this on, the centennial drive for Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia]--." Now, of course, you know Laura Spelman [Laura Spelman Rockefeller], you know, who, who had been Laurance's mother. I mean this is one of her babies, so that--it was just like a family thing. I just want you and the viewers and listeners to understand that this was just some part of the portfolio of a prominent man, to use his abilities to raise money, as the Bush family did with Dr. Patterson [Frederick D. Patterson], with the United Negro College Fund [UNCF]. So this was part of a legacy. But when I popped it for him, when I said to him, I said, "When you are making history, because if you indeed raise $10 million," which was the challenge, and this was in the '70s [1970s], "for Spelman College, you will be doing more in a concentrated way for pre-med, pre-law business administration majors that are women of color, black women, than anyone else in American society." And he took those lines, and he got it, because obviously the feminist movement he was dealing with white women is emerging. And so market it, and in fact, certain friends of his told me that he, you know, he said he was Bill Cosby before Bill Cosby. Well, in fact, he raised $15.9 million, not 10. And in fact, he had gotten the Reader's Digest stock that ended up splitting and splitting. And Johnnetta Cole [Johnnetta B. Cole] told me one time it was just such a joy to be, really, number two of the historically black colleges [HBCUs] in terms of endowment. For a black women's school that was amazing. And, and it was the pop that occurred at that time, because we also, some of us, were part of an underground. It was--Donna Shalala was at the lead. It was really Marian Edelman [HistoryMaker Marian Wright Edelman] at the lead as chairman of Spelman. All this was happening simultaneously. Don Stewart [Donald M. Stewart] was the president of Spelman College when Jim Robinson was asked by Laurance Rockefeller to raise that money. But the Coalition of 100 Black Women, I told them, I said, "We can't scratch the surface of your wealthy, deep pocketed institutional leaders that you know, but we can fashion role modeling programs." Story_ID: 587668 Speaker 1: So we worked in concert with Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia], and we brought to New York [New York] students, and we changed their world, you know. There are people who had planned to be doctors after they shadowed what the lifestyle was like. Because I always believed in that sense of reality. It was a three day mentoring scenario, where the student had to literally shadow. That meant every external meeting, the hands on work of the primo- of the medical, of the doctors, of the lawyers, you know, of the business executives. And many of them, in some cases, we had to recruit men 'cause we didn't have executives within the corporate structure. And a lot of these young women were fortified and said, "Yes, this is what I want." But the majority, at least 75 percent, changed their major because they saw what the real deal was, not in terms of race, but in terms of the discipline and the 24/7 need for doctors, the 24/7 need of serious lawyering, and the absolute 24/7 need for a serious corporate executive. So that we built a, a body of role modeling programs. I always made sure that from that program to the next, which Marian Edelman [HistoryMaker Marian Wright Edelman] really led me to. But I named, I would never allow a program of the coalition to be one that suggested one was a victim. So when Marian, who was dealing with the epidemic level of teen pregnancy, and of course, I had my history from the '60s [1960s] of teaching dance to pregnant teenage black girls [through the Summer in the City program], with a few Puerto Ricans, Latinos a part of it, I had this experience. And I said, well, what do we want for these girls? We want for these girls the same thing that used to happen for us in the '30s [1930s] and '40s [1940s] if we were poor and got pregnant. And the church gathered around us and taught us how to parent, and the church gathered around us and made us be more disciplined and the reality of having to feed and take care of the baby. We got through school; we went to college; or we got through school, and we got a job. So basically, we designed a program in partnership. It was our program, but we used--because I used the, the volunteers of the 100 Black Women [Coalition of 100 Black Women], and you have to, with all the regulations, you have to protect kids from pedophiles and protect kids from, you know, just, you know, anybody with psychological problems. So we had a agreement with Big Brothers Big Sisters [Big Brothers Big Sisters of America] that had a screening process. We recruited from the actual point of birth, so we went into Harlem Hospital [Harlem Hospital Center, New York, New York], you know. We, you know, we, and were literally there, and we offered ourselves. Now the interesting thing is, in the program design--and this is where I am flawed it--and I laugh about it because it, once again, it tells you that you've got to really have a, a group of smart people that bring different things to the table. Story_ID: 587669 Speaker 1: My biggest flaw of the program that I designed and you know, with good help certainly--I'm trying to think of--not Martha Jones, but there were other people that helped, Bernice Powell, for example, who has now gone off and married somebody, so she's a Jackson [Bernice Powell Jackson]. But she, and, in fact, Bernice Powell ended up being president after my presidency of the New York founding chapter [Coalition of 100 Black Women]. But Bernice and I were sitting around, and were putting the program together. And neither one of us had kids, so what we did not factor in was the boyfriends, the boys that had made the little girls pregnant. So we had built in all these, you know, like role modeling opportunities to meet with people like us and getting them a job or getting them into college. We had--the mothers and fathers loved us. You know, I thought that we would have class related tension, because in the main, the 100 Black Women [National Coalition of 100 Black Women], if we didn't start off middle class, we ended up being that. And so we thought that the, you know, if we were helping to mentor a thirteen or twelve year old young black girl from, from an impoverished, disadvantaged background, we thought that the parents would reject us. No, they embraced us. They loved the fact that we were rubbing shoulders. But we forgot about these little boys and sex and, and, but we, we didn't launch our program without having the boys factored in. But I'm just saying that part of what we have done is obviously for our college students through the role modeling programs I described with Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia], and then our programs were teen girls. And I'm very proud to say that our two role modeling programs, one was Career Explorations; the other was Young Black Women in Transition: Women in Partnership [sic. Women in Partnership: Young Black Women in Transition]. So that's not a pejorative title. So who would be embarrassed to be a part of that? So it wasn't a slave name. It was something that people felt proud of. And, my proudest is that Educational Testing Services [sic. Educational Testing Service] evaluated us. I mean that's one of those evaluation tools with the metrics that, that basically helps to build the case, you know, through empirical data, either for public policy or just the evaluation of the outcomes. Well, ETS services, we got--the lowest we got was a 95. We got 95, 96, 97 percent on all of our programs. Multi-funding, some of it was all the Commonwealth Fund [New York, New York], which Marian Edelman [HistoryMaker Marian Wright Edelman] had brought us to. Marian had introduced us to Maggie Mahoney [Margaret Field]. And so it was Donna Shalala before she was the secretary, you know, work, you know, working for Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton], but she was the president of Hunter [Hunter College, New York, New York]. She and I were girlfriends. We knew each other. It was, it was Marian who was--I was like, I idolized Marian. I wanted to create--Marian was the 21st century role model for me for institutional growth, so that what she was doing with the Children's Defense Fund. She was the first person that says it's gonna take ten years before you can build institutional roots. So that's why, another reason why I said it will be ten years that I'm president, because by then, I want to go off and lead more than black people--black women. I want to lead black people. Story_ID: 587670 Speaker 1: So role modeling, let me, let me finish this now. So we had in place our Career Explorations program, which was a summer youth program where we got kids jobs, and they learned transfer- transferrable skills. Women in Partnership: Young Black Women in Transition, that was teen pregnancy with, you know, the goal to delay a second pregnancy and get them into either college or a job. And the third was launched in ei- 1982 and ended in 1992, which was the Candace Award, which was the civil rights statement. You know, now we talk about the Don Imus and the reaction to all this craziness about negative images and all that. Well, the, the 100 Black Women's [National Coalition of 100 Black Women] voice has been consistent, as we were against the Million Man March--not that we were against men. That is so naive. That is so insulting. That is so destructively deceptive, because there is no segment in American society that gives black men a pass, that loves black men unconditionally and has proven so more than black women. So for us to become the enemy is, it's kind of insidious. I don't even have the word, and I'm pretty good at words, to describe it. But Candace was the civil rights statement without saying civil rights statement. Because if you have categories--we did eight or nine awards a year, and we chose an elegant location (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What does Candace mean? Speaker 1: Candace is found in the Bible. It is Acts the apostle, chapter 8, verses 26-27 [Acts 8:26-27], about these great Ethiopian empresses and queens. But I candidly chose the name also because mainstream America, mainly white advertising-marketing people that were going to--they weren't gonna go for some ethnic name. It was called Canda- but they were pronounced it (pronunciation) Candace. It's spelled Candace; hey, whatever worked. Story_ID: 587671 Speaker 1: We then went into the Temple of Dendur, thanks to Ed Koch. I had a relationship with Ed Koch. This was prior to all of the--. And this is important for me. I have a chip on my shoulder about this. A lot of times black women and black people have broken barriers, like Dr. Kenneth Drew [sic. Charles R. Drew], that white people haven't broken. Yet our being recognized for a movement and action is invisible. Now in the case of blood plasma, it can't be. In the case of something that may be seen as superficial--but it wasn't to me. You see, I had been--when Anwar Sadat, before he was assassinated, I had been at a party at the Temple of Dendur at the Metropolitan Museum [Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, New York], and it was hosted by the United Nations [UN]. And it was the first time the Temple of Dendur had been used for a social gathering. And I said in my heart--and that was in the '70s [1970s], and Jimmy Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] was president, I said if I ever have a chance to honor black women, it's gonna be here. Well, of course they had no rules for such. So it was Ed Koch, and he had a bad relationship with the black community. I had a great relationship with him. You know, I think he said some things that were, that were probably in your face. If you're a black person, you could, you could call, you know, somebody a poverty--a pimp, you certainly as a, as a, as a Jew--. First--he wasn't the first Jew. I think that was A. Beame [Abraham D. Beame]. That was a little on the racist side. But, he got access from me. And then Tiffany's [Tiffany and Co.] was wonderful. Tiffany's designed an award. And, and associates of that had been supporting us in other dramatic ways came in and supported us. So we ended up with people like--. We made a hard and fast rule, but we were always flexible when there was need for flexibility. So we did not want to reinforce stereotype, so we were not gonna honor entertainers or sports figures. But we thought we would deal with the scholarship that is ours, so the black woman, who is now deceased, who really started the Pullman car porter movement--and we had a wonderful--she was in a wheelchair. She was damn near ninety then. And we had a cake made like a train. It was just wonderful, wonderful photographs of these great women. So this was a labor leader. We had people like the woman who sculpted the bus for the dime. You know the, the dime that we have, a black woman did that, you know. The theoretical physicist that headed up Bell Labs' [AT&T Bell Laboratories, Inc.; Nokia Bell Labs] satellite strategies was [HistoryMaker] Shirley Ann Jackson. I mean we know about Shirley Ann now. We didn't know her then, but she was, she was of great scholarship. So we had neurosurgeons. We had a statement and range of category, which was our civil rights statement, which was all about the imaging of black women. And we put it in a place that would get us national press. We had--the presenters came from the same discipline. For example, we had Toni Morrison and Frank Thomas [HistoryMaker Franklin A. Thomas] give Kathleen Battle, the great opera singer, her Candace [Candace Award]. Well, Frank, in fact, had been responsible for the money that her college [University of Cincinnati College-Conservatory of Music, Cincinnati, Ohio] had gotten that she--she didn't get it because he got it for her, but that she was eligible for. And, and she and Toni had collaborated on a piece. Really, it was Wynton Marsalis had, and Toni had collaborated on a piece that she performed at Carnegie Hall [New York, New York]. So there was synergy relationship. It made sense. It also was, from a PR [public relations] point of view--and this is my father [HistoryMaker Hal Jackson] and my PR sense--how do you not get national press when you have the head of the Ford Foundation [New York, New York], Toni Morrison, Pulitzer Prize winner, and at that time the prima diva from the classical opera world. Story_ID: 587672 Speaker 1: Would you tell us a little bit or a lot about the Aspen Institute [Washington, D.C.]: what is it, and what does it do? Speaker 2: Well, I had been, as I said, my life has been blessed with experiences that were atypical for women, atypical for African Americans, whether it be a founding member of the New York City partnership [Partnership for New York City, New York, New York], traveling with CEOs of multinational corporations, watching them do business, seeing how they conducted business. Everything I learned from high achievers, opinion makers, powerful people, I tried to translate into tools and techniques for the 100 Black Women [National Coalition of 100 Black Women]. As I was growing in prominence as a public speaker, as an activist, I was invited, which was atypical for women at that time, but there were women, at what is called the Aspen Institute Executive Seminar. And it is a think tank opportunity led by a scholar and a battery of scholars. And it's really a, an extraordinarily intense set of readings, whether it be Aristotle, whether it be the, the papers from the Birmingham jail ['Letter from Birmingham Jail,' Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]. It's a cross section of scholarship. And you literally are sitting next to other captains of industry, and the wives were seated along the wall, which I used to stir up a little trouble there. So after having that experience in 1984, I then went to the board of the Aspen Institute, which at that point was--had very few, if any, women. And Dolores Wharton [HistoryMaker Dolores D. Wharton], who happened to be a African American woman of great scholarship, who was also on the board of the Kellogg Foundation [W.K. Kellogg Foundation, Battle Creek, Michigan], who was also on the board of the own- the ownership of USA Today, I said to her, "Dolores, I would like to create something spectacular where we could come up with a working document, a generational plan of leadership at the Aspen Institute." It was my concept, just like the Metropolitan Museum [Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, New York] Temple of Dendur, is that the perception of black women has to be synonymous with excellent and the best. So if America's corporate elite are trained at the Aspen Institute through executive seminar, which I was privileged to take advantage of and was thrilled with, I wanted to use the same methodology and the same platform for women of color. She got me in. I went to Frank Thomas [HistoryMaker Franklin A. Thomas] and said, "I need this because this is a new organization." Not just new--at that point, it was 1986, so we were been around five years. But we did not want to be the National Council of Negro Women. We did not want to be the National Association of Colored Women's Clubs. We had a new challenge, and so we needed to have a process where empirical data and dialogue could occur. Story_ID: 587673 Speaker 1: The guest list, all expenses paid, even chartered jets to bring in people, which, which blew a lot of people's minds. But we had Claudine Malone [Claudine B. Malone], which most people didn't know was a black woman who sat on Campbell Soup's [Campbell Soup Company] board, who today is the chief executive of one of the most powerful technology companies in the world, Novell corporation [Novell Inc.] in Waltham, Massachusetts, who had been a, an academic, a scholar, a professor of economics at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], who, you know, sat on at least five or six corporate boards. And we had Jim Robinson [James D. Robinson, III] fly in, who was chairman of American Express [American Express Company] in 1986. And we had Dolores as a part of it--Wharton [HistoryMaker Dolores D. Wharton]. Obviously, you--we know her husband, Clift Wharton [HistoryMaker Clifton R. Wharton, Jr.], and all the various, you know, boards that he has sat on and various roles that he has played. But we brought together the highest ranking black women in every industry. So the black woman who was vice president for ABC TV's children programming was there. The head of--at that point, the head of Motown [Motown Records] was Suzanne de Passe. She was there. [HistoryMaker] Marian Wright Edelman as the head of the advocacy organization that protects America's 60 million children [Children's Defense Fund], she was there. Constance Baker Motley, who had argued ten [U.S.] Supreme Court cases and lost one, she was there. And we basically had thirty or forty of the smartest--not just on paper, but proven experience. We had the lawyers that were, were people that were lawyers for--it was so funny because I had never heard of bioengin- engineering. And I didn't know that there was scholarship, and, and law, and the challenges of that, so that we had owners. We had no entertainers, but we had the glamour. Entertainers were the Suzanne de Passes of the world. And the head of NBC family programming was a black woman [HistoryMaker Phyllis Tucker Vinson Jackson]. She, I think she ended up marrying Gene Jackson [Eugene Jackson], think they may still live in South Africa. I'm not sure. At least that's one of their homes. But we brought together Shahara Llewellyn [Shahara Ahmad-Llewellyn], who was an entrepreneur, married to Bruce Llewellyn [J. Bruce Llewellyn]. So we had all these--and then I had ten young women that I called my Young Turks. And they were young women who were--god, in 1986 I was thirty-something, so these women were in their twenties. And they were basically the scribes, but I wanted them to have intergenerational synergy. I wanted them to create a network. And it has to happen through natural chemistry for me for it to really work. Story_ID: 587674 Speaker 1: I also wanted for recruitment purposes the chairman of American Express [American Express Company] and other CEOs to meet these young black women. Unfortunately, the downside was that a lot of racism that we have to fight is racism that is embodied within white women. And so a lot of white women wanted, within Corporate America in particular--had to see themselves go first. And then when they chose black women to recruit black women--we're just seeing breakthroughs now that could have happened twenty or thirty years ago, just like they did for some of the black men. But that's, you know, that, it's not just water under the bridge. That's just sort of history, but that's a history that pains me today. But what happened was we commissioned--just like I said that in my experience at the Aspen Institute [Washington, D.C.], it was reading Aristotle and Plato, and reading writings of Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], and reading writings of Gandhi [Mahatma Gandhi], and so it was a great intellectual leadership exercise. Well, we needed the same kinds of papers for our women to read, so we commissioned Paula Giddings to write a paper about succession planning. And in fact, the phrase naked hatred is I think how she opens it up, that black women have only been allowed to lead themselves, and that when they do challenge the internal establishment of the black community they're met with naked hatred, and it was depth. We also had [HistoryMaker] Julianne Malveaux write the paper on economics, the economic impact of black women as wage earners, what we were earning in terms of our earning dollar. We were always earning less than white women. And white women at that point in the main room was earning fifty-nine cents to every dollar. We today, in 2007, in the main, black women earn fifty-nine cents, and white women earn eighty-seven cents. So that we commissioned a paper from Patricia Williams [Patricia J. Williams], who was working for [HistoryMaker] Eddie Williams at the Joint Center for Political Studies--I think it's now the Joint Center for Political and Economic Studies [Washington, D.C.]; at that point it was political studies--to do a status of black women paper as it related to health, education, and welfare. So we had economics; we had health, education, and welfare; we had education; and we had what was the hidden agenda for me, leadership, succession planning. Story_ID: 587675 Speaker 1: Now the fifth document was groundbreaking. And I feel sorry because the man is dead now, and he thought we were gonna rock the world back in '86 [1986]. His name was Lou Harris [Louis Harris]. And he adored me, and he knew me from Hugh Carey, from politics, because, as I said earlier in the interview, when there's, when there's misfortunate or bad times, there are great opportunities, you know, if you can walk, and talk, and chew gun at the same time. So that Lou Harris, I had asked him to design--because I knew that there was a disparity between--and a, and a disconnect, a total void, disconnect between what true leadership--when I say true leadership, I'm not now making it personal. People who make economic policy, public policy, people who are the captains of industry, those leaders, business leaders in particular, those in the main, corporate directors of the Fortune 500 companies, but there was a disconnect between what they thought leadership was and the characteristics of leadership and what black women thought leadership was. So that the instrument was designed, and two hundred CEOs were interviewed. And I'm talking about CEOs of the nation's top companies. And I had to include black leaders. None of them were CEOs in 1986. In fact, it wasn't even a fantasy on the drawing board. So I went to what Vernon [HistoryMaker Vernon E. Jordan, Jr.] had started, which was the Black Leadership Forum, so all the heads of the civil rights organizations, which were men. And we also queried a few United States senators from states that had high density of black population. And we questioned the Congressional Black Caucus, 'cause that was the only counterpart, the closest. Now, of the 250 polled, two hundred were these males who happened to white, who happened to be the heads of Fortune 500 companies. And some of the interesting questions about leadership--and I think that the--what pops was this: that the black women--and that means the women that came to the forum; these were black women achievers--what all of the blacks, males, and females thought was needed was to be articulate, to be well educated, to be well groomed. None of the white men mentioned any of that, 'cause that was given. White males saw leadership as a facility with people--people skills--an ability to network, creative mind, decision making capabilities. And it, you know, you'll find it an interesting read. Now the fun and funniest part was when we asked if they could name three black women. And remember, this was 1986. Speaker 2: You're asking of the black women? Speaker 1: No, this poll was of white men-- Speaker 2: Got it. Speaker 1: --with a few black people involved and the black women. But it was really to focus in on what the people who were leaders, United States senators and captains of industry, what they defined as leadership tenets and skills, and what was required. But then when they were asked, which was really funny, and I was pleased that my name appeared at least once or twice, and, and I have to say--who else that was--Marian Edelman's [HistoryMaker Marian Wright Edelman] name appeared once or twice and Faye Wattleton [HistoryMaker Alyce Faye Wattleton] once or twice. But basically the three names that the men had were: Pearl Bailey, Lena Horne, and somebody else, because that, those were the black women they knew. Wasn't black women leaders. They were asked: what names of black women did they know. And that was in 1986. It was a Lou Harris Poll [Harris Poll], paid for by the American (Unclear) Foundation. And it was one of the critical instruments of the five that the women were given in advance to read for our discourse. You know Elaine Dowe Carter designed the methodology and the training, and it was quite brilliant. And what we came out with was a twenty year plan of action, a generational plan of action. It was called Inheriting a Legacy of Leadership. It has, in fact, not been enacted, I mean parts of it, but it's still a viable document that I could use today and the coalition [National Coalition of 100 Black Women] must use today. Story_ID: 587676 Speaker 1: Let me now turn to your participation on corporate and cultural boards. Can you tell us how you started your career (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There's a natural synergy that occurs. Most corporate board members are selected. Because I think--and this is, this is my formula. This is not a, a textbook formula. But most corporate boards have a, at least a third, professionals of great experience. That's why the average or the median age is fifty-seven, credential in the field itself. So if it's a medical--if it's a Pfizer [Pfizer Inc.], you're gonna have people who, who, who--because when you're doing--when the analysts from the stock market are talking, you've gotta, you've gotta know the depth of what you're talking about to advise and counsel on the development of, of medications. I mean most people have, you have to know that it's basically a fifteen year tale of be, between beginning and end before a drug can be tested and approved, and that's if smooth sailing. So there are so many different generations of a particular drug. For me, of course my drug of advocacy is, is microbicides, which is the, the topical that we're trying to get to prevent AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] amongst women. And it, it would to me be what penicillin was to the STD [sexually transmitted disease] of the '40s [1940s] when we were talking about syphilis. So microbicides is very important, but most African Americans, and women in particular, don't know that much about it. They--you think that once you support it, that it goes away. No, you've got to support it for if it's a good microbicide. And a couple of them have, have failed the test, so that they're in different stages. There's a stage one, a stage two, a stage three, and a stage four, so that it's a fifteen year--. And one of the realities of out of slavery--we all would talk about blacks being short distance runners, because we've never been on the big playing field. Well, you've got to think generationally twenty years. You've got to think out, which the privilege of being privileged--and I don't mean that just in terms of wealth, I mean that in terms of power--is being able to plan, also being able to fail without feeling as though that's the end of the world, right. But the corporate board situation happens for those people who bring a rolodex to the table. Now today you call it a database. But it, it's people who bring--and I don't mean just a rolodex. I mean people--basically, corporations want to increase market share. And the way--I mean that's why you see a lot of other CEOs. So a third of the board is gonna be at least other CEOs that expands the relationship with the companies, you know. And then a third of the board will be those people who may, in fact, be senior executives from the company that, that have a deep dive knowledge of the company, or you can't get, get synergy and, and involvement. Most blacks and women started to get on boards as the issues of diversity--first affirmative action--the spirit of, of equity in the workforce. That's really the reason why we were selected, to be quite candid. Story_ID: 587677 Speaker 1: My selection was that I worked well with the chairman of one of the top ten country--companies in the world. That was Reliance Group Holdings [Reliance Group Holdings, Inc.]. And he thought that I had a good strategic mind and a good strategic mind in terms of marketing and communication in particular. Saul Steinberg, who was, in fact, known as one of the major mentors of, of a lot of the very prominent financial wizards of the '80s [1980s]. Speaker 2: So, Reliance Group Holding was your first board-- Speaker 1: It was my first-- Speaker 2: --relatively? Speaker 1: --holding company, because a holding company has several boards underneath, and I was on all of them, yes. Speaker 2: I see. And what other boards have you been a member of, and why did you choose them? I mean I'm assuming (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They choose me. Speaker 2: --they choose you, but you then need-- Speaker 1: Why did I accept? Speaker 2: --to agree to accept. And so-- Speaker 1: Well, the Wharton [Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] board was-- Speaker 2: --can you tell us a little bit about your sort of profile? Speaker 1: Well the Wharton board was very important--because there are a couple of boards that I have been asked to join, like I mentioned with the partnership [Partnership for New York City, New York, New York], that--because it's such overt, insidious racism and confusion over diversity. In the diversity grid, usually when you say women, they mean white women. And I have had the great fortune of being selected instead of--usually if they select a black man, the woman is gonna be a white woman. And, and at the--in terms of Wharton, being the first woman and the first black woman on the Wharton board was stunning. There was a secretary of labor who may have been in the same class as I--meaning, class meaning elected as I--but I think I was before her. But if it was, it was a year. And importantly, for African Americans I was--usually when the breakthrough occurs at that level, it's a, it's a black man. And so I'm very, very proud of that. And I helped to develop an international program at the undergraduate level, the, the undergraduate Wharton School, and was asked to recruit. I'm very proud of this--asked to recruit--you had to have, minimal, 1500 boards, and I was asked to recruit black women. And I found young black girls that were so smart. But what ended up inhibiting them in--was that Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] outbid them. Howard would take them with the marks that they had. And you had to be able to be fluent in a second language because you, actually, you didn't go to an American school for half a semester, or a semester. You actually went to an indigenous school, so you had to understand the politics and be able to negotiate and all. And it was sort of the, you know, the advent as we know of this global marketplace that we're all in, you know, that Corporate America knew that we would be in because they think twenty or forty years out and plan forty and thirty years out, so that Jon Heinzeman--Huntsman [Jon M. Huntsman] rather, who is currently the chairman of the Wharton board, it was his money that helped underwrite the, the growth and development. And, and Saul Steinberg's wife [Gayfryd Steinberg] and I actually developed and did a lot of the recruiting and worked with Yogesh Gandhi [ph.], who was the dean of the Wharton School, and we're very excited about it. But I also helped just with marketing. I mean Wharton was this fabulous school. Now, I was on that board for close to fifteen years, so I'm talking about like late '80s [1980s]. And now it's so common when you're watching CNBC, or you're watching NBC, or the networks, or the cable news, it's so common for you to see a--you know, the head of the Wharton School, for this to be a, you know, a pundit, or an analyst. But at that time, Wharton didn't--Wharton wasn't on, you know, wasn't on the call sheet. And I said you know, you know, we have scholars to do that. So my marketing, communication skillsets helped at the board level. My depth and breadth of relationships with CEOs and with the civil rights community and with the feminist community added depth and breadth. So I became a value added to the board, and that was usually why you were selected, at least in my case. Story_ID: 587678 Speaker 1: And now you have your own company, Jewell Jackson McCabe Associates [New York, New York]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And through that company, at least in your blurb, you do executive coaching and some motivational speaking, amongst other things. So I would love to hear a little bit about the associates, some of the services that you provide to corporations, and, oh, and first, I want to start off with, which may be obvious from what some of the things you've just said, why is Jewell Jackson McCabe Associates a multilingual organization? Speaker 2: Well, first of all, the skillsets that I have were developed from my public service, from sense of the synergy between minorities and mainstream, both public and private sectors, so that, all of that, especially as the Latino community has grown and you know has, has, is, is, is the new minority group, it is wise in a global economy, you know, that if I have somebody that has to go to Brazil, that they can speak the language. Same thing, you know, with Mandarin, Chinese, that, you know, you, you're dealing with a billion--a market of a billion people. And a lot of companies, you know, you know, they were there way before we started using terms like global village. And part of the experience that I have had made me alert to it, not just--because, I was very lucky because Mario Cuomo often, when there were international business trips taken. For example, when China first established the four economic development model regional areas, right, he allowed me to represent him. So I was with, you know, companies, the head of Kodak [Eastman Kodak Company] and others when we were visiting Shiyan [China] and you know, and Beijing [China]. And you know, I loved China because sometimes with the women it was so funny, because being a feminist, you always have to be apologetic 'cause the women always feel guilty and, and, and weird about you bringing up women. And so it's sort of like with race, if you bring up black, it's like, why do you always bring up black? Because everything else is considered white, I mean, you know (unclear). So it was so funny because the very bright young women who all, you know, had participated in Tiananmen Square who knew about the Civil Rights Movement, who held African Americans with such high esteem, she would--they would say to me after we, we would be back at the hotel, and the, the translators would be all these wonderful young women, and they say, "Ms. McCabe [HistoryMaker Jewell Jackson McCabe], why--?" And I don't mean to be racist. They didn't speak English well, but they could, they could speak English. I could not speak Chinese. But they would say, "Why is it that every time you talk you ask about the women? Why is it that when you preface everything you say, 'As a woman'?" And I said, "Because there is no equity. You don't see yourself reflected. And it is a given when you're born entitled--you have to remind those that were born entitled and male that there has to be access and opportunity." And they got it of course, and it was quite wonderful. But it was having those trips in the '80s [1980s]. I mean I was in the Middle East, known as a, you know--this is back in 1984 I think--as a, as one of the Reagan women just because Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] was in the White House--and you know, and, and spent time, you know, in Egypt, in Israel, you know, and I felt quite comfortable. I mean my, some of my role models, I talked about Jewel Lafontant [HistoryMaker Jewel Lafontant-MANkarious]. I talk about Constance Baker Motley, Mrs. Anwar Sadat [Jehan Sadat]. You know, these women look like me to me. I mean they were women of color. They were women of glamour. They were women that were in charge. They were not women who just did centerpieces for tables. They knew how to do that. I can, I have the, you know, I have the--I was a Girl Scout. I have a little whatever, the horticulture badge along with my swimming badge. I mean, but basically, they were women of serious nature that also celebrated being women. Story_ID: 587679 Speaker 1: Do you want to continue telling us a little bit about the background of your company? Speaker 2: Oh, I'd love to, because Jewell Jackson McCabe Associates [New York, New York] allowed me to--you know I went to the High School of Performing Arts [Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York], so I'm a bit of a diva and a bit of a drama queen, and it allowed me to use my creative skills. Clearly, we know now that I do a lot of media training and coaching, executive coaching of women and, and minorities because I've had these experiences, corporate experiences that were really atypical for most women and most minorities. So I love my executive coaching responsibilities. That's where you get paid best for doing the least amount of work. But I also have had some extraordinary opportunities with one of my clients. Coca-Cola [The Coca-Cola Company, Atlanta, Georgia], for example, really cared as a consumer product company about obesity. So I had the opportunity to interview in groups of twenty-five each, focus groups of--including custodial workers, staff at Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia], and students, right. So Spelman was a focal point because that gave me a national spread, but it gave me concentration of women, and it gave me an, a class set of distinctions that was also important as a variable. I had, of course, the 100 Black Women [National Coalition of 100 Black Women] at one of our leadership development opportunities. I had these wonderful black women from all over the country, so I had at least thirty or forty states represented. I interviewed two hundred women. I used also the board of--and these were mainly academics and administrators from colleges and universities--the Council for Opportunity in Education headed up by Dr. Arnold Mitchem [Arnold L. Mitchem], and, and Tuskegee Institute [Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama]. So I had these focus groups, and I designed the instrument, just, and conducted the focus groups. Story_ID: 587680 Speaker 1: One of the things that was interesting for me, however, which in the summation I, I found to be an aha moment--most of them were not aha moments because as a black woman I had lived the obsession with food, the unique relationship with food. But there was something gnawing at me that said that there was something bigger than just saying we're lonely, just saying, you know, we're not disciplined, just saying, we, you know, because we don't want to get our hair wet, we don't exercise, therefore--. I mean all those kinds of things were in play. But it was a scholar friend of mine, Paula Giddings, who said, "Well, [HistoryMaker] Angela Davis writes about it. What makes it really the root of, of the uniqueness?" And I said, "What?" And in, in some of Angela's writings and she talked about in slavery, even those who cooked in the big house had to cook what the master and mistress wanted. But it was only in her slave quarters that--not that she cooked the food with love and soul, but she had total control. And she had to make brilliance: delicious meals from the slop, from the pig's ears, from the pig's guts, you know, and, and, and, and the vegetables that were brought over with the slaves, or the yams, and the okra, and the, you know, and the black eyed peas, and the, and the, and the peanuts, so that the relationship, food wise, between the indigenous American Indian [Native American]--. In fact, one time we had a meal served on a reservation in Arizona. And one of the young members of the 100 Black Women [National Coalition of 100 Black Women] said, "Ms. McCabe [HistoryMaker Jewell Jackson McCabe], they make potato salad just like black people." And I said, "We, well, we used to cook together, you know, in the 19th century, you know, in the 18th century." And, and so, it is--food is the only thing that we have been allowed to control. And therefore, it has a profound signature, imprint in our DNA. And we just have to not unlearn that; we just have to eat healthy (laughter), and work out, and become more physically active, you know. But, but that was a Coca-Cola [The Coca-Cola Company, Atlanta, Georgia] project that, in fact, has helped, you know, with them, with their health and wellness, living well, you know, every drop counts campaign, because of their waters and all of the healthy--. You know, as many consumer product companies, obviously the market drives the company. Story_ID: 587681 Speaker 1: The other project that I'm, had opportunity to be hands on, was the Matsushita corporation [Matsushita Electric Industrial Co., Ltd.] that was looking for a marketing project. Well, because of my unique experiences, understanding, I mean most marketing people don't know about the federal government's secretary of education and what that power is. And most don't have a direct relationship with school systems, because school systems tend to be run ultimately by Democrats and Republicans because the governor is a Democrat or a Republican. And so, you'll have tenured people who are a part of, you know, a part of the system, but you'll have a lot of appointees that are--. And I had a rolodex where I could hotwire almost any state to say, could we have a model program with your fifth graders in a particular zip code that is more black, brown, and yellow than others--public schools?. And happened to--I mean I did not originate the program, but I did originate the program. There was a marketing program in fifteen schools in Newark, New Jersey. And when I was introduced to Matsushita, that owns Panasonic, Quasar, Technics, they wanted to have a Panasonic program. So I just did a little brainstorming. It was just luck. You know, this is not rocket science. I said--they said they had all kinds of equipment. I said, well, how many pieces of equipment would constitute a fully equipped video studio? So we--let's say thirteen or fourteen pieces. I said, do you have enough to go around to the schools and to expand it from the fifteen? So, you know, it was in about seventeen schools and a couple in New York [New York]. So we had something called Panasonic Kid Witness News, and we had fully equipped video studios. Well, I then decided that, well, we need a marketing--because I am a marketing person. I'm a natural publicist, as my mother's friend told me, but when I didn't know what a publicist was. I said we need to have a competition that's like an Akidemy Awards [ph.]. So basically, I just took (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Akidemy Awards. Speaker 1: --I just took the Academy Awards [Oscars] program, which I had a copy of, and just, all we did was did a cut and paste. You know, we had documentaries. We had all the categories. We had awards for writing, awards for producing, directing. At the end of the year, and the kids, it was a black tie event. So the little, the little fifth and sixth graders had to wear a black tie and whatever, so that it was a program. And this is what I like about what I think the uniqueness that McCabe Associates [Jewell Jackson McCabe Associates, New York, New York] brings to the table, and then I'll give you the icing on the cake, is that, A, in 1986, when I designed this program, it was atypical. Nothing like it was out there, because technology was only being used, at best, at best, not as teaching tools, as data management, and taking photographs, and home movies. So in working with the secretary of education, I got them to adopt and open doors to help us find the professionals that could create training modules for the teachers. So well, only a person that understands the education system would think to do that. A marketing person wouldn't necessarily think to do that. And also, to introduce--I mean one of the first people that I had the kids interview was Colin Powell [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell], who at that time was the head of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Story_ID: 587682 Speaker 1: So that got the attention of the hierarchy of Panasonic. But what really blew and blasted the program open--so we had this program designed for fifth and sixth graders, and they each got a fully equipped video studio, the class. And each teacher got a, a video that taught them how to use the equipment. And the students got handbooks to teach them how to use the equipment. But what blasted the program open goes back to the rolodex and being on a fast track. Because the day that--Matsushita [Matsushita Electric Industrial Co., Ltd.], at that point, Panasonic specifically, was bigger worldwide than Sony [Sony Corporation], but Sony was America's Japanese company. So the head of Matsushita happened to come to America for something, a luncheon being hosted by the chairman of American Express [American Express Company] and David Rockefeller, who had, of course--David Rockefeller has all kinds of relationships, global relationships of--just like we have, you know, the historic building sites, whatever, they have that kind of relationship with historic sites throughout the world and other financial relationships. So, this is the way the story went with the head of Panasonic when I got called in and my program went from seventeen schools to two hundred. The Japanese head who had come in for the Japanese chamber of commerce lunch, hosted by David Rockefeller and the chairman of American Express, I had called David Rockefeller and told his assistant who staffed him, give him three talking points: Panasonic get, (unclear) hands on video education; a nontraditional use of, of technology; technology as teaching tools. And I gave the same bullets to the chief of staff for the chairman of American Express, and the same bullets to Mike Del Giudice [Michael Del Giudice], who was the chief of staff for Mario Cuomo. So, when all of these important men are sitting around the table at lunch, my guys, who I had worked for and served, who respected me, had my talking points. And so the chairman of Matsushita, who was only in America for two days to go back to Japan, sat with the head of Panasonic and said, "Governor Cuomo talked to me about Panasonic Kid Witness News. Mr. Jim Robinson [James D. Robinson, III], chairman of American Express talked to me about Panasonic Kid Witness News." But what was his mindblower, because for those people outside of America, the Rockefeller name is bigger than life, as it is in America, but it's even bigger than life, he said, "Mr. David Rockefeller talk about Panasonic Kid Witness News." And then he said, "Now tell me: what is Panasonic Kid Witness News?" And from that recognition of the chairman, who resided in Japan, I was called in. And my staff went from three or four to seven. My seventeen schools went to two hundred throughout the country. And our Akidemy Award [ph.] occurred for about a five year period. And it was so successful, and it had--was so branding at a level, because when kids get used to, to using Panasonic equipment, when they get old enough to buy it, they're gonna buy Panasonic equipment, gonna know it. So it worked as a marketing tool. But usually, these marketing programs within corporations have a two or three year life, and then they move on. This was so successful that I lost the account because they created an actual division within the company that--I can't even remember what her name is now that's the head of it, black woman who had been working at Panasonic in New Jersey. But, yeah, so they institutionalized it in the company. Speaker 2: So you worked yourself out of it just by being so fabulous (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, well, but it was--it was--that's okay, 'cause I-- Speaker 2: It's sounds-- Speaker 1: For every creative idea, I got-- Speaker 2: --it sounds fantastic. Speaker 1: --fifteen more, so. Story_ID: 587683 Speaker 1: I've got three main more questions, and the first one has to do with the national coalition of black women. You've told us about the past. Where is the organization now, and what do you see the coalition doing (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, the challenge is now, which is back to the initial question that you asked, which I want to answer again. And that is that the problem is, with any group, they only bring to the table what they're used to. And what has plagued the 100 Black Women [National Coalition of 100 Black Women]--and we went through ten years where it wasn't plagued because I was such a tenacious, young, and energetic woman, and committed to leading as president [of the Coalition of 100 Black Women], but also challenged by a Ruth Mueller Hill years ago that the test of the organization's strength is my ability to move on, not to leave it, not, not to be--not to offer a voice of continuity, but to grow leadership and not to stifle. And the problem is that most not-for-profits don't have what corporations have. Corporations have quarterly sessions, whether they call them quarterly or not, where new techniques are shared, best practices are shared, where there's a continuity of themes and purposes, where principles of governance are reiterated and shared. And so at least four times a year, if not twice a year, there will be some kind of executive training offsite where corporate executives really are honed to stay on point. Not-for-profits in the main don't have that, so that for me to say that we were an advocacy organization to impact public policy about public and private sector access and opportunity for women of color, that we were about positioning women of color as a strong civil rights statement of accomplishment, if we are going to continue to develop role modeling programs to be used to influence public policy as feminist advocates, that concept ideologically exists on paper. But basically, after I stepped away and ran for the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and went out to stretch my wings to challenge the black community to embrace a feminist leader, or at least a woman that was clear about women's issues, we've had one, two, three, about five generations of leaders. And we basically have evolved into a safe club. And so I've got to recruit more people, put some juice behind it, and be back on the cutting edge. So we are alive and well in fifty-seven cities. We're alive and well with seven thousand women. We used to be ten [ten thousand], but that's all right. We are more reactive than proactive, and we are not setting them pace. We're walking shoulder to shoulder. So, my job is to try to reestablish the pacesetter (simultaneous). Story_ID: 587684 Speaker 1: You stated to me at the beginning that one of your mottos and your favorite phrase was that in order to be successful, you've got to be willing to be in the wrong place 90 percent of the time. Speaker 2: (Nods head). Speaker 1: Do you feel that that's the case for you? Have you been in the wrong place 90 percent of the time? Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: And how has that worked out? Speaker 2: That's how--why--I mean people say--if people look at my career and say, "How did she do all this?" I've had people say, until they meet me, oh, this is--can't be. Well, it certainly can be if you're in--90 percent of the time in the wrong place. And that really means--I'll tell you what my days used to be like, and I loved it. I don't want it to be like that today, but I, you know, I used to do three events in New York [New York] every night, not Saturday and Sunday. Gene McCabe [Jackson McCabe's second husband, Eugene L. McCabe] and I went to every movie, you know, and I had to watch him watch every sports thing. You know, I used to say if people sweat, he'd be watching it on TV, basketball, you know, football, blah, blah, blah. And he was my refuge, you know, and he also was a major teacher for me, and I had to be every place. And so what I did was this, and it's real simple, it is very simple. Most events in New York start at 5 and go to 7, 5:30 to 7:30, 6 to 8, 6:30 to 8:30, right? And the latest is 7 to 9. The reality is that most special interests, which New York is a hotbed of, have something going on every night. So every night, that's how I ended up being on the women's list, the black list, right? The business list. Every night there was a reception that was related to the Democratic Party about something. Somebody was about to run for office; somebody was, a, was challenging, you know, you know, pay toilets, 'cause women couldn't get into them; you know, somebody was doing something, right? Then there was the feminist cocktail parties, right, which tended to be white, and then there was the African American cocktail parties; now, interchangeable which one I went to. But I could very easily tell you that the Executive Leadership Council, for example, of African Americans, I would go to and not always do the first ha- hour or half hour (gesture), and then I would split, to the point I got to the last hour. So yeah, I was in the wrong place a lot of times. But when I got the call that, that, as I told you, from this--as I was walking into the wonderful, late, first black ambassador to Ghana, the handsome and Renaissance man, Franklin Thoma- I mean Franklin Williams--when I walked into the Phelps Stokes Fund to go--'cause I was on his board--and a young woman said to me--and I was twenty-nine, about to be thirty--that David Rockefeller's on the phone, I said, yeah, right, Daffy Duck. I figured some fool friend of mine was pulling my leg. No, it was David Rockefeller. Because what I do know, as an older person now, as I tell young people, people observe you, so always be aware that you are being observed. And if you have a consistent track record, whether you want to use--if this is too mi- Eastern in concept, karma does exist. What you put out there will come back. Story_ID: 587685 Speaker 1: What would you like your legacy to be? Speaker 2: Interesting. I was in a near fatal car accident in '98 [1998]. The policeman at the site--it was on Park Avenue and 72nd Street [New York, New York]. Three ambulances had to come. I had to have an eye put back in the socket, and the nest that holds the eye together reconstructed. I have a steel plate in my face on the left side. I am African American, and African Americans keloid. I have scars that were on my face that you don't--you cannot find. I ha- I was paralyzed on my right side for six months. They thought that I had torn the C5, C6, C7; the vertebrae in the back. I had an interesting--I would love to tell you, and I loved hearing Jon Corzine the other day say what I'm gonna say to you. I knew that it, this was for a purpose, but I didn't know what, and I still don't. But I know this: it was from that moment on I realized that if I didn't make a meeting it wouldn't be the end of the world. That didn't mean I was--became lazy. It was at that moment that I realized that everything that I have--and I knew this before, but I know it in a much more teaching sense of sharing of legacy. 'Cause I was learning before; I was being the student before. I had a much calmer sense of the ability to teach. It took me two years, as I had been advised it would, but I don't believe in anybody's timetable but mine. So, to me, if I was physically repaired within a twelve month period, which it was, you know, I was able to--I had physical therapy. I had someone live with me. For an independent woman like me to have to have somebody button my pants on my, you know, on my pants, 'cause I was wearing pantsuits before others, right? That somebody had to help me shower, it was--I think I used the words before about the strengths that my mother [Julia Hawkins Jackson] and [maternal] grandmother [Ercer Ricks] gave me of independence and my rejection, not intellectually and not of my heart and soul of the words humility because I am a humble person. But I don't like those words to be used as a, as manipulators for women, to force them to deny what they rightfully in a society--we're not living in huts some place. We haven't chosen to go off to some island. We live in a urban, progressive, the most progressive city, and the most progressive country. And black women have been the harbingers of the keepers of moral authority, the image of, of--when we talk about great women and we think of the modern voice of Barbara Jordan. She's just a metaphor. The voice is a metaphor. The spirit and the soul is a metaphor for what black women--the best of us, not the worst of us, not those that need to be embraced because they are crack addicts, need to be embraced and, and cleansed because they have been misguided, but the best of us, those of us that have withstood the insults of being invisible even when we are the best. Our responsibility is to share that, to brand that, to move that forward. So my accident, what it did for me is it humbled me, but it didn't break me, and in fact, it shored me up in a different way. And it's--I'm smiling because I have said to people, and they said, "Jewell, that is a, a hard thing to laugh about." But I get it. Since I was in a near fatal car accident, had two act--operations in forty-eight hours, and they thought they were gonna have to operate on my spine. They, you know, they weren't sure I was gonna be able to move. The cards and letters--they actually had to move me from one hospital room to another. And they couldn't close the door because I had so many flowers that they were, were--worried about the oxygen because flowers and plants take oxygen. And the range of letters from people who I didn't know were my buddies, that I didn't know realized--you know the women now all use their middle name, you know, my age women who now are using--I was always Jewell Jackson Ward or [HistoryMaker] Jewell Jackson McCabe--and the wonderful letters of praise from male or female--Peter Solomon [Peter J. Solomon] sent me a note that said, "Jewell, you are not a role model for black women. You're a role model for people; you're a role model for anybody." And that kind of thing I know, I know how I'm gonna be remembered. Story_ID: 587686 Speaker 1: I want to be remembered as somebody like Adam Clayton Powell [Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.]: that had a lot of style. You know, I--one of my fun alter ego, you know, people, Mae West. I think life should be lived in full Technicolor, but I think you've gotta work to earn it. I think you've got a responsibility. I don't care what color you are. Because I get back to whites, you know, that we're dealing with today, especially with the influx of Eastern Europeans, et al. You know, all of us have a responsibility to pay back, to strengthen, and to honor. Even though they were racist and slave owners, those people, the spirit of the [U.S.] Constitution, because this is, this is a, this is a multicultural test. Human nature is to separate. Those people who died to amend our Constitution, whether their heads being--you know, whether it be [HistoryMaker] John Lewis--thank god he's still with us--who's head was bloodied on the Edmund Pettus Bridge [Selma, Alabama], we have got a responsibility. So I want to be remembered when I'm ninety-five years old, maybe a hundred, either on St. James Island [sic. James Island, South Carolina], on the gorgeous islands of, of South Carolina coast, in the French Riviera, Italian Riviera, the old broad in the bikini and full makeup that has a sense of purpose, that may have touched some lives, that may have made a difference. Story_ID: 587687 Speaker 1: This was at The Pierre hotel [New York, New York] in the mid-'80s [1980s]. It was a picture a night that I was being honored by the Northside Center for child--the Northside Center for children's services [Northside Center for Child Development, New York, New York]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: The founder of the Northside Center was Dr. Mamie [Mamie Phipps Clark] and Dr. Kenneth Clark. They appear on the right and left. My dear husband, Eugene, Gene McCabe [Eugene L. McCabe], is to my right, actually. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Yeah, that's camera left. Speaker 1: Okay, camera left. And there I am. I am--it was a wonderful evening. And I was being honored the--I was given the Northside Center award for distinguished service. Speaker 2: This was a birthday party for Jewell [HistoryMaker Jewell Jackson McCabe]. My mother, who's from Baltimore, Maryland, and friends, and I had gone to the Crab Shack [ph.]. It's a restaurant that serves wonderful shellfish, specifically Maryland blues. And I am just sort of a sucker for shellfish and particularly Maryland blue crabs and lobsters and stuff. Speaker 1: I forgot to mention my mother's name, and this is she, Julia Jackson [Julia Hawkins Jackson]. This actually was a few years after her stroke, but she was still able to, to communicate and function even though she did have severe damage to her right side--and my godson, that is Topher, better known today as Christopher Williams. Speaker 2: We're in Chicago [Illinois] for a moment. This occasion, my father being inducted into the Radio Hall of Fame [National Radio Hall of Fame, Chicago, Illinois]. And that is my brother, the judge, Harold B. Jackson, Jr., and myself. Speaker 1: That is James D. Robinson, III, the chairman of American Express [American Express Company] in 1991 exiting the Waldorf Astoria [Waldorf Astoria New York, New York, New York] after he was recipient of the businessman of the year award for long term service to the NAACP Legal Defense Fund [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.]. Speaker 2: That is Sue Simmons to my right, who is still on WNBC-TV [New York, New York] with Chuck Scarborough, but started around about the time we see this picture, in 1979. We are lounging and sort of laidback at Ashford and Simpson's [Nick Ashford and HistoryMaker Valerie Simpson] Connecticut estate [Westport, Connecticut] at their annual white party. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: This is at the golf course at Saint Andrew's [Saint Andrew's Golf Club, Hastings-On-Hudson, New York]. It is a winning team. I have to admit that the men had one or two handicap. I do putt rather well. But it was a golf outing that was sponsored by the Japanese chamber of commerce and the New York City partnership [Partnership for New York City, New York, New York], and that was when I was on the board of the Partnership. Speaker 1: This is the team, the couple, the, the younger brother and sister that I have adopted. This is Christopher J. Williams [HistoryMaker Christopher Williams], Janice Savin Williams, and the little tot in the center is Jilliam Williams. And the young man is Christopher Williams, who you saw earlier. Those are both my godchildren. And Chris and Janice work together. He is the CEO and founder of Williams Capital Group [Williams Capital Group, L.P.]. Speaker 2: This was at a lavish, wonderful dinner at the Guggenheim Museum [Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, New York, New York], in tribute to the opening of the Africa, the continent exhibit, where part of our program had my friend, Bryant Gumbel, as the host of the evening. And that is Sharon Switzer [ph.] and myself. Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: This was my fiftieth birthday luncheon. I celebrated turning fifty the entire month of August. But that's Janice Savin Williams, who is a, a vice president at Williams Capital Management [Williams Capital Management, LLC], and my dear adviser, counsel, friend, author, historian, and the head of women's studies and for a period of time African American studies at Smith College [Northampton, Massachusetts], Paula Giddings, the author of 'When and Where I Enter: The Impact of African American Women on Race and Sex in America' [sic. 'When and Where I Enter: The Impact of Black Women on Race and Sex in America'].' Speaker 1: This is a Rainbow Room celebration of my father's ninetieth birthday. We're at the Rainbow Room [New York, New York] celebrating him. And all of the people involved were members of not only the entertaining performing industry, but broadcast. Dr. Bob Lee, one of the deejays, is to my right, and he is known for his back to school initiatives and his stay in school initiatives. But I'm with my dad, the dean of broadcasting, Harold B. Jackson. Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Hal Jackson, the dean of broadcasting, the first black broadcaster in America, starting in 1934, this is backstage offside of the Apollo Theater [New York, New York], quite honestly, at one of his Talented Teen [Hal Jackson's Talented Teens] activities, where I was the, one of the judges. And clearly, we have a little similarity; we look something alike. Speaker 1: This was at the Temple of Dendur [at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, New York]. This was actually 1983. That's the chairman of American Express, Jim Robinson, Ida Schmertz, who had been the associate director for women's programs for Hugh Carey. And that's Dr. Benjamin Hooks [HistoryMaker Reverend Benjamin Hooks] to my left. And I'm wearing a quite exquisite Bill Blass original. Speaker 2: That is the Temple of Dendur, and that is around 19--I'd say 1990. [HistoryMaker] Maya Angelou was the, the host of the Candace Awards for the last five years of its ten year history. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: This is actually the 21 Club [New York, New York] when I had organized a fundraiser for Reverend Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] when he was running for president of the United States, and we raised quite a bit of money. And it was quite a breakthrough for him to be on the main floor and raising close to a quarter of a million dollars around a table of ten. Speaker 1: This is the fiftieth anni- fiftieth birthday of the designer and the baroness of good taste, Carolyne Roehm. And to her right is the famous, extraordinary designer, Bill Blass. And to her left was her friend at the time, Ed Rollins, who had been campaign manager to Ronald Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan]. And the other young gentleman to Ed's left, seated on the floor with I believe my leg across his knee is the decorator of the A list, David Mann. The women represent all of the women who do lunch, socialites, philanthropists. There's Nan Kempner that we're going by, who's now left us. So many notable socialites. Speaker 2: I was the--we were in the--you know, David Rockefeller's Pocantico Hills [Mount Pleasant, New York], where they had laid a dance floor over the indoor swimming pool to celebrate his daughter, Peggy Dulany's birthday. So that is my dear, dear mentor and friend, and the chairman, not only of Chase [Chase Manhattan Bank; JPMorgan Chase and Co.], but the founding chairman of the New York City partnership. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: This is-- Speaker 1: Oh, I'm sorry. Speaker 2: This is the foursome. We are the co-chairs of the 100 Women Against Child Abuse, a charity event that I started in alliance with these other three women six years ago. There's Carolyne Roehm, the designer, decorator; there is Michele Herbert, who is a benefactor and a devotee of ballet, former ballet dancer, but she and her husband [Larry Herbert] are major fundraisers and philanthropists for the American Ballet Theatre; myself, and my partner is Katie Jacobs Robinson. She and I have a small production company where we're developing properties for tween girls. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: This is the blended Steinberg family. You have Holden [Holden Steinberg], and Laura [Laura Steinberg Broumand], and Saul Steinberg, and Gayfryd [Gayfryd Steinberg] and her son, Rayne [Rayne Steinberg], and Nicholas [Nicholas Steinberg], and you have Jono Steinberg [Jonathan Steinberg] who is married to Maria Bartiromo, and the money, honey. Speaker 1: This is an awards presentation. Vernon Jordan [HistoryMaker Vernon E. Jordan, Jr.] was being honored in 1997 at the--by the Manhattan Urban League [New York Urban League], and this was at the New York Hilton hotel [New York Hilton Midtown, New York, New York]. Speaker 2: Neculai [Neculai Burghelea]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Yes? Speaker 2: I didn't mention that that was my husband there. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Go ahead. Speaker 2: I am toget- because we were separated at that point and divorced. This is the year before he died. I said this is an occasion where Vernon Jordan was being honored by the New York Urban League at the New York Hilton hotel. Gene McCabe and I are there to pay tribute to the great Vernon Jordan...