 Story_ID: 80091 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe and I'm the producer and interviewer for The HistoryMakers for this particular interview. Scott Stearns is our videographer and could you please state your name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Yes, I am Frances Taylor Matlock of Chicago [Illinois], and my background, born in Chicago and my mother [Ednah Victoria Bundy Taylor] had eight children. I am the second of the eight and the last of the eight. Speaker 1: Okay, could you spell your name for us? Speaker 2: Yes, my name is spelled F-R-A-N-C-E-S. All my life I've had to fight that C-I-S, mixing me up with the boys and so it's Frances Moseley--oh, of course, it used to be Moseley. It's Frances Taylor, T-A-Y-L-O-R, Matlock, M-A-T-L-O-C-K. Speaker 1: All right. Can you give us your date of birth? Speaker 2: Yes, January the 6th, 1907. Speaker 1: Okay, can you give us today's date? Speaker 2: Yes, the--pardon? Speaker 1: Today's date? Speaker 2: I didn't get that. Speaker 1: Today's date? Speaker 2: Oh, today's date. Today--oh, June the 3rd. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Right? Speaker 1: Yes, 2002. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: And, where are we? What's the address of the home? Speaker 2: My address? Speaker 1: Yes, ma'am. Speaker 2: Four four two (442) Oglesby Avenue. We just moved out in the suburbs three weeks ago. Speaker 1: That's Calumet City, Illinois? Speaker 2: Yes, Calumet City. Speaker 1: All right, okay now. We have some--oh, I'm sorry, and your occupation? Speaker 2: My occupation? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Oh, my profession--I'm a teacher. I'm a teacher specializing in Social Studies, that's why I've had so many of the international. I've had Haitians, Jamaicans, people all come to my classroom and dance. I've had them do the--I remember the dancer who gave us the hat dance, Carlos Aguilar of Cuba, and he danced a hat dance that he had--he had this shawl, this serape, and my kids were just fascinated with him. They loved to meet these people from abroad. And one of the things that I remember was when I had an Ethiopian visitor and he wrote on the blackboard. I asked him, would you please write something on the blackboard in your writing and the Amharic--it looked like Jewish writing, and they let them see your writing, your handwriting, how different it is from ours. And the kids were so thrilled when they saw that language looking so different from theirs and do you know they would not let me erase the board. They wanted--no, "leave it on the board. Leave it on." So I kept it on there about a week and then it got rubbed off, you know, kind of messy. But the children were just fascinated with these international visitors. Story_ID: 80092 Speaker 1: Okay, now, we have--I've got about five or six questions that just require a short answer but they're, they're kind of like "People Magazine" questions that we always ask. So, you know, they're--they just require a very short answer. Ms. Matlock, what's your favorite food? Speaker 2: My favorite, what? Speaker 1: Food. Speaker 2: Food. Oh, I hadn't thought of that. My favorite food. You mean, dessert or meat? Speaker 1: Any kind of food. Speaker 2: Any kind? Well, I wasn't prepared for that. Of course I like ice cream, chocolate. I'm a chocoholic. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But, chicken, of course. Steak, those are the usual things. Speaker 1: Okay, now, Ms. Matlock, what's your favorite time of year? What's your favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Oh, I guess Spring. I think springtime. Speaker 1: Okay, what's your favorite color? Speaker 2: Turquoise. Speaker 1: And, what's your favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Vacation? Well, I've gone so often, I guess it would be Jamaica. Yes, I have some very dear friends there. Speaker 1: Okay, now, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: A phrase? Speaker 1: Or saying? Yes, favorite saying? Speaker 2: Or favorite saying? I used to have one if I could remember it. A favorite expression. At the moment I can't put it together. Oh, dear, and I love that expression. Speaker 1: Well, we can come back to it. Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: We can come back to it if you think of it later. Speaker 2: All right, okay. Speaker 1: No problem. Story_ID: 80093 Speaker 1: Now, can you please give us your parents' names and the names of your brothers and sisters in birth order? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: Right, and spell them if you can, please? Speaker 2: My father was Creed, C-R-E-E-D, Creed Anderson Taylor. Speaker 1: Okay, and your mother? Speaker 2: He was born in Pleasant Hill, Missouri. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's a suburb of Kansas City. Speaker 1: Okay, and your mother's name? Speaker 2: And my mother was Ednah Victoria Bundy, B-U-N-D-Y. Speaker 1: And how do you spell Ednah? Speaker 2: Bundy? Speaker 1: No, Ednah? Speaker 2: Oh, Ednah, E-D-N-A-H. She put an "H" on her name and my sister was Edna, too, but she didn't use an "H". Speaker 1: And the names of your brothers and sisters in birth order? Speaker 2: Ah, yes, my older brother was Jerome, then Paul, then Raleigh, and Warren, and Marshall. My five brothers, and I had two sisters, Edna, E-D-N-A, Edna and, oh, Sylvia, Sylvia Marguerite Taylor. Story_ID: 80094 Speaker 1: All right, well, tell us something about your parents, you know, where were they from and when did they meet? Speaker 2: My parents? Speaker 1: Uh-hum. Speaker 2: I've never--I've never asked them. My father [Creed Anderson Taylor] wasn't that romantic type so maybe that's why I didn't but I don't remember. Speaker 1: Okay, so they didn't have a story about where they met or--or when they met? Speaker 2: I'm so sorry. Speaker 1: They didn't pass down a story about where they met or when they met to you, at all? Speaker 2: Oh, no, they never--they weren't ro--he wasn't romantic. My mother [Ednah Victoria Bundy Taylor] had all the charm and the--outgoing. She had all of that but he was more aloof. He wasn't the "Papa"--he was not the "Daddy" type, he was the Papa type. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And we had to walk a chalk line and we had to, you know, follow his planning but he never was--we never sat on his lap, never, but eight children, he, in his way, I think he loved us. He was a--he had a passion for education, both of my parents. "You must go to school. You must not be absent. You must be this and you must be-" so that both of them saw to it that we were given a good education. That's for sure. But he was not--he was aloof. He was a barber. He had his barbershop in Maywood. Speaker 1: Now, he was from Missouri, you say? Speaker 2: He was--yes, he was from Pleasant Hill, a small town in Missouri, yes. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: He had three brothers. There were four Taylor men, four of them, but my mother had an ad--she made up for his being so aloof. She made up for it by being so full of vision and all that sort of thing and wanting us to have to know the best. Now I was--I would like to mention, and your question, you asked if I could recommend anybody else that I thought would be colorful and should be included in the history of this collection of this type and I mention Nathan Penn, the internationalist. Nobody can match him in Chicago [Illinois] and he's a wonderful speaker too but--have you ever heard of Bertha Moseley Lewis? Speaker 1: Yes, but, I would prefer probably to talk about them towards the end of the interview-- Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Speaker 1: --rather than in the beginning-- Speaker 2: All right, okay. Speaker 1: --because I want to really have some continuity about your childhood-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --you know, right now-- Speaker 2: You're right, right. Speaker 1: --and you're here. Speaker 2: I didn't--I just wanted to be sure and-- Speaker 1: We'll get back to them. Speaker 2: Yeah, okay. Story_ID: 80095 Speaker 1: But, can, can you tell us about your mother [Ednah Victoria Bundy Taylor], then, some more about your mother and your father? Was your mother born here in Chicago [Illinois] or was she born someplace else? Speaker 2: Yes, she was born here and her mother [Lydia Baird Bundy] was also well (unclear), I inherit my civic work from her and her mother. My grandmother, her mother, was very active. In fact, she was on the board of the group that founded Provident Hospital, the original old Provident Hospital. She was involved in that. Speaker 1: This is your mother or your grandmother? Speaker 2: My grandmother. Speaker 1: Your grandmother, okay. Speaker 2: And then my mother came along with other things. She was involved in that. I have my things that I'm involved in, or was, I'm not active now but people call me all the time for information about this. Could I give them that from my papers--from my pictures. You know, people call me so I'm still active in that sense but not running around and--like I used to. Speaker 1: Now, can you give us your grandmother's name and the spelling of her name? Speaker 2: Yes, her name was Lydia Baird, B-A-I-R-D, Bundy, B-U-N-D-Y. Speaker 1: What was her occupation? Speaker 2: Women back in those days didn't work. My grand--she didn't work but she was a, what do you call it, a nurse. She took care of mothers with babies--having babies. Speaker 1: A midwife? Speaker 2: Midwife, that's--yes, she was a midwife and, in fact, she was well-thought of in the neighborhood and one, this might be interesting. My name is Ruth Frances Taylor because I was named after a young--a girl named Ruth who was left with my grandmother when she was a little girl about four years old, four or five, and she--her--and she was--her mother came to my grandmother, who was an avid churchwoman, religious, all of them were, and she came and asked my mother--my grandmother, to take her little girl and keep her. She--I'll come pick her up later. She was a young white lady from the West Side, living in a black neighborhood. And so she asked could she leave her little girl because my grandmother was fair and so it didn't seem out of order. So she went and never came back. Left the little girl with my grandmother and I am named after her. Her name was Ruth, this little girl, and so I'm Ruth Frances Taylor, named for that little Ruth. But the mother never came to get the little girl. She just left her there. Dumped her. So she was probably an unwed mother. I don't know, but that--that origin of my name, Ruth, but they had never called me--they call me Frances, Ruth Frances, by my middle name. Story_ID: 80096 Speaker 1: Okay, can you tell me about the West Side [Chicago, Illinois] when you were growing up and then I mean, what about your childhood. I know you grew up first on the West Side and then you moved to Maywood [Illinois], right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Tell us something about that? Speaker 2: Came up-- Speaker 1: What--what things were like? What life was like then, I guess, on the West Side and then Maywood (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Well, it was a nice area. We lived on Lake Street. The "L" ran overhead and we lived near Lake and Robey [Street, now Damen Avenue], if you know where that is. And we went to old Emerson [Elementary] School, the Emerson School on the West Side and we, let's see, I can't recall any other particular thing but I remember the "L" going overhead, the elevated going overhead, and oh, the horse-drawn streetcars. Yes, the horses pulled--yes, the streetcars. Speaker 1: When did--do you remember when they became motorized? Speaker 2: No, I wouldn't remember that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But we had moved to Maywood by then. You see, we were out West so that would account for not being aware of that history. My mother would have known. Speaker 1: So you moved to Maywood in 1912? Speaker 2: Nineteen twelve [1912]. Speaker 1: Why did your family move to Maywood, do you know? Speaker 2: Moved-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --to Maywood? Speaker 1: Yeah, why do you think they moved to Maywood? Speaker 2: I guess to get a better background for their children to live in. Two other families had--from the West Side had already moved to Maywood and they loved it and they wrote my mother, "Come on out, the water's fine, you know, come on in, it's lovely out here." And so they--my father [Creed Anderson Taylor] and mother [Ednah Victoria Bundy Taylor] talked it over and they joined their friends living in Maywood. Speaker 1: Now-- Speaker 2: So that accounted for- Story_ID: 80097 Speaker 1: Now, how was Maywood [Illinois] different from Chicago [Illinois]? Was it different? Speaker 2: From Chicago? Speaker 1: Uh-hum. Speaker 2: Oh, yes, I should say so. Chicago didn't have the beauty that the suburbs had. I can remember the day we moved--the day we left Chicago and moved to Maywood. We transferred from the bus--from the streetcar, streetcars in those days, at the corner of St. Charles and Fifth Avenue, the main part of town, and we had to transfer from one thing to another and while we were there waiting, a little girl near us, waiting also, dropped a bottle of pop on the sidewalk, right in front of the bank there, and there it was that red pop all over the sidewalk. I can see it now, that red pop on the sidewalk and we saw the catalpa trees. We looked right across the Maywood Park, right across the street was the park, which is still there, and the effects of the beauty of the park and the catalpa trees that I mentioned a while ago, they--those little fingers, they look like fingers, and the children loved to put them on their fingers and play with those and pretend that they're something else. But, it was an ideal place to raise children. Never any crime. You could play--we used to play even at midnight. We'd play "run-sheep-run" out in the alley behind our house, in the dark, no light, and my mother [Ednah Victoria Bundy Taylor] would be--and her friend would be sitting on the porch while we would be out there and that "run-sheep-run", playing that game, and also we may--we really made the most of--and we had a wonderful school, wonderful teachers. We had those charming well-trained little Irish teachers and they were just as nice to us as they could be. We had no trouble with race, at all, not until we got to high school, we had some of it but not in grammar school. It was--it was just ideal. We were happy and we were in a Jewish neighborhood. We lived in a Jewish area and the food was--we--today, I like some of the Jewish food like Halvah, that Jewish candy, that they call "Halvah," and other things. Red, what was it, red herring, and things like that that we got to know the Jewish culture and we played with the Jewish kids and had a wonderful time. Had no problem with the racial mixture or anything like that. Story_ID: 80098 Speaker 1: Now, your mother [Ednah Victoria Bundy Taylor] was very active, you-- Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: Can you tell us about some of the things your mother would expose you all to as you were being raised? Speaker 2: Well, she was one of the--she was one of the founders of the Maywood and Oak Park Women's Improvement Club. There's a civic club and she was always in with the leadership of--and she was secretary. Everything she belonged to, they made her a secretary. She was always writing and able to lead. You see, she had come from Chicago well-educated. A lot of people from there came from out-of-town, smaller towns, but she came from--from Chicago. See, she was born in Chicago so therefore she wasn't a country hick type so that's why she, I think, had more outgoing personality and wanted us to have. Now her mother was one of the members of the board that founded old Provident Hospital. My grandmother was one of the women active in that movement to set up the hospital. Speaker 1: And she was a midwife, right, you said before? Speaker 2: Yes, she was a midwife, my grandmother. She was a lovely little lady, very religious. Story_ID: 80099 Speaker 1: In the survey you mentioned that your mother took you to the wreck of the [SS] Eastland, the boat that capsized in the Chicago River [in 1915]? She took you all downtown to see the wreck of the Eastland? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Yes, could you talk about that? Speaker 2: Oh, yes, we were fascinated at that boat. It looked like a great big alligator turned over on its side. The people who were--it was a sightseeing boat and the boat was supposed to go out into the Lake Michigan. You go down the river and then turn over east into the river and so that we--the people who came to say goodbye and wave at them, they were too heavy for the boat. They leaned over and waved and they all rushed to the rail and that put too much weight on the whole boat, too much weight on that one side, so that's what made it tip over. It turned over very slowly and there it lay, shining, just like an alligator and-- Speaker 1: Were a lot of people hurt, you know? Speaker 2: Oh, yes, people were killed. A lot of them were drowned 'cause they were caught under the--under the side of the water, where the water was. They were caught underneath that water. So that's--I have a story in my--okay, in my papers here I have these stories. I brought them just in case you might want to see them. Yeah, I have that. Speaker 1: Yeah, about what year was that? Do you remember what year that was? Speaker 2: I can't remember it but I have it in my case there, in my stack of papers. [1915] Speaker 1: Yes, that's pretty well-known. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 80100 Speaker 1: What other things did your mother [Ednah Victoria Bundy Taylor] expose you to when you were a child? Speaker 2: My mother? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: What other did she-- Speaker 1: What other types of things did she expose you to? Speaker 2: Parades, parades, parades. We saw every parade that they--May the 30th, Decoration Day, we called it back in those days [now Memorial Day], Decoration Day and we--my mother took us to see all of them. We would be leaving home early and get downtown and sit down in front of the Art Institute [of Chicago, Illinois] and sit on the curb and watch until the parade started. We'd be running out there to look and see if the parade started. The parade was coming across Michigan Avenue, you know, coming down. So it finally got started and we were just so happy. And once I had an experience, we were right there--we were there at Adams--Adams and Michigan, and I went across the street. My mother let me--the street was empty. We were the only one's on Michigan Avenue. We were the first one's there to see the parade. So my mother let us--let me go across the street and wonder around the glass--that Peoples Gas, I think, building is there today. And so I went--I turned the corner and then the glass cut in, you know how that--where the door is, it's inside and so we saw the--we were out of sight of my mother. We had turned the corner into that glass lobby, where the door was. So along the street came a man, with a gray suit, and he had a box in his hand and he was coming down Adams towards us, toward me. I was alone. My sisters did not come with me across the street. I was alone, wondering, looking at--in the window. And this man saw this little colored girl and he wondered, what's she doing down here by herself? He didn't see my mother on the others--they were around the corner. So, you know, that man stopped and asked me who I was, very kind, and he put that box of candy in my hand, gave it to me, and then he kept on walking. He gave me that box of candy and, oh, I was so thrilled. I ran across the street and showed it to my mother. "The man gave me this, the man gave me that" and there it was. He was so kind. I've often wished I could have thanked him for being so nice like that, for being so helpful and wanted to be kind to this little colored girl. I wonder who he was. I've often wondered. Story_ID: 80101 Speaker 1: And the same thing is true, there's a doctor that I owe a lot to. We lived near Ashland at that--oh, what's the name of that hospital? I'll have to remember that. Speaker 2: Mary Thompson [Hospital]? Speaker 1: That's it. How did you remember? Speaker 2: I don't know. Speaker 1: That was it, Mary Thompson Hospital, and we used to--my mother [Ednah Victoria Bundy Taylor] would take us for a walk in the park, Union Park was right there, right by the building, and so we would walk around by Union Park and one day we were on the streetcar and a little fella jumped up from across the aisle from us where we were seated and this--like a streetcar, and he said, "That's the very child," shaking his finger at me, "that's the very child I want. That's the child I want." He said, "I have wondered why you didn't have sense enough to bring her in to me, in my hospital, and let me take care of her legs." I was bowed legged in one leg and knock-kneed in the other. So my body was rocking, both legs going the same way. Story_ID: 80102 Speaker 1: Okay, Ms. Matlock, we're rolling again and you were talking about the doctor at Mary Thompson Hospital, that stopped your mother [Ednah Victoria Bundy Taylor] and referred to something that he could do to help your legs, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, what happened? Speaker 2: And so the next morning my mother and I were in the hospital early in the morning, at eight o'clock and they had laid me on a bed and then the doctor and my mother went into conference and they talked it over, what they were going to--what he was going to do, and what not, and the next thing I knew--the next few days, I was back in the hospital and having the time of my life in the hospital. Kids enjoy hospitals. They have these play things, you know, for the children, and they have visitors coming in to--clowns coming in to entertain them, and all that good stuff. And I enjoyed being there. And I remember the doctor and my mother didn't want me to have any candy but they--they found me some candy anyway. My aunt came to visit me and she felt sorry for me, like a young aunt, you know, so she slipped me some candy to--without my mother knowing it. And so I enjoyed that candy and I learned to take a--cold milk and bread and butter, I mean bread and butter, kind of that butter that's so heavy, it's so, what should I say, well the butter is hard, you know, and I learned to drink the cold milk and bread and butter and that my mother couldn't--and when I got home, she said, where did you learn that, to eat that--to drink that milk and stuff? And I said, well, I enjoyed it in the hospital. I used to be the--I was the captain of the line, marching in to have breakfast. I would shake the bell and they'd all follow me, marching in and marching out. Now, kids enjoy hospitals but there was one very bad young fella. I was about--I was about five when I had this operation and this little kid was about eight, I guess. He took my candy from me. I was lying in bed all strapped down, you know, crippled up, and I couldn't walk. I was just--I just had the operation and so I was able to--I was not able to do anything about walking so I couldn't defend myself. I was strapped down in the bed. So the--this little boy came along and we had all been given popcorn bags for Christmas, candy and stuff, and this man--this boy leaned over me and took my bag of popcorn and ran off and ate my popcorn and that broke my heart, of course, that he would take away my candy and my popcorn. But it was really heartbreaking to have--when you're lying there helpless, in cast, from your toes up to your neck. I couldn't move and here this kid comes and takes my candy and eats it, right in front of me, laughing. It was a joke to him but heartbreaking to me. And I remember that unhappy--but that was the only thing, but the other stuff, I loved that hospital. They had things for the children, entertainment, and the kids had a good time. Speaker 1: Do you remember the name of your doctor? Speaker 2: No, I wish I did. I wish--I have often wished I knew the name of that doctor. I should have looked it up and I would liked to have--if I had any money, endow the hospital, you know, give some money to the hospital in my name, to thank him for the good life he gave me 'cause I can see if I had not had his attention, I might be crippled today. Speaker 1: So, he did a good job? Speaker 2: Uh-huh, so I think so. Speaker 1: Have you ever had any trouble with your legs since that time, I mean-- Speaker 2: No, uh-uh, I have--I've been very healthy. I have outlived four doctors. I've lived longer than any of them, my own doctors have, so that I've just enjoyed a good healthy life and I've just now, at this late stage, feeling what it is to be sick and feeling my shoulder is out of whack. I've had some falls and I've had a burn trying to fix breakfast and dumped a pot--a pan of--a frying pan of hot water on my thigh and that burned. So that's just recently, just this past two years, I've had these burns and falls so I guess I'm lucky to have had only those few incidents. Story_ID: 80103 Speaker 1: Okay, let's go back again to-- Speaker 2: Can't hear-- Speaker 1: --and those excursions. I think you mentioned at one point that she took you to parades and-- Speaker 2: No, I didn't quite hear that. Speaker 1: You mentioned earlier that your mother [Ednah Victoria Bundy Taylor] took you to parades downtown. Speaker 2: Oh, yes, yes. Speaker 1: And one of your favorite musicians was James [Reese] Europe--Jim Europe-- Speaker 2: Oh, yes, that famous--he was Irene Castle's musician. No, she was--she and her husband, Vernon Castle, were world famous dancers and they danced all around the world and Irene Castle hired Jim Europe and his band to play while--to play for them and they danced around the world and so that they--what should I say, oh, the band was also a marching band--a marching band and a dancing band so that they were versatile and the day that I spoke about when he came to visit Chicago [Illinois] and came strutting down Michigan Avenue, and I mean "strut", the way he crosses his feet, I can see it today. His feet were crossing like those Lipizzaner horses and he went forward and sideways at the same time and with all that big tall baton and that tall shako with the strap under the chin and then with the epaulettes on the shoulder, the gold, shiny gold--shiny on the white suit but most of all that fascinated me was the high boots that he wore. He wore high boots. The band didn't wear them but he wore them. His uniform stood out and he had high heels, that high, French heels, just like the women wear and he was--he wore those to march down Michigan Avenue and strut. He didn't march, he strutted, like this back and forth, sideways, great guy, but I never did know when he passed [1919]. Speaker 1: Yeah, I'm not sure. Speaker 2: Yes, I wonder if he had any children but I never heard or read anything about him, that's why I just wondered about him. But you said you had heard about-- Speaker 1: Talking to a musician in Harlem [New York]. Speaker 2: --a book of it then. Well, that's good. I'm glad to know that. Story_ID: 80104 Speaker 1: Well tell--tell me about what kind of a student you were and what, you know, some stories from school, you know? Speaker 2: I was pretty good. My father [Creed Anderson Taylor] wouldn't have allowed anything else but being good. Both my parents were education minded and we better bring home that good report card. In fact, my father had his own barbershop but he also worked in the barbershop uptown where the mayor and all the big shots had their hair cut and had their shoe shined and Mr. Sego, oh my goodness, how could I remember that name? Sego, S-E-G-O, he was the one who had the--had the shop there and, there I go again, forgetting what I was saying. Speaker 1: You were talking about Mr. Sego and the barbershop that served the mayor-- Speaker 2: Oh, yes, yes. Speaker 1: --and all the big-time politicians. Speaker 2: Right, right, and my father was a spic and span people, never a drop of anything on his clothes--his clothes--his shoes were shined. So he--he was very careful about being dressed up and shined his shoes and all that stuff. So he--he took a, wait, oh, boy, this is so annoying to all of a sudden you can't recall some simple thing like this. Speaker 1: You were talking about the barbershop and-- Speaker 2: Uh, yes, now I hope I don't forget it again. He used to--he was so proud of our report cards. They were good report cards. They better be good. He would have us bring our report cards on report card day, bring them up to the barbershop, uptown where he worked, on Fifth Avenue, and show--show off, see my daughter, my daughter, see her report card, my daughters are this and my daughters are that, proud of us. Now that's how we knew he loved us because he would ask us, you know, to bring our report cards and show that we were smart but other than that, we got no attention from him, personally. I've often--once when we were grown, and I was married and living in Chicago [Illinois], he came to see me, once, and I said, "Why were you so mean to us when we were children? And why were you so, you know, aloof?" "Well, look what I made of you, daughter. Look what I made of you" (laughter). He took all the credit. My mother's [Ednah Victoria Bundy Taylor] the one that did it but he took the credit for having drilled us and drilled us and made us what we are and made us go to college and made us go here and made--he didn't make us because we wanted to go, but he really had that--he really thought he had done something to help us. I guess he did. He gave me one dollar, no, a dollar and a half, every morning, it was on the kitchen table, when I was going to college. He would give me money, car fare, to go to college and I worked my way through college [Chicago Normal School, now Chicago State University in Illinois]. Story_ID: 80105 Speaker 1: I worked in Oak Park [Illinois] where the wealthy white people lived and I had to travel all the way. In the morning I left home at six o'clock. I went all the way downtown, transferred from the "L" to another bus, to a streetcar, to the "L", crossed the "L", down Van Buren, run across steps, and go to school and at three o'clock when school was out, this is talking about teacher's college [Chicago Normal School, now Chicago State University in Illinois], went--at three o'clock, when it was over, and I was going home, I had to stop off at my job, this work I was doing. So I would ride out to River Forest, get off the streetcar, go into the Dr. Conger's home, lovely white people, and work for them, cook their dinner, wash the dishes and then go home and study. I didn't get home at night till nine o'clock, 9:30. Speaker 2: It sounds tough. Speaker 1: And that's what I--that's what I paid--the price I paid to go to college. I had to work my way through. My father wasn't poor but he had eight children and we wanted to be independent so we just went on and my sister had--worked for the same family, then my younger sister, worked for the same family. They liked us because we spoke good English, they said, and they wanted us to be--they had two boys and they didn't want any bad English in the house and they liked our speech. Speaker 2: So these are the Congers? Speaker 1: Yes, Conger, Dr. Guy Park Conger. Speaker 2: How do you spell-- Speaker 1: I remember his name after all these years. Speaker 2: How do you spell that name? Speaker 1: G-U-Y, Guy, Park, P-A-R-K, Conger, C-O-N-G-E-R, Conger. So, that took a lot out of me when I finished and graduated, I was skin and bones. I lost so much weight from working hard, you know, and all that leaving in the morning at six o'clock and getting home at night at 9:30, that was a strenuous thing for a kid to have. Speaker 2: You lived at home when you went to college? Speaker 1: Oh, yes, I lived at home, yes. Story_ID: 80106 Speaker 1: Well I--but we had a lovely--we had in college--in high school [Proviso East High School], we had a little trouble in inter-racial, you know, relation with the children. Speaker 2: What happened? Speaker 1: Well, we would have assembly every Friday, assembly, and we would have to--we would have speakers. Sometimes outside men would come in to speak and they would use the "N" word. They would crack a joke and use the word "nigger" and we would--we resented that. My mother--I would go home and tell my mother [Ednah Victoria Bundy Taylor] "We had a speaker today and he said so and so." My mother said, "What"? She was a one woman NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. The next morning my mother, as fair as she was, she looked like white, but as fair as she was, she marched down that high school, was in the principal's office when he got there, and "What about this, tell me about this, what happened? How did you happen to say so and so. How could you let this speaker come in and insult our children and crack jokes like that?" So they--the principal was always very gracious. He would apologize and say the right thing but we were very, very aware that we had to be on the lookout when we had a speaker, a guest speaker. We had to be, you know, on the defense but my mother always went down there. She was the only mother who went down to fight the battle for all the colored kids but she was there. That's why I say she has such a vision. She knew what to do in those situations but-- Speaker 2: How many colored kids were in school? Speaker 1: Huh? Speaker 2: How many black children were in school? How many colored kids were there? Speaker 1: There were only nine when I was there. Speaker 2: Out of how many? Speaker 1: Huh? Speaker 2: Out of how many students? Speaker 1: I'm so sorry. Speaker 2: Out of how many students? Speaker 1: Oh, about 300, about 300, I guess. Speaker 2: And what school is this again? This is-- Speaker 1: This was Proviso High School. Today it's called Proviso East because they've got two high schools, East and West, but back in those days they only had one so it was called Proviso High School but we had--we had some--some great times and some sad times. There's something else I was trying to recall but I haven't as yet. Story_ID: 80107 Speaker 1: Can you remember any of your--any teachers that were important to you who may have mentored you or guided you when you were in school, in high school or college? Speaker 2: Well, this lady I spoke about, who gave me the youth council, the one who I inherited those young people from her, she was wonderful. She was a civic leader. She was at one time the national president of the Delta Sigma Theta Sorority. Speaker 1: Now this is after you started teaching, right? Speaker 2: Uh-- Speaker 1: You're talking about somebody--a colleague of yours right now, right? Speaker 2: Uh-- Speaker 1: I was asking you about when you were in high school or grade school? Speaker 2: When I was in high school? Speaker 1: Yeah-- Speaker 2: Oh, when I was in high school. Speaker 1: Yeah, who your mentors were-- Speaker 2: Oh, I see. Speaker 1: --in school, yes? Speaker 2: Well, there was a Ms. [Florence] Scott--a Ms. Scott who befriended me. She was sensitive to our being sensitive and she took me when they had dinners--when they had a mother and daughter dinner once and you had--and each teacher chose a student to bring as their daughter and so I was asked--Mrs. Scott asked me to be her daughter 'cause she knew I'd have trouble, you know, getting any other mother to take me to the dinner, so that I enjoyed that. And they also--and we had trouble--let's see what was the other- Story_ID: 80108 Speaker 1: Oh, the worst situation of all was a boy who lived right across the street from school and his sister, Caroline, Caroline Smith, was the most popular girl in the school. She was, she was blond and blue-eyed and everybody loved her. Everybody just admired her and the day that she came in to school to register as a freshman, all the kids-"Oh, here comes Caroline, here comes Caroline. Caroline was this and Caroline was that." Everybody loved her and I heard about her but she didn't come until about the third day and I wanted to see who she was. Well, anyway, when I saw her, I could see everybody did love her but when we went to gym, I was in the gym class with her, and we took up dancing, we volunteered, we didn't have to, but we volunteered to learn dancing. And we did our little one, two three, one, two, three, one, two, three, and then about the third day, it was time to change to get partners and dance together. Well, you know what happened to me? I had nobody to dance with and I surely wasn't going to ask anybody to be my partner and they weren't going to ask me to be their partner. So there I stood. The other girls all had partners, standing there, waiting to start the dance and I stood there without a partner. My arms were empty and I was just agonized just--at that age, you know, you're sensitive to anything that goes wrong and I didn't know what to do. I hadn't thought about having to get a partner. That didn't dawn on me. All I thought about was learning how to dance but learning how to dance meant you had to have a white--a partner and it could not be a white person, of course, not in those days. So, I just stood there but suddenly, who came to my rescue? Beautiful, blue-eyed, blond, Caroline Smith. Caroline dropped her friend's hands and walked across the gym to me and asked me to be her partner. Now that child--the teacher didn't do it. The teacher should have done it. Should have saved my agonizing embarrassment but the teacher--but the teacher just stood there and--but Caroline came to the rescue and "would you be my partner?" She was so sweet and the incident was over, okay. The music went on and we all, from then on, all of Caroline's friends came to--one by one--she set the pattern and her friends came to me, one by one, and saw to it that I was involved in every dance, I had a partner, so that I didn't have to worry about that agonizing embarrassment any more. Story_ID: 80109 Speaker 1: But what happened, her brother was just the opposite. He was just the opposite of what she was. He--the teacher, when she was out of town at a teacher's meeting and she left the class in charge of Caroline's brother and-- Speaker 2: She left the classroom, okay. Speaker 1: Right, so she--so during the class--during the--one of our girls was named Ruth Watson. Ruth--she was one of the colored girls in school, one of the nine, and Ruth had the misfortune to be in this boy's--he was the teacher for the day, this young kid about 15 years old or 16. So we--when it came time, they were reading from a book, a poem or something, and when it was her turn, when it was Ruth's turn to recite, this boy says, "Get up midnight and read". "Get up midnight." He called her "midnight" because she was brown skinned and, of course, it was agonizing to her and my sister came home and told her--told my mother what happened. "This teacher did so and so," I mean, "The boy, the boy did this and the boy said that." And she said, okay. So, you know, Ednah Bundy was there the next morning, in school, she was down at the principal's office, and complained about it and the principal called the boy in. He said, "What's this I hear about your hurting, or insulting this girl yesterday while you were the teacher? You will not sit down until you apologize." So now there you have it. You either apologize right now, in front of the class, or you forget it. So, sure enough, he refused to do it. He was stubborn. You know for three days he stood in front of that class and he would not apologize to Ruth Watson for calling her "midnight." He was just going to just be stubborn, you know. So, at last, on the third day, after being--after standing up in the class for three days, he finally apologized and the principal let him sit down but that experience of being called "midnight," you can imagine how agonizing that was. Speaker 2: Well, it was a time when there was a lot of other racial unrest in the country with a lot of violence, right? Speaker 1: Right, oh yes. Speaker 2: So-- Speaker 1: Right, right, well, but it's funny--the funny thing is that the boy was so insulting and then the sister [Caroline Smith] was just the opposite. She was so kind to me and he was so mean to Ruth. Now how could the boy and girl in the same family, the same mother and father, how could they be so different? How would you account for that? But they were different. He was nasty and she was sweet but she was a doll. I'll never forget her. I'd like to say, hello and thank you to her. I'd like to send her a thank you letter. She may not be living now. But they lived right across the street from the high school and it was easy to take care of it. Story_ID: 80110 Speaker 1: Now, now can you--can we go back to college, now, you're working and you're going to school [Chicago Normal School, now Chicago State University in Illinois] and you were going to school to become a teacher, right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And this is something your father [Creed Anderson Taylor] wanted you to do, you said? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And your mother [Ednah Victoria Bundy Taylor] was all-- Speaker 2: My mother, both of them. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But my father was--was strict, you know, and demanding that the best of us--the best education, the best grades, we had to have good grades or else, you know, so that was understood. I remember one of my incidents with a teacher, Florence Scott, Ms. Florence Scott, a lovely teacher. She was a lot of fun, had a sense of humor. And we had a dinner--a mother and daughter dinner. She asked me to be her daughter and the dinner was downtown, in one of the hotels, downtown. So, I went as her daughter and had a wonderful time. But now when it came to the prom, that's when it hurt. They--I--they were not allowing any outsiders to be the partner. For instance, I couldn't bring a partner from the South Side to dance with me. See, there were no other boys in my class. I was the only black in my class. So, whom am I going to dance with? Who am I going to socialize with at the dance so that--it was pretty rough to be there in that situation. Speaker 1: So, things were that segregated then-- Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: --for you? Speaker 2: In a quiet, you know, subtle way, not so openly but these outside teachers who came in from California or Nebraska, or wherever they came from, they would start cracking jokes, you know, and they didn't--maybe they didn't see us in the audience, there were just nine of us all together, the whole school, so maybe they didn't see us until they had cracked the joke, or maybe they didn't care, but anyway, the principal always straightened it out, my mother and the principal, and especially that boy who had to apologize after three days of standing up in front of the class. He learned his lesson. Speaker 1: What was the principal's name? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: Do you remember the principal's name? The principal of your school? Speaker 2: Mr. Tolman, Tolman, T-O-L-M-A-N. I don't remember his first name. Speaker 1: So, did you have much of a social life in college, when you went to college? Speaker 2: You mean in high school, college? Speaker 1: No, no. I was asking. I know your social life was kind of stagnated in high school-- Speaker 2: Yup, uh-huh. Speaker 1: --what did you do at the prom? What happened? Did you dance with any-- Speaker 2: I sat in the balcony. My mother took me and we sat in the balcony and looked down. Everybody was dancing but we were just sitting in the balcony, outside of it, just there but not participating. Speaker 1: So you never danced at the prom? Speaker 2: We couldn't bring anybody. They wouldn't allow us to bring anybody from outside Chicago--outside the high school. You had to have somebody from that high school. Well, there were no colored boys in my class. Speaker 1: Did that make you angry? Speaker 2: Of course. I could have--I know colored boys in Chicago. I could have brought them, you know, I could have invited them but we weren't allowed to. You had to have--just inside the school. Speaker 1: Did they--do you recall if they ever reformed that policy when your sisters came along? Or-- Speaker 2: I don't know whether they ever did or not. I probably graduated before they changed it. There was one girl who lived in Maywood [Illinois] and she graduated, I don't know which high school she came from, but anyway, she had to go way out to Robbins [Illinois] to teach school, every morning. Robbins, from Maywood, that distance, way out there on the bus or whatever it was. But that's how she made it, teaching outside Maywood. But nowadays it's all different. They have all kinds of, you know, colored and white. Story_ID: 80111 Speaker 1: Now--now, where did you go to college, again? Speaker 2: I went to, first of all, I went to Chicago Normal [School, now Chicago State University in Illinois]. I have my graduation thing with me over here. They have Chicago Normal and then, Chicago Normal was only a two-year college, then. Speaker 1: Like the City Colleges of [Chicago]-- Speaker 2: Yeah, and so I had to go back to school two more years to get my degree. So I went to Northwestern [University in Evanston, Illinois] so that's where I went to get--to finish up my two years and get my four-year degree at Northwestern. I didn't get a master's because I was too busy doing all this kind of stuff. Busy with that all the time. I didn't have time to--to do anything else. So-- Speaker 1: Well, was your social life any different in college or any better than it was in high school in terms of-- Speaker 2: No, there were a few--there were some men too. There were some--black men were there so that was no trouble in college. None at all. Never had any trouble. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So that went all right but it's funny how you have to handle those things when they come up. They're so unexpected, they catch you off-guard but what I marvel at was how my mother [Ednah Victoria Bundy Taylor] handled everything. She was the one woman NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People. She took care of anything herself. She didn't ask for anybody else. She didn't ask for somebody to go with me. She went down there alone and did her thing and straightened out whatever. It wasn't just for my sister, it was for somebody else, anybody's child, if it happened, she was there, and straightened out trouble. Yes, she had vision and she wasn't going to have any nonsense, no monkeyshines. Story_ID: 80112 Speaker 1: When you--now, how did you like Northwestern [University in Evanston, Illinois]? Speaker 2: Well, it was okay, kind of impersonal, I wasn't buddy buddy with anybody. I was going at night, see, I was working by day and then go to night school so that was no problem there. Just go to school and go home. There was no time for any socializing. Speaker 1: Okay, now what year would this be? I mean, what years were these when you went to-- Speaker 2: Lord, my memory--I know I can't remember that. See I finished high school in '24' [1924] then I had to--after I graduated from college, I had to wait--or you're supposed to be assigned as soon as you graduate--you're assigned as a teacher. Well I wasn't because I lived in the suburbs [Maywood, Illinois]. I had to live in Chicago to teach in Chicago, back in those days, so that I had to go back to school and take up some missing courses that I had missed, you know, by being in a two-year college. So that you had to kind of make out in a situation like that, you just do the best you can. I have--I've kept a lot of these papers. I have that graduation from Normal, I have over there in my papers. I looked at it this afternoon, from Normal, that's what they called it back--now they call it Chicago State University. Speaker 1: Oh, okay, that's-- Speaker 2: You see they changed the name to Chicago State so and then--but I still had to go two years to make up for it. So I have a four-year training period. Speaker 1: So you were living in Maywood [Illinois]-- Speaker 2: Yup. Speaker 1: --going to school at Chicago State [University], which is all the way across town-- Speaker 2: Yeah, going to school. Speaker 1: -and then you were working. Where were you working? Speaker 2: Yeah, working in service, what they call "in service." I paid the price-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and as I said I lost a lot of weight and going home at night, 9:30 at night, it's all dark, the streets are dark, standing out there in River Forest. I worked in River Forest [Illinois] and those trees and whatnot, you know, are kind of dark at night and while you're standing there waiting for the car to come along, for the streetcar, you had to be on your "P's" and "Q's" but back in those days there wasn't any crime, there was no crime. People didn't kill each other back in those days. You were comparatively safe. Nothing ever happened that I know of, to anybody. So, I guess it was all right but nowadays, Maywood isn't what it used to be. It's not as safe as it used to be. Story_ID: 80113 Speaker 1: Now, now what was your first teaching job? Can you talk about your first teaching job? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Right, what was it? Speaker 2: My first teaching job was on the--on the West Side, at Hayes [Elementary] School, at Hayes, and I have a picture--I have all these things I've hung on to. I-- Speaker 1: We'll get to the pictures at the end and we'll have you narrate the pictures. Speaker 2: Yeah, so now-- Speaker 1: Can you tell us something-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --about Hayes School? Speaker 2: Yes, so at Hayes School, that was my first teaching experience and the children were so sweet and so loving, more so--now when I transferred to the South Side, the kids weren't as affectionate, they weren't as loving, but the West Side kids just loved you and they hugged you and there's a letter that I'll give you that the letter expresses the love of a child for a teacher. It's a beautiful letter. I couldn't--I hoped to have anything nicer than that said by a child so, little Arlene O'Connor. There was a testimonial dinner given for me by the Chicago Courier newspaper and so that--Arlene came to that dinner. Now I had transferred to the South Side by then. I no longer was on the West Side but I was able to--there I go, oh, boy, they--now what am I trying to say? Speaker 1: You were talking about the testimonial that the child who was a student of yours at Hayes School gave to you after you transferred to the South Side. Speaker 2: Oh, yes, so now when my little helper, Arlene O'Connor, a little teacher's pet sort of, when she--when I had--when this big dinner was given for me by the Chicago Pittsburgh Courier newspaper, and that--400 people were there, little Arlene heard about the affair and she had gone on--she was working at Illinois State [University in Normal, Illinois], this was about ten years after she graduated, and so she heard about the dinner being given for me and she wanted to come and she made arrangements. She came all the way from the West Side, where she still lived, to the South Side so she could buy a ticket for the dinner and she--oh, there I go--it's a good thing you've got a good memory. Speaker 1: So she went to the dinner, you were saying, she went to the dinner. Speaker 2: Yes, she came to the dinner. She was in the--she was in the office when I was in the office writing a story for the paper that day and she came in to buy her ticket and when she saw me, she hadn't seen me in several years, she just had a fit, "Oh, Ms. so and so, Ms. Taylor," so and so, she just had a fit, you know, and we hugged and all and she explained that she had come to get her--she and a few others were coming from all the way from the West Side, coming to my dinner that night and so we were very, very happy about that. And she began, oh Ms. Matlock, my name wasn't Matlock then, it's Moseley, you were so kind, you were so this, you were so that, you were so wonderful, oh, a child's love for her teacher has no bounds. If they love you they really show it and so she went into those--I said, "Well, would you come to the dinner and say these nice things at the dinner?" She said, "Of course, I would." I said, "Now that's a promise." She said, "Sure, I'll be glad to come." You should see what that child said. I have the speech in my purse over there and there she was. She just poured it all out. The love of a child for a--you should hear what [HM] John [H.] Johnson said when--in that video that Jennie [Scott Washington] did for me. You should see what John Johnson said about me. [HM Dr.] Margaret Burroughs, every time I see--any time we're out in public, Margaret-"Ms. Matlock in the audience," you know, and she's this and she's that and she--they make a fuss over me, every time. And on that video, John had some beautiful words to say. Now he was a little older than Margaret. A little bit older than Gwendolyn and he had-- Speaker 1: Gwendolyn Brooks, too? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: Gwendolyn Brooks, too, you're talking about? Speaker 2: Yeah, she was in that same high school group. We were all in it at Phillips High School, not Phillips, but at DuSable High School so that's--and they all stayed together. They're together today. They're friends today, John and Margaret, all of them. Story_ID: 80114 Speaker 1: So, let me get this straight. You started off at Emerson [Elementary] School on the West Side and when you moved from Emerson School [sic, Matlock attended Emerson, but did not teach at it], the students there, when they heard about a testimonial-- Speaker 2: In Emerson I was only in grammar-- Speaker 1: You were teaching what grade? Speaker 2: In Emerson, I was in kindergarten--kindergarten, then we moved to Maywood. Speaker 1: So those were your kindergarten students that came to see you? Speaker 2: No, the one's that Margaret and all? Speaker 1: No, no, those students that came to the testimonial are--Arlene? Speaker 2: Yeah, they were from-- Speaker 1: --they were your kindergarten--okay-- Speaker 2: --the old West Side. They were from the old West Side, that's right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, they came from old Hayes [Elementary] School. Speaker 1: Yeah and you're saying that on the South Side, that you were able to touch the lives of Gwendolyn Brooks-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: --[HM] John [H.] Johnson-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and [HM] Dr. Margaret Burroughs-- Speaker 2: Yup. Speaker 1: --when they were students? Speaker 2: And there were others too but these are the ones that people know, in general, that's why we only drop their names, but the others, you know, were not included in my list but I always drop John, of course, and Margaret, of course, and so we're a matter of--teachers and-- Speaker 1: I want to talk about them in some detail-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --if you can but before we do that, maybe you can--you should tell us what your philosophy of teaching is? Speaker 2: My philosophy of teaching? Speaker 1: Yeah, uh-huh, and how you're so--what do you think it is that makes you so effective as a teacher? Speaker 2: Well, I do believe that you have to show some respect and love for the children. You've got to let them know that you like them. I have other young men too. Do you know Eugene Moore? He has an office down on the river. He's in PR work. He was honored recently--somebody--they gave him an award for something or other--from Illinois State [University in Normal, Illinois]. Eugene Moore, a fine fellow, and now he's one of my admirers, one of my students. It's wonderful having students, you know, especially boys, they testify that they didn't, you know, that they want--they didn't know this and they didn't know that but they tell you--they tell you she did this for me and she did that and I didn't know this until she gave me that. She taught me my first social studies. She taught me my first black history. She taught me, she taught me, she taught me. That's what--even the boys, do you think the girls are sentimental? You should hear what [HM] John [H.] Johnson said about me in Jenny's video that she made. She went--she wanted John to be in this testimony and John was too busy to come but he said if you can bring your camera, I'll give you 15 minutes, you know, to talk about Mrs. Matlock. So in that short time he said some beautiful things about me. So I was quite flattered. Speaker 1: What kind of student was John Johnson when he was in school? Speaker 2: John didn't stay in our--he quit, he was a little older than the others too and he was--I mean a little higher, maybe he was a senior when they were freshman or sophomore, or something like that, so that I didn't get to know John in school as well as I--as we did outside. Story_ID: 80115 Speaker 1: So now, now just for the record, you met [HM] John [H.] Johnson, Gwendolyn Brooks and [HM Dr.] Margaret Burroughs when you were advising the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --youth council, the youth council of NAACP? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And that was a volunteer-- Speaker 2: Oh, yes, all of it was volunteer. Speaker 1: You were volunteering at--you weren't actually teaching then, but you were advising them, right? Speaker 2: That's right. I was--no I wasn't teaching them, I was an advisor outside. You're right, you're right about that. I wasn't teaching him. Jeanette Triplett Jones was the teacher and I loved her. Now she was one of my mentors and the fact that she would choose me to turn over these young people to me, to train, it was heavy stuff. It was a responsibility. Speaker 1: Okay, now, this was 1936, I think that you-- Speaker 2: Yup, uh-huh. Speaker 1: --took that over, '36' [1936], and you did that for five years you said, right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: From '36' [1936] to '41' [1941]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes, I-- Speaker 1: And Jeanette Triplett Johnson, could you spell her name for us? Speaker 2: Jeanette Triplett Jones. Speaker 1: Jones, okay. Speaker 2: Jones, Jeanette Triplett Jones. I have in my papers over there, I have the obituary that I wrote when she died and I suggested to the youth council that they would--that they should in some way honor her, recognize her passing, and--but they had another advisor, it was a young man and he wasn't--he didn't have the vision, you know, to take care of the business, so nothing--they didn't send any--I was at the funeral so there was nothing and no message, no flowers, no nothing, from the youth council to Jeanette. They should have sent some flowers or something to her funeral service because she died in Ohio so that--but they weren't--they just didn't seem to care, I guess. The teacher didn't have the vision, that's the word, didn't have the vision to recognize what she had done for them but she only--she only spent two years with them. I spent five years with them. You see, she had two years. Speaker 1: So what did you--what were your duties as advisor to them? What did you actually do? Speaker 2: Oh, I--I've always been--I had--I set up what they call a "training trek." We called "training for leadership." The president of the council, when they turn the council--to kids over to me, when Jeanette told them that she had chosen me to inherit the council, and he--and A. C. McNeal, he was a great guy. Mack told me, "Now listen Frances, I know you're going to work hard and all that, he said, but keep those 'commies' out. Don't let those communist come in there and take over the council." I said, "Oh, no, don't worry about that." And so he was adamant about that and he said and train them for leadership. So I decided that my job was to train them for future leadership. They can be on the board when they get older of the NAACP. Lead, look how Margaret could do it on the board. Look what John could do on the board? You know, none of them are on the board now, have never been. None of those people that I mentioned, Gwendolyn, or any of them, have ever, that I know of, served on the Board of Directors of the NAACP. I don't know why. Speaker 1: Well-- Speaker 2: --'cause I trained them to step in and be active in leadership but now they've been on their own. John did his leadership for the magazine [Ebony]. He bypassed the NAACP. Margaret did hers with the museum [DuSable Museum of African American History]. She bypassed the museum--I mean the others and who else? Oh, Gwendolyn Brooks, poetry, that had nothing to do with the NAACP. So they've all become famous without the help but they are--they are not helping the NAACP. Right now, it's dead. I don't know who the lawyers are today. Back when I was on the board, we had all those big lawyers on the board and I knew all of them and nowadays you don't know who are the leaders of the NAACP. Who--where are the cases that are before the Supreme Court? Have you heard of any? I haven't. I don't know who's fighting our cause in Washington [D.C.]. Thurgood Marshall? Where are the Thurgood Marshall's of today? Story_ID: 80116 Speaker 1: There were several that I was very proud that we could get people on that caliber to come in and teach our kids how to do their committee work. If they're on the publicity committee, show them how to do publicity. If they're on this committee, show them how to do that. Show them--give them your professional experience to do the job. So that's how we made such success of what they were doing 'cause they took it seriously and they did pay attention and they did develop leadership but I thought it was for the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], for the future of the branch. I thought they were going to turn around and help the NAACP but never. I haven't seen anybody. I know [HM] John [H. Johnson] --I've never heard of John being on the board or [HM Dr.] Margaret [Burroughs] being on the board or Gwendolyn [Brooks]. I haven't heard of any of them being on the board. Speaker 2: But you were talking about--we're rolling again, I just wanted to let you know the camera's rolling again. You were talking about the--your "training trek," you know-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --those you train, just so whoever's, you know, when we mention this tape in the future, they'll understand what we're talking about here. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So you have something called the "training trek" and you bring in people to train-- Speaker 1: Yeah, we call it the "training trek." Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And we'd start out with Friday night and we'd have a dinner, a nice big dinner Saturday night and it was the weekend and everyone--every October we had this training for future leadership. That's what I called it, for future leadership. But-- Speaker 2: For NAACP? Speaker 1: But then--for leadership for themselves but not for the NAACP. Margaret led--sure she put the museum [DuSable Museum of African American History] there but once it got--the NAACP had nothing to do with it. See it--Margaret didn't build and it isn't Margaret's fault, it's the leadership. They knew what I was trying to do. I was training them for future leadership and back in those days they had the lynching down in Sikeston, Missouri, the lynching, and they would--we had--we'd march around the streets at night, holding up flags and whatnot and signs, "stop lynching," stop this, stop that, you know. These young kids, these high school kids, marchin' around the neighborhood, protesting against lynching. Now that was NAACP work. That's the kind of work the NAACP should fight against lynching. We met--our kid met Walter [Francis] White, all the other big ones, Roy Wilkins, all those great guys from the--my kids met all of them. Speaker 2: Just for the record, who's Walter White and Roy Wilkins? Speaker 1: Who is Walter White? Speaker 2: Just for the record here. Speaker 1: Walter White was the Mr. One, Mr. NAACP. He was a little short, blue-eyed, blond hair, you didn't know he was colored. He went--he attended and sat in on a lot of those lynchings. He was in the audience watching them hang that black man, this white-skinned fella, Walter White. He was a great guy. He was the head of the NAACP. When I came in, then there was A. C.-- Speaker 2: Wait a minute, now. He would watch the lynching and then what would he do? Speaker 1: Yeah, he'd be in the audience. Speaker 2: Then what would he do? Speaker 1: And he would testify in court against them. He could do that, see, he was there to observe. If he'd been brown skinned, he would have been killed and he wouldn't have dared be in that audience but see, since he was fair, he could just stand there, just watch them, hang that black man. He couldn't stop them so he might as well watch them and be there as a--to testify--to be there to testify against and see who did it. I saw, he was there, she was there, you know, he could testify. Speaker 2: So-- Speaker 1: And so I--that's what I thought I was training him to be angry and to be mad and to--to be, you know, head up and work about--against civil rights--against, what is it, the lynching. Story_ID: 80117 Speaker 1: But, this, I can't think of this young fella's name but he was a young fella, well, so was I when I took over. I was quite young but this fella evidently he didn't--now for instance we had an anniversary, what was it, was it a 25th anniversary? What was our anniversary for the [NAACP Youth] Council--but it was a flop. I didn't even go to it. It wasn't well-planned. He didn't have the vision. He didn't know how to do--he didn't have the leadership to know how to develop the Council. He didn't have the same success I had had. We had, at one time, we gave a dance at one of our training treks--we gave a big dance and we were--we were, no wait, let me get it together here, oh my, and you can't help me 'cause we didn't get that far. Let me see if I can pull it together, no. Speaker 2: Dance at the-- Speaker 1: Dance, that's the word, that's the key word, dance, yes. We were--we had a dance now. We--back in those days there was a fella named Ziggy Johnson, he was a union man, a musician's union, and we didn't have the money to pay for the band. We had--these kids didn't have any money, they're poor kids, just all of them were poor, [HM Dr.] Margaret [Burroughs], [HM] John [H. Johnson], all of them were poor. So they didn't have money to pay for the band to play but--so here came Ziggy Johnson, in the middle of the dance, he came looking for money for his men, for his musicians, he wanted the musicians to get paid. So the kids were shocked, you know. They came to tell me that Ziggy Johnson's out there, so and so, and so I went and spoke with him. "I said, don't expect these kids, they don't have any money, their future is in--their value to us is in the future, it's for leadership, it's not for money. These kids aren't worth money right now but they will be later, later on they'll have money but right now you can't expect the kids this age to have any money to pay musicians, maybe we shouldn't have had the dance but they had to make money someway or another." So, he said, "Okay." So he let us off. He said, okay, go ahead. He didn't--he was going to close the dance down, he was going to pull his men out so they wouldn't have any dance music, and you know kids want to dance at that age. So, he--he said, okay, you can go on and he let us get by. So now, when it came to--now let's see how was that--give me the next cue? Story_ID: 80118 Speaker 1: Okay, all right, well, let's--maybe we should talk about--I want to go back to school maybe and talk about what you taught in Social Studies. What was your curriculum like in Social Studies and what did you emphasize for the students? Speaker 2: You mean my curriculum? Speaker 1: Yeah, in Social Studies and when you taught Social Studies at Forestville [Elementary School in Chicago, Illinois]? Like what did--so what did you teach and you know, what did you--what did they mandate that you teach and then what did you teach, I mean-- Speaker 2: The teaching itself? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Well, of course, you teach geography, mountains and rivers and all that. You teach geography and you teach history and that sort of thing. I was on a committee to supervise the selection of textbooks to be used in the public schools of Chicago and I would go down to the Board on Saturday morning and look over the books, the textbooks, and if they had anything in there against black folks, I would report it. I would check the book and see that it was okay. So that's one of the things that I did as a teacher. I supervised the selection of the textbooks of Chicago. Now, the-- Speaker 1: Is there some policy then by the School Board not to--not to publish books, I mean, or not to distribute books with derogatory references to black folks in them or what? Or how did you get that job, I mean? I guess that's what I'm getting at? Speaker 2: How did I get the Social Studies job? Speaker 1: Well, approving the textbooks? Did the Board have a policy now to-- Speaker 2: I don't know. There was a committee. There were teachers from other schools too, on the committee. There were teachers from other schools. Speaker 1: I guess what I'm trying to ask is, who--who decided that the Board of Education should police itself from those, you know-- Speaker 2: I don't know. I don't--back in those days, you didn't hear about white liberals and black liberal teachers, you know, you didn't hear about people taking care of the business like that. I don't know how I happened but I would go down there and they would have the publishers, would send over--would send to us, during the week, samples of their books that they had. For instance, for--about civil--I would look--first thing I'd open the book, I'd look to see what did they say about slavery. What did they say about--I'd look at the index. What does this book say about so and so. I would check it out to see that it said the right thing or did not say the wrong thing so that kept the books straight--kept the publishers 'cause they would report to the publisher. If I didn't like the book, I would say so and they would not--and I would not endorse the book. I wouldn't recommend it to be used in the city schools. Speaker 1: Now what would be an example of the wrong thing? Speaker 2: Something about blacks, something about slavery, something that we didn't like it. Speaker 1: That, I mean, well, an example of what they might say about slavery that would be wrong? Speaker 2: Or something about maybe Abraham Lincoln freed the slaves and maybe he didn't or maybe he did, and that sort of thing but that was, as I remember, of course, my memory isn't what it used to be-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --but they would--they would send us brand new books and we could keep the books. They would let us take them home and the books would belong to us. Story_ID: 80119 Speaker 1: Is there any particular thing that you thought was the most important thing for black students to learn in Social Studies? Is there, you know, above all other things? Speaker 2: Uh-- Speaker 1: Or any sort of things? Speaker 2: Of course, we talked about black history just so vaguely, you know. We generalized so, about black history. Let me see what would be an example. Oh, we always think, first of all, about slavery, that's the first thing we'd always think about but, let's see-- Speaker 1: I guess I'm just trying to ask, like what was the most important thing for you to teach them, or what did you think was the most important thing for you to teach black children in a classroom about Social Studies? Speaker 2: That's a hard question and it's tough at this late stage, it's tough to remember what I taught then. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I would teach about John Brown. I taught about our white friends, John Brown died for us and I always taught my children that he and his sons sacrificed their lives for you and me and I would have a sign, for Black History Week, I'd have a sign out in the hall, outside my door, they also served to let my kids know that we had white friends who were in there fighting for us. John Brown and his sons died so that we could live and if I hadn't taught it, they would never have thought about it. So that's one thing, all right. Also, Crispus Attucks, he was another, what should I say--oh, what was that battle that Crispus Attucks fought? Speaker 1: The Boston Massacre, he was-- Speaker 2: Yeah, the Boston Massacre--yeah, that's it, the Boston Massacre, that Attucks was involved in that and so that things like that. Anything that had to do with black people, I was looking it up. I had to look it up right away. That's the first thing I'd look up, how they'd treat the black people. How do they treat--in this book. And your book, I'd tell the salesman, "What does your book say about so and so? I don't like what your book says about so and so." So I would let the salesman, the book salesman who was there, I'd let him know that we didn't--that we resented the treatment that it should be another way. So, I made that my business to look in the index first thing. Story_ID: 80120 Speaker 1: Now, did you know many of the black historians back in the-- Speaker 2: Hammurabi [Frederick H. Hammurabi Robb] was my man. He was--he was wonderful. Speaker 1: Can you spell his name for us so we'd-- Speaker 2: Hammurabi? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: H-A-M-M-U-R-B-I [sic, H-A-M-M-U-R-A-B-I]. Speaker 1: Now, was that his real name? Or was that his given-- Speaker 2: No, what was his name at first? It was--that wasn't his first name. Hammurabi, "H", Robb-- Speaker 1: Yeah, I think that's it. Speaker 2: Yeah, that was it. Speaker 1: I think there was a Robb in there. Speaker 2: Yeah, there was another part but he would bring--I can see him now, coming down the hall, in our school, with a big sack of books, come in to--he got permission from the school board to sell the books and he'd come in and show us the books and we'd make our selection and buy and then we'd have our collection. I'd start my collection. That's how I got my collection from Hammurabi. He came into the schools to sell those books. He was a great guy. Speaker 1: Yeah, what kind of books would he sell--I mean whose--who are the authors of some of the books he sold? Speaker 2: [Joel Augustus] J. A. Rogers. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: People like that. Story_ID: 80121 Speaker 1: Did you ever meet him [Joel Augustus Rogers]? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: Did you ever meet him? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. When [HM] John [HM] Johnson began his books back in those days. John began--see he was a little older than the others, than [HM DR.] Margaret [Burroughs]. I think he was more--probably he might have been a senior and when they were freshman or sophomores, so he dropped out of school to open up his magazine, his--what was that name, "Negro Digest." That was before "Jet Magazine." He had "Negro Digest." John was--he didn't have any money. I think they said he borrowed $50 from his mother to start his first book, something like that. You have to see to it that--that he gets credit but I don't understand why none of these smart young people from my youth council are not on the [NAACP] board, why they're not on the board today, because I trained them for leadership, that's what I called myself doing. Speaker 1: Well, they did pretty good. Speaker 2: Well, I think on the whole but their energy went in another direction. Speaker 1: Now what about Gwendolyn Brooks as a young person? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: Can you tell us what she was like as a young person? Speaker 2: Yes. Now I wasn't as close to--Gwendolyn was a quiet, very shy person. Now her husband, Henry Blakely [Jr.], was adorable. He just loved her but she was very shy and aloof and--but he loved--he saw--he saw in her this quiet, shy woman. She wasn't pretty but he saw in her that intelligence, that fineness and he helped her--he helped bring out her personality. So at the--when she developed, she developed because her husband, Henry, helped develop her. He helped make her who she was, who she became. At first she was very shy. You would never have thought she would become the famous Pulitzer Prize winning poet. You think, how in the world could she do it? But she did. But [HM Dr.] Margaret [Burroughs] was just the opposite. Margaret could talk a blue streak, you know, and think nothing of it and John could talk but there were others in the youth council who were smart too. One of them was a fella who used to sing, he was a singer. Then--the minister, Reverend Henry--not Henry but--Henry--something McGee and he's a doll. He's at that big church at 63rd and Stony Island-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --that big church there, he's the assistant minister there. Henry McGee, he's a fine person. So that there were--there are others too but it's just that these are the ones that the public knows more about and so we perpetuate that image of having those--just a few--just to name a few--to name a few. You let them go--but I thoroughly enjoyed being exposed to these brilliant young people. They were so smart and our training treks, they were--I have some of those little program books that we developed for the training treks. So I enjoyed doing all that. Speaker 1: Now in those days, I guess when you taught at Forestville [Elementary School], were the parents involved in the day-to-day life of the students? Speaker 2: Not so much. There were a few. There were always a few. There's one lady named McNeal, they were friends with this fella I told you about a while ago, they were friends of his and he has--the one I told you has an office downtown on the river-- Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: --and he has about fifty employees, his secretary told me, fifty employees. He's in PR work and business development. Speaker 1: That's Eugene Moore, you said, right. Speaker 2: Yeah, so I have--I went to his testimonial. He had a testimonial about a year ago and I went to that as his guest to observe, you know, to watch him receive the award just like I have done the same thing. I've invited people to come and observe, you know, when I received awards. Story_ID: 80122 Speaker 1: Okay, now, you were involved in a number of civic activities to raise money for-- Speaker 2: Not so much, no, I'm not so much a fundraiser. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I'm not so much a fundraiser. I hate to ask for money and they tell me "no". I just can't stand it. I just--now my buddy, Gloria Wailes, now there's a fundraiser. She is--she will walk the streets day and night and today, just this morning, she told me that she's raised money for the women of the NAACP and she--one lady owes her for the ad she put in the--but she didn't pay for the ad. So Gloria had been after her and after her and after her. Now I would never do that. I can't be bothered. If you don't want it, forget it. I don't let anybody, you know, put me on the spot. I don't like--if I'm going to buy it, I'm going to buy it. You don't have to beg me for money but if I decide that I'm going to pay for an ad, I'll pay for it. But this girl had not paid for her ad. She's the last one of all the--of all the stores and shops and people who promised who had said, yes, they'd take an ad. She's the last one who hasn't paid for it but Gloria is on her like white on rye, just like a bulldog chasing after her to get that money. Now I can't do that. I don't like to be told, "no." Speaker 1: But you were able to--you were involved in several activities, I think, to help raise money for some organizations-- Speaker 2: Oh, I do the publicity. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I do the promotion. Now that's what I do to help but not asking for money, per se. I don't, I don't like doing-- Story_ID: 80123 Speaker 1: Can you tell us about the children's theatre [Children's Theatre Group of Chicago] that you're involved in? Speaker 2: Oh, yes, that was a, that was a lovely group. That was years ago and it was a labor of love. It was--we were to buy--we would rent, not rent but we would purchase the plays from the junior league, you know about the junior league? Speaker 1: Well, tell them. Speaker 2: Yeah, these young women who have--so we would buy their plays and we would produce them and we had a lady from Northwestern University [in Evanston, Illinois] as an advisor to help us produce the play and so we would-[HM] Katherine Dunham, if our play called for dancers, we would ask Katherine to put her dancers in there to do the dancing for us. So, the--I was the producer twice but I was also in, I'm trying to think of that name of that, oh, "Steadfast Tin Soldier", the "Steadfast Little Tin Soldier" and I was dressed like I was little--then I was dressed like a little soldier and the, oh dear-- Speaker 1: Now you produced these plays for children, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, they were just for, oh-- Speaker 1: Children that went to school at Forestville [Elementary School]? Speaker 2: No, our school children, our school kids, we'd all--we were most of us were teachers so that we would have our kids there and they would say, when we went back to school, or after the play was over, we'd have a receiving line and the kids would all go down the receiving line, across the stage, all the actors, dressed in their costumes, you know, kids stuff, and the kids would go down that line and they'd say, "Ms. Moseley, I know you as soon as I heard your voice." They would tell me, my kids, you know. But the prices were so low, ten cents for the kids, twenty-five cents for the parents. That was way, way back when things were cheaper and so that was a--these were society girls, these were top socialite, they were well-educated, you know, and they all were happy to serve and provide these plays for little poor kids to enjoy. Speaker 1: Now, were a lot of black socialites or socialites in the black community, school teachers? Speaker 2: No, I'm not sure I-- Speaker 1: Well, I'm just, you know, this group that you were with, they were--were they socialites and school teachers or did you have like some volunteer socialites helping out the school teachers? I don't want to stump you, but, I just asked that question. Speaker 2: I'm not sure I can get, get the drift. Story_ID: 80704 Speaker 1: We're rolling right now. I just wanted to ask you about the fundraisers that you put on for the South Side Community Art Center and what--can you just talk about what the South Side Community Art Center is and what did you all do to--who came up with the idea and what did you do to try to get it established [in 1940]? Speaker 2: That was under the WPA. Speaker 1: Uh-hum. That's the Works Progress Administration. Speaker 2: Yup, that--and this is the last one left, this building in Chicago [Illinois], the last one left. The rest of them are all closed down. Speaker 1: This is the last remnant of the WPA-- Speaker 2: So, yeah. Speaker 1: project, arts project? Speaker 2: And my--that War [World War II] work that I did with the girls, that's the only charm school--we had a charm school and a graduation. The girls graduated with evening gowns and caps with tassels. Speaker 1: Okay, now this is, you're talking about, the hostess program? Speaker 2: Yeah, the training to be wholesome girls, you know, and not chippies, no monkeyshines, just come in and dance with the boys, serve them some food and go home. Speaker 1: Okay, now this is for the Servicemen's Center-- Speaker 2: Yeah, at the Servicemen's Center Number Three. See, there were three of them in the city, North Side, South Side and West Side. Speaker 1: Okay, now where was this one located? Speaker 2: This was at 51st and Calumet. Speaker 1: Okay, and you trained the girls to-- Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: You trained the girls to be hostesses? Speaker 2: Yeah, I selected them--first of all I picked them out. You had to pick them. Sometimes the girls come with knives. They could have a knife in their pocket, you know, be that type of woman, but you don't want those kind of women exposed to our Servicemen, see, so we had to dismiss people like that. We had one girl who--a knife dropped out of her pocket once, so we didn't take her, of course, as a hostess. But we used to love--the girls used to travel. They'd go down to Missouri. They'd go to Michigan to serve. They enjoyed going. They'd go up to Lake Meadow, I mean, not Lake but Lake, what's the--Lake Shore? What's up there on the North Side where they-- Speaker 1: Oh, Great Lakes. Speaker 2: Great Lakes, the girls-- Speaker 1: The Naval Base, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, they would go up to Great Lakes to dance with the boys. So that they enjoyed it. Speaker 1: Did they volunteer or-- Speaker 2: Yeah, oh yeah, they were all volunteers. Speaker 1: Okay, they didn't get paid for going up there? Speaker 2: Yup, uh-huh. Speaker 1: No, did they or did they get paid for doing this or did they-- Speaker 2: Oh, never get paid. Nobody got paid anything. Speaker 1: (Unclear), okay. Speaker 2: But they enjoyed meeting the men. They met men they wouldn't have met otherwise 'cause the [United States] Navy fellas were pretty high-class, you know. Some of them think they were more high-class than the soldiers so that--but they enjoyed meeting the men and they enjoyed dancing with them and talking--sitting around and talking with them and I enjoyed--but I saw to it that there was no monkeyshines, none of that, going to bed with them and that kind of stuff. As far as I knew, as far as we could around there, there wasn't any trouble. Speaker 1: So did--I think you mentioned in the literature that we have that some of the girls actually met their husbands on this-- Speaker 2: Yes, they fell in love with them and married them. Story_ID: 80705 Speaker 1: Okay, all right now, back to South Side Community Art Center, now-- Speaker 2: Did you-- Speaker 1: --you were trying to--I was trying to get you to talk about--I know you did a big fundraiser, several big fundraisers for them. Speaker 2: Yup. Speaker 1: Right, and-- Speaker 2: Well, one of them was to buy the building, make the down payment of the building and the other one was to renovate--to put in the bricks and things and restore the linoleum and all that stuff to renovate the building. So first you had to buy it, with one year, and the next year the money went to renovate. Speaker 1: And you were in charge of publicity and promote, you know-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I did publicity for everything. Nobody else was doing any publicity. Speaker 1: Who else served- Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Excuse me a second. Speaker 1: Okay. So when the South Side Community Art Center when you all first identified--when the committee first identified a building, it wasn't in good condition? The building needed to be renovated? Speaker 2: It used to be some baseball people lived in the building, owned it or something. Speaker 1: Some baseball people, I mean-- Speaker 2: Yes, some--there was--baseball is involved in that in the early part. Now I didn't--I wasn't involved in the money, I raised the money. One of the things that I did to raise money--have you ever heard of, I'm sure you have, Augusta Savage-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --the artist? Well I--I brought Augusta all the way from her house--from her front door to Chicago [Illinois] and paid for it myself. I mean, our Committee paid for it. She didn't--they didn't pay for it and brought her to Chicago to--we had a showing of her sculpture work and that showing brought it--we charged money. We had a lovely affair downtown at the hotel where the--where the whatchamacallit, Auditorium Theatre is now and so that money took care of the whole building, fixed it all up and we were very--that's the last--this is the last [Works Progress Administration art center] building left in the country, the rest of them are all--the building's collapsed or the program--that people quit or something like that, you know. So, today, this building is special. Now Mrs. [Eleanor] Roosevelt came to Chicago to dedicate this building in Chicago [on May 7, 1941]. We were there--I was there. So my school kids were there, those who had helped me go to the store. They went to the store to buy this or to buy that. They went to go buy glue or buy paper or buy something that I needed. So they ran errands and so I thanked them. When Mrs. Roosevelt came, I had my little kids--I presented "Mrs. Roosevelt, this is so and so." Oh, they were so thrilled, and her husband was President, then. So that--they really met the President's wife so that was quite an honor for them to--to be exposed to the President. Story_ID: 80706 Speaker 1: Just like it was an honor when I curtsied to Princess, to Princess Margaret. Speaker 2: Now how did that happen? What happened then? Speaker 1: Because she gave a luncheon while she was here--while she was in Trinidad to--she was in--now wait, oh, boy, this is awful. I've never had this before, I think it was-- Speaker 2: I think it was in Trinidad, right, and you were there on vacation or-- Speaker 1: Yeah, to become independent [from the British Empire in 1962], they were there to become independent, to celebrate and give the freedom papers. So instead of the Queen coming herself, she sent her sister, Margaret, and Margaret brought her husband, his name was Tony [Antony Armstrong-Jones] then, and so that's how that happened and so she, now what? Speaker 2: So that's how you got a chance to meet Princess Margaret in Trinidad. Speaker 1: Yeah, so, while she was here, we went down the long line of being--and then after we went down the line, greeting her, then we had refreshments. She served refreshments to just the press. This was all press and we all enjoyed it so that it was--tell me some more, give me another lead? Speaker 2: You got to tell--okay. Speaker 1: This is terrible. It's getting worse, it's not getting any better. Speaker 2: Now what about your mini trips to Jamaica? I know you've been to Jamaica many times. Speaker 1: Oh, yes, I've stayed there. I--my host, the last time I was there, I visited--I stayed with Carl Barnett. Carl Barnett is the owner of Air Jamaica, the airline for the Jamaican people. They--it flies over the mountains and all at Air Jamaica and Carl owns that and he has a--he built a very modern home, very lovely, and they met me at the airport with the van and all that stuff, you know, the fancy wagon, not wagon but I guess you call it a van. So I enjoyed that. But I had hoped--I had hoped to marry a wonderful, wonderful Jamaican, one of those high class King's English Jamaicans, but Billy--all of a sudden he died. That was the end of all of that. I was hoping that we would, you know, get around to marrying. He had a beautiful--he was a, what do you call it, not farmer, he was a-- Speaker 2: A planter, I guess, or-- Speaker 1: Huh? Speaker 2: --he had a planter's--did he have a big ranch or plantation or something or-- Speaker 1: Yeah, he was--that's what they--but there's a name they call it. They call it--there's a special name that they--anyway, he had--he was the owner of a--I can't understand why I can't get these words, but anyway, it was very painful, very much so. So he went to--he went to England for an operation and he had some kind of a kidney problem and just gone. Speaker 2: What was the year? Speaker 1: He was such a wonderful person. Speaker 2: About what year was this? Speaker 1: That was, I think he--about '56' [1956], way back, way back. But a wonderful family. The whole family was wonderful. Story_ID: 80707 Speaker 1: Now you were married to someone named Moseley before? Speaker 2: Uh-hum. Speaker 1: Now, when did you meet him and what happened with that? Speaker 2: Oh, where did I meet Addison? Where did I meet him? He was a teacher. I met him at teacher's college, that's right. Now I remember. I met him when I was going to teacher's college, one summer, one summer school, but it didn't last long, four years was enough and same thing with my second marriage, [Charles Frank] Matlock. I made short work of him, four years was enough. Speaker 1: Well, what happened? Speaker 2: Life's too short. But he was a pretty nice guy. I mean, I--we kept the nice friendship going. He remarried. The first one didn't remarry but this one did. Matlock, he married a German girl up in Rockford [Illinois]. She was very nice and they had children and he sent me a picture of them but it looks so funny to see this tall brown-skinned guy and all these white wife and white children. The kids are--or his father was white so they get that skin-tone from his father, I guess. So, anyway, there they--there--to look at the picture to see them and the oldest daughter is named Anastasia (ph.), Anastasia, but they are very nice and when he died, he died about a year ago, the kids are all so, you know, upset and it looks funny to see in the picture, these mixtures. This one black man and all these little white people around him, his family, people can't realize that's his family but it was and so that--but he was quite nice in many many ways. I don't--we kept the friendship going and I sent flowers to the services and all that. I must call his wife. I haven't talked to her in a long time. Story_ID: 80708 Speaker 1: Now what about Sir John Carter of Guyana? Speaker 2: Oh, Sir John, that charming man. He and his wife [Lady Sara Lou Carter] have come to Chicago [Illinois] quite often to visit their Chicago official is Dr. E. L. Seys (ph.) Brooms, he was the Consul General of Guyana and he was resided--he lived in East Chicago [Indiana] and he was an official there. So, Sir John and his beautiful wife, she was an American model, and when she went down there to visit, she met this fine--they sent this fine handsome man, bachelor, to escort her around the parties and things that she was invited to and so when she got lined up with him, they fell in love with each other. Well, she was there on a visit. She took her models down--modeling school and modeled those beautiful clothes and had a good time. So she--everywhere she went, every engagement, he was there to escort her, to take her here and take her there. So that gave her a chance, you know, to move in on him so that--they're a charming couple. John Carter, Sir John Carter and Lady Sarah Lou Carter. I also have met--I have pictures again, I have them right over there, on the table, Lady Edris Allan, her husband was Sir Harold Allan. He was the man who helped write the law papers for the independence movement, you know, they had to have all kinds of legal stuff and he was a big lawyer. So he was--the Queen thanked him for his services as lawyer and she made him a knight, so he was Sir Harold Allan. Speaker 1: And he's from Guyana or Jamaica, which one? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: Which country was he from? Speaker 2: From Jamaica. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, they were Jamaican and Sir Harold--Sir Harold and his wife, Lady Edris Allan. When she was here visiting, I took her to lunch at Cooten's (ph.) Home up on the North Side. I had a luncheon for eight of us to have--have lunch together but she was charming. And then I had lunch with Lady Hanna in Trinidad. H-A-N-N-A, I don't know why her husband was--what he did to be knighted, I don't know, but you have to make some contribution to the country before you're made a knight. You've got to have something on the ball. So these were all--then there was a Sir Neville Ashenheim. Now he was one of the white fellows, a knight, but I naturally would be more interested in the black knights, naturally, so that's why I talk about Sir John and Sir Harold. I didn't meet Harold. Harold had died before I went there. So he was already deceased but they were--I loved Jamaica. I liked the English, the speeches, the accent. Now Billy, my Billy, spoke the King's English but when he wanted to be funny, he would lapse into the Patois, you know, the peasants speak, and he would talk--in the field that they were out--he was out directing the workers in the field, he would lapse into it and talk their talk and then he would come back up and talk the King's English. So I used to laugh to hear him speak that Patois. Speaker 1: That he could make that transition between-- Speaker 2: Yeah, right, right. So it's fun but I'm sorry that it didn't work out but you never know. What else--what else do I know of interest? Story_ID: 80709 Speaker 1: Let's talk--did you want to talk about Haiti, at all? Or-- Speaker 2: Haiti. Speaker 1: Yeah, remember you-- Speaker 2: I've talked about Sans-Souci and-- Speaker 1: Now that's the big palace or the big castle? Sans-Souci? Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-huh. Speaker 1: That's in-- Speaker 2: What-- Speaker 1: I think you climbed to the top of that? Speaker 2: Who are they at? The people--the big people in Haiti, Haiti? I--oh, there's a very interesting young woman here in Chicago [Illinois]. She might be of some interest to you 'cause she's very interesting. She's a Haitian and she should be the Consul here in Chicago. She ought to be the Consul 'cause she's just that smart and intelligent. She speaks English as well as we do but her name is Jeanine Ramon (ph.) and Jeanine is from Haiti and has been here for some time and, as I said, she ought to be because of her intelligence and she's a civic leader in that community, in the Haitian community, she's active. So she ought to be the Consul of Haiti or the Consul General. You know the Consul is the official and they call--sometimes if they work hard and do something special, they're given a higher title, Consul General, so he has--she ought to be the Consul General of Haiti or the Consul of Haiti, either one. Story_ID: 80710 Speaker 1: Now, you taught in Forestville Elementary School [Chicago, Illinois] for how many years? Speaker 2: Four, then I transferred to the South Side. Speaker 1: Yeah, you transferred [from Hayes Elementary School] to Forestville, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Right, okay, now how many years did you teach at Forestville? Speaker 2: I transferred--at Forestville, well, it'd be four from 41, I guess about 37. Speaker 1: Thirty-seven years? Speaker 2: About 37 all together. Speaker 1: Well, what were some of the highlights of your teaching experience at Forestville? Did you-- Speaker 2: Some of the highlights? Speaker 1: Yeah, in terms of other teachers or students, any outstanding students there that you could think of or teachers there? Speaker 2: Some of the teachers--teachers. Highlights, highlights. Speaker 1: Well, what was it like teaching at Forestville? Was it-- Speaker 2: What was it like? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Very nice. We had a nice faculty, nice principal. We had no trouble at all. It was very likable. The kids were more polite than they are today. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: We had a great rapport and we had a mixed faculty. They did their thing. I think I did mention--I mentioned some of the--I've always had international interests. I've always accepted the--I'm trying to think of the Haitians, if anything in particular about the Haitians that I can remember. Story_ID: 80711 Speaker 1: But after all these, your years of teaching, what do you think your legacy will be? Speaker 2: The legacy? Speaker 1: Yes. What has it been? Speaker 2: Oh, I think the love that you get from the children when you run across them. One of my girls came to see me a couple of days ago. I hadn't seen her in a long time but she came from the South Side, Forestville [Elementary] School, her name was, oh, just that fast, it was on the tip of my tongue, and now it's gone, just that fast but she--what is her name? Oh, Lord have mercy. Good Lord, this really scares me when I lose a thought like this so quickly. Oh, dear. Well, my books--the address books are in the other room. Speaker 1: But she came to see you the other day, right? Speaker 2: Yes, she came in the daytime. Speaker 1: And what else. Speaker 2: Yes, Ballinger, that's it, Sandra Ballinger, that's her name. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And she came and we had the nicest time greeting each other. But I would like to have you read that story that I brought over, I think it's on the table over there, a letter, a love letter, sort of, from a child to a teacher, but this was written when she was grown. You see this dinner party that was given for me. See that--she was grown then and so she wrote about a teacher but as a grown up she wasn't a child when she wrote that letter. Speaker 1: Yeah, this is Arlene [O'Connor] you're talking about? Speaker 2: But it's beautiful, just beautiful. The explaining and the same thing with [HM] John [H.] Johnson, all of them, Eugene Moore, they all tell me that I gave them so much inspiration. I taught them-"you taught me about black history." "I never knew about black history until you taught me." "You taught me this, you taught me that." That's what I get from the boys. You'd be surprised how the boys are so emotional, the young men are, just as full of love and appreciation. When, two years ago, Eugene's staff gave him a birthday surprise party and they decided to--he had talked so much about me, his teacher, when he was a little boy, that they decided to have me there as a surprise to him. So that's what they did. They invited me to come. Down I went--I went down by the river and they seated me there and when--he was in his office, away from where we were when I sat down, you know, to be seated and then they called him in and when he saw me, he had a fit. Now here he is a grown man, with gray hair and another one of the boys too in that same class, they're buddies, so both of these men just went into hysterics, I mean, just-"you did this for me," "you made me do this," "you did that for me," and "you did so and so for me." They began, just like Arlene did in the [Chicago] Courier office, "you did this for me," "you did that for me," "you made me do so and so," "you made something of me." "I'd like to walk like you." "We wanted to be like you" and all those lovely warm feelings that come pouring out from grown ups, it's very--it's very touching because they are now grown, they're not children and these expressions that I'm telling you about--John is grown, that was just two years ago that he testified on Jennie's [Jennie Scott Washington] test-on, on her videotape. Story_ID: 80712 Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Well, like Fred said--like Fred Wall [Frederick P. Wall] of the "Courier" [Chicago Courier]--and giving a name to the dinner, he said--he asked me, "When are you going to have your testimonial?" I was retiring that year [1972]. When are you going to give your testimonial? I said, "I'm not being given a dinner. Nobody's giving me a dinner." "Yes, but, other people are having it and they haven't done as much as you have. Why aren't you having a dinner?" I said, "Well, nobody's giving it, just haven't thought about it." He said, "Well, I'm going to give you a dinner, the "Courier" is going to sponsor your dinner." I said, "Well, what have I done to deserve it? What can you--mention what I've accomplished? Why would you want to give me?" He said, "because you are a servant who cares." Just like that, it came out of his mouth. I said, well, if you want it--a servant who cares, that's what I have done. I've cared enough to do all that work and not one dime has ever crossed my palm. I've never asked for money and nobody's ever offered me any money. I'd like to have some, I certainly would but nobody has asked me--offered me any. I would love to have some but that--that was his answer. You're a servant who cares and I thought that was pretty--pretty neat. What do you think about that? Speaker 1: Well, why do you think that you--why do you think you care so much? Speaker 2: Why do I care? Speaker 1: Yeah, why do you think that you care so much? Speaker 2: Care for anybody or everybody? Speaker 1: Well, it's obvious that your students all-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --that you care so much for (simultaneous) Speaker 2: All those organizations and all those people. Speaker 1: Yeah, all those organizations and people. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's a lot of people I worked with on my path--has crossed a lot of people there-- Speaker 1: Yeah, I mean-- Speaker 2: To say nothing-- Speaker 1: --it's obvious that you do care. Speaker 2: Yeah, but why? Speaker 1: Why do you think that you do? I mean, I mean above other people that they may have considered? Speaker 2: Uh-hum, I've never thought about it. I've never, you know, considered it, the answer to that. Why do I think I care? That's beyond me, I'm not that bright these days. I used to be much sharper than I am today. You got some good questions. Speaker 1: I don't want to stump you but-- Speaker 2: Um-hum, yes. Story_ID: 80713 Speaker 1: Well how would--how do you think your--your parents would feel about what you have done? Speaker 2: My what? Speaker 1: Your parents? Speaker 2: My parents? Speaker 1: Yeah, what do you think they would think about what you've done with your life? Speaker 2: Oh, my mother [Ednah Victoria Bundy] would love it because she was that way. She was always active, always--anything she was in, she was always elected an officer, usually it's something to do with writing. Speaker 1: Have you consciously tried to emulate your mother? Speaker 2: Not consciously but I just admired what she did for us, that she kept us from being country hicks, that she wanted us to be somebody and so that I could appreciate. I appreciate her vision, that she could--and one more thing, as I told you, my father [Creed Anderson Bundy Taylor] was very strict and wasn't fatherly at all. He wasn't like a dad and so I've always felt that my mother's--stand between us--my mother had to stand between us sometimes when he wanted to spank us or scold us. She was the one who stood between us and made him back off and so that I could appreciate that about her. She was willing to stand up to him and so that he would leave us alone. He would often, you know, make life rough for us. He would send us out into the garden, into the back yard, to--he was going to give us a switchin' and have us go pick our own switch and bring it in so he could spank our legs or hit our legs or something, you know, with the, you know, from the twigs--from the bushes while he'd just flick us, not hard, but just enough to let us know who was the boss. But I--other than that, I can't think of any--but I think of my mother, I think of how brave she was to stand up against him and I wish she had lived longer. She died at fifty-six, which was pretty young, I think, to be gone but, let me see if I can think of anything else interesting to say. You ask a lot of good questions. Story_ID: 80714 Speaker 1: Now you don't have any children of your own, do you? Speaker 2: No, I've never had children. Speaker 1: You don't have children. Speaker 2: My papers, these are my children. Speaker 1: Okay, now all those students, and all those organizations that you have-- Speaker 2: Yup, that's why I don't have children so I use these--my activities as my children. I've enjoyed them and many of them--but I have a lot of young people who call me "Aunt Frances," they're not my real aunt but they call me that, Aunt Frances. Aunt this and aunt that and I enjoyed being called that and they're young people, and they look out for me. They call and see if I'm all right and that sort of thing so that I enjoy that privilege of being loved by a lot of young people, who see in me something that they like when their--when their mothers and fathers are gone, whey they die, then they turn to me like an aunt and I keep up with them. I can't get around like I used to but I do express as much as I can my love for them and--but they're all younger than I, all of them, and so that I feel privileged that they've chosen me for a role model for them. I have three young girls, well they're middle age now, in their forties, and they are--they live here, well one of them, the older one, is--no, the youngest one, is a doctor now in Biloxi, Mississippi so the other two girls still live in Chicago [Illinois] and so the older one doesn't get along too well, she's kind of an off-something's a little bit off for--she doesn't get along with her two sisters. She doesn't make any effort to run with them. She has her own crowd and that kind of worries me. She doesn't--only one of them has child--and that child is adopted, only one of them has the authority--has the privilege of having a child. So they--I would like to see them, the three girls closer together than they are but they're not and the last time we talked about them they told me that this older one was quite--that she's into, not dope, but what's the other one? She's into--what else? What else is there to get into besides dope? Speaker 1: Well, there's, I guess, any number of things, I can't tell you all the things- Speaker 2: Well she's into that. Story_ID: 80715 Speaker 1: How do you feel about what's going on in the world today? I mean, you-- Speaker 2: Oh, I think it's-- Speaker 1: --you're ninety-five years old-- Speaker 2: --I think it's terrible. Speaker 1: Are things better or worse? Speaker 2: I don't--I think it's worse. I think they ought to calm it down. Why do they have to--why can't they say, "no?" I don't understand that. Why they have to--just because somebody offers them a drink or offers them something, they have to take it? I don't know why they can't say "no?" Do you? Speaker 1: I don't know. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. To me it would seem so easy 'cause I've never been tempted. None of that stuff has ever--cigarettes don't tempt me. I tried it years ago. I tried smoking a little bit and smokin' and puffin' and then blow it out again, that's all. Now that--what was that big deal? That didn't taste like anything to me. So I just didn't bother any more. I used to try--I tried to learn on the Herbert Tareyton cigarettes-- Speaker 1: I remember those. Speaker 2: --but they never did move me. So I escaped that horror, having a smoke and I can escape something else and escape drink. I don't give a hoot about drinking. I don't care about those things. If you've got to get over them later, what's the use of getting involved if you've got to cure that later on? Speaker 1: Do you think young people are under more pressure now than it used to be--than they used to be years ago? Speaker 2: Yes, I do. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Uh-huh, yeah, I just hate to see them, you know, put themselves in a position to have to go to the hospital, get medicine, cure this and cure that. Now, one of these girls, I said I spoke of, one of the sisters, had adopted a daughter, a little girl, she's about three years old now. So they seem to be pretty happy but they live down in Mississippi, down in Biloxi, and the other two live here in Chicago [Illinois] but the two here don't mesh together. Speaker 1: Would you have any advice for today's young people that something that or-- Speaker 2: I just--all I can do is say "no." All I can say is, well, if you don't like it and you don't want to get in trouble, say, "no," that's all you have to do. You don't have to say "yes" because somebody offers you a drink or something. You can say, "no" instead of "yes." So, what's hard about that? Speaker 1: You're asking me the questions now. You turned the tables. Speaker 2: Yup, yup. That's the way I do it. Yes. Speaker 1: You're a good teacher (laughter). It's been a pleasure talking to you and I-- Speaker 2: Oh, I really enjoyed it. It's really been enjoyable. Story_ID: 80716 Speaker 1: What do you think of this project, The HistoryMakers project, what we're doing and stuff? Or do you have any thoughts about it-- Speaker 2: Responsibility? Speaker 1: No, do you have any thoughts about this project, The HistoryMakers project, this interview that we're doing? Speaker 2: Oh, I think it's--I think it's a wonderful idea. Ms. Richardson is something else. She hasn't always lived in Chicago [Illinois], has she? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: I think she's wonderful. I've only been in her presence--she interviewed me once last year with The Links, when we had our--we were installing our collection in the Woodson [Regional] Library. Yes, she was there then and all and she talked to me--to the other ones too just briefly so that this is a different story. This is much longer. Story_ID: 80717 Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, Mrs. Matlock. We're going to start this part of the process. Can you please tell us who that is in the photo? Speaker 1: Oh, I see. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Left to right, if possible, and tell us where it was taken and when. Speaker 1: Now, don't be surprised if I don't always know the answer. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Nobody ever knows all of the following, believe it or not. Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Let me put this on the table. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, let's go ahead and get started. Speaker 1: Okay, now, okay. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, starting on the left, we have-- Speaker 1: On the left we have, oh dear, as well as I know his name, the Judge [Lewis Clymer]-- Speaker 2: This is the left right here. Speaker 1: Yeah but that's his wife. Speaker 2: Okay, the wife of the judge. Speaker 1: Mrs.--the wife of the judge. What is his name? Doggone it. Speaker 2: You told me his name a little while ago. Speaker 1: Yeah, I knew it but it comes and it goes. This is Esther Doby. I know Esther. She's a good pal of mine. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): How do you spell Doby? Speaker 1: D-O-B-Y. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. The second from the left is you? Speaker 1: Yup. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Now where was this taken and when? Speaker 1: This was taken in Kansas City. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): What was the occasion, do you recall? Speaker 1: Yes, I went down for a funeral, a sad occasion and I had never seen him, judge, what's his name, judge something and I never seen him, I'd heard of him but we had a lot of fun together that day in (unclear). Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): About what year would this have been? Do you know? Speaker 1: Oh-- Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Or even approximately, the decade maybe? Speaker 1: Oh, I guess that would be about 15--let's say about 15 years ago [around 1987]. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, great. Speaker 1: --contest when she was 19 years old. She was the prettiest girl in Chicago society. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): This is your mother [Ednah Victoria Bundy]? Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: It doesn't seem to want to stay up here. It looks like it's leaning back. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): There you go. Speaker 2: Yup, that's my mom, Ednah Bundy. Ednah Taylor--Ednah Bundy Taylor. Speaker 1: Can you spell her name? Ednah is spelled slightly different, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Spell it for us--Ednah. Speaker 2: E-D-N-A-H. She put an "H" on her name but my sister didn't use an "H". Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): And how old was she when she was--when this photograph was taken? Speaker 2: About 56. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): She--wait--she wasn't 56. It was taken in--she wasn't 56 in this photo, was she? Speaker 2: I don't-- Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Well, what were you saying about the beauty contest? Speaker 2: What do I think about it? Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Didn't you say your mother won a beauty contest? Speaker 2: Yeah, when she was 19. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: I think the picture was taken probably around the time she was 19 or so, right-- Speaker 1: Could be-- Speaker 2: --'cause you were referring to her picture. Speaker 1: It's a shame that people don't-- Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): How about this one, Ms. Matlock? What is this? Speaker 1: This is the Children's Theatre Group of Chicago, an organization founded to entertain children. These women, they represent the best of our cultural groups and they--they include some of the most interesting and professional groups in Chicago. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, now are you in this photo? Speaker 1: Yes, I'm right in the middle, in front-- Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Right here. Speaker 1: --right there. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): So, that's you right there. If you look at our little TV, that's you in the center? Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Look to your--look to your left at the little TV. That's you, right? Speaker 1: Oh, here, okay. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Center-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: This is Mrs. Sylvester White. This is Lydia Lewis. This is [HM] Judge [William] Sylvester White's wife. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, on the right? Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, and who is that on the left? Speaker 1: Lydia Lewis. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: Now she is deceased. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): All right, well that's very good. Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): What year do you think? Do you have any idea? Speaker 1: Oh, that would be in the '50's [1950s]. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Very good. Next photo please. Speaker 1: This looks like-- Speaker 2: That paper has been-- Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): We need to get you a new scrapbook. Speaker 2: I think so. I would think so. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): I think it'll preserve these photos. Speaker 2: I think we need to have a new scrapbook. Yes, we do. Speaker 1: All right, if I can handle this one. All right. This looks like the executive committee of the same group-- Speaker 2: Yes, Children's Theatre Group of Chicago--share the program and-- Speaker 1: Is this like the executive committee or something or the officers of the group? Speaker 2: Yes, these would be the leaders. This is the leadership group of this group and in it are some of the most prominent women in Chicago. There's Mary Brock, up there. Speaker 1: We'll start--who's this? Speaker 2: The third from the top-- Speaker 1: Oh, do you know who this is? Let's just start each one. Do you know who this one is? Speaker 2: That's Helene London. Speaker 1: Okay, this one? Speaker 2: This one, I don't know. Speaker 1: Okay this one? Speaker 2: Oh, what's her name? Louise Briscoll--Louise Briscoll. Speaker 1: This one? Speaker 2: I can't--I don't have--what did I do with my glasses? What did I do with my glasses? Speaker 1: You might be able to see them better on the screen. Speaker 2: Maybe so. Speaker 1: You can get a little closer. Speaker 2: I don't know why I didn't have my glasses. Speaker 1: Okay, let's start here. We were right here. This one. Do you know who this one is? Speaker 2: That looks like-- Speaker 1: If you don't know, let's just move on. We'll just get what we can. What about this one? Speaker 2: That's--it looks like Madeline Morgan. It looks like Madeline Morgan. Speaker 1: Okay, this one? Speaker 2: Wouldn't you rather leave it blank than put the wrong name? Speaker 1: Well, yeah, if you don't know, just say I don't know, and if you know, just tell me, you know. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's what I-- Speaker 1: We'll just do what we can. That's Mary-- Speaker 2: That's Mary Brock. Speaker 1: That's Mary Brock. This looks like? This is who? Speaker 2: Let's see who that looks like. That's funny. Speaker 1: Let's just move on to another one. How about this one? Speaker 2: I used to know her so well. Isn't that awful. Speaker 1: Okay, right here. Speaker 2: That looks like Louise Woodlieb (ph.) but I'm not sure. Speaker 1: Okay, how about this one? Speaker 2: Now, that's Lydia Lewis. This is me and this I can't make out. Speaker 1: Okay, that's good. Speaker 2: I can't make out. I'm so sorry. Speaker 1: That's all right. So we've got some of them. Speaker 2: (Unclear) to do picture. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, tell us about this photo, on the tape--we're on the tape now. Speaker 2: This is--Lord have mercy. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): You know it's your nephew. Speaker 2: Oh, we call him--we call him "Chipper." Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We call him Chipper. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): And who-- Speaker 2: This is my lovely niece [sic, nephew] and his granddaughter--and his little granddaughter. Yeah, that's a granddaughter. Speaker 1: Okay, so that's Chipper and that's his granddaughter? Speaker 2: Yeah, I can't think of his name 'cause I don't see him that often but he's a doll. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, tell us about this one? Speaker 2: Oh-- Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Who is this one? Is this-- Speaker 2: This is Frances T. Moseley, when she--her engagement was announced to Addison C. Moseley. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, what year would this have been? Speaker 2: This was about 1938 or '39' [1939]. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Great, okay. Let's go to this small colored photo up here and tell us about this one. Speaker 2: Can you lower it a little bit? Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Oh, yeah, we'll fix it. Speaker 2: Oh, this is Raleigh and Gloria and I don't know who that boy is. Speaker 1: These are your brothers and sisters? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. This is my brother, Raleigh, and his lovely wife, Gloria. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): When was this one taken? Speaker 2: Lord knows. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, let's move on to this photo. Tell us about this one please. Speaker 2: Yeah, now this looks like Raleigh. This looks like my nephew Raleigh, Raleigh Taylor. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): How does he spell Raleigh? Speaker 2: R-A-L-E-I-G-H. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Okay, how about this one? Speaker 2: Now this is my favorite. Now you saw Dawn when she came in a while ago, this is the big one. Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. Speaker 2: Yes, she (unclear). And this is-- Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): So, on the left is--with the stripes is Dawn? Speaker 2: Yes, on the left, with the stripes. This is my niece, Dawn Williams. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, and next to her? Speaker 2: And this is her little sister, Marsha Taylor. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, and Marsha is spelled? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): How does she spell Marsha? Speaker 2: M-A-R-S-H-A. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, great. Speaker 2: Marsha, okay. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): All right. Now we're going to go to this photo here. Speaker 2: That's Warren E. Taylor. Now that has a card in it to identify it. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: This is my nephew, Warren E. Taylor. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: He's the father of these two girls. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): These two right here? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, we've shot down and so now let's go--let's see--let's first of all--let's go to the--let's see if I can get those. Speaker 2: Let's see, I can't-- Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): You will in a minute. Speaker 2: Now this is Dawn. That's Dawn. Dawn. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, and that's a graduation from high school or college? College graduation? High school--high school? Speaker 2: This is high school. Yeah this is-- Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, can you go the center panel. Speaker 2: --yeah, this is high school. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): All right. Go ahead and switch to the center photo. Okay, now we're going to do, let's see, this photo right, where is it--right here. Hang on one second. Speaker 2: It's my father and his two--and his brothers and this is my father. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, on the right, tell us the location? Speaker 2: On the right is my dad, Creed Anderson Taylor of Kansas City. This is Uncle Raleigh and Uncle Harry. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Tell us where Uncle Harry is in the picture. Say on the left. Speaker 2: That's Uncle-- Speaker 1: Is this your father here? Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): No, father is on the right. Speaker 1: Oh, he's on the right. Speaker 2: Yeah, on the right. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Now, you made a glare, Larry. Speaker 2: I thought there were four men on that picture, all four of the brothers. One brother is missing. Okay. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, could you just give us the spellings of the brothers names, starting with the one on our left, in the dark suit. Speaker 2: Yes, on the left is Uncle Harry, H-A-R-R-Y. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, then in the center and the spelling. Speaker 2: Then Uncle Raleigh, R-A-L-E-I-G-H. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: And then the right is Creed A. Taylor, our father. The head of the Taylor clan. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, great. Now let's go over here to let's see. Speaker 2: Now there are the same two girls. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, we kind of got them. Speaker 2: There's Dawn with the long pretty hair. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: And Marsha, our little sister. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Hold on. Look at the small TV. How about this colored photo here. Speaker 2: Yeah, check that one. Speaker 1: Where? Oh, yes. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): What about this one? Speaker 1: Oh, that's over on that board. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Oh, I had the wrong side. Here, this one, I'm sorry. Speaker 1: Oh, my goodness, look at all those kids. I could never identify all of them. This is Julie. She's a doctor now, Dr. Julie. Speaker 2: Dr. Julie. Speaker 1: I don't know who that is. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Let's do the right--oh, those are-- Speaker 1: Dawn-- Speaker 2: Yeah-- Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Yes. Speaker 2: Oh, this is a picture of the--this is the West Indian group--this is the Consul General of Jamaica but-- Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): The white guy on the left. Speaker 2: This is-- Speaker 1: Don't ask me, he was--lived so long. Speaker 2: Okay, and where are you in this picture? Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Half-- Speaker 2: I used to know them all but you forget, it's a shame. It's really a shame. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Are you at the bottom right in this photo? Speaker 2: Is this you? Where are you? Speaker 1: Let's see, no, where am I? Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): In the lower-- Speaker 1: Here I am. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Oh, okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, here I am. Speaker 2: Oh, you're here. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Yeah, okay, all right. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's it. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, and when and where was this taken? Speaker 2: This was taken in Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, this was taken in Chicago. Speaker 1: Do you know the year? Speaker 2: This was at a travel--this was at a travel show. You see they had the straw hats some of them are wearing and all. That was sponsored by the American West Indian Association and the gentleman to the left is the Consul General. Speaker 1: Do you have approximately the year that this was taken? Speaker 2: These pictures were taken in the, I would say '50's [1950s]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, '50's [1950s]. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): How about this photo here? Speaker 2: Here? Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Look at the TV--the little TV. Speaker 2: Oh, here I keep forgetting. Here? Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): This one. Tell us about this photo right here, this one, the one on the TV? Speaker 2: Yeah, I have no idea. I don't remember ever seeing that face before. I couldn't--when I saw it this afternoon, I couldn't believe it. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): When was this photo taken? Speaker 2: This was taken not too long ago, about five years ago. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: With my hair--I could tell by my hair. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, how about this photo here? Speaker 2: Here, here is Gloria and [Raleigh] Story_ID: 80718 Speaker 1: The first photo here, can you give us any commentary that you want on this photo. This is from the Sunday Chicago "B", 1942. It says, Senior Hostess and Dean of the hostess charm school of the Servicemen Center. Is that correct? Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, Ms. Frances Taylor-- Speaker 2: Servicemen Center No. Three. We had three Servicemen Centers at Chicago, then-- Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: --and so I was at number three. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, and you were Ms. Moseley at this time, right. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: And I was the Dean of the girls of the young hostesses. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: I was the Dean. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Excellent, excellent. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Let me just-- Speaker 2: See, that's enlarged. See the printing? The letters are larger. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, great. It says on the back that this photo came from Rodin's (ph.) Photo and Press Service, November 9th, 1964. So, Ms. Matlock, if you could give any comments here (simultaneous) (unclear)-- Speaker 2: That was during a political campaign when Roosevelt--when [Hubert] Humphrey was running--Humphrey was running to be [vice] president so we--we women decided to help Humphrey so we bought those hats with the tassels, the kind you graduate in. You call that a mortarboard. It has a name and so we all--we wore them downtown in the streetcars and the buses so people would say, "What's that"? "What you got that on for?" "What you wear that for?" Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: We explained so that gave us a chance to talk about our president. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA CHILD'S VOICE): So you wore just the--so you can explain it for attention-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, now this was, who you said Humphrey was running? Speaker 2: Humphrey and [President Lyndon B.] Johnson. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): In 1963? The date on this photo was 1964 so that would have--the campaign would have taken place in '63' [1963]. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Right? Speaker 2: I'm sorry, I don't have the paper. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, okay, so it was Humphrey and Johnson. I got you, okay. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): All right and then what--where was this photo taken? Speaker 2: At the "Chicago Defender" office. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Oh, great, okay. Speaker 2: Upstairs. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: Our headquarters were there, upstairs. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, very good. Speaker 2: All right, the one in the middle with the dark dress on-- Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, go ahead, we're recording now. Speaker 2: --was a concert singer, yes-- Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): If you could tell me--if you could tell me when and where this was taken-- Speaker 2: --yes, I was in Kansas City to my relatives services-- Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Can you identify-- Speaker 2: --and I met him for the first time. I met Lewis Clymer--Judge Clymer for the first time. He was at my father's side and this is his wife on the left. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, so starting from the left is Judge Clymer's wife. Do you remember her first name? Speaker 2: No, I don't. I only met her that one time. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, and then moving from left to right, the next person is yourself? Speaker 2: And Esther Doby. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: Esther St. James. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Esther St. James. Speaker 2: Yes, she had married recently. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: Esther St. James-- Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): And then-- Speaker 2: --she's a concert singer. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Oh, great, okay, and then Judge Clymer. Speaker 2: And Judge Lewis Clymer, L-E-W-I-S. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): I-S- (simultaneous), okay. Speaker 2: Clymer. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): And this is in Kansas City. Do you have any idea what year this would have been? Do you think it's maybe in the '60's [1960s]? Speaker 2: Yes, it would be. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Fifties [1950s], '60's [1960s]? Speaker 2: It would be in the '50's [1950s]. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): The '50's [1950s] or '60's [1960s], okay. Speaker 2: Uh-huh, yeah. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Right, thank you. Next we have this photo here. Speaker 2: Oh, that's a lovely picture. That's, you know, that one. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA CHILD'S VOICE): Aunt Gloria. Speaker 2: Yes, you're uncle and your cousin. That's Gloria and her husband, Raleigh. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, let's go from left to right if you could and identify-- Speaker 2: All right, Mrs. Stalnaker. What is her husband's name? Stalnaker--I can't remember what his first name is. I should have called to get it--and then his daughter is a bride and then the next one is my brother, whom she was marrying, that was Raleigh, Raleigh Taylor and then Matlock. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: Sorry I don't remember. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Where and when was this taken if you can tell us that? Speaker 2: In Kansas City. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay and do you remember the year for this one? When this wedding took place? Speaker 2: No, I'm sorry I don't. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, and Stalnaker is spelled S-T-A-L-N-A-K-E-R? Speaker 2: Stalnaker. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, great. Speaker 2: Telephone. Do you want to answer it? Okay. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, how about this one, Ms. Matlock? Speaker 2: Oh, the idea of that one. That was an invitation to that big affair I told you about that had 400 people--the newspaper honoring a citizen. I was the writer and I did a lot of writing for them so that they appreciated it and they tendered this dinner to honor me for all of my civic work 'cause I was always putting something in the paper about my club work. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, now do you know what year that was? It doesn't say the year. Speaker 2: No, the important thing about that is I--he said, are you going to have a-- Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, and that was--that was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: And that was our theme-- Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): That was 1972. Speaker 2: And that was our theme, yes, '72' [1972]. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, so that last picture we had a date of 1972-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): --and how about for this photo? This is your brother, correct? Tell us about this one. Speaker 2: This is my little brother. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Give us his name-- Speaker 2: One of my brothers. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): --and spell it? Speaker 2: Yes, this was--this is my brother Paul David Taylor. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, how would we spell--Paul David, okay. And this is obviously in the Military? Speaker 2: I'm sorry I've forgotten his rank. I forgot what rank he had. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): What branch of the Service was he in, ma'am? Speaker 2: I-- Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Army, Navy, Air Force, Marine? Speaker 2: I have papers of things but I've misplaced them or they got misplaced but I--when I moved I lost a lot of my material. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA CHILD'S VOICE): They could be in storage, Aunt Frances. Speaker 1: Huh? Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA CHILD'S VOICE): It could be in storage. Speaker 1: Yes, some of it is in storage, you're right about that. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, then let's do this one. Speaker 1: And that's my dear little sister--my dear big sister. That's my sister Edna. These are my family. Edna Morrison. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: She was an assistant principal-- Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: --of the Dodge [Elementary] School on the West Side. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, great. Go ahead when you're ready with the description. Speaker 1: Ah, yes. Now this is one of our school programs where all of the children were participating. I--on the caption it explained what the whole thing was about. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, right. We have--this was--this is from the "Pittsburgh Courier"-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): --March 22nd, 1941. It says 'the panel discussion on "Your Child and the Community Art Center" conducted at the meeting of the Forestville School, Parent-Teachers' Association, March 11th, featured several children: Barbara Browning, Arthur Joe, Charles Hall with Gertrude Gamble, Mayor of Forestville, Grace Walker and Fred Rogers, Vernon Winslow, assistant director of the South Side Community Art Center, Mrs. Frances Taylor Moseley, faculty David Ross, exhibit director of the Art' and it's cut off there. Mrs. Alvia Stephens representing the PTA. Anything to add to that? So you were director of the Community Art Center? Speaker 1: That was so long ago, I've forgotten. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): You have. Doesn't it bring it back when you see this? Speaker 1: It does in a way-- Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: --but there's so many other things I've done since then-- Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Oh, okay. Speaker 1: --that-- Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Well, hopefully we've covered those. I believe we have. Speaker 1: Yeah. (OFF-CAMERA CHILD'S VOICE): Aunt Frances, you don't remember those files we had? Speaker 2: Huh? (OFF-CAMERA CHILD'S VOICE): You don't remember those files we had? We stapled newspapers together and put the files in the newspapers? Speaker 1: Your voice is so soft. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA CHILD'S VOICE): You don't remember the files we had when we sorted them out on the floor? You gave me pieces of paper and you had certain words on them and then we put the papers in a certain file and all the files we put together we stapled newspapers and we put the files in them. Speaker 1: I don't--I looked over all my papers in my room, every one of them. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA CHILD'S VOICE): (Unclear). Speaker 1: All of them, I didn't see that...