 Story_ID: 599577 Speaker 1: I'm Denise Gines, the interviewer for The HistoryMakers, and Matthew Hickey is the videographer. Would you please state your name and spell it for me, please, including any middle names? Speaker 2: Henry Heywood Mitchell [HistoryMaker Reverend Henry Mitchell], H-E-N-R-Y, H-E-Y-W-O-O-D, Mitchell, M-I-T-C-H-E-L-L. Speaker 1: Your date of birth? Speaker 2: September 10, 1919. Speaker 1: Your place of birth? Speaker 2: Columbus, Franklin County, Ohio. Speaker 1: What is the location of this interview? Speaker 2: My residence in the City of Atlanta [Georgia]. Speaker 1: Today's date? Speaker 2: February the 16, 2010. Speaker 1: It's July [July 16, 2010]. Speaker 2: July. Speaker 1: (Laughter) It's okay. Speaker 2: Oh, my goodness. Speaker 1: It's okay, July, okay. And what is your occupation or former occupation? Speaker 2: My former occupation, I'm retired now, was professor in seminaries for many years. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I have been a pastor and a teacher. Story_ID: 599578 Speaker 1: Now I'm gonna ask you some fun questions. Tell me what is your favorite food? What do you like to eat? Speaker 2: I love ice cream, but that's not food, I guess. That's dessert. Speaker 1: But that's fine. Speaker 2: But salmon or something like that. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: What about a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Favorite vacation destination, locally is Hilton Head [Hilton Head Island, South Carolina]. I go there every year. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Not really, but if I had to have one, it would be either spring or fall (laughter). Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: No. Story_ID: 599579 Speaker 1: Let's begin by talking about your family. And we can begin with your mother. If you would, tell me her name and where and when she was born, if you know? Speaker 2: My mother's name, Bertha Estis, married to my father, Mitchell, E-S-T-I-S [Bertha Estis Mitchell]. She was born in Ross County, Chillicothe, Ohio, 1894. Speaker 1: Did your mom talk to you about her growing up at all? Speaker 2: Not a great deal, no. I don't remember much about her, her growing up. Speaker 1: Do you know, did she grow up on a farm-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA INTERRUPTION) Speaker 1: Okay, we're, we're gonna stop it for a second. Speaker 2: Okay, you were going to tell me about your mother. You said you didn't know much about her growing up. But do you know whether she lived in the city, and how much-- Speaker 1: She lived in a small town called Chillicothe, Ohio. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: She grew up in what amounted to a community of relatives. She had several first cousins that might as well have been sisters. It was a otherwise German community. And when she was small she spoke a little German. I wish she had taught it to me. It would have helped when I did my doctorate. Speaker 2: And was your mother German? You said it was a German community? Speaker 1: No, but the German neighbors gave my grandmother the name that they gave my mother, which was Bertha. Speaker 2: Okay. Did they live in a rural area? Did they live on--tell me-- Speaker 1: It was a small town. Chillicothe was a rather small--the only big thing there was Camp Sherman in World War I [WWI], which was close to where they lived. Speaker 2: Okay. And what about your grandmother? What was her name, and was she born there as well? Speaker 1: She was born in Virginia. Her name was Elizabeth Lewis [Elizabeth Lewis Estis]. Her maiden name was Lewis, L-E-W-I-S. Speaker 2: And she was born in Virginia? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Okay. And tell me about your grandmother. Did you have a relationship with her? Speaker 1: Yes. When my younger brother [Elbert Mitchell], younger--I had two brothers. The younger of them had a long season of whooping cough. They almost lost him. And while he was being cared for, my mother put the other two boys of us in the care of her mother, which was about forty-eight miles away. Speaker 2: So where did your grandmother--what's the name of the town where she lived? Speaker 1: My grandmother? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Chillicothe, Ohio. Speaker 2: Okay. You said she lived forty-eight miles away from where? Speaker 1: From Columbus [Ohio]. Speaker 2: From Columbus. Speaker 1: Forty-eight miles from Columbus, yeah. Story_ID: 599580 Speaker 1: Tell me about your relationship with your grandmother [Elizabeth Lewis Estis]. Tell me what type of person she was. Speaker 2: She was a jovial, freckled faced lady. She (laughter), she cooked good biscuits. And my mother [Bertha Estis Mitchell] didn't believe in biscuits because she thought they ought to be on something nutritious. But grandma thought she should feed me 'til I wanted no more. My mother thought she knew how much I was supposed to have, so I remembered my grandmother very affectionately 'cause she cooked what I liked and all I wanted to eat. She had me picking up apples in the backyard, and she had stirring a big steel pot over an open fire while she made apple butter. And I remember those things. I still eat a lot of apple butter. Speaker 1: Tell me about your grandmother's house and what you would see, if you, if you can remember, about her backyard. You said there was an apple tree. What else went on in, in that area in which she lived? Speaker 2: Well, there was a pump for a cistern where they saved rainwater, and then there was a well. And then there was this spot where they boiled things on. In this big pot she boiled clothes a little before she put them through a handwringer. So I went through all of those things with her. Speaker 1: What else can you remember? Speaker 2: What's that? Speaker 1: What else can you remember? Speaker 2: I can remember her out there on the back porch doing her laundry and singing. You could have heard her a block away (laughter). She was a, a very--how should we--she was well adjusted. She, she worked hard and perspired a lot and all that, but she was a happy person. She died, unfortunately, when she was about I think sixty-four. She had strokes. Speaker 1: Did she work outside of the home? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. What about your grandfather? What was his name? Speaker 2: Henry Estis, E-S-T-I-S. He, he was a country preacher in his later years. By that time I was with him. He could do everything. He could build a house singlehanded. He was a carpenter. In those days they had lath and plaster. He could trowel a plaster wall 'til shone almost like a mirror. He didn't--he tried not to ask anybody to do anything. He had his own charger for his battery, for his Model T Ford [Ford Model T], which you started by a crank. And I remember all those things. He could build a house. Not only did he do carpentry and plastering, but he did everything else, and he did build houses, or extensions on houses. On the weekend he was a country preacher. And I have been known to ride to him to one of the churches where he went once a month in a town even smaller than Chillicothe [Ohio]. He also, at times, grew plants like green beans and went through the streets selling green beans out of his, back of his car. He had an interesting stance. He looked unfortunately like Hitler [Adolf Hitler], but he didn't like to know that. He was taller than Hitler too. But he, he didn't want to work for a white man at all, though he looked as white as anybody. So he did all of these like truck garden selling, and he could build a room on your house and all of that and do all of the work. He fixed his own car. He, he, he was very self-sufficient. Speaker 1: How much education did he have? Speaker 2: Maybe three grades. Speaker 1: And what about your grandmother? Did she--about how education did she have? Speaker 2: I have no way of knowing. I don't think that was ever discussed. Speaker 1: Did they own the land that they lived on? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: I had an interesting experience with them. He had a big house on the front and a garage on the back of the lot. And one day he jacked the garage up and moved it to a new foundation in the middle of the, the, of the lot. And then he built a house on the foundation that was on the, the back of the lot. And when he moved the two car garage up, he put planks down and put logs under it, and my grandmother pushed one plank, and he pushed the other. And when the plank ran out or a log ran out, I would grab the log from the back and put it in the front. So we were house movers, and I was maybe six years old. Story_ID: 599581 Speaker 1: Now do you know your grandparents--your great-grandparents? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Do you know their names? Speaker 2: I think my great-grandmother that I knew more about was the one who escaped by the Underground Railroad. I think her name was Mary [ph.]. She escaped to London, Ontario [Canada], and that's where my Grandfather Mitchell [Henry Mitchell], was born. But whereas I had always thought he was Marshall's [ph.] offspring, it turns out that he said that, but his real father was a British soldier posted in London on the Thames [Thames River], Ontario, Canada, in the year 1852. Speaker 1: Okay. And his name was, the great-grandfather? Speaker 2: His, my great-grand--Thomas Mitchell [ph.], I think. I've never been able to verify that, but I should--when I was in Scotland I should have looked him up in the archive, but it didn't occur to me at the time. Speaker 1: Okay, so Thomas Mitchell you believe was a, a British soldier? Speaker 2: Yes, Scotch-Irish British soldier. Speaker 1: Scotch-Irish, okay. And-- Speaker 2: Well, Mitchell was a Scotch name, and the Irish came over mostly from the fact that the Scots moved over to Northern Ireland, and then eventually they moved over here because of a famine. Speaker 1: Okay. And do you know more about the story about how Mary escaped on the Underground Railroad? Where was she coming from? Speaker 2: Southampton County, Virginia. She was from Nat Turner's neighborhood. Speaker 1: And do you know what year she was born? Speaker 2: Have no idea. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so, they were in Canada, and that's where she had your grandfather, Henry. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 599582 Speaker 1: Do you know when Henry [Mitchell's paternal grandfather, Henry Mitchell] moved to, to Ohio? Speaker 2: Oh, that's a long story. Him, his mother married a, an escaped slave all the way from Alabama, a very talented--they called him master carpenter. We probably would have called him a contractor. He decided to cash in on the wealth of the Gold Rush. And in the waning years of the Gold Rush in California, he took his wife and his stepson, my great-grandmother and her son, around Cape Horn, all the way from New York [New York] down to the bottom tip of South America, came back up on the other side. I have since done that route in a big steam liner, and I don't know how they did it in the wooden ships in those days, 'cause it's rough down there. But he settled in San Francisco [California] and was doing quite well I think, very fine cabinet work and so forth in the homes that he built. He taught my grandfather the trade. And one day when my grandfather was fifteen, he left a harm--hammer mark in a, in a hardwood floor. And this is the story my grandfather told me. And his father hit him with a two by four and knocked him between the floor joists, and they were no longer together. He had promised to send my grandfather back to the East to college in Oberlin [Ohio]. There were two schools that accepted blacks, Oberlin [Oberlin College, Oberlin, Ohio] and a school named Berea down in Kentucky [Berea College, Berea, Kentucky]. But at that point, they broke off relations. Nevertheless, my gram- great-grandmother, I don't know how she did it, but she talked to a Baptist missionary, and he told her about a college that black folk went to in Pennsylvania, Lincoln University [Lincoln University, Pennsylvania]. So grandpa went down to Panama and went across Panama and up to New York--this was before the Panama Canal--and entered Lincoln University. He had to do some of his high school work there, and he finished there in 1876. And so when I went there it was sixty-five years later. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now, tell me just, once again, Mary [ph.] married who? Who was the-- Speaker 2: I haven't, I--her-- Speaker 1: Did the, the, the-- Speaker 2: I don't know what her-- Speaker 1: --her husband-- Speaker 2: --married name was even. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. But this was the, the gentleman who was the carpenter? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: During my grandfather's years at Lincoln, he got word that the man that mistreated him was mistreating his mother too or something like that. Took him a whole year to go home and come back. And I have some record of what he did while he was home. He did some interim work at a white Baptist church in Salinas [California]. I don't have any idea what--when his stepfather died. His mother moved from where she lived down in Salinas up to San Jose [California] and eventually lived a while in Oakland [California] before she was buried in Oakland. He visited her in 1928, so I know she lived that long, but I think that's when she died. That's when he came back to California. But his wife, my grandmother [Laura Parsons Mitchell], went on a trip to see her mother, who had moved to California, and married a fellow named (laughter) Mitchell also. And they were there during the San Francisco earthquake in 1907 [sic. 1906], I believe. Speaker 1: Nineteen o-seven [1907]? Speaker 2: Yeah. But my father [Orlando Mitchell], by that time, was grown and stayed in Ohio. But I know about it because his brother [Theodore Mitchell] told me about it. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, where your, your grandparents--me see, I'm just trying to make sure that we--okay, we, we have the, the order. Speaker 2: What was that again? Speaker 1: I was just trying to make sure that we, that we had covered all of the dates that-- Speaker 2: My-- Speaker 1: --that you a- available. Speaker 2: --my mother's father [Henry Estis] was from Virginia. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And they moved to Ohio. But my father's father, who was a minister, went to Lincoln University and then lived all over the country-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --as a preacher. Speaker 1: All right, well, let's go on to--I want to--well, we'll come back to talk a little bit more about your relationship with your mother [Bertha Estis Mitchell]. Story_ID: 599583 Speaker 1: Your father's name? Speaker 2: Orlando Washington Mitchell [Orlando Mitchell]. Speaker 1: And tell me about your father. Speaker 2: My father stayed in Columbus, Ohio, in 1907 because he was nearly grown when his father left Second Baptist Church in Columbus, Ohio, and went to Newark, New Jersey, or somewhere in that vicinity. My father was a letter carrier. Speaker 1: Okay, so he-- Speaker 2: He was a very strong church person. He was chairman of the trustee board. He was chairman of the troop committee for the Boy Scout troop [Boy Scouts of America]. He used all of his vacations to take Boy Scouts on camping trips. And the camping trips were interesting 'cause they were all makeshift camps. In those days, we couldn't go to the regular Boy Scout camp in our area, so we had to go to somebody's farm and make us a camp. And when I was fourteen, I cooked on makeshift fires with sheet metal over them for thirty people for two weeks. Speaker 1: What year was your father born? Speaker 2: Eighteen eighty-six [1886]. Speaker 1: And he was--tell me where he was born, because you said that he comes to Ohio in 1907. But where was he born? Speaker 2: He was born in Danville, Virginia. And his father lived in Danville shortly. Then he lived, lived in Farmville [Virginia]. Then he pastored the Bank Street Church [Bank Street Memorial Baptist Church] in Norfolk [Virginia] until 1900 or so when he moved from Bank Street Church Norfolk to Second Baptist Church, Columbus, Ohio. And that's where my daddy went to high school. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, tell me your grandfather on your father's side, what was his name? Speaker 2: Henry H. Mitchell, Henry Heywood Mitchell [Henry Mitchell], first; I'm the third. His original name was William Henry Mitchell. He's registered at Lincoln class of '76 [1876] as William Henry Mitchell. But there were so many people named William Henry that he changed it. In his class of, I think it was fourteen people [at Lincoln University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania], twelve of them were named William, and ten of those twelve were William Henry; same thing was true with my other grandfather. They both were named William Henry after William Henry Harrison, president and hero, and both of them dropped the William and kept the Henry. That's how I got my Henry. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay, I think we need to just go back and, and do a little clarification, because I think we were talking about your--when we were talking about your mother, I'm not sure, I'm not sure on, on the genealogy. So let's just take a minute to go back. Your mother was Bertha [Bertha Estis Mitchell]. Her mother was Elizabeth [Elizabeth Lewis Estis]? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And her father's name was Henry? Speaker 2: Henry Estis. Speaker 1: Okay. And then your grandmother--great-grandmother was Mary [ph.], the runaway, the, the-- Speaker 2: On my father's side, yeah. Speaker 1: No. We're talking about your mother's side. Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: Your great, your great-grandmother, Mary, was that not your great-grandmother on your mother's side? Speaker 2: Not that I know of. I've got a, a-- Speaker 1: The, the, the woman who was the slave that lived in Nat Turner's neighbor-- Speaker 2: That was my father-- Speaker 1: Okay, see, that's, that's why I wanted to go back. We originally were talking about your mother's side of the family, so we kind of got the genealogies a little bit mixed up. So I want to just make sure we get it straight. Okay, your great-grand--your grandmother--your great-grandmother, do you know her name, on your mother's side? Speaker 2: I don't remember it. Her fa- her husband's name was James, as I recall, James Lewis. Speaker 1: James Lewis, okay. And you don't remember the grand--great-grandmother? Okay. Speaker 2: I think her maiden name was Cooper [ph.]. That's about all I know. Story_ID: 599584 Speaker 1: On your father's side, your, your father's name was Orlando Washington Mitchell [Orlando Mitchell]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay, and he was born in 1886. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Your grandmother's name, your father's mother? Speaker 2: Laura Parsons Mitchell. Speaker 1: And do you know what year she was born? Speaker 2: No, I don't. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you know where she was born? Speaker 2: Richmond [Virginia]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I don't know what her--well, she had a strange genealogy because she had the same grandfather on both sides. Speaker 1: Really? Speaker 2: Her father [Joseph Gorgas Dill] was the son of a well known tobacco family. We still know that name, but I won't use it. And her mother was--gave birth to her because she had been used by her master. So his--her mother and father were-- Speaker 1: Brother and sister. Speaker 2: Yeah. One was master, and one was slave. Speaker 1: Now, those are your grandparents. Your great-grandmother, do you know her name? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: No? Okay. Speaker 2: Which great-- Speaker 1: Now we're talking about your father's side now. We're on your father's side. Speaker 2: You're what? Speaker 1: You're on your father's side. Mary [ph.] is now your great-grandmother on your father's side, right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. And she was the slave. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. And Thomas Mitchell [ph.] was the father. Speaker 2: He was a soldier. Speaker 1: Solder, okay. Speaker 2: British soldier. Speaker 1: And then she married and had a stepfather for your grandfather [Henry Mitchell]. Speaker 2: Right. Story_ID: 599585 Speaker 1: Tell me more about your father [Orlando Mitchell]. Speaker 2: My father was I suppose you could you say short, 5'5". He took various jobs after his folks moved east, and he stayed in Columbus [Ohio]. His earliest jobs, he worked for a haberdasher, men's clothing store. And then he worked at Columbus Motors Parts [ph.], which is why he rebuild engines, and I did too. And then in '22 [1922], he got a job as a letter carrier, and he stayed on that job until he retired. He had a previous marriage, however, and a son and a daughter, and all three of them were lost to tuberculosis, so that when he had his next family, he treasured them. He kept his boys with him everywhere he possibly could and gave his life to Boy Scouting and stuff like that. But way after a while, he had a daughter [Marjorie Mitchell Wilson], and of course, she took him away from us, but (laughter), or something like that. But he was a very family oriented man. He used all his vacations taking us to camps and things. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And he was a very--well, he had a saying: if a man made it, a man can fix it, and I'm a man. And he groomed me up with the strong opinion that if it was broke, I could fix it, and I've fixed washing machines and everything. Story_ID: 599586 Speaker 1: Tell me about your siblings. How many siblings do you have? Speaker 2: I had two brothers. My mother [Bertha Estis Mitchell] gave birth to three boys in thirty-nine months, 1919, September, when I was born; May of '21 [1921] my brother was born; my other brother was born December of '22 [1922]. So, we're born at nineteen month intervals. We were a tight group. People used to (unclear) those Mitchell boys. We, well, we, we were pretty active. We were delinquents, so. Speaker 1: What were your brothers' names? Speaker 2: My next brother was named Louis [Louis Mitchell] after my mother's mother's maiden name, but his was spelled L-O-U-I-S. Louis wound up with M.S.W. and M.Div. and a Ph.D. (laughter). My baby brother, Elbert [Elbert Mitchell], was named as the pastor of the church at that time. And he became a cartographic engineer and mapmaker and worked for, for the United States Geological Survey 'til he retired. Speaker 1: I'm sorry. What was his name? Speaker 2: Elbert. Speaker 1: Elbert. Speaker 2: Elbert Estis Mitchell. Story_ID: 599587 Speaker 1: Now, tell me about your growing up. And if you can think about your earliest childhood memory, what would it be? Speaker 2: The earliest thing I can remember is when I was circumcised belatedly and was in Children's Hospital [Nationwide Children's Hospital, Columbus, Ohio]. And I was looking out the window at the swans in Franklin Park [Franklin Park Conservatory and Botanical Gardens, Columbus, Ohio] and the lake. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I couldn't have been more than three and probably less. Story_ID: 599588 Speaker 1: If I were to ask you about a sound, a sight, or a smell that takes you back to that time when you were growing up, in your--between when you were born and say, elementary school, twelve years old, what would you think about? A sound, a sight, or a smell? Speaker 2: One of the things I remember most is we had a garden on the railroad right of way. Railroad right of way was real wide, and they couldn't build on it, but they let the neighbors use it for garden space. And then, of course, the railroad didn't have to cut the weeds. And my, some of my most vivid memories are planting and cultivating and harvesting. We were in the city, but I had the, the farm type experiences. Speaker 1: Okay, so that-- Speaker 2: When I was--I forget now. Anyway, my first money I ever earned was when I took--I had a plot, wasn't more than about ten or twelve, by ten or twelve, something like that, the garden, and I grew things with the (unclear)--what is it? Forget it--anyway, the, the, the club they have for kids in farms. And I took my stuff to the fair, and I got two dollar prize. So that was quite memorable. Speaker 1: Okay. So, the garden would be a sight. What about a sound or a, a smell? Speaker 2: I could always hear the N and W railroad. We didn't--we lived about a block and a half from the Norfolk and Western [Norfolk and Western Railway]. The garden was their right of way, but it was about a half mile away. Speaker 1: Okay, and what about a smell? Speaker 2: I don't remember any smells. Story_ID: 599589 Speaker 1: Tell me about the neighborhood in which you grew up. If you were to--you said you lived in the city, so if, if you had to take me on a tour of a square block, what would I see? Who would own the stores? And who were some of your friends? Speaker 2: I grew up on a street that was in the late throes of transition from white to black. There were still couple of white families left. My friends were boys who lived in the block, in fact, on, most of them on my side of the street. Speaker 1: Remember the name of the street? Speaker 2: Harvard Avenue, 1607 Harvard Avenue [Columbus, Ohio]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We moved out there about 1921. And at the time we moved there, the house was sort of a makeshift house, but it, and it didn't have central heat. We had a potbelly stove in the dining room. We had gas, lights, and we had toilet facility on the back end of the lot. My dad [Orlando Mitchell] hired a plumber to put plumbing in in a few years. He didn't do it right away. And we helped him put wires, electric wires in the house, 'cause like I say, he's one of these fellows that believe everything any other man did (laughter) he could do it. So, we would put our ears up against the wall, and he would drop what he called a mouse, was a weight on the end of a, of a string, and he would go up in the attic. In those days, they didn't have fire blocks. Now we put those between every--what's the word--anyway, between the, the two by fours there's a block. So if there was a fire, it would be blocked. They're called fire blocks. But he could drop it all the way down, and we would listen. When I was six years old, and I'd tell him the mouse is between these two. Then he would cut a hole in the wall, pull the mouse out, and pull the cord down, and the cord would pull the BX cable link, which was electric wires with a flexible case. And he would pull the wire down. And in thus doing it, we would help my father electrify the house. So he put in all the electricity, and he hired somebody to put in the plumbing, and eventually he hired somebody to put in a furnace. Then I had the great privilege of carrying the coal, which was dumped in the street, up the little grade and into the window to dump the coal down in the basement. And I hurt my back then. It's been hurt ever since (laughter). Speaker 1: All right, that was a great description of your home. Story_ID: 599590 Speaker 1: Now, describe the neighborhood, the people who lived in the neighborhood and some of the-- Speaker 2: People that lived in the neighborhood you might call lower middle class, although one side the neighbor was a cement contractor, 'cause he was like middle, middle class maybe. On the other side there was a fellow who worked in the railway yard. He, Mr.--his name was Cobb [ph.]; I think he, he hostled [ph.] freight engines in the, in the storage yard, but something like that. He used to go swimming and catch fish and give us some. He caught carp fish, which I now know are garbage fish. But in those days I didn't know that, great big fish, and we baked them and ate them. Speaker 1: Okay. You're giving me a, a tour around the, the whole block [in Columbus, Ohio]. Speaker 2: Across the street there was a fellow who was a waiter on the railroad [Norfolk and Western Railway]. Those were good car--good jobs. So we were fairly solid middle class at that time, because a contractor, freight yard worker, railroad; there was a man lived up the street named Mr. Saunday [ph.] who worked for a very wealthy family. Speaker 1: What did he do for that family? Speaker 2: Oh, he was a typical family servant. Speaker 1: Okay. Who owned the stores in your neighborhood? Speaker 2: There was a little store block--well, up the, up to the corner and over a, a short block. And then there was a Kroger store [The Kroger Company] half a block down the street. That was the two stores we went to. Speaker 1: Was there a park in your neighborhood? Where did you play? Speaker 2: We played in the street or on an empty lot. That lot was built up after--not very long after I was a child. Speaker 1: And what types of games did you play. Speaker 2: I don't remember playing any games much. I remember in the snows, sliding on my sled up and down the, the, the icy street; we would run and flop on the sled, stuff like that. We used to make things, like, we'd take old skates and make a scooter out of it, put one into skate on one end of the stick, and one on the other, and then a stick sticking up. We made a lot--I tried to make a pontoon boat. I took six ten gallon cans, and I made pontoons out of them. When I put them in the creek, the thing I had them holding them to the frame just split right off. My weld didn't hold at all. I had to give up on that one, but I was going to go down the creek with it-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --pontoon boat, like they have in the Pacific Islands, where you ride on top of a couple of floaters. Story_ID: 599591 Speaker 1: Was your school far from your home, your elementary school? Speaker 2: Three quarters of a mile. Speaker 1: Tell me about your school. What was the-- Speaker 2: My school was a strange thing. My--Eastwood elementary [Eastwood School, Columbus, Ohio] was on the edge of the hood. And the other side of the hood was a very exclusive mansion sort of thing. And it had been a virtually all-white school original. But my neighborhood became more and more black, especially after World War I [WWI]. So you had this strange combination. And eventually they gerrymandered the school district to move all of the blacks out of this school into the school in the hood. And they moved my two brothers [Louis Mitchell and Elbert Mitchell], but they didn't move me because I was sixth grade, and they didn't think it was too smart to send me over to another school for, for a single year. So they went to Mount Vernon Avenue [Garfield School, Columbus, Ohio] in the hood, and I went to sixth grade, and then I went to junior high, and junior high was almost across the street. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, in elementary school, Eastwood was the school that was predominantly white? Speaker 2: Majority white, but it had, like I say, a substantial number of blacks. Because originally it didn't, but it moved up little by little in the '20s [1920s] as a result of all of the African Americans that had moved in from the South to work in World War I. So then you had the strange phenomenon of school districts that would go down the middle of this street and pick up this family and go back to the middle of the street, so that they could separate--there, there were just too many blacks for them. They didn't want that, so they, they moved all of those people to a school that was actually further away to, to, to make my two brothers to an all-black school. And I could see my mother with her hands on her hips talking to the principal and really chewing her out about the fact that they had really segregated the schools. And Ms. Phillips [ph.] said, "Mrs. Mitchell [Bertha Estis Mitchell]--," my mother looked like a white woman--, "Mrs. Mitchell, I'm surprised." She said, "Well, you needn't be surprised." And she went right back to work on that woman. I'll never forget that (laughter) long as I live. But they did move my brothers anyway. Speaker 1: Okay. So your brothers went to Mount Vernon (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They went to Mount Vernon, and I stayed at Eastwood. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We all went to the same Pilgrim Junior High [Pilgrim Junior High School, Columbus, Ohio], which was almost across the street. It was about a block and a half away really. Then we all went to the same high school [East High School, Columbus, Ohio]. Story_ID: 599592 Speaker 1: Tell me about your elementary years [at Eastwood School, Columbus, Ohio]. What type of student were you? Speaker 2: I can remember my porch--report card for the first year. My mother [Bertha Estis Mitchell] went up and down the street showing it (laughter). They had a system where E was excellent; G was good; F in this case was fair; and P was poor. And I had a card with seventeen Es and two Gs on there. And my mother was very happy about that. Speaker 1: What grade were you in? Speaker 2: That was first grade (laughter). Speaker 1: (Unclear) first grade (laughter), okay. Speaker 2: I remember also that I started out with a left hand, and the teacher made me go to right hand. Speaker 1: Yeah, at that time, they thought it was something wrong with being left handed. Speaker 2: Yeah. They tell me that really messes some people-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA INTERRUPTION) Speaker 2: Yes, and, and you were saying about being left hand someone one told you-- Speaker 1: I was--I have heard that people have personality difficulties once they are shifted over. I never did write very pretty; I know that. Speaker 2: Okay. So the rest of your elementary school days, were your grades just as, as good as your first grade? Speaker 1: Just about, yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. What were some of the classes that you really enjoyed in elementary school? Did you like to read-- Speaker 1: In elementary school I loved geography. And I saw a little boy in an Atwood Geography [Frye-Atwood Geographical Series] in Peru or someplace who looked just like me. And the kids said you've been down there. Yeah, I told them. I liked geography, and I really liked math. In fact, I really loved geometry and all that stuff when I got up to high school. Speaker 2: Was there a favorite teacher in elementary school? Speaker 1: In elementary school it was probably this Mrs. Shockley [ph.]. She was a mother of several children. And she's the one that helped me to love tables, multiplication tables, stuff like that. My first grade teacher, I could remember her name is Zwarner [ph.]. I liked her, but like I said, she's the one that made me move from left. So I guess Ms. Shockley would have had to have been the one. She's the only one whose name I remember (laughter). Speaker 2: In elementary school, did you take any music lessons, or were you involved in sports? Speaker 1: No sports. I sang in choirs and stuff. I started taking violin lessons later. But no, I didn't take any music lessons-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --'til I was in junior high [Pilgrim Junior High School, Columbus, Ohio] I think. Speaker 2: What activities were you involved in? We're still staying within elementary school. What activities were you involved in outside of school, extracurricular activities? You talked about the, the Boy Scouts [Boy Scouts of America]. Was that in elementary school years? Speaker 1: I was pretty much into junior high when-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I was in elementary school maybe a year or so. Story_ID: 599593 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Were there any other activities? Speaker 2: Sang in--my church had an idea that they, anything they saw that's supposed to be great, they, you know, anything white people can do, we can do it too. So I grew up, I started singing soprano in a boys choir, which was to match the boys choir that's now famous, operating out of Princeton, New Jersey [American Boychoir]. But it started in the Episcopal church downtown and 'cause it was a, a white boys choir, and we sang in a black boys choir. And when we started singing parts, I was among the first to sing alto. Speaker 1: What was the name of your church? Speaker 2: Second Baptist Church [Columbus, Ohio]. Speaker 1: Do you remember who the pastor was? Speaker 2: What's that? Speaker 1: Do you remember who the pastor was at that time? Speaker 2: Well, the one that was really effective me formatively was E.W. Moore. But the one most of my youth was a man named J.B. Pyeth [ph.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Well-- Speaker 2: And then there were some supply pastors when H.A (unclear)--when I got to high school [East High School, Columbus, Ohio], the pastor, the most important pastor was a man named C.F. Jenkins [Charles Frank Jenkins], 'cause he helped me through college and so forth. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. How old were you when you started--'cause you said in the choir you started as a soprano, and then as you got older, how long were you in the choir? As you got older you became an alto. What age did you start in the choir? Speaker 2: I haven't any idea. Speaker 1: Okay. How long? Speaker 2: I'm sure I must have been at least a couple of years old. I was probably eight or nine, something like that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I sang soprano at my tenth grade music lessons. And I wore my first pair of long pants to sing soprano in a concert for the school voice students. Shortly after that, I shifted to baritone. The voice changed. But I could see myself now with my first pair of long pants (singing), "Once a boy a rose espied. In the hedgerow blooming--." I mean, a German thing ['Heidenroslein']. Story_ID: 599594 Speaker 1: Now, let's, let's talk about the attire when you were coming up, because most of the time you wore short pants. Talk to me about the dress-- Speaker 2: Well, that's-- Speaker 1: --of that day. Speaker 2: --what everybody did. Speaker 1: I understand, but-- Speaker 2: Boys were not allowed to wear long pants. I wore either knickers or shorts. And my first pair of pants was, I think, white flannel. And that's when I--still wearing--still singing soprano with long pants now. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, talk to me about your other attire that was kind of standard for boys your age during that time. Speaker 2: That was it. I mean, you wore pants--you wore knickers or, or shorts, and that's it. Speaker 1: Okay. I know that they had different style hats. Boys wore like, what they call the Applejack hat. Speaker 2: I don't know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No? Okay. Speaker 2: --what that would be. Story_ID: 599595 Speaker 1: On to junior high school, and tell me more about your transition from elementary school to, to junior high school. Now you had a lot of black students in your elementary school, but there were white students. Was this the same in junior high school? Speaker 2: More so. Yeah, I, I would say there was maybe--I just guess--at least half and half in elementary school, at Eastwood [Eastwood School, Columbus, Ohio], 'til they ran the segregation of the school district. Eventually, shortly after that, they closed the school 'cause they didn't have enough students one, once they took the blacks out. Junior high became an elementary later on; for what reason, I'm not sure. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But it was easy going to junior high 'cause it was maybe as much as a block from my front door. Speaker 1: Now you, you said earlier it was Pilgrim Junior High [Pilgrim Junior High School, Columbus, Ohio], but you said Eastwood. Which, which one did you attend? Speaker 2: Pilgrim Junior High is the one that was like-- Speaker 1: That's-- Speaker 2: --like a block from my house. Speaker 1: Okay. And you went there in the seventh grade? Did you do seventh, eighth, and ninth? Speaker 2: Seven, eight, and nine. Speaker 1: Nine, okay. Speaker 2: It was there that I think I made the crucial transition into really loving math. I enjoyed multiplication tables in the fifth grade. But when I got to tenth grade, and the teacher had us proving geometric, whatever, and I pra- solved a problem one day, and he said it wasn't right, and I said it is right. And I proved that I was right, and I made the move--did it in fewer moves than he did it. And he was so absolutely happy about that, that I, that I challenged him and won (laughter). He, he sent for the principal and put me through the same routine. But it did backfire on us at one point, because my next brother [Louis Mitchell] went through and did very well to. My baby brother [Elbert Mitchell], the one that wound up being an engineer and living by math, was told, "You're one of those Mitchell brothers. I'm expecting you to do so and so." He was an excellent teacher, but that was a terrible mistake, 'cause he put my brother in the, my baby brother in the position of having to compete with his two older brothers, and that's not healthy. He made a mistake there, but he was a great guy otherwise. Speaker 1: What was his name? Speaker 2: Williamson [ph.], I think. Speaker 1: Were there--now, back to the elementary school, 'cause you said that happened in high school, but--I'm sorry--in junior high school. Were there any teachers that you remember from junior high school? And math is still your favorite-- Speaker 2: In jun- in junior high Ms. Judd [ph.] is the one who broke my problem with geometry. And she, little tiny lady about to retire, she sat in these little desks where you open up the top, and then seat folds up. She slid in beside me after school one or two days, and it was just like somebody had turned the light on. After that I just ate math. Speaker 1: Okay. What about reading? Did you do well in reading and writing as well? Speaker 2: I did well in reading, and handwriting was never pretty, if that's what you (laughter) mean. Speaker 1: No. I, I mean writing stories or essays. Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I could do all of that. Speaker 1: Did you enjoy it? Speaker 2: Yeah. My favorite, I guess though, was actually revolutionary history. I read novels about the Revolutionary War and stuff like that. Speaker 1: So you were really interested in, in history, or had an interest in history as well? Speaker 2: Well, I, I'm not sure it was history. I just thought they were exciting stories and stuff (laughter). Story_ID: 599596 Speaker 1: So, now in high school, and tell me the name of your high school. Speaker 2: East High [East High School, Columbus, Ohio]. Speaker 1: Okay. And had you always known that you would go to college? Speaker 2: Yeah. It's one of those strange things. Neither one of my parents [Bertha Estis Mitchell and Orlando Mitchell] finished high school, for reasons beyond their control actually. But I don't think there was ever any doubt in anybody's mind that we were gonna go to college. My father's father [Henry Mitchell] had finished (unclear)-- Speaker 1: Okay. So in high school, what are your interests now? Because in junior high school [Pilgrim Junior High School, Columbus, Ohio] and high school you become involved with the Boy Scouts [Boy Scouts of America]. Speaker 2: And the choir. Speaker 1: And, and you were still-- Speaker 2: My inter-- Speaker 1: --in the choir, um-hm. Speaker 2: Now what's the question? Speaker 1: Were there any other interests? Or you can tell me a story about-- Speaker 2: Well, there's choir, and there was-- Speaker 1: And the Boy Scouts. Speaker 2: And the Boy Scouts. I was interested in shop, 'cause I didn't--in junior high, I, I took a shop course, 'cause I wasn't, I wasn't aware at the time that I had to take up pre-college--when I got to tenth grade, then I took an academic course and stuff like, in the ninth grade, drafting. And I took machine shop and stuff like that in, in tenth grade. I took woodwork in the ninth grade, in junior high. Speaker 1: Okay. So, how do you prepare? Now you said that Mr. Jenkins helped you prepare for college. How did-- Speaker 2: Mrs. who? Speaker 1: You, you said C.J. Jenkins [sic. Charles Frank Jenkins] helped you prepare for college. Speaker 2: Did I? Jenkins? No. The ninth grade lady that helped me through, she--into algebra actually, was Ms. Judd [ph.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I don't remember talking about a Ms. Jenkins. Speaker 1: Okay. He was the principal. Who was the principal of, of, of your high school? Speaker 2: When I got to high school, it was the same principal I had in elementary, Ms. Phillips [ph.]. Speaker 1: All right. Let, let's stop here. Speaker 2: Jenkins was my pastor [at Second Baptist Church, Columbus, Ohio]. Story_ID: 599597 Speaker 1: --Body. Speaker 2: Nobody? Okay. Speaker 1: I helped myself. Speaker 2: Okay, you, you helped yourself to prepare for college. How did you prepare for college? Speaker 1: Well, I took Spanish [at East High School, Columbus, Ohio]; you had to have a language. I took chemistry. I took physics; I loved physics. I got a, I got a illustration of something right now that'll put a lump in your throat, coming from my experience in a physics lab. Speaker 2: What was that? Speaker 1: Well, the professor got out there with a stick, stuck it in a cup. The cup was called a beaker. Meanwhile, we're sitting sort of in bleachers, and here's this big bench. So, he said, "What happens if I heat this, this drop of water." We said, "It expands." "And what happens if I cool it off?" "It'll contract." He said, "Yeah?" "Sure, law of expansion and contraction." Said, "What if I cooled it off below thirty-two degrees?" Then suddenly it became obvious that law of expansion does not apply, because when they get ice cold they expand and break the milk bottle open when you part- . They used to deliver milk onto your front porch and stuff--and well, it didn't break the bottles, but you would push the top of--anyway, then he said, "What difference does that make?" We didn't know. And he said, "Well, if ice sank, it would close up all of the openings in the inner earth, and the heat exchange that water engages in would disappear. In other words, it, when it's too hot in the, in, in, on the earth, it is brought down by ocean, because ocean is always cooler and the wind off the ocean, keeps us from having extreme heat. And then, in the wintertime, when we could really get frozen to death, the ocean water heats the wind and warms it up. So you have this tremendous temperature control, which could not be true if there wasn't this one exception to the law of expansion and contraction." And then, with a lump in his throat and another drop of water in the corner of his eye, he said, "In so many words, this is a public school, and I can't take this any further." And I get a lump in my throat even now when I think about what this man was doing in that, in that physics lab to strengthen my faith, 'cause I could have shouted when he said that 'cause so many people thought science was the enemy of religion. Here's a man, if you know enough science, it'll help your religion, and it was a real, real important thing to me. Speaker 2: How else did you prepare? How did you decide what schools you would apply to? Speaker 1: Well, I decided to go to Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio] my first year 'cause that was the only place I could go, and the, the tuition in those days, days was very small. And of course, I could--had to pay a nickel to ride up to the high--to Ohio State. At that time, Ohio State had more students than any black school [HBCU]. It only had about thirteen hundred, but the typical black school, the biggest ones had a thousand, like Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]. I decided to go to Lincoln [Lincoln University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania] because my [paternal] grandfather [Henry Mitchell] had gone to Lincoln. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And I thought that I would get a scholarship because I was H. H. Mitchell III [HistoryMaker Reverend Henry Mitchell]. I got scholarships all right, but I didn't get it that way. Story_ID: 599598 Speaker 1: What year do you graduate from high school [East High School, Columbus, Ohio]? Speaker 2: January '37 [1937]. Speaker 1: Why did you graduate in January? Speaker 2: 'Cause I got ahead way back. I skipped the second grade of--I skipped a whole semester or something like that, and then that's how I got on the midyear. It was an interesting class too, 'cause it was only thirty-five of us, and then two of them were cousins of mine-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --girls. Speaker 1: Were you close, in the top 10 percent, close to-- Speaker 2: What's that? Speaker 1: Were you in the top 10 percent, close to being valedictorian? Speaker 2: Was I what? Speaker 1: In the top 10 percent of your class? Speaker 2: Oh, well, yeah, definitely. I finished high school at National Honor Society. There were four people in my class that finished National Honor Society, and three of them were black, although only 30 some percent of the class was black. And the other person, interestingly enough, was Jewish, and he was the darkest one in the bunch, which was a strange phenomenon indeed. One of them was a fellow named Cal Haskell [ph.], who became a very outstanding heart specialist, internal medicine specialist or something. And one of them was a girl named Mitchell, whose father [J. Arnett Mitchell] was principal at Champion Junior High [Champion Junior High School, Columbus, Ohio], which was a segregated black school. She was a very brilliant student too. Story_ID: 599599 Speaker 1: Now tell me about your experience going to Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio] for your first year of college. Speaker 2: Well, I did fairly well, but I--they had so many interesting things. I could play pool and swim and all that stuff. So, I did well enough, but I didn't make straight A's. Speaker 1: Okay. And what about-- Speaker 2: My lunch, I would make two big sandwiches. And I had a buddy whose mother was dead, and he didn't make--bring sandwiches. So, he would bring a dime, and he would get a quart of buttermilk. And I would drink a pint of his buttermilk, and he would eat one of my (laughter) sandwiches. We was poor. It was ahead--it was right, right at the peak of the Depression [Great Depression]. Speaker 1: Many people that we talk to during the Depression say that they didn't really realize that they were poor. Is that the same? Did you find the same view? Speaker 2: We didn't think of ourselves as poor, even though I--there were times when I hardly had a nickel for car fare. No nickel did I have for lunch. So my buddy had a nickel, and could buy the buttermilk. Story_ID: 599600 Speaker 1: Now, you talked a little bit about religion. But I want you to tell me more about your church [Second Baptist Church, Columbus, Ohio] and your affiliation, besides the choir. When did you, when did you get the call? Speaker 2: I got the call after I finished high school [East High School, Columbus, Ohio]. I was working on a job that was made for me, 'cause they didn't need me in that place [Truck Tractor Equipment Company]. But the fellow that was the head Negro in charge was a good friend of my dad [Orlando Mitchell]. My dad had been very helpful to this fellow when he almost died in an auto accident. They were in the Mat- Ma- Masonic lodge together, and he was the foreman. So my dad went to him one day and said, "My boy is finishing high school. Is there any possible chance you'd give him a job?" Said, "I don't have a job, but I'll make him a job." The result was that at points on the job where I was making twenty-five cents an hour, twelve dollars a week, he would have to put me somewhere to make it look like I was really needed, 'cause otherwise, the boss would have made him fire me. "You don't need that little boy." So, I handled freight that I shouldn't have handled. And I still got problems from that. And he would put me up in a warehouse assembling farm implements have been shipped in in pieces before he needed them. Usually, he would assemble whatever the harvester was or something like that. He would assemble it after he needed it. But he put me up there to put some stuff in stock already assembled. Well, I'm up here looking busy, pushing a ratchet wrench, putting spade lugs on a real big tractor wheel, and didn't take any brains at all, and my mind was floating all the time, they call free association. And one day it dawned on me, every time my mind floats I wind up in a church somewhere, in a pulpit somewhere, either in Africa or in the United States or wherever. And finally, it dawned on me that I was being called. And well, I did, I admired both of my grandpas [Henry Estis and Henry Mitchell] who were Baptist preachers, but I didn't admire them enough to want to join them. But it got on me so bad I couldn't sleep, so finally I yielded to the call. I to- I tried to keep it a secret 'cause people have been calling, telling me I was preacher all along. My--I don't know how this happened, but I, I could recite chapters from the Bible, and I don't even know when I memorized them. When I couldn't read, I could relate that: "Let not your heart be troubled: ye believe in God, believe also in me. In my Father's house are many mansions: if it were not so--," [John 14:1-2] when I did my first funeral, after I became a professional pastor, I'm walking down the aisle reciting this stuff in front of the coffin as it rolls down the aisle. And you would have thought I had been pastoring, 'cause I wasn't reading any--(laughter); I was just reciting. But it was because I've known when I couldn't read I could recite that stuff. Speaker 1: And, and that was just from going to church and hear- hearing it over and over again, you think? Speaker 2: I haven't any idea how I got it. It must have been something like that, because I don't remember my parents sitting down telling me, "Now memorize this or memorize that." Speaker 1: But you did go to Sunday school. Speaker 2: Oh yeah. I memorized the books of the Bible and all that sort of stuff. Story_ID: 599601 Speaker 1: Before we go on, what was the name of the company that you worked for? Speaker 2: Truck Tractor Equipment Company. Speaker 1: And what was the man's name that hired you? Speaker 2: Jack Fields [ph.]. He was the boss. He had me helping at anything he was doing. I packed; I read packing--read orders and packed stuff; I handled stuff when it was freight; and when our freight dock rotted out, I had to pick the stuff up and put it on the tailgate of a truck. I did a little of everything. I drove the truck when necessary. I mopped the floor first thing every morning. Speaker 1: So how long did you, did you work there? Speaker 2: I worked there from, oh, sometime in February to sometime in late July or something like that. Speaker 1: And so-- Speaker 2: I'm trying to remember. Speaker 1: So what, what happens next? Speaker 2: I worked--the final part of that summer, I worked with a carpenter and learned how to do double hung windows and stuff. (pause) Carpenter was a deacon in the church [Second Baptist Church, Columbus, Ohio]. His name was Henry too. Story_ID: 599602 Speaker 1: Now, 1937, you say you got the call right after high school [East High School, Columbus, Ohio], which was in '37 [1937]. But in '39 [1939] World War II [WWII] begins, and then they have the draft in 1940. Were you exempt from go--being drafted? Speaker 2: I signed up, and because I was by that time in seminary--I signed as a conscientious objector, but they didn't want to deal with that. The secretary of the draft board was the father of--he lived right down the street. He was a lawyer, and his kids were same as me and my brothers [Louis Mitchell and Elbert Mitchell]. So they--he just--I told him what I wanted to be, a conscientious objector, and whatever the price is, if I have to go to jail, whatever. And he good as said, "I'm not putting in," (laughter), "jail and having this people on my back" (laughter). He said, "Are you giving up ministry?" "No." I couldn't tell a lie. "I, I, I know I've got to preach." So he gave me a 4-E [sic. 4-D], which was theological exemption. Story_ID: 599603 Speaker 1: So tell me, between '37 [1937], when you finished work, working for that company with the windows [Truck Tractor Equipment Company], what happens next? How did--where do you go to school? Speaker 2: Well, that fall I went to school at Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio] or one year. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And there I was confronted with compulsory military training. And that's one of the reasons I wanted to leave. It was a land grant college, and if you are physically able, all land grant students had to take ROTC, Reserve Officers' Training Corps. Speaker 1: You said land grant student. What does that mean? Speaker 2: That means that the United States government gave huge hunks of land to various places on the--under the terms that on that land they would build a university. Speaker 1: I see. So Ohio, Ohio State was one of those? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. So, you stayed there for a year? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. And you said your grades were just okay. Did you know-- Speaker 2: My grades were what? Speaker 1: You said your grades were just okay? Speaker 2: Yeah, I was like a, maybe a B or a little less. Speaker 1: Okay. And so how are you taking care of the fact that you, you were called to preach? Speaker 2: Well, I finally loosened up and had a secret session with my mother [Bertha Estis Mitchell] and told her that I was called. I asked her afterwards what she thought. I was asking for this private conference when nobody was home. She said, "I thought maybe you had fallen in love or something like that," (laughter). Then she said, "But before you were born I prayed that you would be a preacher." And I thought she'd be shouting or carrying on or something when I told her. And it was all what she had asked the Lord to do in the first place. Story_ID: 599604 Speaker 1: All right, so what happens next? Speaker 2: Well, I finished Lincoln University [Lincoln University, Pennsylvania], and I went-- Speaker 1: Well, we didn't get to Lincoln yet. When--how did you get to Lincoln? Tell me how you transitioned from Ohio-- Speaker 2: Well, I-- Speaker 1: --State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio]? Speaker 2: --I wanted to get away from compulsory military training, field artillery. And I got a hold of something in which it said that H.H. Mitchell I [Mitchell's paternal grandfather, Henry Mitchell] was the third oldest living graduate of Lincoln, and it was a newspaper clipping from back east. And I said well, that's where I want to go to school. And of course, the interesting thing I found out after I got there, they didn't have compulsory military. They had compulsory Bible. That was a lot better (laughter). So I went there assuming that I would be able to, you know, get some scholarships just on the name H.H. Mitchell III [HistoryMaker Reverend Henry Mitchell]. They didn't give me anything on that, but they gave me scholarships for--I won one scholarship for memorizing the, the catechism for the Presbyterian church, stuff like that. Speaker 1: What, what--how, how did you get that type of scholarship? You said memorizing the catechism. Tell me (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They, well, they just had a Robinson Scholarship [Samuel Robinson Scholarship]. Every year people took a test. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: And the one that won--there were supposed to be four scholarships for fifty dollars apiece. Now mind you, this is the Depression [Great Depression]. Fifty dollars is a lot of money. So, I memorized enough to pass the test. And an African student named Jones Cordy [ph.], one of my classmates, he passed enough, but the other guys flunked it. So when I got back to school in the fall, I said, "Somebody made a mistake. There's too much money here." And I said, "This says a hundred dollars. It's supposed to be fifty dollars." They said, "Well, it was supposed to be fifty dollars, but two guys flunked it, so the two guys that passed got a hundred dollars apiece." (Laughter) So, oh, thank you. I did my first year teach--at Lincoln. I was a waiter in a dining hall. My second and third years, which were actually my junior and senior year, I was a teaching assistant in the English department. I made very good grades there. And Lincoln, incidentally--I don't know whether you knew this or not--was the Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] of the black community in those days. I went to school with Kwame Nkrumah and people like that. Thurgood Marshall was a Lincoln man. Langston Hughes was a Lincoln man. I mean, the, the biggest names were at Lincoln, though it was a small school out in the country. Story_ID: 599605 Speaker 1: Did you work as an elevator operator in a white hotel (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The summer of '39 [1939], I worked as a lifeguard in the daytime and ran the elevator on the night shift at the Deshler Wallick [Deshler Wallick Hotel, Columbus, Ohio]. Speaker 1: I'm sorry (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Between--ran the elevator on the night shift at the Deshler Wallick Hotel, America's most beautiful hotel, a thousand rooms and a thousand baths, blah, blah. Speaker 1: Where, where is it located? Speaker 2: Right down in the heart of town. Speaker 1: Now-- Speaker 2: And I made six dollars a week at the, at--and I worked six days--six nights a week, I think. And made fifteen dollars a week, but I was the head lifeguard at the pool, and I had to be there if the pool was open. So I put in like seventy-two hour weeks and made fifteen, sixteen dollars. Between the two jobs, I made twenty-one dollars a week, and that was all day and all night. Meanwhile, I got a suntan, which I couldn't keep. It wouldn't stay on there for nothing. Speaker 1: The what? Speaker 2: Suntan wouldn't stay on me for nothing (laughter). I'm much darker now, after I had radiation for cancer. But I had those two jobs. The--I got them both strictly on connections. The ha- the hotel job was the husband of the choir director, the youth choir I had sung in, he was the head Negro. He handled all of the bellhops and all that sort of stuff at this big hotel, and he gave me this six dollar a week job. The lifeguard job was a lady named Hettie Green [ph.]. She was a big time Republican. And I don't I mentioned her, which the city would give me this job as a, a lifeguard; didn't know it was head lifeguard. And she went down to city hall and said to the big time politician, "I've been doing stuff for this party all these years; I've never asked you for nothing. That job, a lifeguard, that's Henry Mitchell's [HistoryMaker Reverend Henry Mitchell] job." (Laughter) And so it was; that's how I got it. 'Cause I was smaller than any of those guys. The guys that taught me were on my staff, but the difference was, that they were on WPA [Works Progress Administration; Work Projects Administration], and I was on city. WPA was like CETA [Comprehensive Employment and Training Act of 1973] workers, and the government makes a job for people. And they couldn't be called lifeguards because lifeguards would be responsible for anybody drowning. So they were called swimming instructors, and I was the only lifeguard. They worked a forty hour week, and I worked a seventy-two hour week. They got 17.50 a week, and I got fifteen. They worked a forty hour week for WPA. Speaker 1: So you worked a lot longer for less money (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm tell--almost double (laughter). They had families too. Story_ID: 599606 Speaker 1: So, you do very well. Is there a professor or someone at Lincoln [Lincoln University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania] that, that you looked up to or encouraged you or that you just remember for whatever reason? Speaker 2: The, the professor in the English department, one that was one of the few blacks. Professor Hill [Joseph Newton Hill] encouraged me by making me his teaching assistant. I graded his papers and stuff like that. I was president of an outfit that I organized. They were, they were--when I went to Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio] I pledged Omega. It was like a revival meeting. Guys was testifying and crying and (laughter) carrying on. And, and at, at that time, Omega Psi Phi [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity] was the poor boys, but we had a higher cumulative grade point average of any fraternity or sorority, white or black on the Ohio State campus, so I figured I belonged in that bunch. When I got to Lincoln, they saw my little lamp photos on my lapel. Oh, you--so they said you have to be at the meeting at such, such time. You have to memorize all these things, the officers and the chapters, which have no value whatever. I didn't bother. Got to the meeting, I didn't remember any of it, didn't want to remember any of it, didn't have a good attitude. They said point. Point means bend over, and then they teed off on me with a, with an oak paddle. And apparently I didn't cry, and that frustrated them. So they hit me a second time, broke the paddle; I still ain't cried. Now the fact that I did not cry, they did not understand. Actually, I did not cry because after the first time they hit me, my bottom went numb (laughter). If it had been hurting I probably (laughter) would, but I took it like I was cold (laughter) and didn't care. You break your oak paddle. That was so frustrating to those guys. And I won't tell you what I told them, but in so many words it was that you can, so forth, and if you got any friends, you too (laughter). And I walked out of the room. I--so they said well, you can't be president of anything. Oh yeah, I can. I was president of the student assistant thing of the radicals that, that was organized under my leadership (laughter). And they--I got sent to all kinds of conferences and stuff. So, I didn't suffer at all. I was secretary of the student body; I couldn't be president. But the secretary made all the decisions and kept all the records. So when there was a place to send somebody, I sent the secretary (laughter). I had a great time (laughter), singing the old--love that Greek. We rehearsed three nights a week, and I loved rehearsal. I sang baritone. And when they traveled--they had guys that had been singing free couple of years, and you had to sing down to get on, on the tour. And guys that had been singing two years, I unseated, when the--in the, in the--what they did, they put you with three guys that could sing, one questionably; they were professionals. They, they paid them, these students, and you had to sing a part with those guys. And if you could hold your part, you could travel. And my buddies in the baritone part that didn't go were the persons whose seat I took. But I traveled to the South in spring of '39 [1939]. I traveled to New England in '40 [1940], and I traveled in the Midwest in '41 [1941] with the glee club. It was a good glee club. And like I say, we traveled--we, we practiced three nights a week. Speaker 1: Now, just to go back a little back and get a little clarity, you were the president of what organization? You said it was a radical--but I, I-- Speaker 2: It was-- Speaker 1: --didn't get the name of it. Speaker 2: I don't remember the name of the organization (laughter). Speaker 1: Oh, okay, okay. All right, let, let's-- Speaker 2: It was an organization that was later on accused of being Communist. But when they tried to give me some Communist things, I told them to take it all and where to put it, 'cause I wasn't (laughter) about to get involved with all of that. Story_ID: 599607 Speaker 1: But even though you couldn't remember the name of the organization, what was it that you accomplished (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) American association of some kind, but I can't remember. Speaker 1: What was the purpose of the organization? Speaker 2: It was an organization that--civil rights and stuff. And they got--well, at the time I joined it, the head of it was a, a very close friend of the president's wife, Mrs. Roosevelt [Eleanor Roosevelt]. But it got infiltrated and taken over. And they were offering me all kinds of stuff. No, thank you. Speaker 1: Who was the president at Lincoln [Lincoln University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania] while you were there? Speaker 2: Wright, President Wright [Walter Livingston Wright]. He was white. They had their first black president later. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Their first black president was Bond, the father of Bond [HistoryMaker Julian Bond] well known here, Horace Mann Bond. Speaker 1: Okay. So, you graduate or, or get your degree from Lincoln in 1941. What was your, your major? Speaker 2: English. I wanted to major in philosophy, but I had been given special permission to take philosophy my freshman year at Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio]. And the result was that I had taken all the courses they had, so I had to change majors, and I changed to English. And I was a student assistant in the English department, and I won the English prize in my class. It's a whole twenty-five dollars. So I went there struggling financially, but the last thing that happened on the day of my commencement was they gave me the English prize, and it was twenty-five dollars (laughter). Story_ID: 599608 Speaker 1: Now, as far as church, you have gotten a call. And you're now getting ready--you're actually gonna graduate from Lincoln [Lincoln University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania]. What are your thoughts about seminary (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, first of all, I should indicate that I declared my call and was licensed to preach on January 1, 1939. Speaker 1: Okay-- Speaker 2: I went to school knowing, and then my, middle of my year or something, I, my junior year, I guess it was, I announced it officially, and I was licensed to preach. Speaker 1: Do you remember your trial sermon? Or did you have one (laughter)? Speaker 2: Vaguely. I, I did have a trial sermon. And the one thing I remember about it is that Deacon Simpson [ph.] very kindly said, "Young man, you preach well, but don't you ever get in the pulpit again without taking a text," 'cause I didn't take a text (laughter). And I had followed him faithfully ever since. When I had a book published, and I said something about a text, they said you don't have to have a text if you preaching. Now if you're not gonna have a text, you're just lecturing (laughter). Speaker 1: Tell me what-- Speaker 2: So I went to--oh, that's an interesting story. There was a fellow in the junior year--I was in my freshman year at Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio]--name was George Moore. His nickname was Gate Mouth (laughter). He was a Roman Catholic, and he was confined to a wheelchair. He was physically handicapped. He said to me one day in the spring of '38 [1938], "Henry [HistoryMaker Reverend Henry Mitchell], where are you going to seminary?" I said," I'm going to Oberlin [Oberlin College, Oberlin, Ohio]." He said, "Why are you going to Oberlin?" I said, "Well, the two seminaries here are Catholic and Lutheran, and neither one of them accepts black folk anyway. So, Oberlin was always was the first school to accept blacks, so I'm going to Oberlin." He said, "Why don't you go to Union [Union Theological Seminary]?" I said, "Where is that?" He said, "New York [New York]." I said, "Why would I go there?" He said, "Well, it's only the, the greatest--," now this is a Roman Catholic layman--, "it's the greatest Protestant seminary in the world." I said, "I'm going." And that was it. I vote and got a scholarship and everything. Speaker 1: When did you prepare to, to there, in your senior or junior year at Lincoln? Speaker 2: Well, I wrote them asked them--I sent them a transcript and asked them what I should take my senior year. And they evaluated my transcript and told me that I was short on history, which was quite odd because history was my joy. They said you got enough Greek. Don't take anymore Greek. And so, I heavied up on history my last year. But I had Greek, and of course I had English. I was a student assistant in the English department. Story_ID: 599609 Speaker 1: So even though you were not Protestant, you felt that you wanted to go there [Union Theological Seminary, New York, New York] because it was-- Speaker 2: I was Protestant. Speaker 1: Oh, you were? I thought you went to a Baptist church. Speaker 2: Well, well, technically you're right. Baptists were not technically Protestants, but everybody thinks of them as Protestants in the sense that they broke away from the Catholic church. Speaker 1: Okay. So growing up you went to a Baptist church though, right? Speaker 2: Second Baptist Church [Columbus, Ohio]. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Historic Second Baptist, founded in 1834, pastored by H.H. Mitchell [Mitchell's paternal grandfather, Henry Mitchell] from 19 something--from 18 something to--no, from 1902 to 1907, something like that. Speaker 1: All right, so, and I'm, I'm still confused about the Protestant part of it. Speaker 2: Well, most people wouldn't have the faintest notion what I mean when I say that cat- that the, the Anabaptist, the re-baptizers historically, were people who baptized folk over again 'cause they didn't believe in baptizing babies. And they were not Protestants in the sense that the Protestants broke out of the Catholic church, but the Baptist were never in it. So that's why. If you want to get real tight, then you say we're, we are protest--we are not protesting it because we weren't in it. We didn't need to protest it. Story_ID: 599610 Speaker 1: Have you been out of Ohio before this time to go as far east to New York [New York]? Speaker 2: I had gone to Louisville [Kentucky] with my father [Orlando Mitchell] to a scout camp. They had a very outstanding black Boy Scout [Boy Scouts of America] troop set up in Louisville. And my dad went down there, and I went with him. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I had been out of the state at that one point, no other. Speaker 1: So what was the transition like, to go from--well, I mean of course you went to Virginia to go to school. But from Virginia to New York, what was the transition like? Speaker 2: Well, now I don't, I didn't go to New York from Virginia. I went to New York from Lincoln [Lincoln University, Lincoln, Pennsylvania]. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, tell me, tell me about the (laughter), the transition? Speaker 2: Well, the transition was no problem at all. I, I enjoyed going there. They took my scholarship away though my last year 'cause I got involved in some pranks. Speaker 1: Pranks? Speaker 2: Yeah. You want to hear that long story? Speaker 1: Well, if you could shorten up a bit, yes. Speaker 2: Yeah. We had a, a maid on the seventh floor. On every floor they had a maid that's supposed to make beds and keep the students' rooms clean, because, I mean, that's, that was what had happened in those days. It was, you know, we had--I had a room, and then my room, my roommate, he had a room. And then we had a big living room, and we lived pretty high. But this woman couldn't, couldn't make a bed; she couldn't do it. She was an older Irish lady. So, one evening I'm going to my Boy Scout meeting down in Harlem [New York, New York]. And as I go out, I noticed that the firemen are there putting out a fire in the dust shoot. You know what a dust shoot is? It's a, it's a shaft in the wall somewhere where you dump trash. You don't have to carry it downstairs. It falls down. Down at the bottom is a big container, and when it's full they take it up and you know, dump it. It's where the trash goes. Well, there had been a fire down there in the dust bin. And I heard some clown say, "I'll bet it's because Annie Regan [ph.]," our, the, the maid on our floor, shook her dust mop for the first time, 'cause she didn't do nothing right. She didn't make a bed right (laughter). So (laughter), I thought about it, and when I got back from my scout meeting I wrote a thing: "Proceeds of the Union Theological Seminary [New York, New York], night court, defendant, Annie Regan; charge, arson. We have it on inrev- inrevitible--in- in- something, inrev- irrevocable evidence that the said defendant shook her dust mop for the first time, upsetting the equilibrium and adjustment of the dust particles in the said dust shoot, setting into motion the fire of the said date; charge--no, the, the judgment, she shall not again molest to dust." Well, she came in every morning and stood there and looked. I put it up on the bulletin. Well, first, she couldn't read 'cause she sure didn't read that one. She went on up to the seventh floor and cleaned the floors, et cetera. Meanwhile, the head housekeeper, the widow of a Meth- white Methodist minister, read it when she came through. And she pulled it down it down off the (unclear) and confronted Annie, of all places, in my room. So, by the time I get to my room, Annie is sitting there crying and carrying on. Oh, they just don't treat you right, do they, blah, blah, blah, blah? I acted like I didn't know nothing about who did it, 'cause, I mean, that (laughter) wouldn't have helped if I had said I did it. Well (clears throat) some square fool in my class, Woodrow Wilson Willie [ph.] was his (laughter) name, told eventually that I was the one that did it. When she found that out, she went to work. She did a lot work for the president on the side. And she told the president, ah, all this. I had--she had caught me in another prank was before where I wasn't really the one, but that orange thing, oranges, it's a, anathema when Irish, their, their color is green, Catholic Irish. So this is my second prank, and that plus something else had them put me out. I said well, you can put me out, but I'll be back, taking my scholarship and everything else. But the Lord called me to preach, and unless you throw me out, I'll be there. And if you take away my scholarship, I will manage. Don't worry it. The Lord will take care of me, and sure enough, I went back, and they didn't stop me. I finished on time. Story_ID: 599611 Speaker 1: Let's talk about your first year there at, at Union [Union Theological Seminary, New York, New York]. Speaker 2: My first year at Union I had one slight problem with the school. The--somehow it became apparent that I was helping one of my brothers in college. And they had worked at an ice cream store and stuff and helped me and, when I was in college. Now I'm in grad school, so I sent some of the money they gave me to my brother, and they didn't want that. I said well, take it if you want it. But as long as he's my brother, and I got something, I'm gonna help him. And they let it go (laughter). But then they took it on the basis of this other stuff. This woman said I was a filthy mouth. We did a lot of profane language, and I was fluent in it. 'Cause when I was on the block, in the hood, I'd scare people, I could talk so bad. And I was little, but they didn't want to bother me a lot of times. Anybody talk that bad must have a knife or a gun or something (laughter). But I was not your stereotypical theological student. I was rough little rascal. I could pick pockets. I could shoplift. I could clean the counter; you wouldn't see my hand. You can go ahead and laugh. You don't have to swallow it (laughter). Story_ID: 599612 Speaker 1: You meet the love of your life at this seminary [Union Theological Seminary, New York, New York]. Is that right? Speaker 2: I met a person first and got engaged to her. But then the engagement was broken when it was determined that she couldn't get a job. She wanted a, a professional job. And she had finished an Ivy League finishing school, but she couldn't get a job doing what she wanted. And her mother said she shouldn't get a job--shouldn't marry me for my from my senior year unless she got a job, so she backed out. So I told her, well, I can get a job. I can work and go to school too. And I was trying to keep it going, but, anyway, she said it, well, if she didn't get a job, she didn't get married. So you can decide whether your mother's deciding your, your future or I am. It's, it's now or never. She said well, I guess it's never, so I didn't marry that girl. Meanwhile, I had been friendly with Ella [Ella Pearson Mitchell] all the time. She had almost gotten married too, but this guy thought she was too churchy for him, and he was in med school. So, Ella and I were like little brother and big sister, 'cause she was older than me and bigger than (laughter) me. But eventually, when this engagement broke up, it broke up in September. The end of the semester in the next year, January, I had some time, after I wrote all my papers and everything, so I decided to pray about it. I prayed all night, practically. And the Lord told me, what about the Pearson girl? Well, that was the same thing my daddy [Orlando Mitchell] had said, 'cause my daddy met her when I was supposed to be dying, and she comforted him. But nobody else knew who she was, and she decided to find out who this man was sitting up here crying in the dining hall. And when she found out it was because I was up in the hospital, supposed to be dying, so she comforted him and sort of looked after him 'til he went back home when it finally was determined I wasn't gonna die. But I was in intensive care for a long time. Speaker 1: Well, tell me what happened. You didn't tell me that story. What happened? Speaker 2: I had a problem. Well, the summer before I had worked up in Canada, and I had some gastric difficulties. And if I had had another one I probably would have been dead. But I left early and came down, and I didn't have any more of those outbreaks until November. And then they took me to the hospital, and they removed my appendix. But apparently they didn't cauterize the track properly. And a week later I was put in intensive--I was operated on, and then I was put in intensive care. They re-operated. Then I came down with generalized peritonitis fecal fissure, two other things: fecal fissure, paralytic ileus, bronchopneumonia. So they had me in intensive care, and that's why my dad came to New York [New York] and to see after me. That's when he met Ella. And then when I was telling him later that I couldn't find a wife that had the kind of religion and so forth that I needed, he said, "What about that Pearson girl?" And I told him she, wonderful person, make some preacher a wonderful--why not you? I said well, she's way bigger than me. At that time, she outweighed me by a hundred--about sixty-five pounds or so. And she's always was, like, almost two years older than me. So, my mother [Bertha Estis Mitchell] said what does age--what does size got to do with it? 'Cause when she married my dad the exact same relationship (laughter) prevailed. So I sort of skipped out of there then, but that was in Christmas vacation. So then, at the end of that semester--they used to end the semester in January rather than December--I prayed all night, and the Lord told me the same thing my daddy told me. So I did what the Lord said, and God knows I never regretted it. We lived together sixty-four years without ever having a really sharp division of any kind. Story_ID: 599613 Speaker 1: Tell me about, about Ella [Ella Pearson Mitchell]. Tell me about her. Speaker 2: She was--she entered Union Seminary [Union Theological Seminary, New York, New York] the same time I did. We met on the elevator the day we registered. She was very countrified at that time. She had on some good looking shoes with her clothes. She made them, and it was obvious that all they did was cover her. They had no style at all. And I said ooh, wow. But then we got to be good friends, big sister, little brother. And then when this other engagement broke up and all of that, and I was praying, and the Lord told me the same thing my daddy [Orlando Mitchell] says, so I began looking at it. And first thing happened, we went out one night, and she was--we were way up in the night talking in the lobby of the apartment house where she lived because it wasn't a room up there except for her bedroom. And she wasn't gonna entertain me in (laughter) her bed. So we're sitting up there talking, and I found out that she had signed up for an overseas mission. And that's what I was afraid of, getting married to a girl who wouldn't do anything and go anywhere the Lord told me to go. She had already signed. She was way ahead of me. So I said this must be the one. And the minute I started doing that, everything I saw fitted where I knew it's supposed to be. And I just knew that's who I was supposed to marry. So later on when I told her, I said I'm not madly in love you understand, but I know the Lord is telling me (laughter) to marry you. And of course, we got so madly in love that everybody kidded us all the time. But we, we got married on the basis I told her that, and she said, "If God be for us, who can be against us?" That's the most un-Hollywood proposal you ever (laughter) heard, but that was how we did it. Speaker 1: What year did you get married? Speaker 2: Nineteen forty-four [1944], two days after I got my degree, August the 12th-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --nineteen forty-four [1944]. Story_ID: 599614 Speaker 1: Before we go on, because she [Mitchell's wife, Ella Pearson Mitchell] also--tell, tell me about her degree and, and some of the things that she accomplished. Speaker 2: She had a two year degree or less, actually. Her degree was in Christian education, jointly conferred by Columbia University [New York, New York] and Union Seminary [Union Theological Seminary, New York, New York]. She did some of her work at Columbia and some of it at Union. She did most of it at Union. So she was an M.A. in Christian ed, religious ed, they called it, and later on she got her doctorate, a year after I got mine, at the same school. And we actually worked on our doctorates together. We used--she did--there was a big stack of slave narratives, and I went through the whole stack--no, I went through half of the stack for what she was looking for and what I was looking for. And she went through the other half for what she was looking for, for her dissertation and what I was looking for, for mine. And we both came out with--she came out with a Doctor of Ministry. I came out with a Th.D. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She was a very gifted woman. She could play the piano and sing and sew. She could do everything but cook. I had to teach her to cook. She didn't cook because she came up with a mother, three older sisters [Ermine Pearson Washington, Jessica Pearson Brown, and Lurline Pearson Cotton], and two grandmothers. All of them tried to cook. They'd tell her to mend socks or sew or play the piano. She could play the piano, organ, all of that and sew. She could really sew. And she got to where she could. It wasn't she didn't want to know. Fast as I taught, she picked it right up. Speaker 1: And she was from where? Speaker 2: Charleston, South Carolina. Her father [Joseph Pearson] was a Presbyterian minister. And the Presbyterians tried their doggonest to get me to join her in the Presbyterian church, but eventually she joined me in the Baptist church. Speaker 1: Well, she was--was she licensed or ordained? Speaker 2: Hm? Speaker 1: Was she licensed or ordained? Speaker 2: That's an interesting question. She didn't think she needed to be licensed. She didn't think she was called to preach. Girl could preach people out the door, but she didn't think she was supposed to, to, to, to preach. Eventually, she did see that she was called to preach and not just to teach, 'cause she could really preach. So she was--one Sunday I was sitting up in the pulpit. I was still supposed to be sick at the time, and 'cause I had dropped out of being a professor. And I got back on my feet, and of course, it's, the rest is history. But I looked up, and she wasn't where I knew she had been sitting back in the pew and eventually discovered she was sitting up front. She came to confess, said she was called to preach, and so she was ordained. She had been licensed. And the pastor at the church set it all up, and then at the last minute decided the Lord told him not to, not to license her. So I talked to a friend of mine, who was standing right there when I got the word on the phone that she had been canceled. He said well, I'll ordain her, guy named J. Alfred Smith [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. J. Alfred Smith, Sr.] in Oakland [California]. So, pastor in Los Angeles [California] had canceled, but he set it up in Oakland, and she was ordained there. Speaker 1: Was one of the reasons that the Presbyterian did they--were they opposed to women being ordained? Speaker 2: No. They would have taken her on. They, they had--there was a time when they did, but by that time, they were--she could have had a Presbyterian church. Speaker 1: But her mother was opposed to, to it. Speaker 2: Oh, boy, she didn't even admit she was called to preach 'til her mother died. You know that verse in the year King Asa [ph] died, I saw also, blah, blah? I the year Mama Pearson [Jessica Pearson] died, that's the year she (laughter) saw (unclear)-- Speaker 1: (Cough) Excuse me. Okay, we're gonna talk more about the two of you as we, we go on in your life, because I know that y'all work together for sixty-four years as a tag team. Is that right? Speaker 2: What's that? Speaker 1: I said y'all worked together as a tag team, so we'll talk more about that-- Speaker 2: Well, the tag team-- Speaker 1: --at later on-- Speaker 2: --thing that happened was in the late years. We did (simultaneous)- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, so I said we'll, we'll get to that when we, when we move on. Story_ID: 599615 Speaker 1: Back to the seminary [Union Theological Seminary, New York, New York]. There were a few professors of or, or, or, or teachers there that you might want to talk about who might have had some influence on you. Can you talk to me about that? Speaker 2: Well, the two most famous teachers there were the biggest names in the 20th century. One was Reinhold Niebuhr. And I was very interested in him, got, got a high grade, got an A minus on my paper and so forth. The other was Paul Tillich. And Paul Tillich had a tremendous influence, because I went to his class in symbolism, and he, he told us all to write an assignment on symbolism in whatever church we were working in. So when the class was over, I went to him to him. I said, "Professor Tillich--," I worked in Concord Baptist Church [Concord Baptist Church of Christ] in Brooklyn [New York], which is famous now because Gardner Taylor [HistoryMaker Reverend Gardner Taylor] was there for so long, but he wasn't there then. And I said, "We have some symbolism in the windows and stuff, but that's what the white people put there. We don't have any symbolism." He gave me a fit. He said, "Everybody has symbolism. Everybody's, everything has some meaning. Now go there and see what the meanings are and give me a report." That's what everybody is supposed to do. Well, when I came back then I said, "Well, the preacher doesn't come in 'til later that makes--that symbolizes that we ain't done nothing 'til he gets there," and stuff like that. And I got an A because I did see in a very radical way what, what the symbolism was that we were practicing and didn't know about. And it was at that point that I started being the authority on the black church. Because most people were just like me; they, they thought white culture was right, and black culture was wrong. And then I started talking about black culture and black religion. And I wrote a book called 'Black Preaching' [Henry Mitchell] and clearly established that we had nothing to be ashamed of. In fact, white folks will love to get some of what we got. Story_ID: 599616 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In the first place I was--I already mentioned the fact that we believe in worship in the whole group. And when he, when the pastor [at Concord Baptist Church of Christ, Brooklyn, New York]--at that time his name was Adam [ph.]--when he stayed in just in his office and did a little mundane, any kind of thing, it wasn't that he was sitting in there trying to get spiritually together, but he'd be talking and doing whatever. So that was important. The symbolism of shouting is something of extreme importance. And people thought it was sickness; when, in fact, this was a way of healing people. And the symbolism occurred at the point where people shouted, and other people supported them, and that's probably the most important thing. The preaching thing, again, is important because symbolically we preached because the Holy Spirit told us to preach instead of preaching because we had studied our lesson. Now you have to do that too, but the point is that we were completely caught up in a holistic engagement, a holistic encounter, and not just an idea. It was a total experiential encounter. And of course, there are a lot of symbolism in things like deacons and communion and all that, which meant maybe a little different from what the, the, the racial ethnic minority thinks, but these, these were the most important days. We didn't believe in preaching by manuscripts. Educated people later on started doing it, but we preached by the spirit, having studied it and all that, but not just writing it down. I still don't preach by manuscript. (Unclear) I'm writing some books--some sermons for a book right now. And I've got to write them all from scratch because I never used a manuscript. Story_ID: 599617 Speaker 1: You want to talk more about the philosophy of--your philosophy at that time? And did he influence your, your philosophy? Speaker 2: Who, who Tillich [Paul Tillich]? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, the, the philosophy of the whole situation involved total encounter. In other words, intellect had to make sense, but it also had to have emotional content as well to be holistic. Paul said, "Now by the faith holds another, grace to these (unclear)--," but do you know what, all three of them are emotions. So people tend, in Western culture, to think that religion is an idea. And ideas are true, but idea don't save you, an experience, a total experience explains--is what really counts. And of course, without even knowing it or being able to explain it in any way, the typical black churchman is into something where his feelings and everything else are together with the idea. And if you, if you try to have feelings without idea, without doctoral understanding, it's empty too; you need both. But once you have the idea, you have to have the idea holistically. Faith, hope, and love are emotions. They are not ideas. People are not saved by ideas. And this is the major difference between the, the, the ethnic majority in this country and the Europeans, because they tended to be an idea. People aren't saved by ideas. They are saved by an experience, and we preach experience with an idea content. Speaker 1: Okay. So-- Speaker 2: It tickled me 'cause there was a time when people thought shouting was something that needed healing. What they didn't know was that, that emotional catharsis in the form of shouting is more healing than a psychiatrist if the Lord uses it right. Speaker 1: Okay. Were there any other ideas or anything else that happened during your, your courses with those two? Speaker 2: Well, that's the main idea far and away, and it has all sorts of aspects that I have written a bunch of books about. But, for instance, storytelling, they think black preachers are great storytellers, and the storytellers are entertaining the people. Yep, the opposite of entertaining is boring, so you do have to entertain the people. But you better have some substance. And it's little details like that, but it all centers around the idea that this, thou shall (unclear) all that, so the, the might all their strength, all of that, all the mind. And if you don't (unclear)--touch God with your mind, you can forget all the rest of it. And in that sense, black religion is the model for which everybody now wants a piece. Story_ID: 599618 Speaker 1: So, what happens when you leave the seminary [Union Theological Seminary, New York, New York]? What happens next? Speaker 2: When you what? Speaker 1: When you leave the seminary, what happens next? Speaker 2: I had thought that the pastor was gonna keep me on full time [at Concord Baptist Church of Christ, Brooklyn, New York] and talked about letting me use an apartment. They own several apartments. They'd let me use an apartment as parsonage and so forth. But near the time when I said something to him about it, he acted like he had forgot he ever talked about it. So suddenly I realized that when I was out of school, I was out a job. And when I didn't know what I was gonna do, a phone rang and I was offered a job as dean of the chapel at North Carolina Central [North Carolina College for Negroes; North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina], out of the clear blue sky. What actually happened was a fellow who was president later on of Virginia State [Virginia State College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia]--but a lot of blacks took seminary work so they could get cheap housing for the summer when it was real hot and they like to do it. And, and when--and they would have a, a break from the grind of the southern schools, they could get additional credits and get better salaries because of the credits, and all of this in New York City [New York, New York]. So, one of them, the president of Shaw [Shaw University, Raleigh, North Carolina] at that time, but became president of Virginia State, he [Robert Prentiss Daniel] was in a class with me. So, president of Central said to the president of Shaw, "I want somebody to be my interim dean of the chapel." He said, "The man you want is Henry Mitchell [HistoryMaker Reverend Henry Mitchell]." I was in class with him, 'cause he was in class not to hear Henry Mitchell, the ideas. He was there to get cheap rent (laughter). But of course, he did have to study the coursework, but it added to his credentials. So that's how they offered me the job, and I took it. At the point I had no place, nothing, nothing else to do, 'cause I thought the--when I started talking to him about when am I gonna have a look at my apartment or something like, he looked at me like he didn't know what I was talking about. He acted like he had forgot he ever talked about I'm gonna let you stay on here and use you. Like, I did--I think what he did was to give me real--how should I put--competence in black culture, 'cause I was from the middle west, and I was more, more middle west than I was really staunch black culture. I came from a high church Baptist. My people were educated in my home church and all. But when I got to that church I really got down and liked it and became competent at it. And the result was that (laughter) he suddenly apparently decided not to, to let me work with him after all. So now I'm looking for a job, and the Lord blessed me in this sudden offer where the president of Shaw told the president of North Carolina Central, "There's a guy named Henry Mitchell would be a good dean of the chapel." So I served there one year. Speaker 1: One year, okay. Story_ID: 599619 Speaker 1: While you're in New--in New York [New York], while you're in seminary [Union Theological Seminary], the war [World War II, WWII] is going on. And is there a story about the Japanese population on the West Coast? I mean, how did the war have any effect on you personally? Speaker 2: The war had no effect on me directly. But my brother, my next brother [Louis Mitchell], among the things he did in the community--what, what does he call them--anyway, a, a community center ministry in Sacramento [California]. He, he had, among the things as his responsibility was the Nisei, the English speaking Japanese worship. And so, my other brother [Elbert Mitchell] was working and living there, and he (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In Sancr- in California? Speaker 2: My baby brother married one of the Japanese people out of his other brother's church, which was a Japanese--an, an American congregation of Niseis as opposed to the first generation Issei, Issei, I guess they are called. Does that answer your question? Speaker 1: Yeah. You said he, he married a Japanese-- Speaker 2: My baby brother did. Speaker 1: You--okay. Speaker 2: The one that's an engineer, cartographic engineer. Speaker 1: Well, did you eventually, or was it he that adopted a half Korean child? Speaker 2: We adopted a Korean boy. Speaker 1: What, was that later on, or was it during that time? Speaker 2: That was afterwards. I--we adopted him in '56 [1956]. Speaker 1: Okay, so that was much later on. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Story_ID: 599620 Speaker 1: Are you and Ella [Ella Pearson Mitchell] married when you go (cough) excuse me--to this next position? Speaker 2: Hm? Speaker 1: When you go to, to be the, the dean of chapel at Shaw? Speaker 2: No, North Carolina Central. Speaker 1: North Carolina State. Okay, I'm sorry. Speaker 2: Central. In those name--in those days though, the name was North Carolina College for Negroes [North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina]. That was the official name (laughter). Speaker 1: Were you married? You were married by that? Speaker 2: Oh, sure. I mar- I-- Speaker 1: In 1944. Speaker 2: We were married in '44 [1944] and (unclear) and my first job was when I finally got one in a split second found a job was at North Carolina Central. But at that time, its name was North Carolina College for Negroes (laughter). Speaker 1: Right, okay. Speaker 2: Later on it became North Carolina Central--North Carolina College and then North Carolina Central. Speaker 1: Okay. So tell me about your, your year as the dean there. Speaker 2: Oh, I thoroughly enjoyed it, and my wife did too, 'cause she had a lot of friends there. But I taught English, taught two, two classes of English and presided at chapel. We had--they had to come to chapel once a month--once a week or something like that. And so I presided and I preached at chapel part of the time. The president [James E. Shepard] said, "Well, you, you'll get paid when you preach or not." I said, "Yeah, but I'm tired of introducing somebody else to preach. I want to preach." And he was a Baptist preacher's kid, the president was, so, he sort of lightened up and let me preach myself. I'm gonna be chapel here, I want to be preaching in this chapel. But then I taught a couple of courses in English along with that. I taught courses in remedial English, by the way, but I, I did very well with it actually. Speaker 1: Okay. And why did you decide to leave there? Speaker 2: Well, I was just there for a year as the interim while the previous dean was working on his Ph.D. in New York. Well, as it turned out, I could have stayed, but I had already accepted a job on the West Coast. And the president--the, the professor came back, but it was another year before he got back, got his work done. Story_ID: 599621 Speaker 1: So you already had a job lined up for you on the West Coast. So, do you and your wife have any children in these years? Speaker 2: We were married in August [1944], and July of the next year we had a baby. In fact, I wanted one sooner than that. They still kid- kidded me 'cause I wanted one on the first round. Speaker 1: And, and-- Speaker 2: They, they claim I cried when she had her, her menstrual period. That meant that she still hadn't got a baby. That was just the first month (laughter) we were married. And then the irony of it all was that when she had, she got, she did--well, I got sick. And the doctor checked with me, and he couldn't find anything. And he told my wife, "Come to my office tomorrow." And the rabbit died. That was the test they gave. And she--I did the, the, the, the sickness that most women have to do for having a baby (laughter). And Ella [Ella Pearson Mitchell] taught my class (laughter) while I was in the bed (laughter). I have, I never knew--I wasn't--in Britain it's common for a man to do the illness for the-- Speaker 1: Have morning sickness and that type of thing? Speaker 2: For morning sickness. Speaker 1: Yeah. Is that what you mean? Speaker 2: I'd never heard of it, was--so it wasn't something that I, you know, confidenced myself into. But I was sure doing the--I did the work. I did the same (laughter)--she, she taught my class. Speaker 1: So, in 1945, then you had--was it a son or a daughter? Speaker 2: Son, Henry H. Mitchell IV [Henry Mitchell IV]. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now, was this in where you were, in North Carolina [North Carolina College for Negroes; North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina]? Speaker 2: No. He was con- we think he was conceived on a railroad train (laughter), but we don't know. Speaker 1: But where was he born? Speaker 2: But she spent the vast majority of the period in--no. I was finishing up the year, that one year, a school year, and she was pregnant. And when it was fairly close to it, she didn't want hospitals in the South. She thought medicine was much better in Ohio, so she went to Columbus, and my mother [Bertha Estis Mitchell] took care of her. And it was very helpful. And then when I left North Carolina, I went by Columbus, and she was still waiting, and then I went on to California. She came to California after the baby was born and she could fly. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's all 1945. Story_ID: 599622 Speaker 1: So, while we're talking about your children, just so that we get them all in and their dates, and we don't want to miss anybody, what other children do you have? Tell me about them. Well, tell me about your son [Henry Mitchell IV] first and you know, what does (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, he was a-- Speaker 1: --and then your daughters. Speaker 2: --big fellow. He eventually became six, almost 6'2", I believe. I asked the Lord to--I wanted him healthy and, and smart, and, and if he, if he, if, if he's still giving out blessing, don't let him be short as me. And he wasn't. Forgot to tell him (unclear) stay forever. He died of exposure to acute monoblastic leukemia as a result of the exposure to atomic radiation. He was a, he was an intern in atomic experimentation with the, the Lawrence radiation lab [Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, California]. He was under--he was an intern among the biggest names in atomic physics at the time. He, before he finally died, he did some interesting things. He spent a semester in Austria, Vienna. No, he wasn't Vienna. He was in another country, another town in Aus- in Austria. But at that time he was registered at Redlands University [University of Redlands, Redlands, California]. Then he went to Hood [ph], and eventually he never did finish officially. That was July. April of the second year after that was Muriel [Muriel Mitchell Lawrence]. They were in high school together. She went to a famous women's college in Denver [Colorado], Colorado Women's College. And it was sort of an Ivy League situation. But then she wanted to go overseas and do one year. And it didn't work out, so she went to Dillard [Dillard University, New Orleans, Louisiana]. And she liked the black school [HBCU] so much better that she finished the rest of her studies at Dillard and finished Dillard as opposed to being the only black at a Ivy League type of women's finishing school in Denver. The next child was Liz [Elizabeth Mitchell Clement], and she went to Talladega [Talladega College, Talladega, Alabama] where her mother [Ella Pearson Mitchell] went to school and studied music under the same person her mother studied under at Talladega. Speaker 1: Okay, so that was in '47 [1947] was Muriel. Speaker 2: She was born-- Speaker 1: It was in 19-- Speaker 2: --April 23, 1947. Speaker 1: And then Elizabeth was born in 1949. Speaker 2: September 27, 19-- Speaker 1: Forty-nine [1949]. Speaker 2: Forty-nine [1949]. Speaker 1: Okay. All right, and what does Elizabeth-- Speaker 2: Karen? Speaker 1: --Elizabeth do? Speaker 2: Elizabeth is a minister now and works for the Fund for Theological Education. She does program design and runs programs for enhancing the impact of churches in the enhancement of the call. 'Cause we've had an interesting thing to happen. When I was in seminary [Union Theological Seminary, New York, New York], almost my whole class was Phi Beta Kappatites [Phi Beta Kappa Society], and this hasn't been true in recent years. And there, there is just a simple insistence that we've got to do something to challenge people in the minister so they don't all go into technology and make more money. 'Cause when I came along, the very fine people, they were--they went to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey], Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], all those places. And in recent years, the, the test scores have slumped considerably-- Speaker 1: Okay, all right (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) or an interest into seminary. Story_ID: 599623 Speaker 1: Tell me about when you get out to California. Speaker 2: Okay. They didn't even test me out. Eventually, a fellow that they checked somebody out, they talked to a minister in Washington [D.C], and he said no, the man you want is old Dr. Mitchell's [Henry Mitchell] grandson. They were all graduates of a school that he had founded in Lynchburg [Virginia], or helped to found in Lynchburg. So they asked me to come out and candidate, and I said well, I wasn't about to come out there if they weren't gonna give me a roundtrip ticket to candidate. So then he stumbled up on my brother, who was out there already. He said, "Your brother's got all of this very fine education. How does he get along with nitty gritty black folk?" My brother said, "Well, he gets on me for being snooty." He said, "He's really down. He gets down." So they offered me the job without ever seeing (laughter) me. And I stayed on that job fourteen years. Speaker 1: Okay, and tell me again where this is. Speaker 2: Hm? Speaker 1: What school is this? Speaker 2: What school? Speaker 1: Yeah. Well, where do you go to work, in California? Speaker 2: When I went to, went to California for this job-- Speaker 1: Yeah, where-- Speaker 2: --after I left--after this one school year at North Carolina Central [North Carolina College for Negroes; North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina]. Speaker 1: Yes. Where is it? Speaker 2: So I flew, flew directly to, to the job in California. Speaker 1: Where was the job is what I'm asking you. Speaker 2: Northern California, six hundred miles of Northern California. My office was in San Francisco [California], and then it came to Oakland [California]. Speaker 1: Okay, and I'm trying to find out what, what job is this. Speaker 2: I was called field secretary. I was helping to build an organi- organize and build churches to meet the needs of thousands of blacks who had moved to the West Coast to work in shipyards and stuff in World War II [WWII]. So my job was to organize new churches. I had to draw plans for buildings, 'cause they had to build their own buildings, and I had to help them. There was a lot of confusion 'cause different people from different places showed up in once place, and they didn't do the same way the other folk did it. So I would, I spent a lot of time helping people form into a single workable organizations called congregations. But I dro- drew plans; I, I wrote the incorporation of churches; I defended churches in planning. They had to have var- variation for plans in zoning and all that. I did that sort of stuff-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --drew the plans-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --defended. Speaker 1: So you did this for fourteen years, and this was actually the-- Speaker 2: Fourteen years, yeah. Speaker 1: --the, the Baptist general association? Is that what it was called? Speaker 2: Well, that was the black association, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. But it was part of the Northern California Baptist Association. Speaker 2: Convention. Speaker 1: Convention. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But they had regional organ associations. And the blacks had an association that covered the whole territory, but they also worked with the regional predominantly white association. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But then I took on a bunch of other jobs too. The first one, I became director of the Spanish (unclear) work for ten years. Speaker 1: (Laughter) When did you learn to speak Spanish? Speaker 2: In high school [East High School, Columbus, Ohio] I was gonna be an engineer. Engineers couldn't get jobs in this country (speaking Spanish). I was gonna be an engineer in South Africa--at South America because black folk couldn't get into engineering jobs in this country. But then when I was called to preach, I never dreamed I'd ever use any of the Spanish. But I learned all the engineering and did a lot of blueprints for buildings, smaller buildings, and I learned Spanish (unclear) so I learned to work with the Spanish people. Story_ID: 599624 Speaker 1: You received your Th.D.? Is that what's called? Speaker 2: Th.D. Speaker 1: That's in, in Cali (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well-- Speaker 1: At Claremont [Claremont School of Theology, Claremont, California]? Speaker 2: --first, I got a master's in linguistics. Speaker 1: Where did--what year was that and where did you get it? Speaker 2: While I was a pastor at, at Fresno [California], I, I got interested in--I can't even remember what they called it now, but it was human communication; rather, the name of the thing I don't remember right now. But they didn't have the course for that, but they said what I needed was a more established (unclear) thing called linguistics. So I took a course in linguistics at Fresno State University--California State University at Fresno [California State University, Fresno, Fresno, California] was actually the name of it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: California Fray- University at Fresno. And that's where I took this master's [degree] while I was pastoring the church and doing a lot of other stuff. Speaker 1: So you got--do you remember what year you, you received a master's in linguistics? Speaker 2: I got the degree in '66 [1966]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was converted '66 [1966]. Speaker 1: And when did, when did you go to Claremont School of Theology? Speaker 2: I studied at--I did the doctorate after I left Colgate Rochester [Colgate Rochester Crozer Divinity School, Rochester, New York] where I was a professor, and I studied while I was supposed to be on a sick leave. So at that time I was working on it, I was supposed to be dying. I didn't quite make it. Speaker 1: Do you remember what year you received your-- Speaker 2: I think I got the-- Speaker 1: --degree? Speaker 2: --degree in '73 [1973]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, when you get to California the Ko- the Korean War is going on. Was there anything significant about that time? Speaker 2: I wasn't involved in any way in that, no. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 599625 Speaker 1: I understand it was a, a tragedy that happened during 1950--1953 with your sister-in-law, or something that happened. Speaker 2: What's that again? Speaker 1: Was there something tragic that happened with your sister-in-law? Speaker 2: Sister-in-law? I lost my sister [Marjorie Mitchell Wilson] way back in '49 [1949]. Speaker 1: Okay, all righty. Speaker 2: She was murdered in a drugstore. Speaker 1: She was murdered in a drugstore? Speaker 2: Hm? Speaker 1: Your, your sister was murdered in a drugstore? Speaker 2: Yeah, in Oakland, Oakland, California, 1949. The sister that came to the West Coast got married, had baby, and behold was killed. Speaker 1: Wow. Okay. Now, civil rights didn't start until-- Speaker 2: The tragedy that I had later was the death of our son [Henry Mitchell IV], and I'm trying to remember the time. Speaker 1: The son that had leukemia because of the atomic-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. If that comes to you, we can just put it in. You could just, you know, tell us about it. Okay, now-- Speaker 2: He, he died while I was still at Colgate Rochester [Colgate Rochester Crozer Divinity School, Rochester, New York]. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now-- Speaker 2: And that's while part I have of, of, of the problems I had with the heart attacks and all of that stuff. Story_ID: 599626 Speaker 1: In the 1950s--we're going into the 19--the end of the 1950s, 1956. This is when civil rights is starting to-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --come to the forefront. Were you involved in civil rights? In, in what way? Speaker 2: I was involved in all kinds of ways. We had one demonstration with har- Martin King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] right there in Fresno [California]. Speaker 1: Tell me about that. Speaker 2: I have pictures of it in the stuff that I've got some pictures of. In Fresno I was able to clear up police brutality and stuff, got them to deal with blacks, black justly and e- even made them hire blacks, where they didn't plan to and so forth. I almost got to be ordered to the--elected to the school board, but I had found the school board was wrong on some things. So all the teachers organized the whole--that's a big bunch of people against me because I had caught the school board. And the school board really didn't want me to be on the board 'cause I had caught them wrong too many times. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, were you involved in the National Baptist Convention [National Baptist Convention, USA, Inc.]? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Can you tell me what the involvement of the National Baptist Convention was to the, in this--I guess there was some kind of little--a rift between civil rights or their views on civil rights in the National Baptist Convention. Do you know about that, or do you have an opinion about that? Speaker 2: Well, we had some strange things happen. For one thing, Martin Luther King should have been president of the Congress of Christian Education. And the president had a power base in Mississippi and places like that. And they thought of Martin too radical, and they moved him--he was elected president of the congress, and the president stopped him, did not rec- it was, it was a, a, a technical thing where the presidency or the, the, the, the, the mother convention had to approve the officers elected by the congress. And the congress elected Martin King as president, and the president re- had the convention to deny the usual form of approval. And they picked a new president for the congress because they thought was, that Martin King was too, too radical, stupid stuff like that. So the president was unfortunately the sort of person who, who was almost satisfied with things like they were. And he said just let us, let us fix it with the vote. We don't have to have all of these demonstrations and stuff. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: I was quite active in the city. I was too far out to be terribly importantly involved in nationally. But I did have a demonstration in San--in Fresno, in which Martin King did came and--did come, and take part. Story_ID: 599627 Speaker 1: In 1956 is when you and your wife [Ella Pearson Mitchell] decide to adopt a child. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Tell me, tell me why you decided to adopt a child at this time. Speaker 2: Well, our oldest child, Hank [Henry Mitchell IV], was unhappy about having no brothers. And when I was on the road a lot, he was the only male in the family, his mother and two sisters [Muriel Mitchell Lawrence and Elizabeth Mitchell Clement] and one boy, and he wanted a brother. And when my doctor told my wife not to have any more children that was not--she could have had another girl even then, so he was--he asked us to adopt a child. And the kids all voted on it, and we, we stumbled across the fact that there were some--oh, we looked at some other sources of an adoptee and then didn't work it out. So then we discovered that they had black part, part African American, what they called war orphans. And we read about one and sent for him. And the kids took responsibility for various parts of his life and were quite happy with their new little brother who was younger than the youngest sister. Speaker 1: Okay, so when you say one of the war, war orphans from the Korean War, so he was half-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --half African American and half Korean. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He was, he was apparently abandoned by a Korean mother because he was dark, and the Koreans were treating him very mean. So, he was left to die in a wheat field, and a chaplain found him, but we've never figured out who it was. And they had him in a makeshift orphanage, and we sent for him. And we received him--the, the original makeshift orphanage had gotten him when he was like three months old, when he was found dying in a field. And he had been taken care of until he was about four and half. And that's when we got him and had him ever since. Speaker 1: What is his name? Speaker 2: His name in their record was Wiedor Kim [ph.]. And Wiedor was actually a German name, supposedly the name of the person that found him, who was supposedly a chaplain. But nobody could find anybody by that name. And his first name was Kim. So, his real name on their record was Wiedor Kim. But for us he was Kim. Eventually, legally it was changed to Kenneth [Kenneth Mitchell], legally. Speaker 1: And, and what is he doing today? Speaker 2: What's that? Speaker 1: What is he doing today? Speaker 2: He has just finished a term as el- elementary school credentialed teacher holding responsibility in providing computer, computer--what should I call it--computer assistance in the curriculum of an elementary school. So he was--he did computer type curriculum support. Story_ID: 599628 Speaker 1: So now in 1959, you become pastor of the Second Baptist Church in Fresno [California]? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And this is during the, the Viet War [Vietnam War] time as well. So talk to me about both of these things: how you felt about the Vietnam War. We, we understood how you felt during World War II [WWII]. And do you hold, continue to hold these, you know, the same views about war? Speaker 2: Oh, I hadn't changed. I'm still a pastor, 'cause I don't believe in war. But I have not been involved in peace organizations like I was in my early years. Speaker 1: Okay. So tell me about your, your congregation. Speaker 2: In Fresno, I had an interesting congregation of about maybe 250 people. And I had an interesting combination of about eighteen public school teachers; we had three medical doctors, a pharmacist. My board of deacons had two, three people in the junk salvage business, very important leaders too. So I had the interesting combination of people who collected junk for a living and people who practiced medicine, taught public school, and did all sorts of things in between. Speaker 1: So how did your pacifist view of the war, did it affect how you preached or affect your interaction with your congregation, because a lot of them-- Speaker 2: No problem. Speaker 1: --had to deal with the-- Speaker 2: No problem of any kind. Speaker 1: Okay. Did you speak about the war from the pulpit? Speaker 2: Yes, but it wasn't one of those things where I preached on what some people might think, that, that's, that were shutting the war down. I, I--the issues that really were relevant to the needs of black folk were the things I preached about. And it wasn't a matter of like I'm preaching about peace. And there was very little they could do about it. Speaker 1: Okay. So how long were you pastor there? Speaker 2: Seven years. Speaker 1: Okay. And, and what do you pride yourself about in an accomplishment that, that you happened--that happened there while you were there in those seven years? Speaker 2: We did a homework help kind of thing that helped our students do a lot better. We had, we had basketball teams at every level, and we won the city championship at every age level except the, the adult people, and we were runner up for that. I was very happy with the--well, we had vacation ver- church schools, and they were very successful. Among the things that happened, one, one vacation church school, both of, both Liz [Elizabeth Mitchell Clement] and Ken [Kenneth Mitchell] made decisions to confessions of faith at that Homewood [ph.]--that vacation church school. And I baptized both of them on the same Sunday, and that was a very moving Sunday for me. Speaker 1: I'm sorry. Who, who was that? Speaker 2: I baptized both Ken and Liz. Speaker 1: Oh, your children. Speaker 2: Liz was the shortest female candidate, and Ken was the shortest male. And the shortest one is usually one that people baptize first. Well, I didn't want to baptize my kids first and then everybody else, so I bapti- baptized Liz first, and then I baptized up to the top of the women. And I had started at the top of the men and worked down to the bottom, and I bap- baptized Ken last. And he spoke back with such a powerful expression in his restatement of faith that I just couldn't take it. I shouted for the first time right there in the pool. It was a powerful moment. Story_ID: 599629 Speaker 1: So now we're getting close to '63 [1963] and the March on Washington. What were you doing, and what were your thoughts at that time? Martin Luther's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] march in Washington [D.C.]. Speaker 2: I'm trying to remember. I supported it. I didn't go to it. I couldn't. I went to, I went to King's funeral, but I didn't do the March on Washington, '63 [1963]. Speaker 1: Well, just tell me what your thoughts of, of the speech were? And the same year Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] is killed. What are your thoughts about that? Speaker 2: Well, of course, I, I thought it was tragic. I thought that Kennedy was a great loss, and certainly the same was true of Martin. I went and served a religious emphasis week at bith- Bishop College [Dallas, Texas] shortly after Kennedy was shot. And I did go to Atlanta [Georgia] for the funeral for Martin King. Story_ID: 599630 Speaker 1: All right, so, '63 [1963] through '68 [1968], and, and what year do you leave Fresno [California] as the pastor [of Second Baptist Church]? Where do you go next? Speaker 2: From there I went to Santa Monica [California] as pastor of Calvary Baptist Church. I stayed there three years. It was at Calvary Church that I rescued a church that was in throes of a major split. I thought I pulled them together and helped them. And when I went on to be professor, I thought I left them as a well organized, unified, strong congregation. It didn't turn out that way, but it, it in some kind of problem, split up and so forth ever since. Speaker 1: So you stayed there until 1969? Speaker 2: Well, I went there-- Speaker 1: In '66 [1966]. Speaker 2: --in '66 [1966] and stayed 'til '69 [1969]. But I actually--trying to remember. I, I left there and went to Colgate Rochester [Colgate Rochester Divinity School; Colgate Rochester Crozer Divinity School, Rochester, New York]. But I thought I had sort of pulled it together, but it, it never got back together again. Story_ID: 599631 Speaker 1: In 1969, at Colgate Rochester [Colgate Rochester Divinity School; Colgate Rochester Crozer Divinity School, Rochester, New York]? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. And you're the first Martin Luther King professor of Black Church Studies [Martin Luther King Jr. Memorial Professorship of Black Church Studies]? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Tell me, tell me about that. Speaker 2: Well, the students, the black students at Colgate Rochester went on a strike and locked the school up and everything. And when that whole division was settled, they organized a program, Black Church Studies, of which I was the author. And I was one of four or five faculty, black faculty that were added to the faculty. And they also had about five or so new trustees on black--on the trustee, on the trust, board of trustees. I went in to teach some courses. We had--let's see, I'm trying to remember how--they had one black there already, and myself was two. Then they had Jefferson [Frederick D. Jefferson] in theology, which was three. And they had another man in ethics, which is four, and an Episcopalian who was dean of the (unclear). There were five blacks taken on the faculty. Speaker 1: Okay. And so you're there for how long? Speaker 2: I was there from '69 [1969] to '74 [1974]-- Speaker 1: Seventy-four [1974]. Speaker 2: --technically. But I actually was ill, so I was on campus and registered (unclear) from '69 [1969] to '72 [1972]. Speaker 1: And then you leave again and go back-- Speaker 2: Then I went--then I went into, in illness. But little by little I went to work back again, and that's when I organized a Ecumenical Center for Black Church Studies in Los Angeles [sic. La Verne, California]. Speaker 1: Okay. So what year did you--were you a professor of religion in Pan African studies at California State [California State University, Northridge, Northridge, California] at (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was there for one year, and that would have been '74 [1974], '75 [1975], I think. I don't remember exactly. Speaker 1: Okay. All right, so now you receive your honorary D.D. from American Baptist Seminary [American Baptist Seminary of the West, Berkeley, California]-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --from West Berkeley. Do you remember the year? Speaker 2: Sixty-nine [1969]. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. And now, is your wife [Ella Pearson Mitchell] working with you at all or at '78 [1978] when she becomes an ordained minister that you start working together? Speaker 2: Well, she was working me, with me from the beginning in that center [Ecumenical Center for Black Church Studies, La Verne, California]. The curriculum that she did, she did all of the Christian education for that curriculum-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --for the Bachelor of Arts degree. Speaker 1: So, when do you start preaching together? Speaker 2: We started preaching together probably--trying to remember. I've got--it's written in there somewhere, I think. But anyway, we--must have been about 1995 or something-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --maybe before that. Story_ID: 599632 Speaker 1: I just want to go through the years of your degrees that you received. You get an honorary L.H.D. degree from Lincoln [Lincoln University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania]. Do you remember the year? Speaker 2: I don't remember-- Speaker 1: Okay, that's fine. Speaker 2: I can find it in-- Speaker 1: All right. Now, in 1982, you serve as academic dean and professor of histories, history. Is this at the Proctor School of Theology [Samuel DeWitt Proctor School of Theology] in West Virginia? Speaker 2: Richmond, Virginia. Speaker 1: Oh, in Richmond, Virginia, okay. And how long do you stay there? Speaker 2: What's that? Speaker 1: How long do you, are you a professor there? Speaker 2: Four years, actually. I stayed 'til five, but I resigned from deaning to, to teaching for one year. I promised I'd stay, as I went there originally as the interim. And I was almost immediately pra- promoted to being the dean, so I stayed in that for four years. Speaker 1: Do you remember who the president was at the time? Speaker 2: David T. Shannon. Speaker 1: And now tell me, your next move is to Atlanta [Georgia]. Is that right? What year did you move to Atlanta? Speaker 2: About '89 [1989], I think it was. Speaker 1: And what made you move here? Speaker 2: Well, I had resigned as dean, and Ella [Ella Pearson Mitchell] was already in Atlanta working for Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia], so I wanted to be with her. And I let her vocation determine where I live, because my vocation had re- had determined all of her locations up to that point. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: So I moved to Atlanta and actually was supposedly retired for a year before I got appointed to a full professorship [at the Interdenominational Theological Center, Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause it, 'cause this is now eight--1988, actually. And this is when the two of you start preaching together. Speaker 2: Yeah, approximately. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. And okay, the directory service, the founding director of the Ecumenical Center for Black Studies [Ecumenical Center for Black Church Studies, La Verne, California], that was after you came to Atlanta? Speaker 2: I organized that before that time. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I did that before I went to Richmond. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That was done about--started working on it in 1974 or '75 [1975]. Story_ID: 599633 Speaker 1: When I went to the West Coast, I was on a, originally sick leave from Colgate Rochester [Colgate Rochester Crozer Divinity School, Rochester, New York]. And then I didn't feel like going back the next year, so I gave a resignation, which was effective on, in '74 [1974]. Then the question you raised was what now? Speaker 2: What was the purpose of you forming the Ecumenical Center-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --for Black Church Studies [Ecumenical Center for Black Church Studies, La Verne, California]? Speaker 1: There was a movement to get a center for black church studies, and they--when they found that I had already done this, a fellow challenged me, said we could do, you could do it here too. And so they all decided they would, the preachers and bishops and everybody. And then the fellow that was really gonna do it challenged me we couldn't find any money. Let's just teach anyway; we got credentials. So I took it over, and two weeks later I found out he moved east to a national job in the Methodist office, and I was left holding the sack. So I didn't intend to be the founder, but as it turned out I was, 'cause the fellow that was helping me was the fellow who challenged me to do it, went off and left me holding the sack. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So, Ella [Mitchell's wife, Ella Pearson Mitchell] and I took it on, and it's still there. Story_ID: 599634 Speaker 1: Now, in 1990, is this your first book that's published, 'Black Preaching' [Henry Mitchell]? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. And, and-- Speaker 2: It was in the process. And one of the terms of my appointment to the professorship was that it be taken to press and so forth. So, that as (unclear)--so it was published as-- Speaker 1: Nineteen ninety [1990]? Speaker 2: --sixty [1960]--no. It was published before the--my first book, 'Black Preaching' was published--well, I went to press with it--I went to teach there in '69 [1969]. One of the terms was that it would be posted (unclear)--it was first published in '70 [1970], in '59 [1959], in '60 [1960]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That doesn't sound right, fif- '50 [1950], no. Fifty-nine [1959] is when I went to Fresno [California]. It was '69 [1969] when I went to Colgate Rochester [Colgate Rochester Divinity School; Colgate Rochester Crozer Divinity School, Rochester, New York], and the book was published in '70 [1970]. Speaker 1: Okay. And, and tell me, the book is trying to preserve the, or reclaim the history and traditions of the African American church? Speaker 2: Well, it provided a history, but primarily, it functioned as a rationale in defense of the methodology of the tradition. Up to that point, everybody sort of looked down on it, and they made black folk even ashamed of the tradition. But they had to do it anyway 'cause the people demanded it. What we've now discovered is, and I guess I'm the one who broke the ice, was that we, yes, we're emotional. We believe in being emotional, and emotion is not to be sneezed at. Unless you have emotion, you haven't got faith 'cause faith, hope, and love are all emotions. So it was I who went to press with a very solid explanation of the tradition and its value and strength, and of course everybody's headed that way now. But the most important thing the book did at first was not about the methodology. I have refined it considerably since that book. But the thing it did originally was to give to typical black preachers some self-respect, some self-pride in the, in, in, in the preaching tradition rather than to be ashamed of the fact that we had feelings. Speaker 1: So your next book, which is 'Preaching'--'Preaching for Black Self-Esteem' [Henry Mitchell and Emil Thomas], does that-- Speaker 2: That's not my next book-- Speaker 1: It's not? Speaker 2: --by a long shot. That was much later. Speaker 1: Oh, really? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, what was your next book then? Speaker 2: After 'Black Preaching,' I did a book, 'Recovery of Preaching' ['The Recovery of Preaching,' Henry Mitchell]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And it was a much more sophisticated, analytical analysis. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And it was, among other things, a public production of the, the basic materials that I had produced as the Beecher Lectures [Lyman Beecher Lectures] at Yale [Yale Divinity School, New Haven, Connecticut] in '74 [1974]. What, what I did in the lecture in terms of to validate analytically, what were the strengths of the black pulpit, the lecture then became the book, 'Recovery of Preaching.' Speaker 1: Okay. Well, the, the reason why I, I bring up 'Black Self'--you know, 'Preaching for Black Self-Esteem' is because you were saying that that was the first book. 'Black Preaching' was kind of a foundation to bring self-respect to the black preacher. So, I was just trying to see or understand whether 'Black Preaching' for, I mean 'Preaching for Black Self-Esteem' came out of that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, it did, but it wasn't the first book. Speaker 1: I understand that. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It wasn't the first book about, that really, that the, the really--the first book that really dealt analytically with it was the Beecher Lectures-- Speaker 1: The lectures-- Speaker 2: --at Yale. Speaker 1: --theories. Okay, all right, that's fine. So, 'Preaching for Black Self-Esteem' was published what year? Speaker 2: I don't remember exactly. I-- Speaker 1: Does 19-- Speaker 2: But it's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) nine--does 1994 sound-- Speaker 2: --you've got--I sent you lists of all of my-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --bibliography, the fat thing in the--all of that's in the material. Speaker 1: Okay, that's fine. Does 1994 sound about right? Speaker 2: Right now I'm not-- Speaker 1: You don't remember. Okay, that's-- Speaker 2: I don't want to-- Speaker 1: --that's, that's fine. Story_ID: 599635 Speaker 1: Now you and your wife [Ella Pearson Mitchell] also write a joint autobiography. Is that right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, and, and tell me about that, the name of the book, and what it-- Speaker 2: And that-- Speaker 1: --was about. Speaker 2: It's a joint autobiography of our relationship. So, some people call it a love story at least. So, what we originally started out with, telling about our ancestry and all that, all of that part, was postponed. And we wrote strictly a, a joint autobiography, beginning at the point where we met each other and eventually married, et cetera. Speaker 1: So the name of the book is (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 'Together for Good,' ['Together for Good: Lessons from Fifty-five Years of Marriage,' Ella Mitchell and Henry Mitchell] which comes out of Romans 8:28: "Believe that God works in everything for good." Speaker 1: Okay. And it's lessons from fifty-five years of marriage? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: What were some of the things that being married--you and your wife were married for sixty-four years before she passed away. What were some of the things that you--or maybe you can give some advice that was in your book, something to help other couples be successful in marriage. Speaker 2: One of the things that we strongly believed was that marriage for too many people is a getting process. See, you can out get, out--in other words, it's self-centered. We decided that the best marriage is a marriage where you try to out give each other. And both of us thought we were losing; that is, I thought she was giving me more, and she thought I was giving her more. And the both of us were quite happy that at no point did we engage in competition as such. I, I gloried more in her victories than I did in mine, and she likewise, so there was never any competition between us. The other thing that we would tell anybody is that you can't be together with different values. We believed, for instance, in tithing, giving a tenth. Well, we both did it. So our value system all the way down the line was comparable. Our personalities were radically different, but our value system was the same. We never argued one time over five cents. We bought cars, houses, whatever; all, everything we did was done in, on the basis of two things: one, all of the really objective data that you can put on a table, and then you pray over it, and what the Holy Ghost says, with the guidance of the facts is how we do it. And we don't ever decide who won or who lost. Story_ID: 599636 Speaker 1: Now, for a number of years, you actually were called a tag team. And-- Speaker 2: We were what? Speaker 1: Called a tag team. You all-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --your, you all teamed-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --up to teach. And how long did you all tag team? Speaker 2: Well, in teaching, what happened was that when I retired I moved to Atlanta [Georgia], and Ella [Mitchell's wife, Ella Pearson Mitchell] at that time was dean of the chapel at Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia]. And I wasn't teaching anything for a year. Then when I was asked to teach at ITC [Interdenominational Theological Center, Atlanta, Georgia], I wasn't in position to accept a salary because I was taking social security, and I wanted to keep the social security. So I told them my wife was older, so she could receive. So I taught with her. We taught together. They paid her, and I volunteered, and then she could take as much as they were willing to pay. So that's how we made up the tag team, to get her involved. And now, of course, in 20/20 hindsight, it's really a, a, a, a, a blessing we did it because she had never been in social security before. She had had teaching pensions and stuff like that, but she had never had a social security. And on the grounds of the salary that she was getting, she got social security as much as I got from being in social security since they started. When they sent us half a social security, I signed up in 1937 (laughter). She was just getting in, but her, her social security, when she started drawing it, was so close to mine it's unbelievable. So that was a real blessing, but it was also a blessing because she could no longer get down in the floor and do all the things she used to do with small children. She was an expert. She could charm little children unbelievably. But it sort of got beyond her ability (laughter) when she got up in her age. Speaker 1: So you all taught at the Interdenominational Theological Center? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. And-- Speaker 2: Then we also both taught at United Theological Seminary and, and we are airplane faculty at the United Methodist seminary in Dayton [Ohio]. We had a pretty good full life, as you may have decided by now. Speaker 1: And then you, you have another sec- a second book. You and your wife write 'Fire in the Well' ['Fire in the Well: Sermons by Ella and Henry Mitchell,' Ella Mitchell and Henry Mitchell]. Do you all write the--do you co-author that book? Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, somebody else co-authored it, I think, but I, I did a lot of the editing. But she had six sermons; I had six sermons; and then there were seven sermons in there that were written by both of us in dialogue. Story_ID: 599637 Speaker 1: And then there's 'Black Church Beginnings' [Henry Mitchell]. Speaker 2: That is the book that I had been thinking about for thirty years. Speaker 1: What is it about? Speaker 2: It is about history of the black church in this country with data that nobody else has seemed to have. Both of my grandfathers were Baptist preachers, and particularly old Dr. H.H. Mitchell [Mitchell's paternal grandfather, Henry Mitchell]. I knew stuff about the church that other people just didn't put in the books. Speaker 1: Some--tell me what some of that might be. Speaker 2: And then some of the stuff the Lord just gave me. First, there's, there was always a big tango about what was the first black Baptist church, and most people agreed. Even a Virginian and Vir- and a, a D.C. [Washington, D.C.] pastor, Walter H. Brooks, who happened to be a Lincoln man too [Lincoln University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania], said that the first black Baptist church was in South Carolina, Silver Bluff [Silver Bluff Baptist Church, Beech Island, South Carolina]. Well, it's true that one of the earlier churches was there, but there were churches in Virginia that were just as old. But he said the first church because in Virginia they had to have a white preacher. But that's a, that's not really fair to say that you weren't a church until you got a black preacher. Even though it was under supposed the leadership and sponsorship of whites, black folks did all kinds--they didn't, they didn't allow them to preach, but when they allowed them to pray, they preached anyhow, 'cause you know how that's done (laughter). I mean, it was a lot of--the very first churches that we know--that I know anything about were considerably earlier than the 1870--than the 1773 at the church at, at Silver Bluff. There was up in Virginia, there was chur- black folks worshipping. The slave master hired a couple of white missionaries to preach black services as early as 1756. So, there are so many different ways, so many different criteria to decide who was first that all we can really say is that a church was founded at Silver Bluff, South Carolina; a church was founded at Williamsburg. That's in Virginia, et cetera. And they all very early. Story_ID: 599638 Speaker 1: You were telling me what, what other information you had that wasn't put in other books, and one was about the earliest church. And you had some other information from your [paternal] grandfather [Henry Mitchell]. Speaker 2: Well, for instance, it didn't even involve my grandfathers. The first black Baptist association was in southeastern Ohio, Providence Association of Churches [Providence Regular Missionary Baptist Association]. Everybody knew that. But I had a--my mother [Bertha Estis Mitchell] grew up not too far from there, and I had a cousin who was living there and died there. When I went to her funeral, they said that she was a member of this church. I said that sounds like the church that was in the first association. I checked that thing, and I liked to went into--I mean, the earliest church people didn't know. These guys had the nerve to hold church near the river and to help people when they sneaked across the river and helped them on up to, to Canada. And the irony of it was that these people lived there. And of course, they were constantly under--in danger, 'cause if you lived that close to the river somebody could slap you in a boat, take you across to Canada--to Kentucky, and automatically you're a slave already. And I mean you've got to have nerve to hold church where they could capture a whole church full of them. But there were seven of those churches that were constantly one of their main functions, not only save souls but to free people. So they would catch people that were coming off the, off the, the, the beach and get them out of there before anybody could get to them. And they were really a major underground station. Nobody had ever said that. They just said that was the first church, the first provident--the first association. The blacks in the association in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] belonged to the white association; at least they thought they did. The white folks thought of them as their missions, not their peers in membership. So the first place they--and these people started the association 'cause they had been with the white folks over around Cincinnati [Ohio], and the whites didn't give them any kind of rights. They said forget these people. They started their own association. And so that, that is one thing in that book that nobody else has. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And of course, what I said about Silver Bluff [Silver Bluff Baptist Church, Beech Island, South Carolina] is not in anybody else's book either. I had lived in black church history all my life. And I have--the rest of these people that write were not in any way as saturated for, in the black church. If they were members, they were never, as I was a member in the sense that I was just strictly proud of my church. I had a reason to be 'cause I had these two grandfathers and all that. I could be as critical as anybody. But they were being critical without seeing the strengths of the black church. And when I wrote the book 'Black Preaching' [Henry Mitchell] I validated what we have been doing analytically, which they had never done, still don't do. Speaker 1: Well-- Speaker 2: Take a book like Carter Woodson [Carter G. Woodson] and some of the things that he had said. I wouldn't know if he hadn't said them. But he was busy pointing out people, geniuses of various kind in the black church, and his job was to prove that we're as good as white people were. Well, I don't need to prove that. What we got, if it's better than white folk, good as white folk, not as good--whatever it is, it's ours, and it serves the purpose, and it serves it very well. And of course, people have gotten around to the place where now you can see, in, particularly in the, in the lesser television shows, that influence in the black church is very strong in white pulpit. Story_ID: 599639 Speaker 1: Is there anything that we did not talk about that you would like to talk about? Speaker 2: What I say about preaching is something that I want to hope that little by little becoming the authority of things but not all of it. Among the things that I--we didn't talk at all about was trips to Africa. I took nineteen people. Originally, we gave seventeen doctor of ministry degrees as a result of a three year part time doctor of ministry curriculum, which included a summer in Africa, summer in Atlanta [Georgia], and a summer in Rochester. And some of the best known preachers in America, black, many of them are all graduates of that doctoral program. But the first year we did six weeks in West Africa. We did Ghana, Nigeria, primarily. The next summer we studied in Rochester, New York, third and used the resources there. Third year we studied and--no. We did a summer in Africa, a summer in Atlanta, third summer in Rochester. Then that was the writing summer. We had people like Wyatt Walker [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Wyatt Tee Walker], and we had Episcopalians, very famous Episcopalian priest, et cetera, who turned out to be major leaders. We had two bishops of the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church, John Bryant [John Richard Bryant] and Phil Cousins [Philip R. Cousin, Sr.]. It was, it was a very outstanding group of people that some wrote books. I thought I was gonna get a book from all nineteen, but they said silly boy, nobody write--nobody gets classes that (laughter) fruitful. Story_ID: 599640 Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be? Speaker 2: I suppose the, the most important legacy I would want to leave would be the analysis and pure purification, or whatever you want to call it, of the black preaching tradition. And it's more and more out there and more and more--well, I--anybody that has studied under me and gets a (unclear) can get a, a job teaching anywhere (laughter). It works like that. One of the people who has best grasp my school of thought is my own daughter, Elizabeth [Elizabeth Mitchell Clement]. She's an excellent preacher. She didn't follow her mother [Ella Pearson Mitchell]. She didn't follow me. She followed her own way. But that, that would be it. My second most interesting or pleasing heritage would have to be the black church itself, not just the pulpit part, but the whole tradition of it. Story_ID: 599641 Speaker 1: I have strong feelings about things like the role of women, et cetera. I would think that one of the major aspects of our heritage would be our book, 'Together for Good' ['Together for Good: Lessons from Fifty-five Years of Marriage,' Ella Mitchell and Henry Mitchell] and told about first fifty-five years of our marriage. Speaker 2: Well, as, as far as your philosophy on black teach- black preaching, it was many years that the black church did not recognize women as preachers. And I just would like to know your thought on that. Speaker 1: Well, I was the one who pushed my wife [Ella Pearson Mitchell] (laughter), insisted in fact--to keep her from being tempted to be a secretary I volunteered to do all the typing. That's how strongly I felt about that it. I only typed with these two fingers, but all of her books I typed. She didn't type any of my books. We helped each other. We gave each other ideas and all that all the time. (Unclear) and, and, and, and the full analysis of it, the truth is that I was far more of a feminist than she was. Speaker 2: So you don't believe in that, that tradition in--because when you say in the black churches, I, I just--well, I should ask, is, are you talking about the, the Baptist church? Speaker 1: Well, they're all loosening up some. The A.M.E.'s [African Methodist Episcopal] now have female bishops, but that's very recent. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: I taught one of the female bishops. Speaker 2: So, the tradition of not having women in the pulpit is not something that you subscribe to, as a tradition? Speaker 1: Yeah, that's not a tradition I'm trying to defend at all. Speaker 2: (Unclear)-- Speaker 1: Like, I'm dead against it-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and have been from the beginning. Speaker 2: So, a few of the traditions that you are defending are what? Speaker 1: Primarily, they are, first of all, a consideration of the sermon as a holistic experience of the gospel as opposed to abstract idea of the gospel. That sums it all up in-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --in one, one sentence really. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. Speaker 1: But that's, that's my strong feeling, and that's the strength of the black pulpit. Story_ID: 599642 Speaker 1: That was taken outdoors during the American Baptist biennial convention. And the location is a park in San Jose, California. And my guess is that the date is in the early '90s [1990s] (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Okay, tell us who's in the picture. Speaker 1: What's that? Speaker 2: Tell us who's in the picture. Speaker 1: That's me and my wife. And it's--doesn't show in the picture, but it's, it's characteristic of the fact that we wore matching clothes all the time. That was--we were both dressed in, in green in that one. Speaker 2: That's the Reverend Dr. Henry H. Mitchell I [Mitchell's paternal grandfather, Henry Mitchell]. And that picture was taken in his younger years while he was pastor in the State of Virginia. He served churches at Richmond, Danville, Farmville, and Norfolk, all in Virginia. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: That's our family when they were very young, Hank [Henry Mitchell IV], the late Hank, Elizabeth [sic. Muriel Mitchell Lawrence], and the little one is Elizabeth [Elizabeth Mitchell Clement]. Elizabeth at that point is about two years old, and she was born in '49 [1949], so that picture must be 1951. It's interesting to know how much they are sisters, in appearance; you look across their eyes, but other than that, one is short, and one is tall, et cetera. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: That's a picture of me when I first moved to Durham, North Carolina, in 1944. Speaker 1: That's me reading in a station somewhere while I was waiting to travel, but I very honestly can't tell you when it was. I did a lot of traveling of course. Speaker 2: That's me in '66 [1966] I believe, after I was given my first honorary degree, which was a D.D. at the Baptist seminary (unclear) [American Baptist Seminary of the West, Berkeley, California]. And the other person, of course, is my wife. Speaker 1: This is a picture of my wife at the time we got married. That's again 1945. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): It wouldn't hurt to reiterate the name. Speaker 1: Elizabeth--Ella Pearson Mitchell. She was about twenty-seven at that time. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): 'Cause the people looking at us won't be us. I, I mean the people looking at this won't be us here in the room. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: That's me and our son, Hank, Henry IV. Speaker 1: This is a picture of Ella and me taken about 1988 when I first moved here in Atlanta [Georgia]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Well, the picture in the top left is Ella and me in 1944, August the 12th, New York City [New York, New York], when we got married. Speaker 2: The next picture coming down is Ella about the time we got married. Speaker 1: And of course, the next picture is Ella when she was an infant. Now where do I go, back to the top? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Back to the top in the middle is Ella and our son, Hank. The picture was taken in Niagara Falls in the year 1972. He had been released and was in remission before he died following fall--no, the following year in February or something like that. Speaker 2: The next picture is the Mitchell family in Fresno, California, about 1957. See, I went there in '59 [1959]. It wouldn't be '57 [1957]. No, it'd be in the early '60s [1960s]. On the left is Muriel; the second child on the right is Hank, the oldest; in front is Elizabeth; and in front is Ken [Kenneth Mitchell], whose original name was K-I-M, Kim. And at that time, he was about seven years old. Speaker 1: Over here are family groupings. The top one is the Pearson family. The older people are--no, the older people aren't even there. It's the four Pearson sisters. On the left is myself. And then above that is--can't tell. But the, the two men on the, the right are--the, the, the taller one is a mortician, Fred Brown of Charleston [South Carolina]; and next to him is an orthodontist dentist specialist, Wendell Cotton. Fred Brown is Jessie Pearson's [Jessica Pearson Brown] husband. And Wendell Cotton is Lurline [Lurline Pearson Cotton] just below him, his wife. Wendell is an orthodontist, he was. Speaker 2: This is a recent, this is a recent, relatively recent shot of our daughter, Elizabeth, who was dressed in her clergy apparel. She is an ordained clergyperson, a program professional for the Fund for Theological Education here in Atlanta but working all over the United States. Speaker 1: Are these your grandsons? Speaker 2: This is our daughter, Elizabeth, and her, her two sons. Her husband [Arthur Clement, Sr.], who is an architect is sitting down, and she is standing up, which means that he is 6'4" or something like that. The little boy on the left is a, one of our grandsons [Mitchell Clement]. He is now graduate of Annapolis Naval Academy [United States Naval Academy, Annapolis, Maryland] and an officer on atomic submarines. His brother [Arthur Clement, Jr.], the tall one standing up, is a faculty member in the King's Academy, and that's (Unclear), Jordan [Madaba, Jordan]. He teaches sciences to the royalty of the Near East and coaches their soccer team and among other things. This is in his third year. And of course, his mother in the middle is the minister who--..