 Story_ID: 527102 Speaker 1: We'll start by slating. I'm [HistoryMaker] Harriette Cole, I am the interviewer today for The HistoryMakers, Scott Stearns is our videographer. We are, today is October 6, 2016. I would love for you to say and spell your name. Speaker 2: My name is [HistoryMaker] Donnie McClurkin, D-O-N-N-I-E, M-C, capital C, L-U-R-K-I-N. Speaker 1: And where are we? Speaker 2: We're at Perfecting Faith Church here in Freeport, New York. Speaker 1: Excellent. And what is your birth date? Speaker 2: My birth date? Well, I was born November the 9th, 1959, on a Monday evening at seven PM, Lakeside Hospital, Copiague, New York, 11726. Speaker 1: All right. Story_ID: 527103 Speaker 1: Okay. I have some People magazine kind of questions for you (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. Let's go. Speaker 1: What is your favorite color? Speaker 2: I don't, yeah, I don't know that I have a favorite color. I don't, I don't know. Some would say black but I, I, it's all according to my mood. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, there's no specific, you know, color. I'm not that kind of guy, you know. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You give me a burlap bag I'll wear it, I don't, I don't really care. Speaker 1: What about your favorite food? Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Well, my favorite food would probably be Jamaican, ox tail, and rice and peas, callaloo, plantain, the whole nine yards, that would be my favorite food. Speaker 1: And season of the year? Speaker 2: Hmm, I don't know, I don't know that I have a favorite season. I'm that eclectic guy. Every season means something to me. And, if, if, if I lived in a place where the, where the four seasons didn't happen, I'd, I'd be miserable. I like the, the cold and the white of, of winter. I love the, the transition of spring. I love the heat of summer. I love the foliage of, of the fall, you know, I love it all. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: My favorite destination would probably be home. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: My house would be my favorite place to, to vacate. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: And, and 'cause, you know, when you travel so much you go to all of the different places that people would use as vacation spots, so my thing is, if I can go home, lock myself up in my bedroom suite and watch my court shows all day long and my Cartoon Network all night, I'm good. Speaker 1: (Laughter) There you go. And do you have a favorite saying or phrase? Speaker 2: Yes. My favorite saying is yes, well, no, my favorite saying is no is as good an answer as yes. Story_ID: 527104 Speaker 1: All right. So, now I wanna go to your family history. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And we'll do both sides of the family but let's start with your mother, if you would tell me her name, when and where she was born, and tell me about her? Speaker 2: Well, my mother's name is Frances Elizabeth Reid McClurkin [Frances McClurkin]. She was born and raised in Harlem, New York [New York], and real, real different situation. I'll stop there unless you ask me more but Frances Elizabeth Reid McClurkin. Speaker 1: And I will ask you more. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Tell me about the different situation. Speaker 2: Well, you know, Frances was a different child. My mother was a child that was born of rape and my grandmother was raped by her stepfather from the age of ten to twelve years old, consistently from 1930 to 1932. And then my mother-- Speaker 1: What is your grandmother's name? Speaker 2: My grandmother's name was Olivia, Olivia Jenkins. And she, oh, she'd, she'd keel over if she heard me tell this story. But, so my, so my mother was born to a thirteen year old in 1933 in a church environment where it was totally misunderstood and, and, and kind of abusive to my mother. Speaker 1: The congregation? Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, it was kind of abusive, you know, to my grandmother specifically. So, my mother was raised up believing that her grandmother was her mother and that her mother was her sister. Speaker 1: 'Cause her mother was thirteen when she was pregnant? Speaker 2: Yeah. So, she didn't know her mother was her mother until, until she turned sixteen years old. Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: So, she was a junior in high, a sophomore in high school before she found out that her older sister is really her mother. And so, they had that kind of relationship, kind of a sister, mother kind of thing. And, and, and my mother, you know, didn't realize that she was an only child for the majority of her growing up. Speaker 1: And how many children were in the house where she grew up? Speaker 2: Well, she grew up with her aunts and uncles thinking that they were her siblings. Speaker 1: Sure. Speaker 2: So, there was five, there was Robert [ph.], there was Clarence [ph.], there was Lillian [ph.], there was Jeanette [ph.], and there was my grandmother, and, and my great-grandmother who they called Mumma [Mary Dinge]. And, and that, that was the, that was the family situation back then in Harlem (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, it was at Mumma's house where-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --she grew up? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And it was Mumma's husband-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --who had raped her? Speaker 2: Who had raped my grandmother. Speaker 1: Your grandmother? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Did Mumma know? Speaker 2: Once she did know or once she admitted knowing, that's when she ended the relationship. And, and my mother never got to really meet her father. My mother would tell stories about they would be walking out on the streets when she was like eight or six years old and all of a sudden Mumma would grab her and pick her up and start running with her. And she found out that's because her father, her step-grandfather, father, was across the street and they didn't want them to connect. So, my mother grew up, you know, with that kind of disconnect. Her world was totally, totally turned upside down at sixteen and-- Speaker 1: How did she find out? Speaker 2: Her, my, my great-grandmother decided it was time for her to know. Speaker 1: Mumma? Speaker 2: Yeah. Mumma decided it was time for her to know and sat her down and explained to her that, you know, "Sis, is not your sister, you know." Speaker 1: And at sixteen is like (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Very, very-- Speaker 1: --changing times where-- Speaker 2: A very precarious age. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: And it, it, it disrupted everything, you know, all of her friends, all of the, her social climate was changed by that revelation. And well, you know, but life continued to go on and they made the best of it. And then my mother met my father [Donald McClurkin, Sr.] in 1953. And-- Speaker 1: So (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) that's--we all got here. Story_ID: 527105 Speaker 1: So, going back-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --you said that in the congregation people were unkind-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --to your [maternal] grandmother [Olivia Jenkins]. How did they even know? Speaker 2: Well, you know, the church world is a very small, microcosm. It's a very small intimate setting. I mean, you got a couple of hundred people in a room but all, you know, everybody's business is known. And, and back in 1933 for a thirteen-year-old girl to be pregnant-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --up north that's not something you can hide at all. Speaker 1: And where were they living? Speaker 2: Harlem [New York, New York]. Speaker 1: This was all in Harlem? Speaker 2: All this was in Harlem. Speaker 1: So, the '30s [1930s] in Harlem is a really booming time. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Booming, it was the, the renaissance of Harlem [Harlem Renaissance]. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: And that's how my mother grew up. She grew up walking up to the Cotton Club [New York, New York] or walking up to the restaurants and seeing Duke Ellington or Mahalia Jackson or Cab Calloway or Ella Fitzgerald or Billie Holiday, sitting at the front window so that all the kids could come by and see them and throw coins out to them and, you know. In the, in the 1920s Bojangles [Bill "Bojangles" Robinson] did a benefit for my great-grandmother. He-- Speaker 1: What, what was her name? Speaker 2: Mary Dinge. He did-- Speaker 1: So, this is on-- Speaker 2: Mumma. Speaker 1: This is Mumma? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, um-hm. Speaker 2: He did a, a benefit dance program for my great-grandmother so they could stay in their house. Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: That's the kind of Harlem that was. Speaker 1: Where did, where exactly did they live in Harlem? Speaker 2: Oh, I think it was like a 127th [Street] and Lenox Avenue [Malcolm X Boulevard]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I believe. Speaker 1: Did they, did they live in a house? Speaker 2: A brownstone, yeah. Speaker 1: That the family owned? Speaker 2: I don't know if they owned it or not. Speaker 1: But they lived in the whole brownstone (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Story_ID: 527106 Speaker 1: You said that they, that your, your grandmother [Olivia Jenkins] was not treated well in the church but your mother [Frances McClurkin] wasn't aware of that? Speaker 2: My mother was aware because my mother was treated badly too. They would call my mother, the kids would call my mother by the name of the rapist, by the last name of the rapist. And-- Speaker 1: But she didn't know why? Speaker 2: I don't, I don't think so, 'cause she didn't know that she was, she was born to that, all she knew she was Mumma's [McClurkin's maternal great-grandmother, Mary Dinge] child. And my mother would tell us stories about how they would malign and how they would verbally abuse my grandmother and her and she would never understand what that meant, "That's not my name, and that's not my name." And so, you know, that, that was their growing up. Speaker 1: And which church were they attending? Speaker 2: Oh, I won't tell you the name of that church. Speaker 1: No, no, was this the, your grandfather's church? Speaker 2: No, no, no, no. Speaker 1: Your Gramps' [John A. McClurkin] church? Speaker 2: Oh, no, that's, that's my daddy's [Donald McClurkin, Sr.]-- Speaker 1: That's, that's, okay. All right. Speaker 2: --that's my daddy's daddy. Speaker 1: Okay. Got it. All right. No, I wasn't trying to out the church just trying to get (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) I know. Speaker 1: What type of church was it? Speaker 2: This is a typical Pentecostal church. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know. Speaker 1: And they stayed in the church even though they were ridiculed? Speaker 2: Well, you weren't going anywhere. You know, church was a family unit and no matter what you went through, you know, you, you dealt with it there. There was no such thing as picking up and just going to somebody else's church, you were dyed in the wool. And consequently, they endured it all and made it through that period. My mother remained a member of that church until, oh, I don't even remem-, until about the '70s [1970s]. Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, that was just home? Speaker 2: That was totally home. I was born and raised in that church too and it's a part and parcel of who we are. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And we still go back and visit. Our church still fellowships with them, and it's like five, four or five, six generations worth of family members that are still connected and still active. Story_ID: 527107 Speaker 1: Did your [maternal] grandmother [Olivia Jenkins] ever get any emotional support or psychological support after having gone through this? Speaker 2: Did my grandmother ever get psychological support? Speaker 1: It's just (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In the '30s [1930s] and the '40s [1940s] and the '50s [1950s]? Are you kidding me? Who do you know from our black communities that have the ability or the privilege to sit down and get counseling for their hurts? Number two, it was considered a taboo, that means you're crazy, so, that was never a thought nor conception. Even today to think about it it's a taboo thought to think about sitting down and having psychological or psychiatric counseling, it is only a by-product of a mental illness but never to bring resolve to broken past. So, no, by no stretch of the imagination, not with clergy, nor with clinical psychologists, none. Speaker 1: And in the family did they talk about it ever (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Never, never. To this day if you spoke with my grandmother about it, she's ninety-six, she would go into a rage, she would go into a rage, we could never speak about those things. My mother [Frances McClurkin] told us this but if we ever dared and we did a couple of times, "Nana, tell us about--." "Oh, what do you need to know that for? You need to mind your business. The, what are you, what are you talking about? Who told you all of this?" You know, and the wall would come up because that was so traumatic to her. That was traumatic. Speaker 1: (Unclear) sure. Speaker 2: And no matter how, how much she grew it grew with her and it was hard for her to deal with so she built a life around it, you know, on top of it, she built a life on top of it to mitigate it, to go on to develop an, an alter life so this way she wouldn't have to remember the, that, that stuff. She separated herself from her siblings and just developed a life with her and my mother. Story_ID: 527108 Speaker 1: What was her work? Speaker 2: Nana [McClurkin's maternal grandmother, Olivia Jenkins], Nana did housekeeping at one time, she did maintenance and janitorial work at some of the buildings and establishments but her husband worked. Speaker 1: And what was his work? Speaker 2: Well, (laughter) well, Grandpa, (laughter) Grandpa Jenkins [ph.], was a numbers runner (laughter). He worked at a, as a bouncer in a local bar (laughter) so. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know, it was that, it was that era when the-- Speaker 1: Sure. Speaker 2: --when the barbershop and the, was, was the place where you came and found all the older guys taking numbers and, you know, and giving payouts as well as collecting, you know, so that's what Gramps really did. And then as he got older in the '70s [1970s] he became a forklift worker. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, you know, I'm saying we had a colorful family. We had quite the colorful family. Story_ID: 527109 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did he have a spot in Harlem [New York, New York] like that-- Speaker 2: Well, the, by that time they were living out here on Long Island [New York]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They were living out in Amityville [New York]. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Where the horror house was (laughter). Speaker 1: Why, why did they move to Amityville? Speaker 2: Well, because everybody wanted to come out to find a more conducive and, and, and, and peaceful lifestyle and that's what, and that's what Long Island was during those times. Speaker 1: This is, around what year did they move to Amityville? Speaker 2: Mom [Frances McClurkin] and them moved out here in 1953. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Around '53 [1953], yeah. Speaker 1: So, this is still during segregation because-- Speaker 2: As best we knew. Speaker 1: At least in the South it was. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, in Amityville was it, did, did they move into a, to a black neighborhood or-- Speaker 2: Oh, of course. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: We moved into a black neighborhood where everybody was family, you know. I heard a politician saying once, "That the urban neighborhoods and they're, they're, they're just, they're horrible, they're falling apart," a presidential candidate was just going off, "And, and they, and the black communities," and I sat back and I said well, what community is he talking about? Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: Because everything's not the quintessential South Side of Chicago [Illinois]. And our communities, our black communities were family. The whole entire block was family. You know, everybody treated everybody's child like family. Everybody knew everybody's name, the families were all connected, you know, and Miss Perry [ph.] was just like Miss Shine [ph.], was just like Miss Mobley [ph.], just like Miss Frutrell [ph.], was just like (laughter) Miss, Miss McClain [ph.], just like Miss Davis [ph.], just like Miss Evans [ph.], all of them, they all watched out for us, our neighborhood was peaceful. You got a whooping by everybody. You're outside playing while your mother and father is at work, "Don [HistoryMaker Donnie McClurkin], what you doing outside," Miss Perry would say. Come in, and she'd whip you. Bring you inside, when the, when she saw your mother's car come up, you'd see her walking across the street, you knew that's another whooping you gonna get 'cause she's gonna tell. Our families in our communities were safe havens. They were, now we had drug dealers and we had numbers runners and we had drug addicts and we had all kinds of people, local transvestite, local, I mean, this is in the '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s], but everybody was connected. You go up to the Associated [Associated Foods Holdings, LLC, New York, New York] grocery store, they didn't sell the best of food but that was our shopping place, you walked there and that's where everybody hung out in Amityville, all the drug dealers, the numbers runners, all the drug addicts, the, the alcoholic, everybody hung up at the Associated. Speaker 1: The Associated. Speaker 2: And Ozzie [ph.], he was our local transvestite, oh, and the, the most fun young man. He was young, heavyset, would wear his shirt tied here and his belly showing, had two little two pigtails and, and always, and always, "Don, does your mother know you're out here? Don, you better get home." He would, no matter how they hung out, they wouldn't let us hang out. Everybody in the whole entire community, Silverpine [Drive], Avon [Drive], Penndale Drive, everything was around us was, was a safe haven, we, everybody knew. You stayed outside until the street lights come on, them street lights come on you'd better be walking up that walkway and coming in the door. We had family dinners, six o'clock, sit down, everybody wash your hands. So, that's, that was our community, that was our upbringing. And we didn't find out about the broken side of the family until we were old enough for our mother to depict it to us. But for the most part we had that kind of Cliff [Heathcliff "Cliff" Huxtable] and Clair [Clair Huxtable], Ozzie [Ozzie Nelson] and Harriet [Harriet Nelson] household. Story_ID: 527110 Speaker 1: Now, I wanna go back to your mother's [Frances McClurkin] family for a moment. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: How far back can you trace her family? Speaker 2: Not far at all. I cannot trace my mother's family back, I can go to my great-great-grandmother, that's as far as I can go. Speaker 1: And what was her name? Speaker 2: Oh, what was her name, oh, I know her name. What was her name? (Pause). Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: I can't remember her name. Speaker 1: What did she do? Speaker 2: I have no clue, 'cause remember our families didn't talk about that. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Because of the, because of the dysfunction our families didn't talk about that. Fleeta, Fleeta Walker [ph.]. No, Fleeta, I can't remember her last name, Fleeta something. Speaker 1: Your mother had, so these siblings, there were a number, were, were they her siblings or these are her, Marlene [Marlene McClurkin-Mason], Cheryl [Cheryl McClurkin], Andrea [Andrea McClurkin-Mellini], were those her siblings? Speaker 2: My mother's? Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: No, those are my mother's children. Speaker 1: Your mother's children. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. So, then, I don't wanna go ahead to them yet. But then so as far back as you can go is to your great-great-grandmother? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Fleeta? Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 527111 Speaker 1: Let's go to your father now. Speaker 2: Oh, lord. Speaker 1: Before, before the two of them met I wanted to know the, that history. So, what's your father's name? Speaker 2: My father's name is Donald [Donald McClurkin, Sr.], I am a junior. Speaker 1: All right. And when was he born? Speaker 2: He was born July 29, 1934. Speaker 1: And tell me about him, where was he born, what was he like? Speaker 2: Dad was born in Chester, South Carolina, right, about forty minutes outside of Charlotte, North Carolina, borderline. He was number seven of eight children. And they were born on a, on, on a farm down in South Carolina. My, his dad was a Baptist pastor of two churches in Union [Union, South Carolina], and I wanna say Union and Rock Hill [Rock Hill, South Carolina] I wanna say. Speaker 1: In South Carolina? Speaker 2: In South Carolina. And my, my grandfather literally went to bible school, he went to bible college in the '20s [1920s] which was very odd for a black man (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, tell me what bible college it was? Speaker 2: I can't remember the name of it but it was all-black and it was for black-- Speaker 1: But what is bible college? Speaker 2: Bible college is where you go and you simply learn theology, you know. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It's a, it was a black seminary-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --that my grandfather went to. So, he was literally educated in, in theology. Speaker 1: And this was John McClurkin [John A. McClurkin]? Speaker 2: This is John. That was John, John McClurkin. Speaker 1: Did you know him? Speaker 2: Yes, I, you know, we, we, we met him 'cause, you know, being, being up north we would go down there for holidays, you know. And so, yeah, I got a chance to know him. Speaker 1: So, when you would go there for holidays, are you, was he living on a farm still? Speaker 2: Um-hm, same, same, same spot, same location, same house that's there to this day. Speaker 1: And so, he was a pastor of two churches, was he also a farmer? Speaker 2: Yeah, had to be because that, they had to farm in order to live. Speaker 1: What, what did they farm? Speaker 2: They, he had a cow, they had a hog, they had chickens, they had corn, you know, they, they, they grew cabbage and, and, and greens. So, they always had a farm. Speaker 1: And did, who worked the farm? The children? Speaker 2: Everybody. Speaker 1: Everybody. Speaker 2: Everybody worked the farm. Speaker 1: Did you have to work the farm when you went there? Speaker 2: No. I milked a cow one time. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: 'Cause, you know, we were northerners, we had no clue what that was. We didn't even know, I remember going down there and they gave us fresh pork sausage and it tasted so strange, "Where did y'all get this from?" "Well, from the hog out in the back." And we were flabbergasted 'cause we thought all food came from the supermarket. We had no clue or idea. Daddy was talking about grabbing a chicken and swung it out and snapping his head off and having, and they did that. And the chicken chased my sister, Olivia [Olivia McClurkin], with no head on it, chased her like he could see where she was going, she was traumatized for years over that. So, everything was, you know, it was farmed. They may have gone to the, to the, to the general store for flour or sugar and things like that. But grandma [Emma Crosby McClurkin] she made her own molasses, they, you know, made her own biscuits though, everything was scratch. You know, when we'd go down there we get, we'd take baths in the galvanized pail and, you know, they'd heat up water and the whole nine yards. Speaker 1: You hadn't seen anything like that? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. You'd take a bath in the kitchen in a galvanized pail. Speaker 1: And did you, did everybody get new water or did you have to share the water? Speaker 2: No, no, everybody got new water. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, you got new water and because they kept heating up water for each child. And then, you know, you had to go out to the, to the pump and pump the water into the pail and it, it was really quintessential country. Had an outhouse in the back. And it was the most horrid thing that you wanted to see or smell, horrific. But I was blessed to be able to be born in that era before that all went away, you know, before they got, you know, indoor plumbing, before they got all that stuff, I was blessed to be able to see it in its, you know, rudimental element. It was something I cherish to this day getting up and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How was the house heated? Speaker 2: It was heated by the, by the furn- by the, by the stove. Speaker 1: Right. By a wood stove (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Um-hm. Story_ID: 527112 Speaker 1: Can you describe the house? Speaker 2: It was a three bedroom house that Gramps [McClurkin's paternal grandfather, John A. McClurkin] built. Speaker 1: One level? Speaker 2: One level, yeah, that Grandpa built. And it was made of, the first one was made of wood. And then when they got a little more they, they built the second one the same location with cinder blocks. And, you know, I, I bought the house after they passed away so that we could keep it in the family and it's still there to this day. Speaker 1: It's the cinder block house? Speaker 2: Um-hm, on the four acres right off of route 9 [South Carolina Highway 9]. Speaker 1: How far can you trace your father's family back? Speaker 2: I had the privilege of sitting with Aunt Azalee [Azalee Crosby Crawford Springs], my grandmother's [Emma Crosby McClurkin] sister, her baby sister, who was ninety-four when I sat with her. And Aunt Azalee just gave me the oral history, how her great-grandmother was born a slave, how her grandmother was born in slavery, at the end of slavery, and how she remembers all of them. My grandmother didn't die until she was about, between 100 and a 101. And she was born in 1898. So, so the, the connection with slavery was very strong. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: And to sit with Aunt Azalee and hear her tell the stories, you know, about how she had long braids and she was a heavy woman and that, that amazed me, you know, that her grandmother, my great-great-grandmother was born a slave, and my great-grandmother was born at the end of slavery, you know. You know, they, [President] Abraham Lincoln was their president, you know, that kind of, that kind of stark reality, surreal reality and that I had a living relative that lived through that, remembered all that, you know. Speaker 1: So, were the other family members farmers? Is that pretty much the work down there? Speaker 2: You know, they worked so that their children wouldn't have to do that. I remember the, the, the age of agriculture laid the, led to the age of industry. So, it was the, the, it was the desire, the dream of the farmer that their children would grow up and get a good job in industry. And, and that's consequently what most of them tried to do. My, my uncle, J.D. McClurkin [John D. McClurkin], he took on, he took on the preacher's role and he became the preacher. My dad [Donald McClurkin, Sr.] became a construction worker. And my aunts [Suenie McClurkin and Eugenia McClurkin] took on, you know, healthcare and, and stuff like that and clerical work. And they, they became a part of the industrial age, the business age. So, the farming aspect of it really died with my grandmother and grandfather. Story_ID: 527113 Speaker 1: So, I wanted to ask you, you said you, even with, even though this is out of order I wanna-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --ask, you said you bought the, your [paternal] grandfather's [John A. McClurkin] property? Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: How, how did that deal go down? Speaker 2: You know, when my, when my grandmother passed away 'cause she-- Speaker 1: And what was her name? Speaker 2: Her name was Emma, Emma Thursty McClurkin [sic. Emma Crosby McClurkin]. And when, when, when, when, when my grandfather passed away really, the house was left, you know, to my grandmother. My grandmother got ill, moved up north to Connecticut with my Aunt Gene [Eugenia McClurkin], and the house, you know, started to go into disrepair. And once grandma died, once Nana died, the house was just left and the grass grew five, four acres of, of grass, the house, the roof caved in and, you know, with, with most families, there's always a problem when it comes to heir property, there always seems to be a problem. And, of course, ours was, was no different. They squabbled over the small things and lost sight of the big picture. And it got to the point where I told my father [Donald McClurkin, Sr.] who was living with me at the time, "Daddy, listen, this don't make sense. If they don't want, if y'all don't wanna do this, sell me the property 'cause I don't want the only bit of property that we have that is, that is historic, to be lost." And, yeah, we went back and forth, talked to the rest of the siblings, they all agreed and, and I paid them a specific amount of money, I won't say how much. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (Laughter) So I paid them a specific amount of money, they split it, the six, the, the, the eight ways, and, and I bought the property and I fixed the house and, and started to manicure the grounds because that, that, that's our, that's our home, that's home. What is that? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Some kind of announcement or something on a speaker. Speaker 2: It sounds like a walkie-talkie. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): I can't tell if it's inside the building or outside. Speaker 2: Oh, you know, it's election year, it's probably somebody driving by-- Speaker 1: Oh, got it, okay. Speaker 2: You know, so, I, I, I, I, when I bought the property I just had a problem, nobody to live in it. And then eventually my dad left me, I sent my son [Matthew McClurkin] away, my dad (laughter) left me and went back down to the family house and passed away there. And, you know, it, it, it's just I wanted to have something that would always be McClurkin, and sooner or later I'm gonna build another home on that property and try to expand it, you know, by buying the adjoining, adjacent properties but it's always gonna be something to commemorate John [John A. McClurkin] and Emma McClurkin. Speaker 1: Excellent. Story_ID: 527114 Speaker 1: So, I wanna go back to your dad. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Who, you said he was a construction worker? Speaker 2: Yep, he was a general contractor, construction worker, all his life. Speaker 1: And when and where did he meet your mother [Frances McClurkin]? Speaker 2: Okay. Now, my mother was working, I guess, in a hospital, I'm not sure where it was, but some, something to do with family care, healthcare, and she met a woman by the name of Odessa McClurkin [Odessa Price McClurkin]. And they were having a party and she invited my mother, her and Odessa became friends. And one day Odessa invited my mother to a party and she wanted her to meet her husband's brother. So, my mother went to the party and Odessa introduced her to her husband, William [Willie McClurkin, Sr.], Willie McClurkin, and then she introduced her to her husband's brother, Donald [Donald McClurkin, Sr.]. And I guess they became good friends and two years later they married in 1955 on the 3rd of September, (singing) "It was the 3rd of September, the day I'll always remember," and man but that's a long story, we, we used to tease them with that song. And they married and then started having a house full of kids, a house full (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How many kids? Speaker 2: My mom and dad, well, my mom was pregnant ten times, and had ten children, two were stillborn, one died when he was two, and seemed like they fought constantly and had babies constantly. It was always an active house. My mother was pregnant every year and a half, every two years. Speaker 1: And where were they living? Speaker 2: In Amityville [New York]. Speaker 1: So, they had, they met in Amityville? Speaker 2: They met in Amityville. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 527115 Speaker 1: And my father [Donald McClurkin, Sr.] had come up from South Carolina in '53 [1953] and was living with his brother [Willie McClurkin, Sr.] and that's how all that came together (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And why did he come to Amityville [New York]? Speaker 1: 'Cause that was, that was the thing, you know, you move up north, you, you go north. When you're from the South you go north for a better job, for a better opportunity, and that's where the migration, most of the South migrated to the North in the '40s [1940s] and the '50s [1950s]. You know, they went from Mississippi all the way up to Detroit [Michigan]. You know, from Alabama up, you know, that's, that's how the whole north got populated with so many black people. Speaker 2: Did your parents ever talk about the segregated South, their experiences there? Speaker 1: My father would, you know, 'cause my mother [Frances McClurkin] was isolated, she grew up in Harlem [New York, New York], Harlem was black, you know. Speaker 2: But it wasn't the South either, right? Speaker 1: Yeah, and, and Harlem was up north. Harlem was, you know, everybody came to Harlem, white, black, everybody came to Harlem 'cause that's where it was jumping. Everybody went to the Cotton Club [New York, New York], you know, everybody went and sat at the concerts. But my dad he remembers, he, he remembered the white water fountains, the black water fountains, going to the movies and have to go up the back stairs and sit in the balcony. He remembers not being able to go into restaurants. He remembers being called boy, you know, and they called him boy in front of me once. And I'm a northerner, you know, and I didn't take it too well. But yeah, he would tell us the stories. Speaker 2: What happened? Speaker 1: Well, you know, I was down there, and we were there for my [paternal] grandfather's [John A. McClurkin] funeral and-- Speaker 2: And this is about when? How old are you? Speaker 1: This was 1980 something, I'm twenty some odd years old. And, no, I think, it was my [paternal] grandmother's [Emma Crosby McClurkin] funeral. It was the '90s [1990s]. And I'm going down there as a northern young man and I needed a shirt so we went down to the general store. And me and my dad go down and-- Speaker 2: 'Cause this is still the rural town? Speaker 1: Chester is in a time warp. Chester, South Carolina, is in a time warp even to this day. And you go down there and there's the divide, there's the white side of Chester and there's the black side of Chester. Speaker 2: Today? Speaker 1: Yeah. There's the white mayor of Chester, there's the black mayor of Chester, you know. And so, we went into the store and I'm walking and she stopped talking to whoever she was talking to, looking at us, sent the guy to watch us while we're shopping, "Anything I can help you boys with? You boys need any help?" And, and my dad had, "No, ma'am, we're fine." And that angered me more that he went back in, he reverted back to kind. And I got mad so I just start putting stuff on the counter, whole, a handful of stuff, put it on the counter. "Anything else I can help you boys with?" I said, "No, you can ring that up." "That'll be three hundred some odd dollars." I said, "Fine, put it back, I don't want it anymore." "Now, you boys get on out of here, you boys get on up out of here." I said, "No, no," I said, "I'm sorry. Here's my credit card." She went to take it. I said, "No, I changed my mind." I said, "I got enough money to buy you and everybody in this room." "I'm going to call the police." I said, "Call 'em." And, and my dad said, "Donnie [HistoryMaker Donnie McClurkin], come on, just come on." I was so mad. I was so angry. And it took a, it took a couple of days to calm me down, you know, because every, it's still, it was still alive and well, alive and well. And so, you know, I thank God for the North. So, my mother never had those experiences. Story_ID: 527116 Speaker 1: I had the experience of being called nigger my first day of kindergarten or third day of kindergarten. I was standing on line waiting to go into the classroom, a little boy behind me named John [ph.] said, "I hate you 'cause you're a nigger." And I'd never heard that word in my house. I was four years old, I had never heard that word in my house. And I said and but I knew it was bad because of the way he said it. And when I went home and I told my mother [Frances McClurkin], "This boy said he can't, he hates me because I'm a nigger." She said, "What did you say?" I said, "He said he hates me 'cause I'm a nigger. What's a nigger?" She said, "I'm going to school with you tomorrow." The next morning we got up, she took me to school, went to the principal, said, "Point out that boy." I pointed the boy, she said, "I wanna see his parents." The next day when we went back up his parents were there, she said, "Now I'm not gone slap your son for calling my son a nigger," she said, "because he doesn't know what that means, he had to get that from you. So, what I'm going to do is I'm going to slap you for your son calling my son a nigger." I won't tell you how things went from there but mind you (laughter) I was never called that in, in school again, well, once, once but I was able to fight then. So, you know, but my dad [Donald McClurkin, Sr.] he has, he had the stories of all of those times in the '30s [1930s] and the '40s [1940s], being a young man growing up, a young black man growing up in rural South Carolina. Speaker 2: How old was he when he moved north? Speaker 1: Well, he married Mom at twenty-five. Speaker 2: And she was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, no, no, no, no, let me take it back. He married Mom, he was twenty-two, my mom was twenty-three, so he moved up when he was twenty-one. Story_ID: 527117 Speaker 1: When you think about your growing up, what's your earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: (Laughter) This is gonna sound crazy. My earliest childhood memory is being in the crib and climbing over the railing of the crib and having my mother [Frances McClurkin] take me and put me back in the crib. So, I must have been about two, one and a half, two years old. Speaker 1: Did you fall out? Speaker 2: No, I was climbing. I remembered that. Put my leg over the railing, holding on, trying to climb out of the crib. Now, some people say that's impossible, you can't have a memory that goes back to that young age, I remember that. Speaker 1: And where are you in the birth order? Speaker 2: I'm number three in the birth order. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I'm number three. My mom had one stillborn before me. My two older sisters [Marlene McClurkin-Mason and Andrea McClurkin-Mellini] are eleven months apart and so I'm number three in the, in the pecking order. Speaker 1: And you grew up in Amityville [New York]? Speaker 2: Yep. Story_ID: 527118 Speaker 1: What are the sights, sounds and smells that you remember from growing up? Speaker 2: Amityville [New York] was, was very, very rural, very rural. It had unpaved roads, dirt roads, when I was growing up. It had Mr. Roper's [ph.] farm. And Mr. Roper would bring the milk, the milk man would come, Mr. Roper, and put the milk on the doorstep with the, with the little tabs on the top that you pull it up and the cream about this much on, on the, on the neck of the, of the glass bottle. And the bread man would come and bring loaves, big round loaves of pumpernickel and rye and sourdough bread and, and Kool-Aid and because we lived off of Kool-Aid. And the ice cream man and asking for ten cents so we could buy ice cream. And penny candy where if you had a dollar you had a hundred pieces of candy. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: Squirrel Nuts, Mary Janes, Bit-o-Honeys, the whole nine yards, Smarties, those are my memories. Saturday morning cartoons, getting up at seven o'clock in the morning so that you could be the one that controlled the television 'cause whoever got to the television first in a large family controlled the television for the Saturday morning, and getting up in time to, to, to get control. And cold cereal, Saturday morning was cold cereal morning. On the week days when you were going to school it was Wheatena, grits, or Farina (makes sound), I hate it to this day. But Saturday morning, woo hoo, Sugar Pops [Corn Pops], Sugar Snaps [sic. Sugar Smacks; Honey Smacks], Sugar Crisps [Golden Crisp], Frosted Flakes, Froot Loops, we lived off of cold cereal. Speaker 1: And did your mother sleep in on Saturday morning? Speaker 2: No, she, her work was cut out for her because she had to prepare dinner and she had to clean the house, it was also house cleaning day. And all of us had our chores and our tasks. And Frances [Frances McClurkin], you know, she was the clothes washer, the dish washer, you know. She wasn't as good a cook as my dad [Donald McClurkin, Sr.] at all because my daddy was a cook, cook but-- Speaker 1: What were his specialties? Speaker 2: (Laughter) He would make liver as black as my pants but it had so much flavor to it. Speaker 1: Was it liver and onions? Speaker 2: Liver, onions, with mashed potatoes, and peas. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: And daddy, I mean, daddy could cook anything, you know, turkey wings and pig feet and chitterlings and meat loaf and daddy could cook anything. And those, those are my memories, sitting at the table, you know, every, all of us, every chick and child, my two, my, my, my sister, Andrea [Andrea McClurkin-Mellini], being born 'cause she's two, two and a half years younger than I am. You know, the, the, the, the growing up was priceless 'cause we were each other's best friends, we fought together, we sang together, we played together and, and that was our growing up. We didn't have lack 'cause my dad worked jobs, we didn't have lack. We never went to bed hungry a night, not a night. And if things got too tight, they, they were on welfare, and we had a box, a long box that had a gray top over the, over the, cardboard top over it, and it said in black letters, U.S. Government Cheese. Speaker 1: The block. Speaker 2: It was a-- Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: --big, long block of cheese, ain't no slices. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: You had to get the butcher knife and work it to cut, and it didn't cut in slices it cut in chunks. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: You put that on bread and put it in the oven, it didn't melt, it just bubbled. It didn't melt, it just bubbled. And, and, and, and then, then the other can, it was a round can, galvanized can, that said U.S. Government Peanut Butter. And you opened it up and the oil is on the top, you gotta open it up like you open up a can of paint, and there's a, oil on top and you gotta take a big spoon or a paint stirrer and try to mix the oil in with the peanut butter, then you try to spread it on your bread and it never spread but it caused the bread to wrap around it so you had a ball of bread and peanut butter. And, and we had a ball with that. Story_ID: 527119 Speaker 1: We had bunk beds 'cause, you know, there was too many of us to have rooms for each of us. I remember sleeping on a, on a queen-sized bed with, well, one head up here, one head up here, one head up here, with people's feet in your face. And, you know, that and we grew up and had a great time. Speaker 2: How many bedrooms were in the house? Speaker 1: One, two, three, three. Speaker 2: So, your parents [Frances McClurkin and Donald McClurkin, Sr.] had a room and then the kids shared the other rooms? Speaker 1: Yep. Speaker 2: And how many boys, how many girls? Speaker 1: I was the first boy, there was two girls [Marlene McClurkin-Mason and Andrea McClurkin-Mellini] before me, me, then two girls after me. And then my brother, Thomas [Thomas McClurkin], and he died at two, and then my brother, Tony [Anthony McClurkin], and then my sister, Tanya [Tanya McClurkin Staples]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So, the first five, we were the, we were the big five, we were the, we were the big five. And we, we didn't know we were poor, we thought everybody had roaches. We thought everybody had a rat or two, you know, but we never ever went to bed hungry, ever. Lights may go off, Daddy would go outside and jimmy that little thing and put the lights on illegally, oh, I'm telling too much, (laughter) you know (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's alright. Speaker 1: You know, the telephone with us, always had a telephone even if they had to put it in somebody else's name. You know, electricity in somebody else's name. But we always had. Story_ID: 527120 Speaker 1: And then when we got older, I was about nine, ten, eleven, my sisters [Marlene McClurkin-Mason and Andrea McClurkin-Mellini] were ten, and eleven, twelve, older, my dad [Donald McClurkin, Sr.] would get a second job come Christmas and he would give the three of us, the three oldest, one hundred dollars each, every Christmas. And the three, the two under us would get fifty dollars each but they were young, they were six and five so the, they'd never know. A hundred dollars back in '71 [1971], '72 [1972], was like giving a child a thousand dollars now. That, my father said, "That's your Christmas, that's your Christmas, and I ain't buying nothing, here's a hundred dollars for you, (laughter) I get, I can hear it like yesterday, here's for you, snap it, here's for you, snap, here's for you," and never told us how to spend it. Speaker 2: How did you spend it? Speaker 1: How would you think a ten year old hooked on candy would spend it? Candy. Speaker 2: A hundred dollars of candy? Speaker 1: You better, I am a diabetic-- Speaker 2: No bike? Speaker 1: --I am a diabetic today for a reason, I chewed my way to diabetes. They, that was the one time a year we had no limits, it was Christmas, it was Christmas. You know, when we were growing up they bought bicycles and cars and, you know, the cars you pedal, the whole nine yards. But I'd want, "Here's the money, you, you go buy your own gifts, buy gifts for everybody." You, I bought my mother [Frances McClurkin] this clock with the, with the inner workings twirling around and a glass dome, I bought it, it cost thirty-seven dollars. I bought this, oh, it was so beautiful. And while we were in Mays Department Store [The May Department Stores Company], I saw the vending machine and I wanted a, I wanted a PayDay and I had the, and my, my little clock in one hand and I was trying to get coins out with the other hand, I bought the, the candy and when the candy came out I went to get it and I lost my balance and I dropped the clock so I could get the candy (laughter) and my sister, Marlene [Marlene McClurkin-Mason] said, "Stupid, why didn't you just drop the candy and hold the clock?" And I looked at her and said, "What do you expect me to do, drop my candy?" (Laughter) 'Cause that was everything to me. To this day they'll still rehearse that line, "What did you expect me to do, drop my candy?" And that's how we grew up, we-- Speaker 2: Did the clock break? Speaker 1: Broke, never did work right. Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: Never did work right. And my mother loved that clock, oh, it was so, but it never worked. Story_ID: 527121 Speaker 1: Your mother [Frances McClurkin] had many children so did she-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --was that her job or did she also work? Speaker 2: Sometimes she worked, sometimes she worked as a, as a nurse's aide. Sometimes she worked cleaning up the local motel, you know. She, she, she worked from time to time but the majority of the time she had to be home for the kids 'cause she kept having them. Speaker 1: And you, was the whole family active in church? Speaker 2: That was nonnegotiable. That was-- Speaker 1: How often were you in church? Speaker 2: How often was the church open? That was nonnegotiable. Speaker 1: Was it in walking distance of your house? Speaker 2: Unh-uh. Speaker 1: No? Speaker 2: Nope. The church van would come pick you up or you, or you were driven there but that was nonnegotiable, you were in church. You were in Sunday school and you were in morning service, and then you came home for Sunday meal. And they cooked Sunday meal on Saturday 'cause Sunday was a holy day. And you'd come in and get washed up and change clothes and you could smell it. Sunday was the, was the big meal of the week. And oh, you're bringing back memories, I'm not gonna cry, I am not gonna cry. But that was, it was really exciting. I loved my family, you know. And we were good until 1968. Nineteen sixty-eight [1968] changed everything. Speaker 1: So, I don't wanna go there yet. Before 1968-- Speaker 2: Hmm? Speaker 1: --in church when did you start singing? Speaker 2: Whoa, my first solo in church I was four years old. Speaker 1: That's 1964, right? Speaker 2: Yep, 1964. Speaker 1: So, your first solo, so that means you were singing in church before? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. So, tell me the story. Speaker 2: No. My mother taught all of us how to sing, taught us three-part harmony, the whole nine yards. My mom, my mom played the piano and sang. My mother was a singer. When she was fifteen they wanted to give my mother a recording contract to sing the blues but because she comes from a church background, my great-grandmother [Mary Dinge] said no. And so, my (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Because it wasn't church music? Speaker 2: Oh, it wasn't church music, they wanted her to sing the blues at fifteen. And so, she never got a chance to live that. So, she taught her children how to sing. And the song she taught me was 'I Had a Talk With God Last Night', (singing) "I had a talk with God last night. He said that everything was all right," (laughter) from a 1950s secular song. And they stood me on the table, the church was in Harlem [New York, New York] on 155th [Street] and McNichols [ph.]. And they stood me on the table and my mother played and my sisters sang (singing) "Woo, ooh, ooh," they were the ooh girls. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: (Singing) "Ooh, ooh," and I was the little (singing) "I had a talk with God last night," and that was my claim to fame. And then I didn't sing anymore until I was eighteen. Speaker 1: Really? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: You, you, you weren't drawn to it as a kid (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was, I, I sang in the choir, I sang tenor in the choir, joined the, the King's Temple Choir [Benny Cummings and the King's Temple Choir] when I was fifteen years old. Came home on that Thanksgiving night, came home after I joined the choir, all the family is there I said, "Mommy, Mommy, I just joined the choir." She looked and said, "Oh, sweetheart, why did you do that? You can't sing," which just broke my little heart. And I stayed in that choir and then God matured me and that's how I learned how to sing. And then the next time I sang a solo from four years old was at eighteen. And in one youth service, Sister Cummings [ph.] got up and said, "We gonna hear a solo from Donnie, [HistoryMaker] Donnie McClurkin, Donnie, look," she said, "from, from, from little Donnie, Donnie come here." And my eyes got big and I was petrified. And I grabbed the microphone and my hands were shaking so bad. And I was thin as a rail and my pants' legs were just quivering. And I closed my eyes and I sang (singing) "Why should I feel discouraged and why," (unclear) and I sang until I broke out crying. Put the microphone down and that was the first, that, that was the first of my singing endeavors. Story_ID: 527122 Speaker 1: In the early years as you're growing up, you told wonderful stories about playing with your siblings and how much love there is in your family. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: There also was a lot of contention between your parents? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah. My mother [Frances McClurkin] and father [Donald McClurkin, Sr.] should have never married. I'm glad they did 'cause otherwise I wouldn't be here, at least not in this form. But they should have never married. They were unequally yoked from the very beginning. My mother comes from a Pentecostal background, my father is staunch, country Baptist. And they married of emotions but, and love but not compatibility. So, they were, they were fighting from the time we could remember. From the time (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What do you mean by fighting? Speaker 2: When I mean fighting, I mean, they were, there was very few verbal arguments 'cause my mother was from Harlem [New York, New York] so things didn't go right they, they was throwing blows, they were, they were throwing blows. My father was, he didn't come from a broken home. My father was raised with a mother [Emma Crosby McClurkin] and father [John A. McClurkin] and everything was intact so my father didn't know how to deal with a verbose women, woman, a, a, a, a woman who was loud and a woman who was, spoke her mind, a woman who was swinging on him, his, his integrity was at stake, so they were fighters, you know. Dad was a hard worker, he didn't spend much time with the kids at all. He'd come home from work, get his pipe, sit down, read the paper, watch television, you gotta be quiet, eat at the dinner room, dining room table, nobody makes a noise, you can't talk at the table. That's, that's the most time he spent with her, my mother would have to force him to take us on family vacations. And so, they were totally two heads butting together. And most fights ended up in physicalities, fist, fisticuffs. Then all of a sudden you'd hear the music playing in the, the room on the hi-fi and you sneak out the room and you'd see them dancing and doing the twirl dance and him flinging her around and grab her and then fling her down and kissing her, and we'd go, "Ooh, they kissing, ooh," then a couple of months later, another baby is coming. You know, and it was, it was such a chaotic scene, one time they're loving each other, the next time they're fighting, and we were caught in the middle. We were the kids caught in the middle. And we started having assignments for fights, you know, my sisters and them would grab my, my two older sisters [Marlene McClurkin-Mason and Andrea McClurkin-Mellini] would grab my dad's legs, I, my job was to get on the phone, call my [maternal] grandmother [Olivia Jenkins] and the police in that order and then try to pull him backwards so he don't hit Mom, and while we're pulling him, my mother is hitting him, and then while we're holding her she's saying, "Get off me," 'cause he's gonna swing and hit her. And, you know, it was crazy growing up. It was crazy (simultaneous). Story_ID: 527123 Speaker 1: We were talking about your, your parents [France McClurkin and Donald McClurkin, Sr.], the-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --passion of your parents. Speaker 2: Yes, the passion, the passion positive and the passion negative. The passion was always there. They grew to really dislike each other very strongly, very strongly but they always loved us, always showed love to us. My mother, she was kind of heavy-handed with discipline to the point of abuse. Speaker 1: To the children too? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yeah, to us. When we got older it went from whippings with a belt to whippings with extension cords, then welts and marks, you know, heavy-handed. But as we got older and she started to understand then she started to change. And we, and, and, and God gave me and my siblings the ability to psychologically understand because of her birth and situation and upbringing confusion, we understood and we never really held it against Mom, you know. And even until the point of her death and, and, and there's some of the siblings that went through some real hard times with my mother but after all was said and done, when those, when those manias were gone, she was the greatest woman in this world. She supported every one of her children no matter what they did, she was the cheerleading section. I was the greatest singer in the world, "Nobody sings better than you. You sing better than all of them. Nobody sings better than you. Yeah, you need to be up front, they need to put you in the front, why do they have you in the back like that?" You know, always, no matter what. Story_ID: 527124 Speaker 1: And your father [Donald McClurkin, Sr.]? Speaker 2: Daddy never said nothing. My father didn't tell me he was proud of me until 19- no, until I was forty-five years old, 2005 was the first time I ever heard in my life my father say I'm proud of you and it was on TBN [Trinity Broadcasting Network], it was on television, the, it's still in, it's still on YouTube, you can punch it up. Bishop Jakes [HistoryMaker Bishop T.D. Jakes] was doing a Father's Day edition of TBN and brought Jamal Bryant and his father [John Richard Bryand] on, and a couple of other, the, Pastor Browner [ph.] and his son and, and all of them were pastors with their kids. And they brought me on to do the music and I was the last interview. And I said, "Now, listen," 'cause my daddy Old Fool, I said, "listen, Old Fool," (laughter) wherever I call him he just break out laughing, "listen, Old Fool, when we get out there, you bet not say nothing. You better shut your beady eyes up, I, I'm going to take you out of here," and he just laughing (laughter). I said, "Daddy, be quiet." He, "No, it's you, boy, you better hush 'cause I'm, when I get that microphone, that's gonna be my time, I'm gonna tell 'em what kind of a bootleg preacher you are," and we're laughing and joking. And I said, they called us, it's time to go on, I said, "Daddy, really when you get out there, don't say nothing." He said, "Unh-uh, I'm gonna get that microphone, I'm gonna tell 'em just kind of bootleg, jack-legged preacher you are." We got out there and we're talking, Bishop Jakes is talking to me and oh, where you been blah, blah, blah. "Pop McClurkin?" "Yep, yep, yep." "What was it like raising a son like this?" And my father began to talk and I tell you in the forty-five years I was alive at that time, I never heard my father talk, I had never heard him in a whole conversation. And he even said, "Well, you know, I made a lot of mistakes, you know, when I was raising him and, and my children and, you know, nobody gave me a handbook on how to be a good father and, and I, I raised him like my father [John A. McClurkin] raised me, my father never spent time with us. My father never took me to a baseball game and never," and I'm in awe hearing my father speak for the first time in my grown life. He said, "But you know I, and the boy he been singing doing this a long time and, and I'm proud of him." And when he said it, I sat back, and Bishop Jakes said, "Did you all just see that, did you see Donnie [HistoryMaker Donnie McClurkin]? Did you see Pastor McClurkin? Pastor, bring the camera on Pastor McClurkin." He said, "Now, Pastor McClurkin," and I said, and, and you can see it on the, on the television, on the, on the YouTube clip, I said, "Bishop, don't do this, don't do this." And he said, "No, tell us, how do you feel about your father saying that he's proud of you?" And I tried to talk and I just went back to five years old, I went from forty-five to five years old, couldn't even talk, (making crying sounds) just crying. And I said, "I've heard dignitaries from around the world tell me how anointed I am, how, how great I am," I said, "but those words, those four words mean more to me than anything else. I've never heard him say this before." And we finished the show. When we walked out, all the fathers and them got in the limousine and we were all riding back in one limousine, Daddy was standing in the, in the, in the hallway, and he wasn't moving. I said, "Daddy, come on, the limousine is ready." He's standing there. And I, I walked up and said, "Daddy, you okay?" And he just grabbed me, with my arms on my side and just grabbed me and lifted me up off the ground, and just squeezed real hard, I tried to make a joke out of it so I wouldn't cry, I made a joke out of it, I said, "Daddy I can't breathe, I can't breathe and he put me down." And my dad's hands were deformed, both hands were deformed, the arthritis, his hands, like my thumb is big, my father's thumb was twice the size of mine, each finger was the size of my thumb and these two fingers were fused together on both hands and they, they were cupped, and he just cupped my face and we walked out to the car, we never talked about it from that day on. Story_ID: 527125 Speaker 1: But we had the best relationship in the world, me and my dad [Donald McClurkin, Sr.], you know. So, he wasn't very verbal, he wasn't very, he didn't voice, he didn't, he didn't voice much but the latter part of, part of life, I'm not gonna cry, the latter part of life was, it was, it was good. I, I loved my father, (crying) I loved my father. Speaker 2: And he knew. Speaker 1: I love my father, (crying) I loved my father. That was a great gift God gave me. That was a great gift God gave me, a great gift. And my father lived with me in the house with me from 2001 until 2012, Daddy lived with me. And when I tell you that we had a ball, we, (laughter) we had a ball. That old man was such a comedian. He, his room was right off the kitchen and everybody entered the house from the kitchen and whenever I would come in at, after church or coming off the road, he'd be meet, he'd meet me at the, the, the opening of his bedroom that leads into the kitchen, he'd meet me there with his pajama bottoms all the way up-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: --to here, literally, and I keep saying, "Daddy, you gonna hurt yourself one day, now pull your, pull your pants down." "And where you coming from?" "Daddy, I'm coming from the church." "Ain't no church going on at twelve o'clock at night. You were out there laying hands on them women, that's what you doing, out there on the beach laying hands on them women." "Daddy," and we would sit there and clown, sit there and, "Now here, now let me run my Sunday school class by you. And now, 'cause this is what this mean in the Bible and the exegesis of it," 'cause he said that's what his father [John A. McClurkin] used to say when he preached, "now, the exegesis of it," and I'm saying, "Daddy, that's not what that Bible means, that means blah, blah, blah." "That's what I said it means. Now, see you gone, see I'm trying to tell you," and we'd go back and forth, back, for hours. Or I'll be upstairs in the bed in my, in, in my little bedroom suite, and I'll hear (making sound) and immediately I find myself at the top of the stairs, not knowing how I got there but going back to childhood when you hear that whistle, you run. And I got so mad one day, he whistled, (making sound) and I'm standing at the top of the stairs saying, "Yes, sir," and I realized I had to run from my bed through the doors to the top of my stairs and I was mad, I said, "Daddy, this is my house, you don't whistle in my house. I'm a grown man, you don't whistle at me (laughter)." He broke out laughing and said, "Boy, come on down here, I done made this food." "Yes, sir." "Wash your hands." "Yes, sir." I'm fifty years at that time. And that's the way, we, and everybody, the whole family whenever we came over the kitchen, not the dining room, not the breakfast room, the kitchen was the meeting place. And we'd all cram into the kitchen, sitting on the counters, sitting at the kitchen table, standing around the kitchen, just my father holding court. Speaker 2: This is in your, his later years? Speaker 1: This is in my house in the later years from 2001 to 2012. Speaker 2: And where, where is your house? Where-- Speaker 1: My house is right here in, in, in Nassau County in Long Island [New York]. Speaker 2: We skipped ahead, it was great hearing about your dad (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I'm sorry. Speaker 2: No, no, it's fine but I wanna go back to a hard time. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Story_ID: 527126 Speaker 1: June 6, right, 1968. Speaker 2: That's the day. June 6, 1968, I was eight years old and I was outside playing in the front yard and my little brother, two-year-old brother, Thomas [Thomas McClurkin], was sitting around on the grass, and my mother [Frances McClurkin] had left me outside to watch him while she was ironing, she was ironing and doing the housework and, you know, she always did it in front of the picture window so she could see outside on the lawn. And I kicked the ball across the street and I ran across the street to get the ball and I heard my mother screaming through the glass, through the picture window, "Donnie [HistoryMaker Donnie McClurkin], get the baby." And he was following me, I turned around, he had come out into the street and the car was racing down the street, it was a green Mustang [Ford Mustang] and the grill was broke up, (making sound) I mean, flying down the street, you heard the, the, you heard the volume of speed from the noise of the engine, and hit him and he rolled under the chassis three times, and laid there crumpled and my mother ran out and he looked up and said, "Mommy," and blood was coming out of his mouth and his ear, and he just died. And that destroyed my mother 'cause he was the baby at the time, that destroyed my mother. And I remember grabbing my mother by the leg, 'cause we had never seen death before, grabbing her by the leg and, hello, grabbing her by the leg and crying and her grabbing me and shaking me and saying, "Get away from me, you killed my son, you killed my baby." She was so distraught. And she had to go stay at my [maternal] grandmother's [Olivia Jenkins] house in Amityville [New York]. And my dad was estranged at the time, dad was living with another woman by the name of Ruth [ph.] at the time. I'm telling all my family's (laughter) business, they're gonna kill me. And Daddy had to come to my grandmother's house to see my mother and he brought Ruth with him. And I remember her rubbing my face and saying, "Oh, hi, you're Donald's [Donald McClurkin, Sr.] son?" And I had no clue, you know, that this was another woman until I got way older. "And oh, you, so you look just like your father." And so, Daddy wasn't home and that killed him because he wasn't home for his baby and he felt guilty over that. Story_ID: 527127 Speaker 1: And they sent us, after the funeral [of McClurkin's younger brother, Thomas McClurkin] on July, on June 10th, they sent us home with my uncle, my great-uncle [Clarence, Sr.], my grandmother's brother and not knowing that he was a pedophile and me being the only boy out of the five of us that were left, I had to sleep with him, and that's when the rape happened three times in the night. Speaker 2: You were eight? Speaker 1: I was eight years old. Speaker 2: How old was he? Speaker 1: Oh, he was younger than my grandmother, my grandmother is forty years older than me so he was probably in his, in his forties, in his forties. And 'cause my grandmother was in her fifties, well, she was forty-eight, my grandmother was forty-eight when I was eight. Speaker 2: So, you had just lost your baby brother [Thomas McClurkin]-- Speaker 1: The night of the, the then, night of the funeral. He was an alcoholic and evidently a pedophile. And I remember the next morning after the rape, I remember my mother [Frances McClurkin] came home that next day and she walked in the bathroom on my uncle drinking the rubbing alcohol because he couldn't find any liquor, drinking the rubbing alcohol, and my mother went crazy and she never knew that the rape took place until I got in my twenties. I didn't tell that story until I was twenty-eight years old. And that was the thing that turned our whole family upside down, that's where we left the Cliff [Heathcliff "Cliff" Huxtable] and Clair [Clair Huxtable] era and went into the real strained era, you know. Speaker 2: So, you're violated by your uncle [sic. great-uncle, Clarence, Sr.] at the worst time of your life-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --what did you do? Speaker 1: Nothing. What, what can you do? They, you can't tell anybody. 'Cause, you know, our, our black families were always you couldn't let anybody know what happens. And then something that dramatic to an eight-year-old boy, of course, I'm, I'm not gonna tell anybody, you know. And-- Speaker 2: Did he attack any of your sisters? Speaker 1: No. He, he, he, he molested them, one, Olivia [Olivia McClurkin], but he didn't rape her, I'm the only one. Story_ID: 527128 Speaker 1: The end of the Huxtable era, what happens next for you? Speaker 2: Nothing, life goes on and everybody tries to pick up. We moved from the house that my brother was killed in, we moved to Chestnut Road in Amityville [New York] and started all over again, started all over again. Speaker 1: And how do you have money 'cause your mother [Frances McClurkin] is not working? Speaker 2: My father [Donald McClurkin, Sr.] is still working. Speaker 1: Even though they're not together he's still caring-- Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: --providing for the family? Speaker 2: He was, 'cause they came back together after that, after the death-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --Daddy came home. And even when he, Daddy never stayed gone for long and he wasn't a womanizing type of man, you know, he had maybe two girlfriends. But when I got older I started to realize (laughter) that he just couldn't deal with my mother (laughter). I'm sorry. He couldn't deal with my mother. And, you know, I only know of two, that time, and another time that Daddy ever stepped out. But they always came back together and that's where the more kids came from. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Right. Speaker 2: 'Cause after Thomas [Thomas McClurkin] who died at two, came my brother two years later, my brother, Anthony [Anthony McClurkin], Tony came along. And then two years after that Tanya [Tanya McClurkin Staples] came along. I was ten when Tony was born, I was twelve when Tanya was born. So, you know, they never stopped having kids, no matter how much they fought, no matter what went on in the home, they never stopped having kids. Story_ID: 527129 Speaker 1: Your brother [Thomas McClurkin] died when you were eight-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and the horrible incident, the rape-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --nine is when you had, when you received Jesus? What happened (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nine years old. Nine years old, I went to a shut-in, I went to a shut-in with my Aunt Ardel, and we went to Amityville Gospel Tabernacle [Amityville Full Gospel Tabernacle] on 30 Brefni Street, 30 Brefni in Amityville [New York], and Pastor William Walker [William H. Walker, Sr.]. And I, you know, I'm eight, I've never been to a shut-in before and-- Speaker 1: What is a shut-in? Speaker 2: A shut-in is when the, the, the saints come to church and stayed from about eight o'clock p.m. to eight o'clock a.m., they shut-in the church and they pray for the whole twelve hours and, I mean, nonstop prayer. And so-- Speaker 1: With your aunt? Speaker 2: Yeah, I went with my aunt. And, and, you know, we, I laid on the floor and got a pillow and, well a prayer, a prayer pillow that they kneeled on to pray, it was a converted garage. And they prayed and I was clapping my hands, you know, acting like them, you know, "(unclear) thank you, Jesus, thank you, Jesus." And, and then all of a sudden I started crying, and I didn't know why I was crying, I couldn't stop clapping. I said, "Thank you, Jesus, thank you, Jesus, thank you, Jesus," like, and I was, my mind, in my mind I'm freaking out but I couldn't stop, I was just, "Thank you, Jesus, thank you, Jesus," so but I don't know about an hour or so, I just kept going. Some of the older, older women came over and they were praying with me, "That's right, baby, call Jesus, call Jesus." "Jesus, thank, thank you, Jesus," I'm just crying. And I kept, I, I, I kept saying, saying in my mind, oh, my god, what is this feeling, this is, I couldn't explain it. Got home and my aunt told my mother [Frances McClurkin] that Donnie [HistoryMaker Donnie McClurkin] was clowning, he was playing and my mother came to me and said, "If you ever go back to church and start playing like that, I and I just said, "I wasn't playing," and I started crying and she realized oh, this is, he had an encounter with God, then she start explaining to me what happened with her when she was nine years old, and how God called her and, and she started breaking it down on me. And maybe about a month later, July 14, 1969, on a Sunday morning, I went to church and Uncle Lowell Clark [ph.] came to pick me up because none of my family was with me that day. And I'm sitting on the second row behind Elder Curtin [ph.], Elder Curtin is sitting in front of me, I'm sitting on the pew, I was swinging my legs, and the man, the pastor is talking about Jesus and that Jesus loves us and how Jesus died for us two thousand years ago and I just, and he's making it seem like it was so personal. And I'm sitting there--they need a muffler. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: And I'm sitting on the front row and I'm thinking how do he know me? And then 'cause Jesus died and he loved you, Jesus loves you. How does he know me? And, and at the end he said, "Anyone who wants to give their life to Jesus come on up." And he probably said now, he, he preached like Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] with the voice shaking and he was always crying, whenever he got to that altar call he was crying 'cause his heart was so impassioned. And I got up and I walked up to the front and he got on his knees and he said, "How can I help you, you, you wanna be saved?" I said, "Yeah, what do I have to do to be saved?" And he broke out crying and he hugged me, and he wore Brut [Brut cologne], I remember that smell to this day, and he prayed a prayer that a nine year old could understand, and I prayed it, and I cried and I just prayed and then the older saints came around me and started praying with me, and I'm saying and that's how I received Jesus. I got home, told my mother, she just hugged me, oh, just so happy. And then I got on my bicycle and I went down the street, Mr. Green [ph.] was mowing his lawn, and I went to Mr. Green, I said, "Mr. Green, Mr. Green," and I was so excited, he stopped the lawn mower and said, "Yeah, Donnie." I said, "I just got saved." He said, "Yeah, oh, yeah." I said, "Yeah. I got saved." He said, "Oh, that's good." I said, "Are you saved?" He said, "Well, I don't know." I said, "Well, what religion are you?" (Laughter) He said, "Well, I'm Methodist." I said, "No, you ain't saved, you gotta be Pentecostal." And that was in 1969. I started pastoring this church [Perfecting Faith Church, Freeport, New York] in 2001. About 2004 who do you think walks down the middle aisle to be a member of this church? Mr. Green. Mr. Green and his wife came and joined this church, he remained a member of this church 'til he passed away. So, I received Jesus then, and the rest is history. Story_ID: 527130 Speaker 1: It's the year after, you know, the worst moment in your life-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --having a direct experience with God-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --do you feel like that, I mean, literally saved your life? Speaker 2: That ultimately most dramatically saved my life because if anybody thinks religion is just a bunch of overzealous people who do this as a crutch to mask their pain or their failure of, of, of life, they don't have a clue. At nine years old a boy who had been raped at eight, found an enlightenment that came with Jesus, found a, a, a, a, a healing for the hurt, found a, a, a, a relationship that put him back together again so that he didn't become a psychopathic maniac or a manic depressant or someone to repeat the same heinous thing that happened to him. It was Jesus who gave me the ability to live through it, to understand it, and God started telling me, now this is nine and ten years old, 'cause he would still come over every Thanksgiving for, for Thanksgiving family holiday (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And nobody knew so. Speaker 2: Nobody knew. And, and, and God starts telling me at ten, eleven years old, in order for him to do that to you, somebody had to do that to him. And then I started feeling more pity than anger or fear. Somebody-- Speaker 1: Did he ever try it again? Speaker 2: No, his son did when I was thirteen. Speaker 1: His son? Speaker 2: His son. So, that means something turned his son on, so if he did it to me most likely he did it to his son. And we were in, we, we got to the church, and everybody got out and Clarence [Clarence, Jr.] stayed in the car with me. Speaker 1: And how old was he? Speaker 2: He was, he must have been about eighteen or nineteen. And when everybody (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, he wasn't that much older than you but he was-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --grown? Speaker 2: Right. And they all got out and they all went in the church and I was slow getting out and I, and he locked the doors, automatic lock, and then he just grabbed me and started to try to kiss me and, and to molest me and fondling me and groping me and I was fighting him but he was a master of martial arts. And finally he, he was kissing me and, and I, he, when I, when he, when I pushed him away I screamed, "Jesus," and he screamed, he said, "Shut up," and then he unlocked the door and let me out and I ran inside. And I still didn't tell anybody, you know. So, God gave me the ability to be able to understand and that's, that's crazy 'cause after going through something like that for, for my mind not to be warped or destroyed, it was nothing but God. Can I tell people that God is real? You better believe it, it's not just a Sunday morning situation; this is a reality. So, that was the benefit of having a relationship with Jesus at nine. Story_ID: 527131 Speaker 1: You're a little boy. You taught yourself how to play piano? Speaker 2: No, Frances [Frances McClurkin]-- Speaker 1: No? Speaker 2: --Frances taught-- Speaker 1: Ah. Speaker 2: --Donnie [HistoryMaker Donnie McClurkin] how to play the piano. Speaker 1: Okay. Your, your mother? Speaker 2: My mother. Speaker 1: Right okay so that's not right. Speaker 2: Yeah, my mom taught me basics on the piano. And I always had one finger on one hand, two fingers on the other, three fingers on this one, yeah, we progressed from one finger on this to three fingers on this one. And then a man by the name of Andrae Crouch came into our lives by way of music. And I was nine years old when I heard the first record from Andrae Crouch and it's, it was Andrae Crouch and The Disciples. And man, I, oh, I was in love with it, all of the songs, (singing) "Jesus is the answer for the world today. Above him there is no other, Jesus is the way" ['Jesus is the Answer']. I was in love with this guy. And I would, I took the speakers those, those big, you know, three, and three foot speakers and turned them to face each other and laid my head in between them on the floor, and just be at the concert, be in the, be in the recording. And he came to our church, Bethel Gospel Tabernacle in Jamaica, Queens [New York], and my mother had moved to that church. And I begged her, "Can we go to the concert?" And she said, "Yes." It was on a, like a week, like a, like a Tuesday night in October. And we went and, and, and his sister, Sandra [Sandra Crouch] had on makeup and pants (gasping) oh, my god. The strict Pentecostal, the denomination I was raised in, makeup and pants on a woman, that was, that was anathema, that was a curse. I couldn't stop staring at her. And then they sang and I'm, I knew every song. And he went into the back study with the pastor and everybody left the sanctuary, we turned the lights off, there was one light over the pulpit and I sat and my mother said, "Donnie, you gotta come on 'cause you got school tomorrow." I said, "Mommy, please let me stay," he went in that room. And she heard something again and she said, "Okay, but you gotta promise to get up for school," like I had a choice. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: And I sat there and finally he came out of the office and saw me sitting there and said, "Hey, little guy, what are you doing sitting here?" I said, "I was waiting for you." He said, "Well, what's your name?" I said, "Donnie." He said, "My name is Andrae." I said, "I know." And he said, "Well, are you born again?" Now, this man in his twenties is talking to an eleven year old, "Are you born again?" I said, "Yes, sir." He said, "I, I was born again at nine." I said, "I know, me too." I was, I was so enamored. He said, "Well, do you sing?" I said, "No." "Do you play the piano?" I said, "No." He said, "I didn't play either, my father [Benjamin Crouch, Sr.] laid hands on me when I was eleven years old and that's how I got the gift to play." I said, "I'm eleven but my father [Donald McClurkin, Sr.] can't pray for me 'cause he's not born again." And Andrae said, "Do you mind if I pray for you?" And he laid his hands on my head and said, "God give him what you gave to me," patted my face and walked away, and that's how I got all this. Amazing. That's how, and he became a mentor of mine and then he became a friend of mine and then I was able, I was able to minister with him and to him until he passed away a year and a half ago. Story_ID: 527132 Speaker 1: For context can you explain who Andrae Crouch is? Speaker 2: Andrae Crouch, (laughter) I want everybody that, that, that can to google that name. Andrae Crouch, if you google, google that name you will find such a plethora of references to the greatest contemporary Christian artist in the history of this music. Andrae Crouch was the quintessential gospel artist who reached all walks of life. I don't know how many languages his music has been translated into but surrounding the globe they, they sing Andrae Crouch. Andrae Crouch has worked from the late '50s [1950s] to the early '60s [1960s], became professional in the late '60s [1960s], wrote great songs that became anthems in the church, you know, (singing) "Hallelujah, hallelujah, hallelujah," that was (unclear). Or, or what is it? (Singing) "Bless the Lord, oh, my soul, and all that is within me, bless his holy name" ['Bless The Lord']. Andrae Crouch, I mean, he wrote the songs that most of the Christian world sings. And during that time he was at his zenith, he was at his peak, his pinnacle. Speaker 1: When you met him? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. I mean, there was, there was nobody more renowned than him other than Edwin Hawkins. Him and Edwin Hawkins came out at the same time. Edwin Hawkins came out with (singing) "Oh happy day, oh happy day" ['Oh Happy Day']. And they were both contemporaries in California and Edwin had that one, that wonderful song, Andrae had a career in this. And he appealed not just to the church, him and Edwin had that same kind of thing, it circled the globe. And then Andrae continued to go forward and Andrae continued to be this eclectic kind of guy who wrote music that was unnatural for black gospel. Speaker 1: And he, did, did you have a family member who performed with him? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, my sister, Olivia [Olivia McClurkin], um-hm, and my Aunt Bea. Speaker 1: Was this, this is after you met him? Speaker 2: Oh, no, my Aunt Bea Carr, she sang with him. Yeah, yeah, it was Bea Carr, she was the soprano of the group. And she would go on tour and he would send back scriptures, and the scripture would say, "Read this, tell me about it the next time I see you." He would never glorify the music, it was always scriptures. And whenever she would come back off the road with him, she'd come to the house, 'cause she lived four blocks over on Walnut [Walnut Road, Amityville, New York], we lived on Chestnut [Chestnut Road, Amityville, New York], and she'd come over and sit in the living room and hold court and tell us about the tour. "And what did Andrae do? And what did Andrae say? What songs did you all sing?" And I was just all in, you know, never thinking that I would get a chance to really know him and meet him but longed for the times she'd come back and bring those postcards or go to the mailbox and find a postcard, you know. That was-- Speaker 1: And you would study whatever he, these scriptures were that he sent? Speaker 2: That's how I really got into learning the Bible. I learned Galatians 2:20, "From him, I am crucified with Christ, nevertheless I live, yet, not I but Christ liveth in me and the life that I now live in the flesh I live by the faith of the Son of God who loved me and gave himself for me." Colossians 3:1-3, "If you then be risen with Christ seek those things which are above where Christ sits on the right hand of God. Set your affection on things above and not on things on this earth because you are dead and your life is hidden with Christ and God." 1 John 1:9, "If you confess your sins, he is faithful and just to forgive you of your sins and cleanse you of all your unrighteousness." These are scriptures that Andrae gave me. And I would go, get into the Bible and just lay on, lay in the bed and just study 'em and memorize 'em, memorize 'cause he said when I see him again, I gotta tell him about it. He knew I wasn't gonna see him (laughter). He would do that to increase my, my desire. Story_ID: 527133 Speaker 1: How long was it before you saw him again? Speaker 2: I saw Andrae in 1984. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: I went to his concerts. I went to the conce- Speaker 1: --like ten years later, no, more-- Speaker 2: Yeah. In 1974 I went to a concert out in Mercer, Mercer, Pennsylvania, to a Jesus movement concert, it was Pat Boone, The Archers, 2nd Chapter of Acts, and Andrae Crouch. And we're all in tents, I was fourteen, in tents, and, and, and 90 percent of the people were white people and it was just, we had, I had never gone camping before in my life, it was the most horrible thing but Andrae was there. And we snuck under the fence after the concert was over and he signed an autograph but never looked at me and gave it to me 'cause he was doing an interview with all these lights in his face. And the next time I got a chance to see him was-- Speaker 1: So, he didn't realize it was you? Speaker 2: Nope. And, and he wouldn't know me 'cause the last time he saw me I was eleven. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Right. Speaker 2: So, I thought. Eighty-four [1984] I get a telephone call, I'm twenty-four years old, living at my mother's [Frances McClurkin] house, don't tell anybody. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: And I get a telephone call, "Hi, is, can I speak to Donnie?" "Who is this?" "This is Andrae Crouch." And I don't know what to say. "What are you doing? Why don't you come out to California?" First of all, I don't have a job (laughter) nor do I have any money. Number three, I'm, I'm, hm. He flew me out to California, me and my sister, Marlene [Marlene McClurkin-Mason], flew us out to, we went out to California 'cause I didn't wanna travel out there by myself, and went to his house at twelve midnight, got off the plane and they drove all the way down to Sherman Oaks [Los Angeles, California] and went to his house. He opened up the door, had this big kind of Thailand hat on and a silk bath robe and his pajamas, and, "Come on in, come on in." He made tuna fish and burnt the toast (laughter). And I sat in Andrae's house, then we went to the piano, he showed me some songs, and he was working on something called 'The Color Purple.' And he had wrote a song for 'The Color Purple' at the time. And, and he did a song, (singing) "Always remember Jesus, Jesus. Always remember Jesus, Jesus. Always keep him on your mind" ['Always Remember']. And he just sat and he played it and we just worshipped at the piano. And, and then from there, the, the relationship just developed. I never thought that I could ever be mentored by him and then become his friend, then minister with him and that ultimately I had to sing at his funeral. But if there was ever an Andrae Crouch aficionado, [HistoryMaker] Donnie McClurkin is it. If Andrae Crouch ever had a son, and I, and I challenge Israel Houghton on this all the time 'cause Israel Houghton is always saying, "I'm his son, son," you're to, you're too young to be his son. I'm Andrae Crouch's son. And, you know, that, that's, that's who Andrae Crouch was and is, one of the greatest songwriters in gospel music of all times. Then he went on to work with Madonna on 'Like a Prayer,' and, and with Michael Jackson on 'Man in the Mirror' and, and, and [HistoryMaker] Quincy Jones and all that stuff. He was a great man. And so, that's how I got the gift to play. Story_ID: 527134 Speaker 1: You were involved, very involved in the church as a teenager? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: What were the, what were the activities that you all were doing? Speaker 2: The, there was no activities in church (laughter) are you kidding me? We didn't have anything separate and apart for the kids, you was in service. You were there with the old Mother Spencer [ph.] at eighty-three years old playing the ragtime piano and with Mother Taylor [ph.] and you were there with, with, with, with Mother Smith [ph.], Mother Williams [ph.], Sister Thomas [ph.], you was there with all of 'em, young and old were in church together. There was no anything else. There was no extracurricular nothing. There were no children's church like we have it today. Weren't no arts and crafts, you did that in Sunday school for a few minutes and then you came into the service. So, that's what I did. I lived to be in the service, that's all I wanted to do. And play the piano when they would let me with one finger and three fingers here. And that's all, and listen to the scriptures, listen to the preaching, go home, write down on cue cards the scriptures, memorize the scriptures, see if you can do it by memory without, without messing up, book, chapter, verse, that, that's all, that was my life. If my mother [Frances McClurkin] wanted to punish me, she would say, "You're not going to church." And my thing is, "Mama whoop me, whoop me, I gotta go." "Nope, you're not going to church." That, because that was my life, that was my heart and still is. Story_ID: 527135 Speaker 1: How did your music career develop during this time? Speaker 2: (Laughter) I wish I had a piano in front of me right now 'cause I'd play some of the stupidest songs. The first song that I wrote, me and my sister, Olivia [Olivia McClurkin], we became the, the, The Carpenters of our day, you know. We became the Donny [Donny Osmond] Marie [Marie Osmond] of our day. Speaker 1: And we decided one day we were gonna write a song, so-- Speaker 2: How old are you then? Speaker 1: I was twelve, I was, no, about eleven and or ten, or ten. And I wrote this song, (singing) "When I'm walking in the dark and the sun has gone down, da dun da dun, dun da, you can hear the crickets, they're the only sound, dun, dun, dun, dun, dun, da, when the moon is high, you can see the stars, dun, dun, dun, dun, boom ba, you can see planet Jupiter and the planet Mars (laughter)." And we were, and we would sing it. (Singing) "Trouble you get, hide 'em in sight 'cause you know I can't see you when the sun is so bright (making sound) and you know I'm afraid of the night, but he, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa," that was the end of the song. The, and we, I mean, we would sing that. I'd get on the piano and just play, and we were hits. And then we were-- Speaker 2: Where were you singing it? Speaker 1: In the living room. In, at, at our mother's [Frances McClurkin] piano. Then, the second hit we wrote, we said we were gone write another hit, you know, we gone write another hit. Well, it's, (singing) "He left me in the slums, in the slums of the city, you left me in the house to blow away, you left in the house to die of starvation and never (snapping fingers) see the light again." And you had to, you had to clap or click off time, you couldn't do this, (snapping fingers) you couldn't do that (snapping fingers), you had to do this (snapping fingers) because it was the '70s [1970s]. Speaker 2: (Unclear). Speaker 1: And that's how song writing started. And it, it became a, it was more of a joke than anything else and we'd give revues. Before we'd go to bed at night we'd give, we, I wrote a song, we gave our, our, our go to bed revue before our parents. My mother and father [Donald McClurkin, Sr.] are sitting in the chairs, in their chairs, and when it's time to go to bed we'd stand before, the big five would stand in front and, (singing) "We'd good night, do wop, um-hm, good night, do wop, doom doom, good night, do wop, um-hm, good night, do wop, um-hm, good night, do wop, boom, good night, do wop, good night to you, good night to you, good night to you, good night to you, good night to you." That was our good night song. Speaker 2: That was your 'Edelweiss' (laughter). Speaker 1: Yes, that, that, that was our 'Sound of Music' ['The Sound of Music']. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: And we made that up and then we'd sing that every night and then we got-- Speaker 2: Every night? Speaker 1: (Nods head) And then we'd have to parade in front of them and each of 'em give 'em kisses on, on the mouth and go to bed. Hate kissing my father, his lips were always so juicy. And that was it. We had fun as kids, you know. We made up our own fun. We made up a card game called Vaseline petroleum 'cause that was the most largest word we could think of, Vaseline petroleum and it had no form or fashion to the game. You know, we were crazy kids. Parents would leave and go shopping and leave my, my older sister, Marlene [Marlene McClurkin-Mason] to watch us, we'd, we'd watch them in the, in the picture window watch them going out, and then when they pull out the driveway and went down the street, we'd scream, "Cursing family!" And you had to say a curse with every word (laughter). Speaker 2: That's funny. So, you-- Speaker 1: Oh, Jesus, I shouldn't have told that (laughter). Story_ID: 527136 Speaker 1: As you're performing in the house, when did-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --you perform before an audience other than your family? Speaker 2: In 1970, '79 [1979]. In 1979 I formulated a group and it was a bunch of people from our church and none of my family, and we did a concert at Greater Second Baptist Church in Freeport, New York. And we didn't have a name, we were the no name singers. And (laughter) it was Andrea Davis [ph.], it was Betty Davis [ph.], it was Carol Carter, it was, I wanna say Frances Mackey-Woodside, it was, I can't remember all of them but we did a concert and filled the house up. And I was so scared, so scared, and I sat by the piano and played and, and sang from the piano and got in trouble the next day in church. Speaker 1: Why? Speaker 2: Because a group of sisters that was supposed to sing, they, they, they didn't make it and so we had to end the service 'cause they were coming from Brooklyn [New York]. And the next day their mother and the mother of the church got me on the front porch of the steps of our church in Hempstead [New York], "And you think you something, you think you something," and they surrounded me on the steps, "and yeah, you, yeah, you think you something, ain't nobody told you, you trying to be famous," and they told me off. And I said, I was trying to explain, "But I had to, we couldn't stay there, it was passed ten o'clock, we had to, you know, we were renting the church." I was eighteen, I was nineteen, and I'm saying, "I had to do it." And the, the girls' mother said, "You better shut up or I'm a slap you across your face." I said, "Oh, ma'am, please don't do that." "Well, what you gonna do?" And her daughters ran up, "What you gonna do?" I said, "I'm not gonna do nothing but I got a mother at home," and I was so serious 'cause I was more concerned about my mother [Frances McClurkin], "I got a mother and if I go home and tell her that you slapped me across my face, she's gonna come up here and there's no telling what she's gone do. So, I wouldn't advise you to slap me, ma'am." And then the other, the church mother said, "Yeah, 'cause your, 'cause your mother is crazy." When she said that, I went bonkers. I, "Don't you ever in your life," and I started rearing up, I had to calm myself down 'cause I was about to punch this woman, 'cause the one thing in the '70s [1970s], don't you dare talk about my mother, there's, those are fighting words. And, you know, that's, that was the first time that I sang publicly. Story_ID: 527137 Speaker 1: And then was it in the same year that you formed the McClurkin Family Singers [sic. McClurkin Singers]? Speaker 2: Nope, that came on after. That came (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 2: --after that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I made my sisters who were not born again at the time, (laughter) Jesus, my older sister, Olivia [Olivia McClurkin], who was the singer of the family, none of us were singers compared to her, she's gone on now but I would make her sing, high, smoking herb, high, make her sing, convict her so, 'cause even though I was younger than her, I was still the boss of the family, I was always the boss of the family. That's right, tell my sister, Andrea [Andrea McClurkin-Mellini], I said that. I was always the boss. And Andrea wasn't born again and she was like seventeen. And, and I made them sing. And then there was Carol Carter, there was Michael Brown, and we made up the singers. Then I heard one day somebody playing Andrae Crouch outside and it was the neighbor in the backyard, the, the backyard neighbor, playing Andrae Crouch, blaring. And I go to the fence and I look over and say, "Ma'am, excuse me, you're playing Andrae Crouch?" She said, "Yes." And she was pregnant, heavy pregnant. I said, "Well, my name is Donnie [HistoryMaker Donnie McClurkin]." She said, "My name Merle [ph.]." I said "Do you sing?" She said, "Yeah." I said "Come around the corner." And I brought her over to my mom's [Frances McClurkin] house, she came and she could sing. I said, "You, be in our group," and she became part of our group, after she had the baby, she was in the group. And that's how the McClurkin Singers started. Speaker 1: And, and where did you all perform? Speaker 2: In the, in the living room. For years we performed in the living room. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: Every Tuesday and Wednesday night from eight p.m. to twelve p.m. was our rehearsal, two nights a week. And that's all we did was rehearse, four hours, one hour prayer, one hour bible study, and two hours of rehearsal, that's all we did. Had no engagements, nothing. Speaker 1: What was your plan? Speaker 2: We didn't know, we was gonna, we was gonna make it big one day, we were just gone make it big, yeah, this is it. And I'd work on harmonies, three, three-part harmony, four-part harmony, five-part harmony. And we were, we'd tear that living room up, boy, we were great in that living room. And-- Speaker 1: And you're singing gospel music? Speaker 2: Gospel, nothing but gospel (simultaneous). Story_ID: 527138 Speaker 1: So, at this point you're, where, where, what has your educational track been as you're singing (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, I dropped out of high school. In, in '77 [1977] I dropped out of high school 'cause I was bullied by a-- Speaker 1: So, where did you go to high school? Speaker 2: I went to Copiague High [Walter G. O'Connell Copiague High School, Copiague, New York], C-O-P-I-A-G-U-E, Copiague Eagles are the best. Copiague, ride or die, Copiague, baby. Speaker 1: And, and just for timeline, where did you go to elementary and junior high? Speaker 2: (Shakes head). Speaker 1: The same? Speaker 2: Deauville Gardens [Deauville Gardens Elementary School] in Copiague, New York. Deauville Gardens, that was my elementary school, Copiague Junior High [Copiague Junior High School; Copiague Middle School, Copiague, New York] was my middle school, Copiague senior high. Copiague Eagles. Speaker 1: And, and what kind of a student were you? Speaker 2: I was a nominal student. I was, I outsmarted myself most of the times. The work was too easy so I would clown around until the last two quarters and then catch up. I would get whoopings at home 'cause I'd get progress reports, he's a charming young man, he just doesn't finish his assignments. "I didn't send you to school to be charming, I sent you to school to learn." And, you know, and I, I, I outsmarted myself most of time but I always passed until the twelve grade when the bullying started. See 'cause I've got webbed hands and I've got deformed feet and-- Speaker 1: You did? Speaker 2: I do. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: See? Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, and they would make fun of me but then it got physical and a young, and a young man decided to take it to a physical level and take it and try to stretch to split my, my, my, my, my webbings and punch me in the chest or punch me in the head and, until, and then my mom [Frances McClurkin] and dad [Donald McClurkin, Sr.] were going through a divorce that year and I just stopped going to school. Mom moved away to start a job up in Dobbs Ferry [New York], and Dad was at the house and he was working, so I just stopped going to school. And that was my education. It stopped there. Story_ID: 527139 Speaker 1: Did you have a sense that you were going to be, of, of what you wanted to do with your life when you were in school? Speaker 2: Oh, I always knew. I got a, I got a notebook from 1977 where I had drawn, drawn the whole configuration for the concert and the microphones and how many people are gonna be around each one, who the musicians are going to be, where the musicians pit was, I always knew that it was going to be musical, always. And I configured everything based on what I saw Walter Hawkins and The Love Center Choir do or Andrae Crouch and The Disciples do, I configured everything after that, you know. The way I sing, Walter Hawkins was that inspiration. The way I played, Andrae Crouch was the inspiration, you know. The way I developed harmonies, Walter Hawkins and Andrae were the, I used everything that I listened to, to develop, you know, the sound, the look, the way they dressed, the way their hair laid, the whole nine yards, it was, I mean, it was so much fun but it was so much work. My sister, Marlene [Marlene McClurkin-Mason], she was working, she, she, she was, she would give monies for us to do it, she managed us. My mom [Frances McClurkin] would sow money into us for us to do this, everybody believed in it, you know. And then, and it was '83, 1983, this guy named Albert Jamison [Albert L. Jamison, Sr.] out in Brooklyn [New York] had a choir called, what was that choir's name? Tri-Boro Mass Choir, Tri-Boro Mass Choir. And one day we went to sing at one of these, the all night hootenannies, they asked us to come and sing. And, you know, we're just, you know, seven singers I'm like oh, and this is a choir heaven. And we sang and he said, "You all know James Cleveland?" I said, "No, I don't, I don't like James Cleveland. I didn't like to listen to his music." And he said, "Well, you need to let James Cleveland hear you." He sent a tape of us out to James Cleveland 'cause he recorded one of the hootenannies. Speaker 1: And for context who is James Cleveland at this time? Speaker 2: Okay. Lord, all right these Methodists (laughter). Speaker 1: It's, you know. Speaker 2: James Cleveland was the greatest traditional gospel singer, musician of the day. Andrae Crouch was the greatest contemporary Christian, Edwin Hawkins was the greatest urban contemporary, and James Cleveland was the greatest traditional, all three of 'em were Californians. And he sent the tape to James Cleveland. James Cleveland sent for us to come to California, the whole group [McClurkin Singers], my mother, my [maternal] grandmother [Olivia Jenkins]. Speaker 1: So, this is a group that's been practicing in your living room? Speaker 2: (Nods head) Every-- Speaker 1: For years? Speaker 2: --every Tuesday and Wednesday. Speaker 1: Every Tuesday and Wednesday. Speaker 2: And we fly out there, he takes us up to his home in Baldwin Hills, huge place, we sit in his living room where there's a piano, a grand piano and a Hammond organ in his living room. Speaker 1: Is it, and for context Baldwin Hills is the-- Speaker 2: It's, yeah-- Speaker 1: --upper middle-class black neighborhood-- Speaker 2: Right, right, in Los Angeles [California]. Speaker 1: --in Los Angeles. Speaker 2: Yeah. It's the upper middle-class black neighborhood. And his house is on top of the hill. Story_ID: 527140 Speaker 1: James Cleveland invites you to come out to California to Baldwin Hills [Los Angeles, California], everybody, how many people are everybody? Speaker 2: Mom, [maternal] grandmom [Olivia Jenkins], Albert [Albert L. Jamison, Sr.], Carol [Carol Carter], Andrea [Andrea McClurkin-Mellini], Olivia [Olivia McClurkin], Frances [Frances McClurkin], and my friend, Shelley [Shelley Brazley] (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And does he send for all of you? Speaker 2: (Nods head). Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: And we get there and we go to the church [Cornerstone Institutional Baptist Church, Los Angeles, California], we go to the church and, his church that he's pastoring, he gets in the car, he puts seven of us in his car, his huge Mercedes [Mercedes-Benz], and rolls up listening to our cassette tape of us singing and lights up his cigarette. And I'm saying, oh, I gotta get out of this car 'cause I didn't like him no how. I gotta get out of this car. "Oh, be quiet, just be still be quiet." And I'm saying, "He's telling me to be quiet, look, I'm outta here, I'm going to the hotel." And he listened and said, "Come on up to the house." And we get in the cars, we drive up to Baldwin Hills, go to the house, we get into the living room, and I'm fuming 'cause I wanna go to the hotel now, you know, diva, and with nothing to show for it, (laughter) you know. And he said, "Sing." I'm not just gonna sing. "Sing." And I got on the piano, all of us got up and we started singing a song, (singing) "If you're ever feeling lonely call me and I'll be there. I will never leave you all alone" ['If You're Ever Feeling Lonely'] something I wrote. And we're singing and all of a sudden we heard, "Yes," and he went into a, into a Holy Ghost kind of conniption. And then every year for two more years he would fly us out there just to come to the house sing, and to go to a couple of churches with him to, to, to sing. Story_ID: 527141 Speaker 1: The doors just start opening up, just, you know, before you know it we were, we, we were doing a little traveling and, (laughter) yeah, it's, it was crazy. And then in 1989 I, well, in 1988 I had moved to Detroit [Michigan] and started a church [Perfecting Church, Detroit, Michigan] with Marvin Winans out in, in Detroit. And '89 [1989] he said start a choir in New York [New York] but I'm living in Detroit. Start a choir in New York. Speaker 2: Who says this (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) God says this. Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Speaker 1: Start a choir in New York. And I said, I, you know, and this, this record company called Savoy Records [Newark, New Jersey], I wrote a song called (singing) "Speak to my heart Holy Spirit, give me the words that will bring the light, whereas on the wings of the morning the dark night will fade away, if you speak to my heart" ['Speak to My Heart']. And I put it on tape. I, I take a train back to New York to my mother's [Frances McClurkin] house, I called Sheila Carpenter and a couple of friends, "Come to my mother's house," we, I teach 'em the song, we put it on cassette, and I take it to Manhattan [New York, New York] the next day to Savoy Records, no appointment, don't know the guy, know of the guy, Milton Biggham, it's the record company James Cleveland was on. So, I go in. "Oh, well, do you got anything?" I let him hear the tape. He says, "Oh, my god, I gotta have this choir. What's the name of your choir?" It wasn't a choir. I lied and said we had a choir but I couldn't tell him this, he was ready to give me a deal. I said, "Well, we don't have a name yet." He said, "Well, how many in the choir?" I said, "Oh, about twenty, thirty." There was only five people in the living room singing. And he said, "All right, well, you know, I got, I gotta hear, I gotta hear them, I gotta hear 'em." I go home, I write a song, I wrote in my mother's house, I write a song (singing) "I see your work in harmony." I put, two songs. What was the other one? (Hums) (Singing) "We worship you Lord" ['We Worship You']. I put these two songs on, take 'em back the next day, he said, "Oh, I gotta have this choir, I gotta have this choir." Speaker 2: You made the song the next night, that night? Speaker 1: Yeah. "Gotta have this choir." And I said, "Okay." He said, "Okay, well, I'm a give you a contract and you sign." I said, "I can't sign." He said, "What?" I said, "I can't sign." I said, "The Lord told me not to sign." He said, "Well, then we can't record you." I said, "Okay, no problem." He said, "Well, wait, maybe, maybe we can work something out. If you can get five people in the choir to sign then I'll sign the choir and just have featuring you, and you'll just be a feature but I'll sign the choir." I got five people from the choir to sign. Speaker 2: (Laughter) The five you had? Speaker 1: No, five other people 'cause they wouldn't-- Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: --they wouldn't sign, the five I had wouldn't sign. And (laughter)-- Speaker 2: Why did, why were you skeptical of signing? Speaker 1: All I heard God say is don't sign the contract. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And I found out as I went on. Story_ID: 527142 Speaker 1: We put out the CD and the CD becomes good, it's great. People were listening to it, they're playing my song on the radio, oh, my god. Me and Pastor Winans [Marvin Winans] are driving through Detroit [Michigan], we're sitting there and all of a sudden my song comes on. "That's your song?" "Yeah." "Oh, my god." Speaker 2: This is '89 [1989]? Speaker 1: Eighty-nine [1989], well, 1990, the song came out in '90 [1990]. Speaker 2: Which, which was the first one? Speaker 1: 'Speak to My Heart' and, and 'We Worship You.' But 'Speak to My Heart' was the only one that really caught on. Speaker 2: And, and was this the first time that you have published music? Speaker 1: First time. First time ever wrote a song that was comprehensive and, and, and that was the beginning of my career and I'm like freaking out. And time, time goes on and then in 1992 we did another recording, the choir does another recording. No, yeah, in 1992 the choir does another recording. And we write some songs, you know, 'No Problem Too Big,' no problem, we and all of a sudden we get a telephone call from somebody who heard the choir's CD or, or record from the Democratic National Convention [1992 Democratic National Convention], will you come and sing at the Democratic National Convention, sing the song, 'I See A World' and, and another song, 'No Problem Too Big' for this presidential candidate William Jefferson Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton], governor from Arkansas. And so, we went and sang and, and a girl named Kelly Price who became a, a phenomenal artist, she led the song, (singing) "I see a world in harmony." And I think Kelly was about sixteen at the time. And-- Speaker 2: What year is this? Speaker 1: That was 1992. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And, and we went to the Democratic National Convention and sang and the place was killing, band, everybody, and we, we really did well. And then, you know, that was Bill Clinton after it was over, he was so hoarse he had laryngitis. After he gave his speech, he, after he gave his, you know, acceptance speech for the nomination, he came through and said, "You know, you guys, you guys did good. I said, "Thank you, Mr. President." He said, "Oh, whoa, whoa, I'm not president yet. I'm not president yet." I said, "But you're gonna be." He said, "From your mouth to God's ear." I said, "No, from God's mouth to your ears, you're gonna be president," and shook my hand and walked away. That was in, I think, August of 1992. We get a telephone call a couple of months later, my sister, Marlene [Marlene McClurkin-Mason] gets a telephone call at my mother's [Frances McClurkin] 'cause I'm still living in Detroit. "They want you to come to the White House [Washington, D.C.] in December, election is over, Bill Clinton won, but President George Herbert Walker Bush wants you to come and sing at the White House for his wife Barbara Bush's initiative, her literacy initiative." "What?" We go to the White House in December, his father [Prescott Bush, Sr.] had just passed away, President Bush's father had just passed away. I'm standing there, there's a forty piece orchestra playing our songs. A choir comes, our choir is there, I go stand on the porch of 1600 Pennsylvania [Avenue] and cry. And God takes me back to the scripture he gave me when I was nine years old, Revelations third chapter, "A man's gift makes room for him and will bring him before great men." No that's, that's Proverbs, I'm sorry, that's Proverbs 19 [sic. Proverbs 18:16]. Proverbs 19 says, "A man's gift makes room for him and brings him before great men." Revelations 3 [Revelation 3:8] said, "Behold I know your works, behold I've set before you an open door which no man can shut." And I just cried and God reminded me of what, what he told me and I cried. Went in there and we sang like we were at home. When we finished, I was just, I was just thirty-two at the time. Story_ID: 527143 Speaker 1: At this point are you making money as a musician? Speaker 2: Not really. I'm working in an AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] clinic in, (laughter) in Highland Park, Michigan, Mercy Family clinic [Mercy Family Care Center]. And cleaning diarrhea covered toilets and excrement off the front porch, every single morning excrement on the front porch, human excrement. And washing down lice ridden exam tables. My, my, my, my hours were six AM to two PM, making minimum wage in 1992 which was not much. Speaker 1: And you were in Detroit [Michigan] because you were-- Speaker 2: I-- Speaker 1: --at the Wayans [sic.] church? Speaker 2: At, Marvin Winans started the church [Perfecting Church, Detroit, Michigan]. Speaker 1: Excuse me, yeah, Winans. Speaker 2: And I was his associate. Speaker 1: So, being a minister-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --was something that, it was, obviously, it was in your family but it came-- Speaker 2: (Nods head). Speaker 1: --that was a calling that came to you too. Speaker 2: Yep, yep. Speaker 1: Was it with Marvin Winans church, was that your first time having a role-- Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: --in the ministry? Speaker 2: That was my first time, yeah, with the preached word. You know, I played piano for other places but that was my first time being established in ministry in a church. And neither one of us knew what was we doing. He was, I was twenty-nine, he was thirty-one. And we learned on, on the go and on the people. We, we, we learned how to pastor on the backs of the people. But it was a wonderful time but I wasn't making any money. I wasn't making anything. I'm working, making minimum wage, living in the basement of a woman's house in one makeshift room, you know, and it was, it was rough but that was the beginning. Story_ID: 527144 Speaker 1: Prior to that-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --you were also wrestling with your personal life? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Can you tell me about that? Speaker 2: Well, you know, after the rape, it impacted me in ways that I didn't expect. Then it started to change my proclivities. It a, it, it affected my, my, my sexuality. And I'll, I'll never forget the first time I started thinking about a relationship in puberty, the only thing I could relate it to was the rape of a man when I was eight, breathing in my ear saying I love you, while he was ravaging my body and that was the only thing I could relate it to. And I, I was attracted to women and men. And I, when I, that was thirteen, fourteen years old, so, you know, you blow that off and you play with your friends, Scottie [ph.], Bugs [ph.], and Ricky [ph.] and you keep on going. And then the older I got the more it started to grow. And, and it finally led into the lifestyle in my twenties of, of, of, of same sex desire and homosexual behavior in the church, in the church. And nobody knew, nobody could know 'cause in the '70s [1970s] you weren't gonna tell anybody, in the '80s [1980s] you weren't gonna tell nobody that. And then something brand new had just hit the gay community called HIV [human immunodeficiency virus] AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome]. And my, my cousin passed away with it and, and it was-- Speaker 1: And was he gay? Speaker 2: Yeah, on the, on the down low 'cause, you know, you couldn't tell anybody. Speaker 1: Right. But did you know that? Speaker 2: Kind of. Kind of. But this again it wasn't something that you would-- Speaker 1: Sure. Speaker 2: --'cause gay wasn't a word back then. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's right. Speaker 2: Queer was, faggot was, you know, homo was, sissy was, you know. And nobody is gonna come and say, hey, I'm a homosexual, not in the black community, not in the black church community, not a black male in the church community, at all, and everything was secretive, you know. We still had girlfriends. But it started to mature into something more until my twenty-first birthday, I was tired of this, and I'm gonna go out in Manhattan [New York, New York] and I'm going to be with whoever I wanna be with, I'm gonna, I'm gonna find a man. On my twenty-first birthday, went out to Manhattan in November when 48th Street was 48th Street and 42nd Street was really 42nd Street, weren't no Victory Theater [The Victory; New Victory Theater, New York, New York] on 42nd Street then. There were, there were peep shows and prostitutes, pimps and, and, and all of that. Speaker 1: Around what year is this? Speaker 2: That was, that was '81 [1981]. Speaker 1: So, this is the, also at the-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --very beginning of-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --awareness of AIDS? Speaker 2: This is '81 [1981]. And I'm, well, well, in '82 [1982], '82 [1982], November of '82 [1982]. And, and please, this is what I'm gone do. And I went, let me take that back, November of '81 [1981] 'cause I was twenty-two. And I walked the streets like a, like a crazed man trying to find somebody. Now, who in their right mind would see a twenty-one-year-old guy, trolling and prowling the streets trying to be picked up and not pick him up. And nobody, on 42nd Street nobody paid me attention, nobody. I went into a peep show, nobody paid me attention. I opened the door to a gay club, the guy was dancing on the table, I screamed, "Jesus," and everybody stopped and looked at me. I closed the door and said, "I'm sorry." Walked, and I walked the streets for the rest of the night crying. I can't even sin right. I can't even sin right. And I was so angry because I was saying church messed me up, I can't even, I can't even have a life. I got on the train and came back to Amityville [New York]. So messed up. And on the train ride home, God had to talk to me and say I covered you, I covered you. And I just cried on the train, just crying, now I'm not crying from frustration, I'm crying from gratitude 'cause, 'cause HIV/AIDS still hadn't been discovered yet. We didn't hear about that until a couple of years later. And he said I covered you. Story_ID: 527145 Speaker 1: But it didn't stop the desire and it kept growing and it kept going and my love for God pulling me one way and my lust for men pulling me another way and doing foolish things. The Bible says it's a shame to speak about things you did in darkness so I would never go into the, the totality of what happened but foolish things to, to, to say the least. And that kept going until finally I got to the point where God this can't be, this is not who you called me to be. Twenty-eight, at twenty-eight, got a group [The New York Restoration Choir] singing, carrying on, and still fighting, this is not who you called me to be. Wanting it but inside saying oh, no, falling and messing up and then feeling the guilt and the condemnation so, so, so, so piercing and crying out to God. Other people saying, no, this is just who you are. And I'm saying if it was that easy, well, see church won't let you be this. It's not church, it's in me. And then I started studying the scriptures, studying the scriptures, and I came to Ecclesiastes 3, "To everything there is a season and a time for every purpose under the heavens, a time to be born, a time to die, a time to laugh, a time to mourn, time to gather stones, cast away stones, time to gather stones" [Ecclesiastes 3:1-5] And then it said, "There's a time to love and a time to hate" [Ecclesiastes 3:8] and I stopped there 'cause nobody ever preached this, a time to hate. And I'm saying okay, God, what does this mean, a time to hate? We're not supposed to hate. You know, and God start explaining to me how, I don't know, all I know is he explained it, not hate people, you've gotta hate what I hate, not who I hate 'cause I don't hate anyone, you've gotta hate what I hate even if it's in you, and that hit me. That became so profound to me. Even if it's in you. And I started searching the scriptures, searching them. I would go to Matthew, I'm sorry, I'd go to the Book of John and I'll read Jesus talking to Nicodemus in the third chapter of John, he says, "Marvel not that I say unto you, you must be born again" [John 3:7]. Wait a minute. Even if I was born this way, even if I was born this way, I must be born again. There's a new life, regeneration, the root word is gene, G-E-N-E, regeneration, to be regenerated again. I mean, it start, God start explaining to me this is what salvation is, Donnie [HistoryMaker Donnie McClurkin]. Salvation is taking you from where you are to where I am, changing your life, giving you an abundant life, not a salacious life, not a lost and wandering life, not, not a, not a lascivious life going from man to man, person to person, Donnie, that's not life. Now, let me show you what true love is. Let me show you what true life is. Story_ID: 527146 Speaker 1: And that's where the transformation started and that's where he started showing me. Now, there are some things that you've adapted, you've adapted to, now, I gotta change your nature. Took me to Romans, took me to Romans, "I beseech you therefore brethren by the mercies of God that you will present your body as a living sacrifice unto God, holy and acceptable unto God which is your reasonable service, and don't be conformed to the things, cultures, social climbs through the systems of this world but be transformed by having your mind renewed so that you can prove that good, perfect, and acceptable will of God" [Romans 12:1-2]. Then the scriptures started becoming alive to me, they started making sense to me. Hey, I got, my mind's gotta be changed. My body says one thing but God my heart and my mind have got to say what you say. I cannot follow after what I want, I gotta go after what you've prescribed. And that's, and that was where the prohibition began. And I prohibited myself from the things, the visions, the activities. And I start, and I started understanding that if I can develop these habits by constantly perpetuating them, by continuing on to practicing them until they became a part of my, a part of my persona by inculcation then if I do the same thing with God in holiness, it's the same principle. So, my thing was okay, fine, I have, I will abstain from this. I gotta abstain from this, I gotta cut these friends, I gotta cut this life. It was hard as heck. Let me take that back, it was hard as hell. Story_ID: 527147 Speaker 1: And now I've gotta surround myself with people of like mind. Sisters, don't go anywhere without your sisters. Now we're singing together, we're traveling together as it was in the first place, now I gotta lean on them and they gotta watch out for me, they gotta watch my back (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now does anybody know about this? Speaker 1: Nope, but they sense 'cause they see the people I'm around, they see the people I'm around. They see the feminine side of me. And they become, they become my wives, they, Marlene [Marlene McClurkin-Mason], Olivia [Olivia McClurkin], Olivia weren't no joke, woo hoo, hoo, Olivia wasn't no joke. The first year we went out to California with James Cleveland on, we were on Hollywood Boulevard when Hollywood Boulevard was like 42nd Street. And my sisters were shopping on a Saturday, it was, the place was packed, it was in the summertime, and I'm standing outside on the wall of the shoe store, leaning up against it and with my leg up, and a guy walks passed and turns back around and comes and says the most vulgar thing to me and I don't know what to say to him, so he continues the conversation and my sister, Olivia, wasn't a bit, a bit more saved than Adam's house cat, she was full of hell. That girl was just as foulmouthed as, as Richard Pryor. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: But she was out there to sing with us 'cause I used to make her come high or however she was. And God sent her out of the shoe store, while I'm standing there going. And she says (laughter), "Who the blank are you?" Real soft at first. "Who the blank are you? You better," (making sounds) and every word was a curse, (making sounds), and, and she hit me and said, "Get your A in this, in this store." That's the first she ever cursed at me. And said, "You were gonna let that man stand up there and talk, say all that stuff to you?" I didn't know what to say. So, they knew undercover and they protected me everywhere we went. And I developed this, this habit, this godly habit, this, the people that I hung around, Pastor Winans [Marvin Winans], all of them, I gotta stay close among, when, when I met them, I had to stay close to them 'cause when I left here when I was twenty-nine I had to stay close 'cause old feelings come back easily. My sisters walked me through the '80s [1980s], now they had to walk me through the '90s [1990s]. Story_ID: 527148 Speaker 1: And nobody is the wiser at this point under s- Speaker 2: (Nods head). Speaker 1: --not, at, at least it's not being verbalized? Speaker 2: No, I finally verbalized it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That, that, that's how you got the book 'Eternal Victim, Eternal Victor' [Donnie McClurkin]. Speaker 1: Sure. But how, how long was--when was that? Speaker 2: I, I, I told that story in '89 [1989] or '90 [1990]. Speaker 1: Okay. So, around, this is-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --do you believe, what I'm hearing is, is that because of the rapes from-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --when you were a child that you believed that's what formed your interests-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and lusts for men? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: I, I believe that the rape was the impetus that started me to the feelings, the sensations, the need to be loved. Remember I got these deformities, so I'm already putting myself down. I haven't taken my shoes off in front of people since I was thirteen years old. To this day I walk around my house with my socks on 'cause nobody can see this and so to think that you're attracted to a girl, they're not gonna like you like this. You're small, lank, lanky, gangly, hands webbed and gnarled with arthritis, no girl wants that. But the guys paid attention. The guys paid attention. And it was sexual, there was nothing really love about it 'cause that's how men are, men are sexual beings, women are emotional creatures. And the attention. Then it grew into, you know, an addiction but it never became comfortable. It never became comfortable. It was always a fight. "Well, it's because of your religious beliefs." It's not in religion, it's my relationship with God. And some people say well, "I'm Christian and I'm gay." You work that out your own way, my thing is not to destroy your stuff, I'm telling my story. I'm telling you what I got out of the scriptures. "Well, then you're condemning all these other people who say that they're Christian and gay, you, you're, God is love." He sure is, God is love. But love has rules. Don't tell me you love me and you gonna watch me kill myself, love has rules. And those prohibited rules, those prohibitive rules that love has it, it, it conforms the way we live. It, it gives us the parameters to, whereby to live. That's what I'm saying. And that's how God allowed me to transform and rekindle my desire for female, for a woman. Speaker 1: Do you believe that people, that some people are actually born gay? Speaker 2: I've spoken to five geneticists and only one of 'em was Christian and there's no proof, there is only theory but there's no proof, there's no gay gene, there's no, you know, homosexual chromosome. And until there is proof of that then we can't say they were born that way 'cause if that's true I was born African American, you know, why because my mom [Frances McClurkin], my dad [Donald McClurkin, Sr.] was African American, my mom's American, Native Indian [Native American], but I'm, I'm African American 'cause my dad is African American and we come from an African, African American culture, biology, DNA. So, if you're born that way then there must be a group of people like there are Caucasians, like there are Africans, like there are Europeans, like there, there must be a group of people who have that DNA and that's the problem. There is no, no, no culture of, of, of homosexual. It's something that, I don't know how it happens, mine happened because of a rape, there are some people that have never been raped, never been molested, and this is just a part of their, their, their orientation, so for, for as long as they can remember. I don't know and I don't condemn them. I know what the Bible says and that's what I live by. Story_ID: 527149 Speaker 1: Do you welcome people into your church [Perfecting Faith Church, Freeport, New York] who are-- Speaker 2: Please. Speaker 1: --homosexual? Speaker 2: Most definitely. I welcome them in and I tell them my story, they don't wanna stay. But I, anybody is welcome. In the house of worship, the house of worship is filled with people that come from all different walks of life. Now, I, I know what the Bible says about ministry and we're not gonna, we're, we're not gonna be that, we're not gonna claim ourselves to be that inclusive church that just everybody come and minister and you're collared as, as a, a homosexual and you function as, as a liar and you function, no, we're not doing that. We're preaching the truth of God and the love of God and all are welcomed. I'm not going by your, your social classifications or categories, I'm gonna call you by what your mama called you. Your mama calls you Cassius, I'm a call you Cassius, you know. Your mama, (laughter) your mama called you Ray, I'm a call you Ray. And I, I was having a conversation with a brother who is homosexual, "And I'm a gay man." I said, "Who told you that?" "That's who I am. There's no shame, I like men." "I know but who told you that you were gay? That's a classification that society has given you. What is your name?" "My name is," whatever. I said, "Well, that's what I'm going to, that's what I'm going to call you. I'm going to call you what your name is." One guy sat at the table, we're at Dave and Buster's in Manhattan [New York, New York], two guys sat down, I'm sitting there with my friends and family. "Hi, [HistoryMaker] Donnie McClurkin." I said, "Hey." "I'm gay." I said, "Well, I'm Donnie." "You know, what I mean?" I said, "Oh, yeah, I'm just saying I'm Donnie." I went and sat at their table with them and just left my friends and family and talked with them. "Oh, I didn't know you were like that." I know, you went by the sound bytes that you heard. You went by the little clips that you saw on YouTube and the little, the little articles you read that that twisted it to, to the way that the, that the journalists wanted it to go. "Can I hug you?" "Come on." "Can I come to your church?" Um-hm. Went to preach at a church, at a church last week, one guy, the pastor said, "So and So, a guy wanted to come to church but he said I can't come to church 'cause Donnie McClurkin is preaching and he hates me." Get him on the phone. There's no hatred in Christ. I don't have to agree with you to love you, I don't have to agree. I don't have to agree and say that that's okay, I don't have to. I can disagree with you and still go down, sit down and eat with you. I can hear your, your story and, and you say this is who I am and I say well, I totally, totally disagree. Do you wanna go to Thank God It's Fridays [TGI Fridays] and chew? And, and, and please, this isn't, this is a big world, 7.3 billion people on this earth and every one of us are as different as snowflakes. All I gotta do is love you and love you with the love that God loves us with and let God do the rest. I'm gonna preach what he said but I'm not gone condemn anybody to hell, I don't have that right. I don't have that right. I can't, only Christ has that, only God can judge a man's eternity. I can judge what is right and wrong but I can't judge another man's life as to where he's gone spend eternity. So, I hope that helped you. Story_ID: 527150 Speaker 1: You were telling me you were invited to speak at-- Speaker 2: I was invited to sing on a talk show and when they found out that I had said that homosexuality is not of God, they wanted to uninvite me. And one of the gay producers went to bat for me and he fought hard and made sure that I got on the show. And when we finished, you know, it was a powerful show, wonderful, the people that didn't want me, wanted me to come back. And when we sat down afterwards and I'm talking to the producer, he's like, "You know, I know, I know somebody like me you wouldn't like me 'cause, you know, I'm a devil, I'm, you know, I know what you think about me." I said, "Well, tell me, what do I think about you?" "Well, you know, you think I'm a devil and that I'm going to hell." And I said, "Who told you that? Let me introduce myself to you. My name is [HistoryMaker] Donnie McClurkin and you, you really don't know me at all." "Well, because I'm gay," and, "Well, who said you're gay? Well, let's, what I care about you being gay, what does that have to do with anything? God loves us all." "Well, I know God loves me." I said, "Yeah, God loves everybody. And at what point, at some time doesn't love cause us to change?" "Well, I, I didn't think." "It does." I said, "God loves you and he will always love you but how much do we love God? Do we love God enough to change? He loved us enough to give us life. Now, do we love him enough to give him ours? Who you're with, I don't know who you're with, I ain't, I ain't in your house. I don't care about who you laying with, that's not my business, my job is to love you. And I'm, if I love you I'm going to tell you the truth and if you don't accept that truth you know what I'm going to do? I'm going to keep loving you." And, and I told him, I, I told somebody else, I said God gave me a song it said (singing) "What if people never change, would you love them just the same? Have we really learned to love, just love?" And, and the truth is in religion we haven't really learned that kind of love. We've learned partial love, you gotta walk like me, talk like me, be like me, think like me, act like me. But what if they don't? Do we stop showing love? Do we condemn folks to hell and take on the role of God or do we tell them what the Bible says? "God so loved the world that who, that he gave his only begotten son that whoever, that whosoever believes in him will not perish but have everlasting life" [John 3:16]. And once you come to him then he will change you, he will, he will re-create, he will cause you to have abundant life but we can't be the judge, we can't sit back and say this one's going to hell, that one's going to hell. Our job is to introduce the love of Jesus Christ to all men and to love them with that same love, not just to tell 'em about it, love them with that same love. And no matter who they are, holy or hellish or hypocrite, let them know about the love of Jesus Christ. And not just his love, the love that you have for them. Story_ID: 527151 Speaker 1: In your, this church [Perfecting Faith Church, Freeport, New York], which is, this church is, is it adjunct to the church in Detroit [Detroit, Michigan]? Speaker 2: Yeah, this church is a part and parcel of Perfecting Church in Detroit. Speaker 1: So, I've read about your, in this church you, you welcome everyone? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And in Detroit you certainly when you were there, I've read about you bringing in people of, with every challenge. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And that you have expectations of them when they're coming in? Speaker 2: (Nods head). Speaker 1: Can you talk about that? Speaker 2: Well, I don't know about expectations of them. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: When we bring people into services, we're bringing them in just as we came in, from all walks of life. And we believe that if you hear the word of God preached in its truth, its honesty, and its right content and context, it will impact you just like it impacted us. You can't, I just said this Wednesday night, you can't clean a fish before you catch it. And (unclear) try to get people to, "Now don't do this, and don't you say this, and don't," that's not what Jesus did. Jesus dealt with people based on their life. He spoke the language of the people. He, he didn't condemn anybody. He talks to a woman, he goes purposely to Samaria [Israel], sits on a well, waits for a woman at twelve noon who doesn't come at six a.m. with the rest of the woman according to culture, she waits because she's got a scarlet letter, she's had five husbands and the man that she's with is not her husband, she's shacking with a sixth guy, Jesus waits on the well for her, she comes, he says, "Hey, give me something to drink." She said, "How is that you a Jew see me a Samaritan who you don't wanna have anything to do with, you have the nerve to ask me for some water," that's why I say she was a black woman 'cause she's telling him off, "and ask me for some water." He said, "If you knew the gift of God and who it was that was speaking to you, you'd ask me for water and I'd give you water so that you never have to thirst again." She said, "Give me this water so I don't have to come back to this well but how are you gonna give this to me and you don't even have, have anything to draw from but if you give me this water I won't have to come back here and suffer the ridicule of these women again." He said, "If I give you water," he said, "the water you give me I'll thirst again but if I give you water it'll be springing up to you, a well of water that leads you to everlasting life." He knows how to talk to her. He's, he's engaged her in a conversation. Then she says, "All right, give me that water." He says, "Okay, fine but according to our culture I'm not supposed to be talking to you without your husband here, go get your husband." She said "I ain't got no husband." He said, "Well, you told the truth when you said that because the truth is you've had five husbands and the man you're with now is not your husband, so you told the truth when you said that." She said, "Wait a minute, are you a prophet?" And then she went into a spiritual conversation. "You all say that you're supposed to worship with, worship God in Jerusalem but our people say you worship in the, (unclear) the mountain." He said, "Listen, look, the time has come and now is where you're not gonna worship God in the Jerusalem or on the mountain but you gotta worship him in spirit and truth, it's not based on religion, it's based on relationship." And he takes a woman who had been married five times, talks her language, she becomes converted and goes down to the very men and women who ridiculed her, said, "Come see a real man who has just told me everything I've done." Story_ID: 527152 Speaker 1: He sees a, a, a tax collecting thief up in a tree 'cause he's too short, he's Kirk Franklin size, he's too short-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: --and he can't see Jesus amongst the thon- throng and the crowds and he climbs up a tree, Jesus looks up and says, "Zacchaeus, hey, come on down, I'm coming to your house." "You're, you're a, you're a rabbi, you can't go to that publican's house. It's against the, the, the, the, the law, our religious law." "Forget that law, I'm going to your house for dinner." And then he talks to him about what he does and he shows him where he's gone wrong, he says, "I'm gonna return, I'm gonna pay back multiple times what I've stolen from people." When you speak the language of love and language of the people, he never once condemned anybody. Where did we pick that up? I don't know who taught me how to do it but I did it well, in my, in, in my heyday, I did it well. I was Judge Judy [Judy Sheindlin] personified, judge, jury, and executioner, you know. But who taught us how to condemn like that? How does that represent Christ? And then I started to realize I gotta minister like he ministered. A woman caught in adultery, in the bed with a man married to another woman, caught in adultery, the religious right comes in, pulls her from underneath the man while they're copulating, drags her through the streets, brings her, throws her buck naked down in front of Jesus who is writing in the sand, and says, "Rabbi, hell, you're such a rabbi, this woman was caught in the act of adultery, what should we do? The law says we should stone her and kill her right here, we're here with the stones in our hand, what do you say we should do?" 'Cause if, now this is a trap, if you keep the law they were gonna stone and kill her, if you go against what the law says we're gonna stone you as a heretic. Jesus says, "No problem, no, fellows no problem, we're all rabbis, no problem. The law does say stone her but let's do it like this, you who have no sin you cast the first stone." And he convicted all of them just by one statement. "You who have no sin, you cast the first stone 'cause all sin is, is punishable by death, so, you got no sin," and they all dropped their rocks and walked away. She's laying huddled waiting to be pelted by stones, he touches her, she looks at him and he says, "Woman," this, this what gets me and I'm not gonna cry, "woman, where are your accusers?" Now she is guilty. She sees them walking away and says, "There are none." And then he says this which we have not really learned yet in religion: "Neither do I accuse you. Go, and sin no more. Don't do this again." Story_ID: 527153 Speaker 1: You talk about God's ability to heal and I, I would say, I don't know whether you use the word miracle but I'm speaking at least at first about your health, your-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --battle with leukemia. Speaker 2: In '91 [1991]. Speaker 1: Which was in '91 [1991]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So, can, can you say, what, how did you learn that you had leukemia and then what happened? Speaker 2: Well, remember I worked for the Mercy Family Care clinic [Mercy Family Care Center, Highland Park, Michigan]. Speaker 1: Which, which treated, this is where you were cleaning up excrement and-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --blood and-- Speaker 2: Yep. This is where I was doing all of that wonderful work. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: Praise God. (Laughter) And, and while I was there I was getting sick, I was getting sick. And, and then I found that my, my, my, my left side started swelling up, no, it was my right side started swelling up some. And I started passing blood through my system. And so, I told-- Speaker 1: How long did you work there? Speaker 2: I worked there for a year and a half. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I told the doctor, Limchoa [Emilio Limchoa], Dr. Limchoa. And they wanted to do some work on me, so they sent me to some, the hospital and did a bone marrow stuff. The reports, the, the results came back, and he sat me down and showed me the graph, he said, "Well, your leucocytes are here, your red blood cells are here, white blood cells are all the way up here, and we found leukemia in your blood." They said, "Now we need to talk to you about some more dramatic medicines because it's in the, it's the, it's in the acute state." I thought acute meant worse and it was just the beginning state. And-- Speaker 1: Oh that's what acute meant in this case (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, I guess, yeah, yeah. And so, I'm sitting there nervous saying, you know, "What, that's cancer." He said, "Yes and we need to start some more dramatic medicines to stop it so that it doesn't metastasize or go through your bloodstream." And I'm saying Jesus. And I sat there and I, I had my head down like this and I heard myself say, "Let me have some time off from work so I can go talk to my other doctor." And my mind is saying, what are you crazy? And he said, "Well, sir, this is nothing for you to play with. We've got other doctors that," I said, "No, I've got my own doctor." He said, "Well, who is your doctor, God?" 'Cause he knows, he knew how I acted around the, the, the office. I said, "Well, yes, as a matter of fact it is God. And I just need some time off with pay," I wasn't that crazy, "time off with pay to, to consult with God." So, they gave me six weeks off. And I went and told Pastor Winans [Marvin Winans], we're walking down the hallway at the church [Perfecting Church, Detroit, Michigan] and we're walking like two old men with our hands behind our backs and, and I'm saying, "Well, I just came from the doctor they told me I've got leukemia," he didn't say anything. I said, "Did you hear me," I said, "they told me I got leukemia." He took his hand from behind his back and hit me in the chest, he said, "Not so," and walked in his office and closed the door. And I'm saying well, this is some good pastoral counseling. I fly to California 'cause I gotta preach at Andrae Crouch, his father's church [Christ Memorial Church of God in Christ, Pacoima, California], my, Bishop Benjamin Crouch [Benjamin Crouch, Sr.]. And I go there and I tell them the story that, what the doctors found, he gets up and says, "Young man, God said not so," the same words, prayed over me. I went back at the end of the six weeks, they did the test again, he said it, even if we take the test again it will be, if there was a change it's too soon to, to tell. Do it anyway. Speaker 1: And were you taking any medication at this time? Speaker 2: There weren't no medicine to take. They gave me pain medications but I wouldn't take those. And we did the, the bone marrow thing again. Tests come back several days later, they bring me in the office, they sit me down in the chair, Dr. Limchoa is behind the desk, two nurses, Renee [ph.] and I forget the other nurses name, and they got this little tablet, the smelling salts to, to bust in case I faint, under my nose. And he says, "Well, first of all, let me ask you a question, how did you do this?" I said, "Do what?" He said, "Well, here, the leucocytes are here, the white blood cells, blah, blah." He said, "But here everything is normal, how did you do this?" And that's when I used the opportunity to preach to him. "Well, Dr. Limchoa, I tried to, I tried to tell you before you went to school for medicine, before there was a school for medicine to, well medicine for you to go to, before there was a medicine, there is God, and God can heal cancer like he does the common cold." The nurse came to church the next Sunday and joined, Renee. That's how I got through that. And from that point on it's never reoccurred. Speaker 1: Did you stay working at that job? Speaker 2: For another six or seven months. Speaker 1: And s- did that occur before the Democratic National Convention [1992 Democratic National Convention]? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: That was a year before, I guess. Speaker 2: Yep. Story_ID: 527154 Speaker 1: Let's talk about the music, you, you're, you're beginning to record, you're performing more, how is your career developing? Speaker 2: (Laughter) The career (laughter), I've always been afraid, I've always been petrified, petrified of performing. And God seemingly stands behind me and pushes me into everything that I've gotten so far. It was 1994, I'm sitting in a rehearsal in Detroit [Michigan] with our, our church [Perfecting Church] choir, I'm just there to pass the time away. And a woman, is like three rows behind me by the name of Demetrius Alexander-Stewart, and Pastor Winans [Marvin Winans] says, "Oh, we've got a visitor with us today and from Nashville [Tennessee] Demetrius Alexander and, and, and she wants to say something." She gave a testimony and then she said, "But I came here looking for [HistoryMaker] Donnie McClurkin." And I'm sitting three rows ahead of her and I turn around and look at her. She said, "I don't know if you remember me but in 1986 I sang at Greater Second Baptist Church in Freeport, New York, and you came to me and you told me God is gonna use me in the music industry. Well, I'm now the, I'm, I'm now the chief executive of Warner Bros. [Warner Alliance; Warner Music Group Corp.] gospel division, and every year we do gospel at the Grammys, and this year I, I came here to ask you if you'd come and sing the night before the Grammys at our gospel, at the Grammy Awards." And I'm saying, "Okay." "'Cause you, you got a choir in New York [New York]?" I said, "Yes, ma'am." It was being held in New York. So, they fly me into New York, we sing the song 'Speak to My Heart' but they put the choir in the balcony and made me stand on the stage by myself. I'm petrified, I need, I need this support, I'm afraid, I'm, I'm a timid little woodland creature. And I sing 'Speak to My Heart' and all of my, all of my idols are there, Tramaine [Tramaine Hawkins] is there, Walter [Walter Hawkins] is there, Richard Smallwood is there, everybody is, and I'm saying Jesus. I sing the song and I literally, at the end of the song run off the stage, literally put the mic [microphone] on the stand and ran off the stage, ran in the back, heart racing, sweating. Story_ID: 527155 Speaker 1: And a man comes past and he's got the Warner Bros. [Warner Bros. Entertainment, Inc.] emblem, a WB with Bugs Bunny, Road Runner, Coyote, Wile E. Coyote, Porky Pig, Daffy Duck, all of them on the crest. And I stopped being nervous for a second and I hit his chest and said, "Hey, man, where did you get that jacket," 'cause I'm a cartoon fanatic. I'm, I know more about cartoons than anybody in this world. I said, "Hey man, where did you get that?" And I'm so reclusive and shy I came out of character. He said, "Oh, this is the company I work for." I said, "Oh, you work for Warner Bros.?" He said, "Yeah." He said, "That's why you're here." I said, "How can I get one?" He said, "Well, sign a contract with us." That's why God told me I couldn't sign the contract with Savoy [Savoy Records, Newark, New Jersey] because this would have been right, this just would have collided with it. He said, "Are you signed to the record company?" I said, "No, sir." He said, "Well, let's talk about signing a contract with us." His name was Neal Joseph. And we went into negotiations and started working on a record for Warner Bros., my first solo album was on Warner Bros. Fine. We do the album (laughter)-- Speaker 2: And when was this album? Speaker 1: This was 1996. Speaker 2: And that was your self-titled album? Speaker 1: Yeah, Don, 'Donnie McClurkin'. And, (laughter) and they tried to get me to sign this, the, the contract at this big affair at the GMWA [Gospel Music Workshop of America, Inc.], at a, at a, I forget what they call it, anyway, it was a, it was a big thing they gave. And I was the new artist, I hadn't signed the contract yet. They in front of everybody there put a sixty-two page contract, turned sixty-one pages to the last page, with no lawyer to look at it, and said, "He's gonna sign right now." I'm intimidated. I gotta sign this 'cause all the, the, the, the media is here and I go to sign it and the Lord says, don't sign that. And I'm standing there, "That's right he's gonna sign it right now." And I sign under the signature line Popeye the Sailor-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: --and I take the sixty-one pages and put it back on top, they hold it up, he signed. We did the whole entire CD and they never realized they didn't have a contract with me. Story_ID: 527156 Speaker 1: The CD went gold, we sold over five hundred thousand because of Oprah Winfrey, because of Oprah. We, (laughter) [HistoryMaker] BeBe Winans went on [HistoryMaker] Maya Angelou's seventy-fifth birthday cruise or seventieth, I think it was seventieth, seventieth birthday cruise with Oprah. He sang the song on the CD ['Donnie McClurkin'] called 'Stand' and Oprah and them said, "Oh, sing it again." The, and they (unclear) him about the song, he said, "I didn't write the song," he said, "but if you really wanna hear how the song goes you need to hear [HistoryMaker] Donnie McClurkin." And the next thing I know Oprah is calling me and that was a long story, and we went and did this, the song in Nassau, Bahamas, at the Atlantis [Atlantis Paradise Island, Paradise Island, Bahamas]. And she comes up in a golf cart, cart and says this, (unclear) me and BeBe are about to record, me and Bebe are about to do this song on the show, she says, "Donnie, how many of these CDs have you sold so far?" I said--now, this is 1999. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: It's been out for two and a half years now. And I went, I said, "Oh, about thirty thousand, I done sold oh, about thirty thousand, so proud." She says, "Okay, good." She gets on the show and holds it up and says, "This is my favorite CD and it's my favorite singer Donnie McClurkin, and he's gonna sing my favorite song for you and along with my friend, BeBe Winans, here's an anointed man, Donnie McClurkin with 'Stand'." And we sang that song. Well, maybe about four or five months later, we went from thirty thousand to over three hundred thousand. By the time we ended we had sold over nine hundred thousand of those, my first CD, my first solo CD. That's unheard of as a new artist. Went gold, all this stuff started happening. Story_ID: 527157 Speaker 1: Then we're doing the Stellar Awards one year and I'm singing, at the end of the s- at the end of the show a guy comes back, David Foster. Dave Foster comes back, "I, I don't know if you know me." I said, "Yes, I know you, you're David Foster," one of the greatest producers in history. He says, "Listen, guy, I don't even know your name." "Donnie [HistoryMaker Donnie McClurkin]," I said, "McClurkin." He said, "All I know is you just blew me away out there, you just blew me away." He said, "I have never asked to work with an artist in my whole career, I've never asked to work for an artist, with, with, with an artist," he said, "but I've gotta work with you. I wrote a song for Celine Dion and Andrea Bocelli with, with Carole Bayer Sager, called 'The Prayer.' I, I, I want you and Yolanda Adams to sing this song, would you, would you consider it?" I'm saying, "Well, yeah." Then, then he takes us to his house up in Malibu [California], shows us the song, and everything happens, we just fall into this, fall into this. And even on the video when we're doing the concept video, he came in and we put a clip of him talking to us while we're on stage, he's like, "Yep these are my artists. That, I've never asked to work with anybody before." And I, and I kept that clip. You know, just like it, it, it was like a Cinderella story. Story_ID: 527158 Speaker 1: Then we did another Stellar Award and these two producers called Buster [Louis "Buster" Brown] and Shavoni [Scott "Shavoni" Parker], they come into my dressing room. Speaker 2: And around what time is this now? Speaker 1: Oh, this is about, oh, Lord, when was that? Ninety-nine [1999], two, maybe about '98 [1998]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And they come in and they've got, wait, no, yeah, about '98 [1998], '99 [1999] something like that. And they've got this story board, they're showing me, "Oh, we want you to, to, to write a song for a movie." "What is it?" "It's called 'The Prince of Egypt,' it's an animated feature by, by, by Jeff Katzenberg and DreamWorks [DreamWorks Pictures; DreamWorks Animation LLC]. The next thing I know, I'm riding on a golf cart at the DreamWorks studio going to sit with Jeffrey Katzenberg and Steve Spielberg [Steven Spielberg]. And I write a song, they put it on the soundtrack, crazy. Speaker 2: And so, you're having these encounters after performing at these national awards ceremonies? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: This is, this is your meeting ground? Speaker 1: And it's, and it, it seems to continue to grow and grow. Then we signed a deal, well, we, we, we meet up with somebody who gets me a, a, a publishing deal with, with Disney [The Walt Disney Company]. Well, I'm the cartoon guy, I'm the animated guy, that's me, I am the cartoon aficionado of the world. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: And so we go there and a guy named Brian [ph.] and a girl named Susan [ph.], they're executives there so they meet us at the door in Burbank [California] at, at the Disney Studios [Walt Disney Studios], at the Buena Vista Studios. And when we're walking in this is the animation department, and when we're walking in they've got these big ceiling to floor murals with, with the elaborate frames around them, and its cartoons. I said, "Ah, man, ah, man, that's 'Snow White,' that's 1937, 'Snow White.'" The guy looks at me and, "Says what?" And he covers it up, goes, oh, uncovers the next one and says, "Which, which one is this one?" "That's 'Fantasia' that's 1941." And we goes down the hallway, I'm saying to him, "And that's, that's 'Mary Poppins' 1964 with Julie Andrews and, and, and, and, and, and, and Tim, Tim Tomlinson [sic. David Tomlinson]." "And well, which one," "That's, that was a bad representation, that was 'Bedknobs and Broomsticks' with Angela Lansbury and, and Tim Tomlinson." And I'm going down the line. We go upstairs, talk about a deal, we go to the executive cafeteria, hm, and I'm sitting there, they say, "Okay, now we want ten songs from you, what do you want from us?" I said, "I want a gospel song that you'll have on, on your 'Hercules' soundtrack." He said, "We don't have any gospel songs." I said, "Yes, you do." I said, then he said, "No, we don't." And Susan said, "I worked that soundtrack we don't have a, a gospel song." I said, "Yes, you do." She said, "Well, which one is it?" I said (singing) "I have often dreamed of the far off place where a hero's welcome would be waiting for me, and the crowds they'll cheer when they see my face and a voice keeps saying this is where you're meant to be, I'll be there someday, I can go the distance, I'll--" ['I Can Go The Distance'] and I sang that. The, the guy, Brian, said, "Hold on," he goes and goes to another table, and grabs the guy, comes in, said, "sing that again." I said (singing) "On an unknown road to embrace my faith, though the road may wander, it will lead me to you. And, and the thousand years would be worth my wait. It might take my lifetime but somehow I'll see it through," and I sang the whole song. The guy looked at me, looked at Brian and said, "Who the blank is this guy?" "The guy that we're trying to sign up with a, we're trying to sign up with a publishing deal." He said, "Give him what he wants," and walked away. He said, "Well, you heard the man." I said, "Well, who is that?" He said, "You know, everything about Disney animation and you don't know who that guy is?" I said, "No." He said, "That's Michael Eisner, he's the head of all Disney." And I was like, "Oh, my god, oh, my." He said, "Well, you heard the man, he said give you what you want. What do you want?" I said, "I want money." Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: "I want a lot of money." And they gave me a lot of money. Story_ID: 527159 Speaker 1: When did your record company, Warner [Warner Bros. Records; Warner Music Group Corp.], discover that you wrote Popeye the Sailor Man? Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: And what happened? They had to have discovered that, right? Speaker 2: They didn't discover it until I brought it to their attention (laughter). We were sitting in the Nashville [Tennessee] office-- Speaker 1: And this is around when? Speaker 2: Oh, about '99 [1999]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They were sitting in the Nashville office and we all had a meeting and they were closing down the gospel division of Warner Alliance [Warner Alliance; Warner Music Group Corp.]. And they brought me in to tell me that, that they were selling, they were, they were giving all of their artists over to Atlantic Records, so we would be Atlantic Records artists. And I said, "Well, no, I'm, I'm not your artist." "I know you, yeah, yeah, you're our artist and we're just telling you that there's going to be, you'll no longer be on Warner." I said, "No, I'm, I'm not your artist." "You are our artist". "No. You guys need to check again." I said, "Go in the vault and get the contract." And they went and they looked at the contract and got back to us and it said Popeye the Sailor. "And no, well, we can sue you because you have an implied contract because you did the project." I said, "There was no meeting of the minds. You know, there, you don't have a contract with me. My lawyer never looked at it, you never gave me a chance to bring it to my lawyer." And they talking about lawsuits. I said, "Okay, well, if we gonna talk about lawsuits, then let's talk about you using my image and likeness without my permission." And so, consequently, you know, they closed that division down and I was able to walk away and sign with-- Speaker 1: Disney [The Walt Disney Company, Burbank, California]? Speaker 2: --no, with Verity [Verity Records]-- Speaker 1: Ah ha. Speaker 2: --as a record company, with Sony RCA [Verity Gospel Music Group; RCA Inspiration], Verity, whatever they call them now in '99 [1999] 'cause we went from that situation to another recording situation with Verity. But they had heard about the, the Popeye the Sailor. And they weren't about to let me get away without signing that. They, they signed me, when, when we looked at the contracts, they made me sign on the spot after the lawyer had agreed to all the terms. And that's when we began the last journey. Disney was for publishing, it wasn't for recording (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Got it. Story_ID: 527160 Speaker 1: So, with Verity [Verity Records], what, what music did you make with them (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, that's when we did our classic CD, live in London [England], 'Live in London and More.' It was where we did, "We Fall Down", and, and "Who Would Have Thought I'd Know You This Way" ["Who Would've Thought"] and, you know, those kind of songs, "Caribbean Medley" (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And did you write all of the music? Speaker 2: Most of it, most of it. And "Caribbean Medley" and all that kind of stuff. Speaker 1: And this album was 2000? Speaker 2: That was, that was, yep, it was recorded in October of 19-, no, yeah, no. It was recorded, recorded in the year 2000. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And it was released in 2001 [sic.]. Speaker 1: And it was number one on the charts. Speaker 2: For God knows how many weeks. Well, really months. Speaker 1: Right, more than forty weeks. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, this is album number what? Speaker 2: That was our second project. Speaker 1: And it goes (laughter) number one? Speaker 2: And it went platinum, over a (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Unclear). Speaker 2: --million sold. Really two million sold. And-- Speaker 1: And as this is happening do you realize that this is rare for music to go-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --so big so fast? Speaker 2: No, because I disconnect myself. I disconnect myself so that I can live, and I'd always come back home. Pastor Winans [Marvin Winans] told me, "You gotta wear it like a loose-fitting garment. And when you finish you take it up and hang it up in the closet and you say, Lord, what's next? And you never live in that." And so, consequently whenever we finish something, I don't even know to this day where I chart when my CDs come out, how many I've sold, they have to tell me, you know, oh, by the way. And we were driving down the highway, me and my manager, Roger Holmes, and got a telephone call while we were driving, he, and he said, "Well, you just went platinum." "Platinum?" "Yep, you just went platinum." "That means I sold a million?" "Yep." And, and, I remember it was just a numb feeling and then we just went on about our business, kept on working. It, it's, it's surreal and it's not, it's not really tangible to me. It's nothing I can hold on to and keep so I, so I let it go. Story_ID: 527161 Speaker 1: Are you, at this time as you're making this music, this is 2000, are you aware of what is happening with other artists and, and is there a difference between what's happening for black artists and white artists in the Christian music? Speaker 2: Well, Kirk Franklin has, by that time Kirk Franklin has risen to the top. It started off in '91 [1991] with 'Why We Sing,' CeCe Winans never lost ground, there are [HistoryMaker] BeBe Winans, Yolanda Adams had risen to, to notoriety and I'm, I was the last guy, I, I was the last guy. Yeah, Fred Hammond had already made his way, the whole nine yards. And when I came in I was older than them but I was really the, the, the baby of the musical bunch. And it was like God gave me a chance to catch up, (laughter) you know, it may sound crazy but it's like he gave me a chance to catch up and go to, and go to the, to, to the length that we went. And then behind me came the Mary Marys and, and, and the great artists like that. But I never really sat down and considered the level of celebrity or fame because it wasn't about that. Story_ID: 527162 Speaker 1: Oprah Winfrey, we were at a, we were at something with Wintley Phipps at, at his Dream Academy [U.S. Dream Academy, Columbia, Maryland], and she was the speaker and I was the singer. We sat at the table and she got, she got me and said, "Donnie [HistoryMaker Donnie McClurkin], I think God told me something, I think it was God." She said to me and to everybody that was there afterwards, "Everybody can't be famous but everybody can be great," and that stuck with me. I don't wanna be famous, fame is all about me, see me, hear me, love me, say my name, pedestal me, laud me, applaud me, give me, serve me, that's fame. Greatness is how can I serve you, how can I help you, how can I advance you, how can I push you ahead, how can I put you on my shoulders, don't even mention me, let me put, bring you to your point of, of purpose, and then let me go back into the shadows and let me hide until the next assignment. Let me make you become, that's what greatness is. Who can I help, who can I feed, who can I, who can I give hope to? That, and that, that that impacted me so strongly and that's my whole thing, no fame. So, if you wanna see my Stellar Awards, you gotta go in my basement and go in the box in my basement. So, if you wanna see two of the three Grammys [Grammy Awards] I have, you gotta go in my basement. It's in a box in my basement. There's no credenza, there's no award trophies shelves, there's no lights on the, on the Grammy, there's no lights on the Stellars or the Trumpets [Trumpet Awards] or the, the two NAACP Awards [NAACP Image Awards] or the Dove Awards, no, because that's not, that's not who he called me to be. He called me to, to love man and to serve him and that's what I do. And all the rest of it, I thank God for it, it's wonderful and, and, yeah, I appreciate it but it's not a part of my life. Story_ID: 527163 Speaker 1: Given that you are a pastor as well as a recording artist, are there, have you ever, have you experienced any unique challenges trying to balance between the two? Speaker 2: Oh, man, there, there's many, there's many a unique challenge trying to balance this. Doing what I'm doing with you here right now is a unique challenge. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: 'Cause there's so much work I've gotta do as pastor, and there's so much work I've gotta do as preacher around the world, and so much work I gotta do as singer that I don't have much time to do much for Donnie [HistoryMaker Donnie McClurkin]. But it's-- Speaker 1: So, what would you say the sacrifices are? Speaker 2: Donnie. Why am I about to cry with that? That sounds so sad. Donnie, I sacrifice Donnie to do this. I've never been married. I've got one child out of wedlock whom I love with the breath that comes out of my body. Speaker 1: Your son? Speaker 2: Good god, yes. Speaker 1: And what's his name? Speaker 2: His name is Matthew [Matthew McClurkin]. I've got an adopted daughter, her name is Michelle, she's thirty. And I adopted her when she was eight. Those are my reasons for living. I've got nieces and nephews, great-nieces and great-nephews, I'm Uncle Donnie to my nieces and nephews, I'm Gruncle Donnie to my great-nieces and nephews, great-uncle, Gruncle Donnie. And I've, I've, I've sacrificed me. I wanted so badly to have a family. I wanted to have my own children where I could lay them on my chest and watch them sleep, rear them, raise them, not from somebody else's house, from my own house, with my own wife, with my own family, I never got that. I had to watch my son grow up from afar, three thousand miles away. Speaker 1: So, you never lived with his mother [Kim]? Speaker 2: Never. And I had to watch him grow up in spurts, go out and visit, bring him here, "Oh, he's walking now, oh, he's talking, da, da." Love on him for a couple of weeks, then I gotta bring him back home. Wow, go with him his first day of school, go to parent teachers when he's in the third and fourth grade and meet the teachers, "This is my dad," so proud, you know, and I have to do it in increments. With it, the Grammys [Grammy Awards] gave me a big gigantic achievement award out here in Manhattan [New York, New York] and it was me, Alicia Keys, it was us, Steve Sondheim [Stephen Sondheim], and Chita Rivera, and Bon Jovi. And they brought my son out without telling me. And my heart, I was giving my acceptance speech and he came out the side and I about lost my mind. And I just kept telling them, "This is my heart, this is my life, this, this boy right here is my life," you know. I would go and sing or preach and he'd come up, I'd bring him with me right when I went to preach, he'd come up with a towel if he saw me sweating, "Here, Dad, you're sweating." "Boy, you can't come up while I'm preaching doing this. You can't come up in a concert while I'm doing this." And I'd take it and wipe, but this is my son, everybody go crazy. My regret is that I couldn't raise him every day, 365, and watch him grow. So I have this, I sacrificed all that by doing it the wrong way. I should have never had a child without being married. Story_ID: 527164 Speaker 1: And you adopted your daughter [Michelle], did she live with you? Speaker 2: Unh-uh. Speaker 1: So, what did it mean that you adopted her? Speaker 2: It meant that I adopted her, she didn't have a father. And I, we met under the most precarious circumstances in London, England. I was at a retreat and preaching at a convention and she was one of the kids at the convention. Speaker 1: And when was that? Speaker 2: This was in '95 [1995], '95 [1995]. And, (laughter) and, and it was in Devon, England, by the water. And it was just, you ever see 'Wuthering Heights'? Well, that's where 'Wuthering Heights' was, was filmed. And all the cliffs and the, it's just classic England. And I preached one night and I said, I, I wanted somebody to show me the beach side and nobody was available and the bishop said, "Well, the, let the kids take you," and about seven kids took me down there and she was one of them. All the kids were older than her and she's telling the kids, "Mind don't go in the water"-- Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: --"don't go in the water." And she comes and she sits behind me 'cause I'm sitting on a shell rock, she sits behind me with her back against mine, I'm holding my knees in my arms, she holds hers and she's talking to me, facing in the other direction and said, "What is your name?" I said, "My name is Donnie [HistoryMaker Donnie McClurkin]." "Well, Donnie, oh, oh, it's, well, how old are you, Donnie?" I said, "Well, I'm thirty-six, I'm thirty-six." She said, "Oh, are you married?" I said, "That's a kind of a forward question for a young lady to ask." "I'm sorry. Are you married?" I said, "No." "Do you have any children?" I said, "That's too grown for you to ask me." And we're still talking back to back. And she said (laughter), and I said, "Well, no, I don't," and I, she said, "Do you want any children?" I said, "No, I especially don't want any girls." She stopped talking. And I felt her going (making crying sounds). And I said, "Hey, hey, hey," and I turned around and she was crying. And I grabbed her and I swung her around and I sat her on my lap and said, "What's wrong?" She said, "You, you don't want any girls, and you don't want any girls. I never knew my father, I never met my father." I said, "Oh, no, no, no, no, no, I didn't mean you, I didn't mean you." I said, "No, listen, you, girl, I'm gonna be your daddy." And I, I was just playing and clowning. And then she said, "Really?" I said, "Yep, I'm your dad, take me to your mom, take me to your mom now." Her mom was the administrator of the church. And we run up the, up the cliff. And we go and see her mother and she says, "Mum, Mum, look." And she said, "And where are you coming from?" I said, "Well, let me introduce myself. I gotta start sending child support papers to you." She said, "Pastor McClurkin what are you, Elder McClurkin what are you talking about?" I said, "I'm her dad." She got so mad. She started talking in the hardest Jamaican Patois you wanted to hear. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: Lost the British accent altogether. "Oh, what you going down there and shame me for, you're talking to that man, what bring this stranger," and she went a musha, mutha and she was going-- Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: --off. And I'm saying, "Hey, hey." "And you American come here, you're not gonna, you're not gonna steal my daughter from me," and she was going off. We became such close friends and her daughter lamented so hard that we sat down and we talked as a family and they let me do so. And I came back to the church and she-- Speaker 1: Right then? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: All this happened at this-- Speaker 2: Oh, no, it took time, took time. Speaker 1: Over time. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: About a year. Came back to the church the next year and she met at the car, church is packed to the, overflow, like hundreds of people outside. And, "My dad's here, my dad's here, my dad's here." And that girl went and introduced me to everybody and said, "This is my dad, this is my dad." We're praying, she takes my arms and wraps it around her like a scarf, so she's standing in front of me and we're just praying and swinging and from that time on, and they allowed me to do it. And now, she's thirty years old. Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: She's thirty. Now, she has two kids, so I'm Pop Pop now. Speaker 1: How often do you talk to her? Speaker 2: Oh, all the time. Thank God for WhatsApp, thank god for, for cellular phones, you know. And that's what I sacrificed, those are my sacrifices and I regret it to this very day. If, if anybody asked me if I had regrets, I regret that I did not have a family the right way, and I couldn't raise my son [Matthew McClurkin], you know. I, I raised my daughter more than I raised my son and that's, that's my sacrifice. Story_ID: 527165 Speaker 1: You came back to New York to found this church [Perfecting Faith Church, Freeport, New York] in (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: --two thousand one [2001]? Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: How, you were in Detroit [Michigan] for how long? Speaker 2: Twelve and a half years. Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: Twelve and a half years. Speaker 1: And how did you know it was time to do this? Speaker 2: Well, I, (laughter) there's a man by the name of Marvin Winans who gets on my last nerve. And we are best friends in the world, he's my brother really, Pop Winans [David Glenn Winans, Sr.] used to say, "You're the eleventh Winans," 'cause there were ten of them. And I worked so hard with him for twelve years and he would always say, "Donnie [HistoryMaker Donnie McClurkin], you're only doing this until you go back and pastor in New York." And I'm saying, "I'm going to heaven from Detroit, I don't know what you're talking about. This is my last stop. I'm going to heaven from here." "Donnie, no, you're going back to New York." And he convinced me to start coming out here in 1999 and start having one, once a month services on the fourth Sundays. And I did it and a couple hundred people came and I stopped 'cause too many people were coming and I was, my thing is, unh-uh, I wanted to sabotage this. Then I gave bible studies on a Monday night when I knew nobody would come out on a Monday night and it started off with three people, I'm like yes, I'm gonna do this for a couple of months, go back and tell him, I tried it, it didn't work. Then the next week ten people were there, within two weeks, two weeks later ten people were there. Then two weeks after that we're sitting there with twenty and thirty people, 'til it got up to like fifty people and I said nope, we're stopping this. Stopped it, and went back to the once a month. And they kept coming, I'm saying, no. Me and Pastor Winans had to go to Amsterdam [the Netherlands] to minister at a conference, a global conference, and we're out to break, we're out to eat one day, he said, "So, so Elder," he called me Elder, "so Elder, Elder how, how is it going out there in New York? You, you, I mean, you been missing a couple of services, you been--." I said, "Well, yeah, I've been having those services." He said, "How is that going?" I said, "It's going okay." He said, "Good. When we get back home I'm a go with you this fourth Sunday." "Oh, no, you don't have to do that." "Yeah, I didn't, I didn't ask you, I said I'm going." And we finished the service, flew here, I purposely didn't tell too many people 'cause we didn't, I made sure we didn't advertise. We got to the hotel and people are standing all outside the hotel, I'm thinking there's a wedding going on in one of the, one of the ballrooms. I, this guy named Steve [ph.] greets us at the car. I said, "Steve, what's all this?" He said, "We're here for service." Pastor Winans looked at me, pushed me into the men's room before we could get into the ballroom, pushed me. He said, "How long has it been like this?" I said, "Well, we've never had this many but yes, about, about every time we do it." "You getting out. You getting out." This was February. He said, "You getting out. May 28th is your last day, you getting out of the church 'cause you're not gonna be a Jonah on my ship. I'm a throw you overboard." And that's how I came here. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: And by that time I knew it was God, I knew it was. Story_ID: 527166 Speaker 1: And so, that year, 2001 was also when you released your book? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Living through an experience is one thing, writing about it and telling everybody is very different. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: How did you come to write 'Eternal Victim, Eternal Victor' [Donnie McClurkin]? Speaker 2: It was just time for, to put faces with the names, to tell the story, to free myself and free whomever else. I'd always spoken about it as I went along but then it's time just to memorialize this in a book, make this so that others who don't have a voice can see that there is a voice. You know, I didn't wanna be the picture poster boy but it was really for a purpose of releasing other people that have gone through the same thing, giving them the, the assurance that you can speak. You can, you can talk about it because that's where the healing comes from. As long as we keep it in inside of us we, we develop different traits and different ways of, of negotiating, mitigating the brokenness that leads us, leads us into some real bad situations. It causes us to make wrong life choices because we never healed and we try to attach ourselves to things and people that are only gonna make it worse. And people can see when you're broken and vultures take advantage of it. I write about the vultures in the book. And I just sat down and took a good year and just wrote. It took a while before that was, it came out in 2001 but it took a while (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right I see, yeah, it takes a--did you talk to your family first and let them know? Speaker 2: I talked to them and they did not agree with it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My mother [Frances McClurkin] did not agree with it, my [maternal] grandmother [Olivia Jenkins] did not agree with it, everybody else did but those two did not. But it got to the point where I had to tell them I appreciate you guys and I love you, and I'll never disrespect my parents-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --but this is no longer your story, this is my story. This is what happened to me. And I'm sitting there in my, in, in my late thirties and early forties, I can't let y'all dictate, I gotta be able to tell my story. "Oh, I'll take you to court, I'll sue you," (laughter) my mother she was really livid. No problem then. And when it came out it was quite the controversial book. Speaker 1: Sure. Speaker 2: And, and I, and I did everything, I made it, I made it so comprehensive that anyone could understand it. Speaker 1: And you have lots of resources in the book for support. Speaker 2: Yes. And we, and I went through that painstakingly. I had used so many references to people who failed at first and who picked themselves back up, [President] Abraham Lincoln, the whole nine yards. Talked about Albert Einstein and them saying that he had a deficit, a learning deficit. I give resources to, to, to places that can help you with your sexuality, help you with your counseling, help you with fear, help you with addictions of, of any kind. And I wanted to make it comprehensive and practical, I didn't wanna write lofty, I didn't wanna write ethereal, I wanted to write practically. Story_ID: 527167 Speaker 1: Did you ever get counseling? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: So, that, that remained part of the family tradition? Speaker 2: Nope. Speaker 1: Did you, did you, did you not get it because you felt that you were talking to God? Speaker 2: Nope. Speaker 1: Why? Speaker 2: I didn't get it because it's been taboo in the black community. Now, ask me am I going to get counseling? Speaker 1: Are you? Speaker 2: Oh, most definitely. I long for and look forward to sitting down with a counselor and pouring everything from as far as I can remember to the day I'm sitting there with him out and hold nothing back, uncover the most dark thing, and see what the science of psychology can afford me. I'm, I'm more anxious than anything else to do that because I think that it's beneficial. I think that we've, we've, we've made it so taboo that we haven't gotten help in our communities. And that there's no harm in sitting with someone who God has given the desire to become a counselor, a psychologist, a psychiatrist, a sociologist, and deal with what's going on in our lives. That's a part of this whole godly walk. He gave us the ability to come to him and the ability to go to one another. Speaker 1: And even as you say you look forward to it, look at how many years it's been since-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --since you even have stated it? Speaker 2: Um-hm. And that's, that's a part, it's not because I was resistant to getting it then, it's because everything took off then. In 2001 everything, it was going at a fast pace as it was but by 2001 and the songs that hit and the industry booming and the demand being so great, everything took off. My son [Matthew McClurkin] was just born the year before, I had started pastoring here [at Perfecting Faith Church, Freeport, New York] the year after, everything was happening. Speaker 1: Your music is at the top? Speaker 2: At the top of everything. The, the church begins, I've got a brand new son, I've gotta, I've gotta meet the needs of my son, I've gotta meet the needs of this new church, gotta meet the needs of my family members who are broken, I've gotta meet, I've gotta meet the schedules that are coming in, I've gotta be at this thing, I've gotta be at this affair, now I'm a part of the industry, now I've gotta be at this Grammy Awards, I've gotta be at this awards show, I gotta do another recording, your two years are up, I don't wanna record right now, I wanna record every four years. I'm going through all of this and your mind it gets caught up in the vortex and that becomes the least concern, sitting down with a counselor 'cause you don't have time to sit down with God barely. Speaker 1: You do-- Speaker 2: But, but now as wisdom has set in, counseling is mandatory. Story_ID: 527168 Speaker 1: So, this is a continuation interview with-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --Pastor [HistoryMaker] Donnie McClurkin. Again, I'm [HistoryMaker] Harriette Cole, the interviewer for The HistoryMakers, and Scott Stearns remains our videographer. Today is October 8, 2016, and we are here with Pastor McClurkin. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Story_ID: 527169 Speaker 1: I'd like to talk about music because that is one very important track in your life. And you talked about learning to play. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: But I'd like for you to share your musical influences. When you were growing up-- Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: --what did you listen to? Speaker 2: When I was growing up, (laughter) I, I wasn't the, the, the, the traditional or quintessential black young man who listened to the music of our culture. The, the only real song that I loved from our culture in the '60s [1960s] was Gladys Knight and The Pips, 'Heard it Through the Grapevine' ['I Heard It Through the Grapevine']. Now, Marvin Gaye's version was nice but Gladys' was real funky, you know. Marvin was (singing) "Oh, I guess you're wondering how I knew about your plans to make me blue dun, with some other guy, you knew before, between the two of us guys you know I loved you more." That was nice. Gladys put that, that, that funk on it, that soul, (singing) "Well, I guess, you're wondering how I knew, dun, dun, woo, ooh, about your plans to make me blue (hums) with some other girl you knew before, ooh, between the two of us girls, you know I loved you more, took me by surprise I would, woo ooh, ooh, ooh, when I found out yesterday, don't you know that I heard it through the--," that made that, and I think they came out about the same year or at least a year apart, and that set that song spinning in another direction. Speaker 1: And how old were you? Speaker 2: Oh, about six years old (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Unclear). Speaker 2: --seven years old. And the thing about is me and Gladys are great friends, we're gonna do a song together on her, on her next project. And it's so surreal. That was about the only real cultural music that I listened to from our, from our African American culture. The rest was Mamas and the Papas [The Mamas and the Papas], Lovin' Spoonful [The Lovin' Spoonful], The Association, The Byrds, (singing) "To everything turn, turn, turn, there is a season, turn, turn, turn, and a time to every purpose," ['Turn! Turn! Turn!'] 'cause they put the scriptures to, to, to music and nobody even knew that that was Ecclesiastes 3:1. And I'm a little church boy saying, "Hey, that's the Bible," at six and seven years old, you know. So-- Speaker 1: How were you listening to it because what was on, what were your family members playing on the radio at home? Speaker 2: Well, well, well, see our, from a strict religious home, you weren't allowed to go out and buy that stuff, you weren't allowed to listen to it on the radio, so you had to wait for everybody to go to work and turn on the radio and I used to have to find, what was it? 101 FM [WCBS Radio, New York, New York] with Cousin Brucie [Bruce Morrow]. Cousin Brucie-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and, and that was my channel, listening to Cousin Brucie play all of the hits of the '50s [1950s], '60s [1960s], you know, and even into the '70s [1970s]. (Laughter) And, and you have to wait until Mom [Frances McClurkin] goes to the store or, and Dad [Donald McClurkin, Sr.] was always at work and while they were gone you'd turn it on and you'd listen to your songs or fight over the radio. Speaker 1: Well, was the fight kind of like the fight over the TV? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. But it, it, whoever got to it first. Story_ID: 527170 Speaker 1: And what were your siblings attracted to? Speaker 2: My, my siblings were attracted to the, the Aretha Franklins. My dad [Donald McClurkin, Sr.] loved Otis Redding. But my mother [Frances McClurkin] who was real, high, highly Pentecostal religion, that was in taboo. Now, my dad was Baptist and he listened to Otis Redding, you know. (Singing) "Sitting on the dock of the bay, watching the tide roll away, ooh, hmm, sitting on the dock of the bay, wasting," that was my daddy's song, (singing) "time" ['(Sittin' On) The Dock Of The Bay']. He played it over and over again. Speaker 1: He, on the record player? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. 45 [45 rpm records], the, the little small one, 45. And so-- Speaker 1: Did you listen to gospel music at all? Speaker 2: Yes. Oh, my mother listened to Dr. Mattie Moss Clark and the International Choir of Church, God, and Christ [Dr. Mattie Moss Clark and the Church of God In Christ International Mass Choir]. My mother listened to James Cleveland. My mother, she, you know, she was, you know, 1969, she, Edwin Hawkins and them came out, 'Oh Happy Day' was in our home. My mother listened-- Speaker 1: You had that on 45? Speaker 2: Mahalia Jackson, you know, the, The Caravans, the, you know, our family was religious. Now, The Violinaires [The Fantastic Violinaires], I remember that, that is a quartet group from back in the day, you, that, that's what my mom listened to. And my, my appetite for music was just totally different. I don't know what, what happened, it was just totally different out of all my siblings. Story_ID: 527171 Speaker 1: How did you even find it though, like was it just shopping on the radio or--? Speaker 2: Television. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: You watched 'The Ed Sullivan Show,' the artists came on 'Ed Sullivan.' Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know, you, you watched the, 'The Johnny Carson Show' ['The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson'] or the Jack Paar show ['Tonight Starring Jack Paar'], came on television. You know, the, the, you know, and in the '70s [1970s] you watched, what was it, with, with, with, with, with Wolf, what was, what was it? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Wolfman Jack. Speaker 2: Well, yeah, with Wolfman Jack. You watched 'Don Kirshner's Rock Concert,' whatever that was. And you heard the music there. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And so when I heard The Mamas and the Papas on 'Ed Sullivan,' I was a little boy, I was five or six years old, and I loved the music. You know, when, when you heard The Lovin' Spoonful, you loved the music on 'The Dick Cavett Show' and the, and the likes like that, 'The Merv Griffin Show,' you, that was my thing. And, and, and, and, and my sisters and them they used to like 'The Nat King Cole Show' or 'Soul Train' and stuff like that. You watched 'Bandstand' ['American Bandstand']-- Speaker 1: Bandstand. Speaker 2: --where you're gonna hear that stuff. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And, and I liked it. Story_ID: 527172 Speaker 1: And then when the '70s [1970s] came on, well, the, The Beatles in the '60s [1960s] and then they introduced this guy named James Taylor in the '70s [1970s] and then he was sitting with long hair and a guitar. And just, you know, you know, you know, (singing) "But just yesterday morning they let me know you were gone, Suzanne the plans we made put an end to you, I walked out this morning and wrote down this song." And I used to love his articulation, (singing) "Just got it, just can't remember who to send it to," he pronounced every word. (Singing) "I've seen fire and I've seen rain, I've seen sunny days that I thought will never end," loved it. And then the second verse was (singing) "Won't you look down upon me Jesus," he put Jesus in the song, whenever you were a Christian back then and you heard Jesus in a song, it was like yes. (Singing) "You gotta help me make a stand, just gotta see me through" ['Fire and Rain']. So, while I'm listening to James Taylor, my sisters are listening to Gil Scott-Heron and they're listening to Angela Bofill and they're listening to Steely Dan, you know, (singing), "Aja when all my dime dancing is through" ['Aja']. And I'm, I never really liked it, all that stuff. I wanted to hear something that made some sense, that was good old music. Steely Dan's music was too complexed, their chord structures were too progressive, and their harmonies were a little, I weren't used to those kind of, I wasn't used to those kind of harmonies. But you gave me something like, The 5th Dimension, (singing) "Would you like to ride in my beautiful balloon, would you like to glide in my beautiful," ['Up, Up and Away'] to this day that still gives me chills and brings me back to, you know, (singing) "Let the sunshine, let the sunshine, and the sunshine in" ['Medley: Aquarius/Let the Sunshine In (The Flesh Failures)']. I was a fan, I was a fan. You know, "Won't come, won't you marry me Bill, got the wedding bell blues, you know" ['Wedding Bell Blues']. What was the other one? (Singing) "Surry, surry," what was that? (Singing) "Surry (hums) surry," what was that song? Come on, y'all know that song. Speaker 2: Sorry I (unclear). Speaker 1: 'Stoned Soul Picnic,' 'Stoned Soul Picnic' (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: Man, that was the song. (Singing) "Hurry down to the stoned soul picnic, hurry down." I loved that kind of stuff. And my family (laughter) thought it was corny but I loved that stuff and that influenced my music. Story_ID: 527173 Speaker 1: And you were beginning to make music by this time? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: No? Speaker 2: I was too young to make music by then. Speaker 1: Okay. So, what, when, at what age were you, because you were at home singing and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, but we made up the songs like I told you. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Me and my sister, Olivia [Olivia McClurkin], we made up, you know, left me in the slums of the city. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Or (laughter), you know, stupid stuff. And it had its influence from that. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: But, you know, one, I wrote a song for, for Bishop Hezekiah Walker and The Love Fellowship Choir [sic. Hezekiah Walker and the Love Fellowship Crusade Choir]. And it was (singing) "This is the gospel love, Jesus Christ, (hums) this is the gospel love, Jesus Christ, yes (hums) and I believe every word of the gospel of Jesus Christ," ['This Is The Gospel Of Jesus Christ'] that was the song. I got that from (singing) "Slow down, you move too fast, (hums) you gotta make the morning last, just kicking down the cobblestones (hums) looking for fun and feeling groovy and" ['The 59th Street Bridge Song (Feelin' Groovy)'] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Unclear). Speaker 2: That was 1966. I'm listening to those songs in 1966 and incorporating them at the end of the century in my gospel writings, you know. That, that's how I-- Speaker 1: So, the '60s [1960s] music is really the base of your-- Speaker 2: Sixties [1960s] and the '70s [1970s]. Speaker 1: --your love of music, '60s [1960s]? Speaker 2: Sixties [1960s] and the '70s [1970s]. But mainly the '60s [1960s], the mid-'60s [1960s] to the mid-'70s [1970s], that's what it was. Speaker 1: So, as you begin to create music-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --was it, was it conscious that that was in your awareness of what you, you, you were drawing from? Speaker 2: No, no, it really wasn't anything purposely done, that was just the influence that was in me. That was inculcated in me so it became a part of me, unbeknownst to me. So, when I began writing songs I drew from my musicality, not identifying it as this is what I learned here, this is what I learned here, it just was a part of me by that time. It had become my matriculation and so I adapted to it. I adapted it and, and adopted it as my, that was my writing base, that was my musical base. Story_ID: 527174 Speaker 1: As it relates to the story telling-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --how did you come up with, can you tell me about the development of some of your songs? So we can choose, like 'Stand' for example. Speaker 2: 'Stand' was one of the few songs that I wrote out of my experiences. Most songs just come to me, I'll sleep and a song will come. Speaker 1: Really? Speaker 2: But I was on a plane, I was just starting this music career and I was on a midnight flight from L.A. [Los Angeles, California] back to, to, to Detroit [Michigan], 'cause I was living in Detroit. And then from Detroit I was going to, to Cleveland [Ohio], on a, on a, on a connection. I had been gone for two weeks and I was gonna be gone for two weeks more and I was exhausted and I was, I think I was mad 'cause I never thought it was gonna be like this, and it was, I was so drained. I sat in the back of a plane 'cause there was no first class for me during that time (laughter). Speaker 1: Pre-first class days (laughter). Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, way pre, way pre. Speaker 1: Back, back of the plane days. Speaker 2: You know. And I, and I looked out the window from L.A., pitch black, they turned all the lights off in the plane and I was so tired. And I kept saying, you know, everybody is pulling everything from me and nobody even cares how I feel as long as I keep producing, as long as I keep singing, I could die and they would take the last song from me before I die and then step over my body and go to the next one. And then God just started asking me a series of questions, okay, so what do you do when, when you've done everything that you could possibly do and for people it's never enough? And, and what do you say when, when the call for ministry is so great that people who wanted to be your friends leave you because you're, you're too deep and you're all alone now? What do, what do you give when you've given everything you have and you don't have enough for yourself? How, how do you handle all of your past and all the things that happened and all of the things that you did? How do you, how do you deal with the shame of it? How do you smile when your heart's broken but you can't show it in front of the people? In about twenty or thirty minutes the song was finished. Speaker 1: You're on the plane? Speaker 2: On a plane. By the time I got to Cleveland I taught it to the choir in Cleveland and they had never heard, nobody had ever heard this song before. So, that's how that come, came about. How, how I usually write, like I said, I just wake up and hear a song in my dream and go to my piano immediately before I forget it 'cause if anything happens to take my attention, I'll lose the melody (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 2: I'll lose it. Story_ID: 527175 Speaker 1: I want you to talk a bit about God talking to you. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Because you've said this a lot that God told you this or that, how, how does God talk to you, how do you hear God? Speaker 2: Oh, well, that's hard, that's hard. Speaker 1: I know. Speaker 2: That's so simple for me but it's hard to put into words. It's so divine, it's so divine. One time I was burning garbage, I was about sixteen years old, I was burning garbage outside of, out in the backyard of my mother's [Frances McClurkin] house. And while I was burning this galvanized pail of garbage, you know, stoking it so that the, it aerates so that the flame can consume all of the content. And I heard take a step back, take three steps back and count to ten, I ignored it. And it screamed inside of me, take three steps back and count to ten. And so, I got scared and I took three steps back, I started counting to ten, by the time I got to six the whole garbage can blew up. There were three, three aerosol cans in there that I didn't know about, it just blew up. God speaks in such dis-, distinct yet defined ways that it's hard for me to put it into words. Oh, God, somebody said, "Oh, God talks to you?" I said, "Every day and if I listen to him I really hear him, I'll hear what he has to say." "Oh, you hear him audibly?" "No, I don't hear him audibly, it just resonates in me." And it's not amongst a, a, a bevy of thoughts, it is singular, it is clear cut, it is absolute, and it's instructive, it, it gives direction, it's informative, and, and it's, it's God. It's not me 'cause I could never be that smart. It's not me 'cause I could never be that creative. It's not me because I could never want to do what he tells me to do. Speaker 1: How do you know it's God? Speaker 2: Because if, because number one of the, of the signature feeling, hearing, knowing, that I have. And number two, based on the results. The results are always phenomenal. Always phenomenal. People would wanna say well, that's just you, that's because you're smart, you're creative. Like I said I don't have that much creativity, I surely don't have that much wisdom to be able to do, know, accomplish all the things that I have in these five decades. There's no way in the natural born world I could come up with schemes, and schematics, strategies, and stratagems out of the clear blue sky. No way that I would know who to hook up with and who to leave. No, no way in the world that I could walk and stumble into all of these situations, scenarios, occurrences, meetings, networks, there's no way, that I would know not to sign a contract because there's another one coming. There's no way, (laughter) you know, to know sing this song and that's the song that's gonna launch you into fame. No, no, not that one, this song. There's no way. Speaker 1: As a young man-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --because, you know, as you get older it can become easier to know what the voice is that's-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --talking to you. As a young man was there ever confusion as to what you were hearing? Speaker 2: As, as a young man, no, I think it was, I think it was much more clear as a young man because, you know, young people, I was born again at nine, young people are quick to believe, quick to believe. And so, when you hear God talking to you, you, you get excited and you wait for it to happen and when it happens you are gob smacked, you are totally blown away, blown away. And then as you get older it becomes common, you, it becomes, it becomes natural, it becomes normal but as a young man, it was a journey, it was such a wonderful journey, fantastic voyage, an amazing story, it was literally God talking to a child. Story_ID: 527176 Speaker 1: In what I'll call the dark years-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --were you just ignoring God's voice, could you hear God's voice when-- Speaker 2: Hm. Speaker 1: --when you describe you were involved in-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --actions that you now know (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You can say it, come on you can say it. Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: You can say it. Come on you can say it. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: Come on, let it out. Speaker 1: When you were having relationships with men. Speaker 2: Um-hm. No. The, you never ignore the voice of God 'cause you can't. That's like having your mother in, in the room with you and her saying something and you ignoring it, it's impossible because it's in you and you hear the no, you hear the leave, you hear don't go down that street, you hear don't go into that area, you know it before you get there, you know it before it happens, and you choose to override it but you never get confused. You know what he's saying, you know his instruction, you, you've already read it, he's already told you, so now what you've gotta do is you gotta contend with that in order to do what you want to do. Your way has conflict with this, you gotta make a choice, either accept my will and throw his will away or accept his will and deny myself of the pleasure I'm looking for. Speaker 1: Since you were saved so young-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and as you are just describing now, you, you heard God's voice through all this time? Speaker 2: (Nods head). Speaker 1: Were you constantly in conflict? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Constantly in conflict. There's never come a time in doing anything that I knew was against the will of God that I was ever comfortable, ever, to this very day, never out of the forty-seven years that I've been born again. I've always had to deal with the conviction, the guilt, you know, after the fact or even during the fact. There are many things I did regretting that I was involved, regretting that I was there, regretting that I was with these people, regretting, but trying to keep up appearances, trying not to be the odd man out, and hearing God saying go home, no. And that no ringing in you, no matter how long you stayed. No matter what deed you do, no, no matter, who else is around you, you're sitting there uncomfortable 'cause you, you gotta fight with God and you always lose. Speaker 1: Did you ever try drugs or alcohol to-- Speaker 2: Never. Speaker 1: No? Speaker 2: Never tried illicit drugs. Never tried marijuana or PCP [phencyclidine] or heroin or any of that. Even the times they've given me oxycontin or oxycodone, whatever you call it, oxys, when you're sick or you had a major situation, couldn't stand the feeling. Going to the hospital with neuropathy or pain, they give you morphine, oh, my god, horrible. So, drugs, because my family was laden with drug history, drug abuse history, I never wanted to do it. My family was laden with alcoholism, I never wanted to drink, not a cigarette, nothing, so that was never a problem. Speaker 1: So, escaping wasn't something that you tried to do? Speaker 2: No. And that, that's kind of made with, made it better and worse. Better because it, I had to face my realities and not sugarcoat them. I can't blame anybody for this. I can't blame anything for this. I can't get away from it. I did it, it's me. And yeah, and, and the worse is, you know, I couldn't get away, there was no, there was no escape, there was no place to go, there was no respite, there was nothing that, there was no safe haven, there was no escape. Story_ID: 527177 Speaker 1: When you came to the point where you made the decision that this was not the way you were gonna live your life-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --you talked earlier about it was hard. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I, not so much the actions but I, I wanna know what that, what was that, what is that internal struggle like? Speaker 2: The, the internal struggle is desire, desire. It's like being hungry, being, being famished and sitting around nothing but food. Now, if you can, if you can internalize that and where you can eat but you, but you, you know, you can't. That's like me being, and, and I know this is trite, that's like me being a diabetic, sitting in a room full of food and know that it's food filled with what I can eat and cannot eat but my appetite has been for decades what I cannot eat or I should not eat. And thinking about what decision I'm going to make, how I'm going to get through this without sneaking, without cheating, (laughter) without grabbing something and nibbling on it where nobody can see me, that's the way it had, that's the best way I can get you to internalize it and to see it. Knowing that if I eat the food I favor it could kill me, it could kill me. As a diabetic if I eat the foods that I favor, this could be my demise in the long run. It'll be good for the moment but then I'm going to have to deal with how it's gonna destroy my body and cause my body to deteriorate as opposed to eating what's healthy, eating what's good for you, what your body was made to consume that will help, you know, progress your strength and increase your stamina and build your body up and deal with the lack of flavor for the benefit of the health, you know, for the increased, for, or for extended life and a better living, you know. This I can enjoy for the moment and die or this I can, I, I can endure and live for a lifetime, you know. And that's how it's been, that's how it is, you, you, you, you, you deal with it, and you deal with it until it becomes customary. Now, I'm, I'm accustomed to it, I can see it, and come over here to the brussels sprouts-- Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: --and the let brussels sprouts, if they're, if they're roasted brussels sprouts, oh, my god, I'm a happy camper. If you give me fried green beans, woo, I go to Fridays [TGI Fridays] for that, oh, my god-- Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: --it's wonderful. You, you give me that and I've always loved green peas, I've always loved green peas, you give me green peas and mashed potatoes, woo, hoo, oh. Now, it doesn't taste as good as the chocolate eclair, it doesn't taste as good as the red velvet cake, it doesn't taste as good as the fried chicken, it doesn't taste as good as the macaroni and cheese, and, and the, and the potato salad, don't taste that good, it doesn't but the benefits outweigh the pleasure and that's, once you get used to it-- Story_ID: 527178 Speaker 1: Now, I completely understand what you're saying. And when, when you take that model and look at relationships-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --you know, the argument back to you could be well if it's more attractive over here the choice-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --to be heterosexual, the choice to be in that lane where maybe it's not as desirable, how does that make you not gay? Speaker 2: Well, first of all, what makes you gay? That's the question. Now, if we're going by societal classifications and characterizations, that's one thing. But to sit down and have to explain to somebody that I'm not gay because (laughter) that's a, that's a, a, a, a futile conversation 'cause that's not where my mind is. I'm not thinking about satisfying people with explanations that's, that are based on societal characterizations, that's, I could care less about making anybody understand except for those who come in earnest looking for a true hope or help, then I'll sit down and talk with you but to satisfy the, the general populace based on their, their, their acceptance of societal norms, I don't have that time, I don't have that time. What makes me who I am is who God made me, God defines me, pure and simple. I'm, I'm not a part of this group or that group, I'm a part of a kingdom, the kingdom of God. I'm a son of the most high God. I'm [HistoryMaker] Donnie McClurkin, the man. The gay man? The man. Are you heterosexual? I'm Donnie McClurkin, the man. Now, you all fight that out amongst yourself. Well, if you feel like this then you're--look, I may feel like killing somebody, am I a murderer 'cause I feel like killing somebody? No, I'm not a killer, I'm not a murderer until I kill you. And if I didn't kill you, I'm not a murderer, I just feel like killing you, you know. And, and, and, and I look at how people become so torn over this stuff. We, well, we'll just be practical, I just want people to be practical. It doesn't have to be like society says, it doesn't have to be like the sound bites say, it doesn't have to be like the activists say, it doesn't have to be like the quote unquote self-proclaimed experts say but it does have to be like God says and it does have to be like you say. Story_ID: 527179 Speaker 1: I wanna talk about the development of the church [Perfecting Church, Detroit, Michigan]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So, what year was it that you moved to Detroit [Michigan] to work with Pastor Winans? Speaker 2: I moved to Detroit in 1989 after working on the road with a Broadway play with Pastor Winans and them from '87 [1987] until '89 [1989]. Speaker 1: And what was the play? Speaker 2: It was called 'Don't Get God Started' at the Longacre Theatre [New York, New York] on West 48th Street and Broadway. Speaker 1: What would, well, let's talk about that for a minute. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: What were you doing in the play? Speaker 2: I was in the chorus. I was a choir member. And it was [HistoryMaker] Kim Fields, Chip Fields, Giancarlo Esposito, Marvin Wright-Bey, Conni Marie Brazelton, and a, and, and Marilyn [Marilyn Coleman], I forget Marilyn's last name. What was Marilyn's last name? She played on-- Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Marilyn McCoo? Speaker 2: No. She played on, on Richard Pryor's 'Which Way is Up?' I forget Marilyn's last name, and [HistoryMaker] Ernie Banks. And, and a bunch of church kids. And-- Speaker 1: And how old are you at this time? Speaker 2: I was twenty-seven years old when I got the part. Speaker 1: So, did you know Pastor Winans before that? Speaker 2: I knew him briefly. I met him in '82 [1982]. And I'd see him once a year when he came to preach in New York [New York]. And I was never a fan of The Winans, never a fan of the group The Winans, never. I was a fan of BeBe and CeCe Winans [HistoryMaker BeBe Winans and CeCe Winans] 'cause there's a 112 Winans, so you gotta pick-- Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: --you gotta pick your group. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And Marvin Winans, Pastor Marvin Winans and I became close friends, great friends, to best friends, to brothers. Speaker 1: And it started with this play? Speaker 2: It started well, in '82 [1982] and ended-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --and really solidified with the play. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I was just going about my business and, and God told me, here we go with God told me-- Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: --again, people didn't know God talked that much, he talks all the time, New York, and in time, I'm sorry. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: We were, me and my sister Andrea [Andrea McClurkin-Mellini] were on our way to prayer, going from Amityville [New York] to Hempstead [New York], that's a fifteen minute drive. And while we're driving Andrea is sleep in the back of the car, it's about seven o'clock at night, and the Lord says, go to Brooklyn [New York], sit in Pleasant Grove Baptist Church [Pleasant Grove Tabernacle Church, New York, New York] on Fulton Avenue [sic. Fulton Street]. And I'm saying okay. And the closer I'm getting to our exit in Hempstead to the church for prayer, it's just, he's yelling, my whole inside is just saying go to Brooklyn, go to Pleasant Grove Baptist Church on Fulton Avenue, sit in the back of the church. And I passed the exit, we were driving a little too long for Andrea, she sat up and said, "Where are we?" I said, "We're going to Brooklyn." She said, "Donnie [HistoryMaker Donnie McClurkin], no, I wanna go to prayer," and it was her car. I said, "Andrea just, the Lord said for us to go to Brooklyn." And-- Speaker 1: And did, does she believe that the Lord talks to you? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, 'cause-- Speaker 1: So, she's-- Speaker 2: Yeah. She's-- Speaker 1: --she's, she's okay with that? Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause she was going to prayer with me, you know-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --she's, she was born again too. But she didn't wanna go to Brooklyn she wanted to go to prayer. And she reluctantly, you know. We go to Brooklyn, we go to Pleasant Grove Baptist Church, I know the church, and sit in the back of Pleasant Grove Baptist Church, well, they're having rehearsal, sit there from 8:00 'til 11:30. They ended the rehearsal at 11:30. I said, ah, man, I missed God, that wasn't God. I'm so hurt, disappointed, and embarrassed and I said, "Come on, let's go," and she's furious but she's my younger sister so she's gotta do what I say anyway. Story_ID: 527180 Speaker 1: And we're walking out and while we're walking out and I'm dejected, I'm just heartbroken. A guy named Stanley Brown comes in, he says, "Oh, my god, we were just talking about you. We were just talking about you." I said, "Who?" He said, "Me and Marvin Winans." I just dropped him off at the Milford Plaza [Milford Plaza Hotel; Row NYC Hotel] in Manhattan [New York, New York], we were just talking about you." And well, Stanley wasn't really the most credible guy at the time, sorry, Stanley. And, and I was saying, "Yeah, okay, tell him I said hi." I'm trying to get out 'cause I'm so embarrassed. People had stopped and we're talking, he runs to the pay phone, this is in 1987, he runs to the pay phone, he comes back, taps me on the shoulder and says, "Marvin Winans is on the phone." I go to the pay phone, pay phone, and surely it's Marvin Winans. And, "Oh, oh, man, oh, man I forgot all about you. Listen what are you doing tomorrow?" I said, "What?" "What are you doing tomorrow?" You know, we did small talk. I said, "I gotta go to work." He said, "You and your sister," my sister, how did he know my sister was with me? "You and your sister go down to Lafayette Street in Greenwich Village [New York, New York] tomorrow." "For what?" Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: "Look, just go down there, just take off from work." Now, we're not that close but he, I'm so timid he intimidated me. Speaker 2: And what was your job at this point? Speaker 1: I was working at import export at Kennedy Airport [John F. Kennedy International Airport, New York, New York]. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: And Andrea [Andrea McClurkin-Mellini] was working at some agency, I forget the name of the agency. And I said we, I came back and said, "Well, that was Marvin Winans, we gotta take off work tomorrow." "I'm not taking off work." Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: "We have to take off work, he said we have to take off work." I don't know how (laughter) he had the power over us he did, you know. Darn you, Marvin Winans. And we took off the next day and we went down to Greenwich Village, went to Lafayette Street. We go to the address and we walk in there's three hundred people in there, and they're all, and we walk in and we saw someone that we knew, Monique Walker. She said, "What y'all doing here?" I said, "Well, Marvin Winans told us to come down here." She said, "Oh, you're in the right place." And I said, "Well, what is this?" "It's for a Broadway show." I said, "Oh, absolutely not. No, let's go Andrea 'cause we can't do Broadway. The Bible says we can't do Broadway," because the Bible said, "broad is the way that leads to destruction, that's a scripture, broad is the way that leads to destruction, to destruction and many there are that follow it." [Matthew 7:13] So, me being that ultra-religious guy, "We can't do Broadway because the Bible says, 'broad is the way that leads to destruction and many there are that follow it.' Let's go, let's go." And we're walking to the door, get to the door, this little short lady with no neck named Samantha [ph.] who is a, who is a chronic smoker, small, small Jewish lady named Samantha. She comes and says, "Is there a soprano here?" So, everybody raises their hand, 'cause everybody wanted a part in (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure. Speaker 1: --the play ['Don't Get God Started'] 'cause this is Broadway, this ain't off-Broadway, this ain't off, off, Broadway, this is Broadway. And we're walking out and the lady points through three hundred people and says to Andrea, "You, at the door, are you a soprano?" And Monique says, "Yeah, she's a soprano." "Could you come with me?" I'm saying, "Andrea, when you're finished let's go, we gotta go." And they come back, they get me and ask me to come into the room 'cause I'm, they need me to play a song for her. I played the song and then the, the, the music director said, "Okay, now, you sing for us too." I sang, he said, "Well, you can wait outside." I said, "No, no, we're not waiting outside, Andrea, come on, we have to go." And the music director got mad, his name was Steven Ford, he said, "You can step outside, I'm not finished with her." I said, "She's finished, let's go." "What is your name?" I said, "My name is Donnie." He said, "Donnie what?" I said, "[HistoryMaker] Donnie McClurkin." "Oh, my god, you got the job. You've got the job. Marvin Winans told me you were coming, I'm so sorry, you got the job. You and your sister report back here next week." "For what?" Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: So, the next week we had to go back down and there were thirty. And then the next week we had to go back again, and there were twelve, that was the twelve that made the cut. And this guy, Barry Hankerson, who was a major, major manager back then in the day, Gladys Knight, what's the girl that died in the plane accident? Aish- Speaker 2: Aaliyah. Speaker 1: Aaliyah, yeah, Aaliyah. He was everybody's manager. And that's how we got the part to the Broadway play-- Story_ID: 527181 Speaker 1: I went from a chorus member to the understudy for the lead singer [of 'Don't Get God Started'] over two week time. The, the, the, the director and the producer were walking through, said, "[HistoryMaker] Donnie McClurkin step out, Donald Albert you step out," Donald Albert was the understudy. Donald Albert, you're not the understudy anymore, Donnie McClurkin, you're the understudy and walked off and left me standing there (gasps) looking at Donald saying, "I have no idea how this happened." Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: And that's how we stay, we were only supposed to have been on Broadway, we were only supposed to have been on Broadway for one month 'cause it was a totally gospel play with an evangelistic ending, with a, with a real gospel message, it wasn't ambiguous, it was straight forward. We were only supposed to be on for one month, we stayed four and a half months. Speaker 2: And was this the first time that there's a gospel-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --play on Broadway? Speaker 1: The, the first time that there's ever been a full gospel play on Broadway and the last time. And this, this Broadway show opened across the street from us, 'Penn and Teller,' and they opened and closed, we were still there. Shows were opening and closing within a month, two months time because they weren't bringing in, we were packed every night, every night. And it was remarkable. Then we finished up. Story_ID: 527182 Speaker 1: Then the next year we went on the road with it. Packed houses across the country. It was wonderful. And that's how Pastor Marvin Winans and I became brothers. And we started something called Don't Get God Started, Church of God In Christ, Apostolic, Methodist, Baptist Church [ph.]. And he, they called him Pastor Winans, they called me assistant pastor, and we were doing it, we'd have Sunday morning services. Speaker 2: Where? Speaker 1: At the hotel we were in. Speaker 2: Oh, so as you were traveling-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --with the show? Speaker 1: With the cast members that wanted to and then people in the community would find out we were having service and they would come to the service, and we'd have a hundred, two hundred people sitting in the ballroom, while we had church 'cause we had to have church while we were on the road. And we didn't know it was gonna parlay into a brotherhood and multiple churches across the country and around the world. Now, there are over forty churches based on what started as just a way to be spiritual on the road. Now, it became a part of our everyday existence. Speaker 2: Well, and let's talk about that for a second. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Because being on the road, whether it is a Broadway production that's traveling or (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I love your shoes. Speaker 2: --thank you. Or a tour-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --or, you know, a, a musical tour, it can be trouble, you know. Speaker 1: How? Speaker 2: Well, there's, there are many stories of people-- Speaker 1: Oh, you mean, oh, you mean-- Speaker 2: --making bad choices, like-- Speaker 1: --so, you mean, road, road love, you're talking about? Speaker 2: Road-- Speaker 1: Road love? Speaker 2: --love and all kinds of things. Speaker 1: Yeah, we called it road love. Speaker 2: Road love. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So-- Speaker 1: Road love is just temporary for the road. Speaker 2: Right (laughter). And so-- Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: --bringing church to the road-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --was obviously a conscious decision. Was it immediate that you did it? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Immediately. Once the play ['Don't Get God Started'] started, we developed Bible study on Wednesday nights or on Wednesdays 'cause the show was Wednesday night. So, Wednesdays we would have Bible study and all of the cast that wanted to would come together and we would have homework, you know, assignments, we'd have to memorize scriptures, we'd have to do, take tests, the whole nine yards, Pastor Winans, myself, you know. Pastor Winans was the key, he, he taught the classes, you know, he graded the papers. And that's how it began, that was the way that it became and we just, it just grew from that, you know. And we never thought that we would start churches 'cause my thing is, you know, you're gonna be a pastor one day. He said, "No, I'm never gone be a pastor, I'm just doing this while we're on the road." So, all of the road love and all of the-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: --the drugs, and the, you know, sex, drugs, and rock and roll, that never happened with us. The ones who were not churched went off to the side and did their stuff but when it came to this, the whole production, oh, we were focused. You couldn't curse because we weren't playing. This is unto God, this, this play is a miracle in itself that it got on Broadway, you, you're not gone mess this up. And we, and the people had integrity. Story_ID: 527183 Speaker 1: The consummate professionalism of the actors and the, the, the neophytes, us, who are the novitiates, we were the, we didn't know what Broadway was. And they made us respect Broadway. We came in there just gangly and just, you know, just janky, just ready, just nasty, janky. And they demanded that we respect Broadway 'cause they were the thespians. And we didn't like the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And who is the they that you're speaking about? Speaker 1: The Conni Marie Brazeltons, the Giancarlo Espositos, the Chip Fields. Chip was a consummate actress. You saw her on all the sitcoms, the Norman Lear sitcoms, 'Good Times,' whatever shows that they were, Chip Fields, [HistoryMaker] Kim Fields, you know, from all the shows that she, when they got to that stage, they were professionals. You know, Glynn Turman, professionals. And when you came in there, you better change that, we don't do that on Broadway. Oh, we got into so many fights it wasn't funny. We don't do that on Broadway. And who they think they are? But when we got out there you better do what they say. 'Cause one day the Broadway rep came, the Broadway union rep came and read us our rights, with a scarf around his neck and his hat to the side and, and he talked so down to us, and we learned quick, we learned quickly. And the only, the only road love that happened was a legitimate road love. The stage manager fell in love with one of the young women and they literally got married. Speaker 2: Wow. Speaker 1: That stage manager was a great Italian man by the name of Louis Mellini who married an African American girl by the name of Andrea McClurkin [Andrea McClurkin-Mellini], my sister. And they married in January of 1988, and the rest is history. Speaker 2: Wow. Speaker 1: And he became a part of our family, the first time we had an interracial bonding in our family. And we became a part of his family, not knowing that one day he'd be the assistant pastor of the church [Perfecting Faith Church, Freeport, New York] I was gonna pastor. And that, that, that union would cause him to leave here and start another church in California in July of this year. Speaker 2: Wow. Speaker 1: So, all of it was just really God, it was really God. Story_ID: 527184 Speaker 1: The decision to move to Detroit [Michigan]-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --to, you know, you're off the road, now you're founding a church [Perfecting Church]-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --in Detroit with Pastor Winans, was it just that you are off the road so now it's time (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, it was-- Speaker 1: How did that? Speaker 2: --it was God. Here we go again. At, it was God. I, Pastor Winans by the time we ended the play in '89 [1989], said, "Yeah, you were right, I gotta go home and I gotta start church, come on, you come with me." And my thing is, "Unh-uh, he called you, he ain't call me. I'm going back to New York [New York] 'cause I'm a New Yorker." I, I only went to Detroit to do the play. And a couple of times met Rosa Parks, met a lot, Aretha Franklin, met everybody there through the play, but my thing is when the play was over, this is a good two, two years, deuces, I'm going home. And I came back to New York and, you know, I'm ready to hunker down and get a job and somebody asked me to preach a revival in Harlem [New York, New York] at White Rock Baptist Church. And I, they wanted me to do a, a four day revival and stay at evangelist So and So's house 'cause they couldn't afford a hotel, well, I really didn't need a hotel 'cause Harlem to New York is a train ride. But I stayed in evangelist So and So's house and I woke up in the morning and I felt homesick for Detroit, 6:00 in the morning, homesick. I get on the phone at 6:30 in the morning and I called Marvin Winans who is sleep in the bed with his wife, Vickie [Vickie Winans]. Vickie answers the phone. I said, "Vickie." "Who this, who is this?" (Laughter) I said, "Vickie, this is Donnie." "Who?" "[HistoryMaker] Donnie McClurkin." "Donnie McCrimon?" Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: "Why are you calling this," "I just wanna speak to, can," we used to call him Peanut, I said, "I need to speak to Peanut." "Hold on. Peanut, Donnie, Donnie McCrimon is on the phone." Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: "Tell him don't, tell him to call back at a normal hour, don't be waking people up." I'm sitting up feeling bad now, he gets on the phone and says, "Hello, who is this?" I said, "Peanut, this is, this is Donnie." He said, "Donnie?" I said, "Donnie McClurkin." He said, "Well, what you calling for?" I said, "I don't know why I'm calling. I just feel homesick for Detroit." He hollered, spoke in tongues for a moment, and said, "Donnie, listen, let me tell you how much I knew you were gonna call. Let me tell you how much I knew you were gone call. There's a plane ticket waiting at Northwest Airlines [Northwest Airlines Corporation] for you right now. I bought a plane ticket for you, it's waiting for you at the airport right now. Pack your bags, say your goodbyes to everybody, get on that plane, go tell your family goodbye and come to Detroit, we got to build a ministry here." It took a couple of days and I told my parents [Frances McClurkin and Donald McClurkin, Sr.], told my family, I was a fool, you, you following a man, you just following up, you up in man's behind, just, you just foolish, you got something here, why would you leave and go there and build his stuff. All right. Go tell the church, I gotta go. The bishop tells me, "Well, is it because I can't give you a position?" I said, "No, I don't want a position, you gotta give it to one of the sons of the church." "Well, I can't make you the head of the music department because I gotta give that to my son but I'll make you the head of YPWW that's Young People Willing Worker." I said, "No, sir, you don't have to do that, just give it to one of the sons of the church, I gotta go to Detroit." "Oh, I don't want you to leave. At least let me make you an elder before you leave so you go there with the credentials." And I had to leave and I left everything here. Two green, emerald green garbage bags filled with clothes, stuffed them in the overhead of the Northwest flight from LaGuardia [LaGuardia Airport, New York, New York] going to Detroit. As soon as I stepped off the plane, I felt immediately acclimated, immediately. Never had to get used to it, immediately. Story_ID: 527185 Speaker 1: And when you had gone to Detroit [Michigan] before, how long had you been there? Speaker 2: Stayed two weeks and it was like, you know, get me out of this joint, oh, my god. Soon as I stepped in that, in '89 [1989], immediate and didn't look back. Told 'em, I'm, I'm never leaving here, I'm going to heaven from here. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: This is my last stop. I'm going to heaven. Mother Bowman said that, Vickie Winans' mother, Mother Mattie Agnes Bowman [Mattie Bowman] said that about Perfecting Church in Detroit, she said, "No, I'm going to heaven from here." I took that motto, I'm going to heaven from here. Didn't know I was gonna come back. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Now, what is Detroit like during this time, this is '89 [1989] going into the '90s [1990s], what's going on in Detroit? Speaker 2: Detroit is suffering and it's losing population at that time. It had a million people, then the next census they couldn't get to a million, it was like eight hundred thousand, nine hundred thousand. And it was a constant ebb, everybody is moving out to the suburbs, no major commerce in downtown Detroit any longer, everything has moved since the riots of the '60s [1960s]. Black government, what was his name? Coleman. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: What was his name? Mayor Coleman Young. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Coleman Young. A very real, outlandish, big, boisterous mouth, foulmouthed mayor. He cussed, just 'cause. He cussed 'cause he woke up in the morning. He would cuss out anybody, just cuss on interviews but he was the best mayor that they had. I mean, he got things done. No nonsense. And housing was very affordable there. And Detroiters were very loyal. Speaker 1: Was Motown [Motown Records] gone already? Speaker 2: Motown was gone. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Motown was gone. Speaker 1: Moved to L.A [Los Angeles, California]. Speaker 2: You know, and the, the, the building that the, the first studio was a museum [Motown Museum, Detroit, Michigan]. It was, but gospel wise, it was the mecca of gospel music during that time. You had The Winans, you had BeBe and CeCe Winans [HistoryMaker BeBe Winans and CeCe Winans], you had Daniel Winans, you had Vickie Winans, you had Mom and Pop Winans [David Glenn Winans, Sr. and Delores Ransom Winans], you had The Clark Sisters, you had James Moore, you had Thomas Whitfield, you had all of this happening in Detroit. It was powerful. Detroit was the music of the nation at that time. Gospel music, it was all coming out of Detroit. Vanessa Bell Armstrong, killing. The next thing you know, they're doing soundtracks for movies, they're doing soundtracks for sitcoms, the 'Amen' sitcom, Vanessa Bell Armstrong (singing) "Turn on the light, put me on the right road, (unclear), woo, hoo, hmm," ['Shine on Me'] the just, and you're listening to, to this and saying oh, my god, this is Detroit 'cause I'm no longer a New Yorker, I'm a Detroiter. And there was such a camaraderie in the gospel musicians and singers. If Dr. Mattie Moss Clark was giving a reunion of the, of the north, the Northeast Region Choir [sic. SouthWest Michigan State Choir], Bailey's Cathedral [Bailey Cathedral Church of God in Christ, Detroit, Michigan] was filled to the overflow, people outside, all of the artists were there, The Winans were there, Vanessa Bell Armstrong, her sisters, Charlene [Charlene Bell], Margaret [Margaret Bell], all of 'em were there 'cause Detroit supported its own, the, the supported its own. Pastor Winans give a live recording at the church, of the church choir, who's there Karen Clark Sheard, Dorinda Clark Sheard [sic.], Dorinda Clark-Cole is there, Vanessa Bell Armstrong is there, everybody is there. Tom Whitfield gives something, everybody's there because--and I had never seen that before. Story_ID: 527186 Speaker 1: In California, they didn't do that. You know, Crouch [Andrae Crouch] do something, you know, the Hawkins weren't there. The, you know 'cause the--Andrae do something, well, Andrae didn't do anything, but, you know, it, 'cause Andrae was just so international. It was amazing. This was camaraderie like I had never seen it. And whereas I saw on the other stations because this sounds crazy but Detroit [Michigan] took over from, from California. Speaker 2: Even as now-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --Motown [Motown Records] has moved to California? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: But Detroit takes over from California? Speaker 1: In gospel. Speaker 2: In gospel. Speaker 1: Because during the '50s [1950s], '60s [1960s], and '70s [1970s], all of the gospel music is really coming out of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: --California. You know, you, you got the, the, the, the James Clevelands and you got the Edwin Hawkins, you got the Andrae Crouch, you got the, the, the who else? Brenda [Brenda Watson Nicholas] and Phil Nicholas [Phillip W. Nicholas], you got, you had all of these, all of the major gospel acts were coming out of L.A. [Los Angeles, California]. Then '81 [1981] there was a shift, it seemed like there was literally a passing of the baton. Speaker 2: Why '81 [1981]? Speaker 1: That's when the, that's when Andrae Crouch introduced a group called The Winans. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Now, in '75 [1975] when Andrae Crouch introduced a guy by the name of Walter Hawkins and Love Center Choir [Walter Hawkins and The Love Center Choir], everything shifted, Andrae was that guy. And he introduced them and then, all, the whole world starts singing (singing) "Change, a change has come over me," ['Changed'] because this guy, Walter Hawkins, was writing songs like we had never heard before. Who is he? Hawkins. Oh, that's the brother of Edwin Hawkins. Edwin Hawkins, the guy that wrote 'Oh Happy Day' in 1969. The same year that Andrae Crouch came out, Edwin Hawkins came out. So, you got in '69 [1969], (singing) "I've had many tears and sorrow, I've had questions for tomorrow through it all (hums) through it all, I've learned to trust in Jesus," ['Through It All'] that's Andrae Crouch. So, you got the whole church world, white and black, singing 'Through It All.' Edwin Hawkins comes out, you got the whole church world, white and black, and the secular world-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --singing, (singing) "Oh happy day, oh happy day, oh happy day, when Jesus--," atheists singing, "--when Jesus walked." Jews were singing, "When Jesus washed my sins away" ['Oh Happy Day']. Everybody is singing this song (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That became, yeah, a huge international hit. Speaker 1: And California became it. Story_ID: 527187 Speaker 1: Eighty-one [1981] comes along Andrae Crouch introduces The Winans, four boys from Detroit [Michigan]. Wait a minute, they've got the Motown sound. They've got the sound of The Temptations, the sound of the Four Tops. They've got a mixture of sounds. Who are these boys? Nobody had heard of 'em before. Andrae introduced them. (Singing) "The question is will I ever leave you, the answer is, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no." Nobody had ever heard a song like that before. This sounds like a R and B song. Dun, dun, dun, (hums) (singing) "The question is, (hums) will I ever leave you, the answer is, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, they're doing Pips moves, no, no, (laughter) no, no" ['The Question is']. They sounded totally different. The young people go crazy around the world. They're playing this on the radio. They're playing this on BLS [WBLS Radio, New York, New York], they're playing this on all of the secular stations. Then all of a sudden they come out with, with another song and another song and another song. (Singing) "Tomorrow, who promised you tomorrow, better choose the Lord," ['Tomorrow'] they're playing that on the secular stations. Who are these boys? Speaker 2: And is this the first time that this is really happening? Other 'Oh Happy Day,' yes. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: But in terms of hit after hit-- Speaker 1: (Nods head). Speaker 2: --that gospel music is being played on the R and B-- Speaker 1: On secular stations. Speaker 2: --secular stations? Speaker 1: Um-hm, yeah. And-- Speaker 2: And, and, and topping the charts? Speaker 1: Topping the charts. It's crazy. [HistoryMaker] Quincy Jones gets involved. "Come here, guys, let me produce you. Be on my label." These four guys from Detroit. And sing on Michael Jackson's stuff. (Singing) "I'm looking at the man in the," and you hear The Winans, oh, yes. Marvin Winans arranges the background vocals (singing) "But I changed," ['Man in the Mirror']. Mike Jackson. You know, (singing) "Ain't no need to worry what the night is gonna bring," Anita Baker, (singing) "Don't you worry yourself about, it'll be all" ['Ain't No Need to Worry']. So, you got The Winans singing with Anita Baker, well, Anita Baker singing with The Winans, however you wanna put it, it's all over the secular stations. You know, and then after they come out, BeBe [HistoryMaker BeBe Winans] and CeCe [CeCe Winans] hit. Who is this kid singing-- Speaker 2: What years are we looking at now? Speaker 1: We're looking about '85 [1985] with BeBe and CeCe, '84 [1984], '85 [1985]. These two young kids, CeCe must have been about nineteen years old, they got a song (singing) "Lord, lift us up where we belong." They take a song from a movie track. (Singing) "Lord, lift us up where we belong, where the eagles fly" ['Up Where We Belong'], and all of a sudden, they're hitting. Then they start writing songs that they're not really gospel songs but they're gospel songs, you're confusing me. (Singing) "Day by day no more reaction, you are my center attraction, every week my heartbeat is your song. From hurt and harm you're my protection, path I take is your direction because I know with you I can't go wrong. Ever since that day I asked you into my heart, my world has changed so promise me you'll never part, I'm lost without you" ['Lost Without You']. This is on the secular stations, they're singing about God but it's ambiguous. You could be singing to your girl like that. Before you know it they're writing song after song. (Singing) "Time to, time you should admit, I'm so addicted, you see he's taken my heart, taken my heart, and showed me the right way 'cause I found it was addicted love" ['Addictive Love']. What, how are they getting away with this? Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: And we in the gospel world are saying how are they getting away with this? They are both gospel and secular, this is not fair. Every song they, every CD they put out had a hit on it. 'Til a girl named Whitney Houston heard 'em, fell in love with them, come to their concerts, jumps on stage, sings with them, then they bring her, and they become best friends, BeBe, CeCe, and Whitney. Story_ID: 527188 Speaker 1: So, you were talking about BeBe [HistoryMaker BeBe Winans] and CeCe [CeCe Winans] and Whitney [Whitney Houston] and their relationship. Speaker 2: They become fast friends and best friends. Whitney goes on tour with them. Speaker 1: This is the beginning of her career? Speaker 2: This is at the height of her career. Speaker 1: The height. Speaker 2: This is when Whitney Houston is God's gift to the world. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: She decides they're going on tour, I'm a go on tour with them. And they sang a song together, (singing) "I was hold up the light, save the world from darkness," Whitney, (singing) "Oh, yeah, hold up the light" ['Hold Up the Light']. And they sang the, the eke out that song. They sang so it wasn't funny. And Whitney strutted that stage with them and that threw them into another level of-- Speaker 1: Around what year is this? Speaker 2: Oh, what was that about in '90 [1990]? Speaker 1: I think so. Speaker 2: Ninety [1990], '91 [1991], something like that. And it was just crazy. Everything was coming out of Detroit [Michigan]. Then all of a sudden this guy, Thomas Whitfield, produces a record on this girl named Vanessa Bell Armstrong. And Vanessa sings an old James Cleveland song, (singing) "Master, the tempest is raging, oh, the billows are tossing high. The sky," I can't (laughter) even do it. (Singing) "Lord, shine on, when blackness," and her rungs are absolutely crazy, sounds like The Clarks but more aggressive, sounds like The Clark Sisters, that Detroit sound. (Singing) "Carest thou not, that we perish," just crazy. (Singing) "That we perish. How canst thou lie asleep when it seem" ['Peace Be Still'], she's doing crazy things with her voice. And this, she becomes so great so, she's such, such a vocal refreshing sound-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --that this woman by the name of Oprah Winfrey hears her. Oprah says, "You gotta come on my show." She goes on Oprah Winfrey's show ['The Oprah Winfrey Show'] and she sings the life out, got Oprah crying, Oprah is singing with her. And Oprah pushes her to another level. Then the next thing you know, there's a sitcom, 'Amen' comes on. "We want Vanessa Bell Armstrong." So, Bill Maxwell who has become a great producer, says, "Come on, I'm going to work with Vanessa." (Singing) "Turn on the light from heaven, Lord, shine on me (hums) turn on the light from heaven Lord, shine on me, shine on me." And Andrae Crouch writes this song and Vanessa, (singing) "Turn on the light, put me on the right road, help me find my ooh, ooh, Lord, just" ['Shine On Me'], and every week you run home 'cause you gotta hear Vanessa sing. Just everything starts coming out of Detroit. Speaker 1: And, and 'Amen,' what year was that? Speaker 2: Oh, I don't know what year that was. That was in the, that was in the '90s [1990s], no, no, yeah, that's the end of the '80s [1980s] going into the '90s [1990s] 'cause I remember Vanessa had to take off from the play, 'Don't Get God Started' to, to record that, so it was like '88 [1988]. Story_ID: 527189 Speaker 1: All of this is happening, Detroit [Michigan] in, in terms of gospel is on fire. Speaker 2: On fire. Speaker 1: And you all start your church? Speaker 2: Started the church in '89 [1989]. Speaker 1: And the church is called? Speaker 2: Perfecting Church [Detroit, Michigan]. Speaker 1: How did you come up with that title? Speaker 2: Marvin Winans prayed and God gave him that, he gave him that vision, Perfecting Church, making church, working on church, meaning what it's supposed to be, you know, building people, perfecting church where ministry means people, that's the motto, and that was his whole thing, we've gotta make church what it's supposed to be, not what it's turned into. Speaker 1: And so, what did that mean, what was it supposed to be, what was your mission? Speaker 2: It was supposed to be a place of integrity, church was supposed to have integrity. If you're right it's because of God, if you're wrong it's because of you, you don't cover it. You don't use your position as pastor to be, to, to, to have a lack of integrity. And you don't, you don't hide behind your, your cross. You, you stand up and you give God glory and you take blame. To bring integrity back to the scriptures. People don't know scriptures, they know songs. If you sing a song the whole congregation will sing. If you quote a scripture, they'll wait for you 'cause all they know is, "For God so loved the world," well not, that's, let me take that back, let's, that's so final, it's not all they know, but the main scriptures that they know, "God so loved the world that he gave his only begotten son whosoever believe in him should not perish" [John 3:16]. "Jesus wept," you know, you know, "The Lord is my shepherd I shall not want" [Psalm 23:1]. Speaker 1: Everybody knows that (laughter). Speaker 2: You know. You know, "In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth" [Genesis 1:1], hallelujah, oh, glory, as Aunt Esther [Esther Anderson] would say on 'Sanford and Son.' Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: And we don't know, you know, on a whole we don't really know the scriptures. And we wanted to bring back that integrity, we wanted to bring back the integrity of the scriptures, the integrity of living a holy life, a clean life, a righteous life, the integrity that comes along with keeping your word as well as keeping the word of God, you know. We wanted to take off the, the, the trappings that, that were just drapes on a dying building. We wanted to make sure that we brought back the structure of the building, brought back the real life that comes from church to the point where it became desirable, where kids weren't waiting to, where kids weren't (makes sound)-- Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: --where kids weren't waiting to turn eighteen to age out and say, "I'm never coming back to church again," you know. And we did that, young and old, from all walks of life. Made church something that could become not just inspirational but educational so instead of Sunday school, the Academy to Perfection [Perfecting Church, Detroit, Michigan]. We started the Academy to Perfection. What is that? It's glorified Sunday school on steroids. "As, as a matter of fact let them pay a registration fee." "You making people pay for Sunday school? That's a shame." No, it's not. People respect what they invest in. You don't pay for it, oh, I don't think I'll, think I'll go today. But you put your money up for it, you gonna be there because you have an incentive now, there's, there's a reason. And nominal, you don't charge 'em much, charge 'em five dollar, charge 'em ten, let 'em come in. That's for the, that's for the semester. And we do it like school, have seven, several different classes and you teach them. You know, in, in our, in our church we used to have these Sunday school books and you had to go over each month, each week had a different lesson plan and how to be good in school, and Jesus said I will come and heal him, what is the theme, what is the topic, who are the characters, and that's good. But we wanted something a little more meaty, so we have Basic Bible 101. We'll have Evangelists. We'll have Women in Ministry. We'll have homiletics, you know. Speaker 1: What is that? Speaker 2: Homiletics is how you, it is the art form of, of, of constructing a sermon, developing your homily, homiletics. And for the preachers, they wanna take that. For the people who wanna know more about ministry, we can give 'em a course for that. For people who wanna know the Bible, the culture of the Bible, the time periods, the, the characters of the Bible, the dispensations of the Bible, the ac- the academics of the Bible, we have that for them. Story_ID: 527190 Speaker 1: You know, and we, we did this and it grew and people started coming. People would come from other churches just to be in our Academy to Perfection [Perfecting Church, Detroit, Michigan] Sunday mornings, you know. And 6:00 AM prayer, 10:45 service, well, our first service was really 3:00, when that became too big we started 10:45 AM service. And-- Speaker 2: So, the first service at 3:00-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --why so late? Speaker 1: Because we, we wanted people to enjoy their Sunday. We wanted Sunday to be family day and we do that here when we started the Perfecting Faith Church [Freeport, New York] too. We want it to be family day. We want you to be able to wake up in the morning, have breakfast, have breakfast with your family, go outside, walk, run, you know, and enjoy, sit on the porch, patio, 1:30 start getting ready for church, come to church enjoy a good two hours of church, go back home and have Sunday dinner. And the church grew. And it became too large for the, for, for it to house and so we had to start a 10:45 service. And that, that, that's how it was. And we started that, it was May 28, 1989, oh, my god. He, he-- Speaker 2: And how long were you there? Speaker 1: I was there twelve years, almost a decade and a half, twelve years. Story_ID: 527191 Speaker 1: I read about some of the evolution of some folks who came through, you had that, I mean, you had--tell me, what, what some of the ministries were in bringing folks in? Speaker 2: Well, what do you mean? Speaker 1: Well, so, I read about people who may have been drug addicts or-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --may have been homeless, you know-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --who were down and out, really struggling-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and the kinds of inspiration that you offered. Speaker 2: Oh, we turned, we turned the church [Perfecting Church, Detroit, Michigan] into a warming station during the winters and we put cots, put army cots down in the basement. We would feed them and have maybe about forty or fifty downstairs, have to take shifts, you know, watching them and being the matrons and, and the wardens, for lack of a better word. And, and, and we would feed them. We would feed hungry people on a constant basis. We started, you know, different organizations. We started, we, we started the store, a copy store for the community so that they could come and bring, have all their copying needs met, met there, Perfect Copies [ph.] was the name of it. Yeah, we started a food pantry where people could come on Tuesdays, still do it 'til this day, people could come on Tuesdays, sit in the Tuesday, Tuesday morning Bible study, after the Bible study is over they would take them in, let them, "hey, get all the nonperishable foods that you want, the clothing there, take it, take what you, what you need." And, and the same thing with shoes, donate shoes, good shoes, barely used shoes, or go out and buy some new shoes and, and give it. We used to give away Thanksgiving baskets, the whole nine yards. Story_ID: 527192 Speaker 1: And then we became really, really concerned about education. So, Pastor Winans [Marvin Winans] started a charter school. And the charter school became like number one charter school in all of Michigan, number three or something like that in the whole of, of the nation. It's called WAPA, W-A-- Speaker 2: How do you spell it? Speaker 1: --W-A-P-A, Winan, Winans Academy of Performing Arts [Marvin L. Winans Academy of Performing Arts, Detroit, Michigan], WAPA. And literally that school is a premier school. Speaker 2: That still exists? Speaker 1: Oh, not no, not still exists. Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: It is now an entire school district with elementary school now, junior high school, high school, they've got their own district. Speaker 2: And has that been replicated along with the church in other parts of the country or the world? Speaker 1: Our church? Speaker 2: Schools? Speaker 1: Yeah. Marvin Sapp who is a great gospel singer, he's got an academy [Grand Rapids Ellington Academy of Arts and Technology, Grand Rapids, Michigan]. Cordell Jenkins in Toledo, Ohio, he's a part of our organization, he's got. I mean, it, it, it's, it's a part and parcel when, once you really get into church, you've gotta get into the totality of man, not just the and Moses, ha, on the mountain, ha, and, and John, ha, on the island Patmos and Gilligan on the island, yeah, it's more than that. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: It's more than that. And you've gotta deal with the body, soul, and spirit of man. And that's what, that's what we did. And Pastor Winans built the school up brought in all of the major minds, hired teachers, fired teachers, you know. Speaker 2: So, he oversaw everything? Speaker 1: You got a whole entire company, he put together an entire company out of the people in our church [Perfecting Church, Detroit, Michigan]. Homegrown, homegrown, and brought them in. What we didn't know, we went out and, and gleaned and picked the brains of other educators and we, we, we replicated what was right and created what we didn't have. And be, and the focus was the students, the students. Our first year I think we had it by, by a lottery, that brought about two hundred students in. And we could have small classes, seven in a class, ten in a class. And the job was every child is educable, you can educate every child. And if you have any failing children in your class, it's not the students fault, it's got to be the teacher's fault. And if you fail to educate our children, then we fail to employ you as teacher. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: And literally they would fire teachers. Just about the, the entire populace of the school were honor rolls. Then, then they developed the, the music program, violin, horns, keyboards, percussions. Got so good that they traveled and performed in Italy. Traveled and performed as one of the premier musical bands in the charter school. That's, that's the impact, that's the impact. Speaker 2: Is the class size still small now? Speaker 1: Still small. We-- Speaker 2: So, the challenge is all the people who can't get in 'cause there's no room? Speaker 1: Right. Just like, just like any school district. Speaker 2: Just--sure. Any great school. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Story_ID: 527193 Speaker 1: So, you came here, you described how you came here earlier. Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah. Speaker 1: But so that you actually were building the church [Perfecting Faith Church, Freeport, New York] before you got here per following Pastor Winans [Marvin Winans]-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --command (laughter). Speaker 2: (Nods head). Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: That's a good way to put it. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Did you start in this building? Speaker 2: We started in a hotel. Speaker 1: Ah. Speaker 2: Before we became official we became a, when we, when we started officially we started in this building. But when we were bootlegging-- Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: --as my daddy [Donald McClurkin, Sr.] said, we started in the hotel, in the Best Western Hotel [Best Western Hotel & Convention Center], 80 Clinton Street, Hempstead, New York. Speaker 1: And what year was this? Speaker 2: This is 1999 we started, December 5, 1999, was our first time. And we would have service. The first service, we, we would never advertise, it was always word of mouth, first service about two hundred some odd people were there. And my thing was, you know, I gotta sabotage this, this cannot continue. And I told you that story already and it, you know, I never expected it (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So as you grew-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --did you incorporate all of the elements that were in Pastor Winans' church [Perfecting Church, Detroit, Michigan]? Speaker 2: I incorporated everything, everything. I was there from the start of it, I was one of the founding members, I was member number eight, you hear me Mother Bowman [Mattie Bowman]? No, number nine, I'm sorry. And I incorporated everything that I learned from Pastor Winans and from Gilbert Earl Patterson, Bishop Gilbert, Bishop Gilbert Earl Patterson in Memphis, Tennessee, and Bishop Norman Wagner [Norman L. Wagner] in Youngstown, Ohio, and Bishop O.T. Jones, Jr. in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Those were our mentors. Speaker 1: And they're bishops of the Pentecostal Church? Speaker 2: Yep. Bishops of, of PAW [Pentecostal Assemblies of the World] and Church Of God In Christ [COGIC]. Story_ID: 527194 Speaker 1: As this church [Perfecting Faith Church, Freeport, New York] here has grown, what are some of the highlights of your growth? Speaker 2: Bishop Charles E. Blake [Charles E. Blake, Sr.] from West Angeles Church Of God In Christ in Los Angeles [California] who is the presiding prelate of the entire Church Of God In Christ [COGIC], six million strong, he was the first one to, I was, the second week of this ministry, which was the first, was the second week in July of 2001, I had to do a concert in California and I missed the flight coming home and I missed that midnight flight that connected in-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --Detroit [Michigan] and came back to New York [New York]. And I said oh, my god, and what am I gonna do, I'm gonna miss service, service is at 3:00, I won't get home until 4:00. And, and the Lord said, go to West Angeles. But it's 12:00, by the time I get there it'll be 12:30, they'll be finishing service. Go to West Angeles. I said, "Come on y'all, we're going to West Angeles." We go there and surely we get there, they're making the appeal at the end of the service for anyone who wants to receive Jesus. And I'm saying now, we could have went out to get something to eat. As I'm sitting down on the side of the church, you got, you know, they house 4,500 people, he says as he about, as, as he's about to dismiss he says, "I hear that Brother [HistoryMaker] Donnie McClurkin is in the building and I can't go home, Mae [Mae L. Blake] won't let me go home, if you guys can come up and sing just one song." And everybody clapped and I got up. He said, "I hear that you started a church?" I said, "Yes, sir." He said, "When?" I said, "Two weeks ago." He said, "Okay. Let's bring him an offering." Five minutes, if that long, everybody just came and just threw money on the altar. Nobody had ever done this before. We had a, we had a bill here, we were renting to own and it cost us $12,000 a month as a brand new church with just a few members, $12,000 a month for six months and then at the end of six months we had to come with three hundred, no, $415,000, $465,000 to close on this building that was costing us $1.3 million. Small building, only 23,000 square feet, cut in half, upstairs and down, only sixty-six parking stalls. And we had to pay $12,000 every month, plus have $465,000 at the end of January to close on the building otherwise we couldn't stay here anymore. And so, we go there, they raised $15,000 in an offering. And I go to sit with Bishop Blake and, and Mother Blake, Lady Blake, and Sister Blake says, "Charles, give him $5,000 from us." He said, "Mae, we already gave the man $15,000," and he gave us an extra $5,000. That was the, the miracle seed gift that brought us to a point of miracle finances. For six months we never missed a payment. No--this place was a, the church was a, a empty derelict grocery store that had sat empty and abandoned for three years-- Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: --that they couldn't sell. It was, it was dilapidated, falling apart, you couldn't walk through here in heels on, holes in the floor, the basement was nothing but a concrete and steel poles, water on the floor, no lights, no nothing. The boiler was broken so they had one space heater up here, small space heater up here that heated the whole 11,500 square foot radius. And-- Speaker 1: So, folks had on coats in the winter? Speaker 2: (Nods head) Sitting in service with coats on, with coats on. There were only two toilets, right back here, two toilets. Story_ID: 527195 Speaker 1: No other (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And the congregation [Perfecting Faith Church, Freeport, New York] is growing all the while? Speaker 1: (Nods head) And the bathroom line would wrap down the wall and, and curve in a L while service is going on, waiting for-- Speaker 2: The two toilets. Speaker 1: Yeah. And in the summertime we would have to rent porta potties and put it outside and take up about fifteen parking stalls which was against the codes and law. And had nine hundred seats in the room. And in the summertime it would be hot as hades 'cause there was no central air, cold as the arctic in the winter, hot as hades in, in the summertime. And we kept growing. At, and kept paying $12,000 a month and never missed a beat with the lights, with the water, anything. At the, and, and when we started Pastor Winans [Marvin Winans] told me, "Donnie [HistoryMaker Donnie McClurkin], get an office." I said, "Why would we get an office, we got a building that we can't barely pay for?" "Don't let your mail come there, get an office, get a secretary, get an address." "But we got an address at the church?" "Donnie, go get office space." Him being my pastor, we went down to Hempstead [New York] to Fulton Street [sic. Fulton Avenue] in Hempstead and got a, got an office space. Now, we're paying $500 a month plus $12,000 a month, $12,000 a month, twelve, comma, zero, zero, zero. Speaker 2: That's a lot of money. Speaker 1: So, we add $500 to that so that we can just make our way harder, why don't we just do that, make your way much more difficult. There was a miracle in that. Just like there was a miracle in going to California, there was a miracle in getting an office space. We get a computer, we get a secretary who's never typed, I'm very serious, never typed, doesn't know how to use a computer, not to mention a typewriter. And she, we employed her to be the secretary. She says, "Pastor, honestly, I don't know how to type and I surely don't know how to use a computer." "Girl, well, you'll learn, you're gonna learn, don't worry, I got faith in you." She got this little disk to teach herself how to type and how to use a computer, in six months, she learned that thing. We get this, we get a computer, one for my office, one for the receptionist. And something brand new has just come out, it's called a website, it's 2001, something brand new has come out, a website. What is a website? It's, I don't know but you gotta get one. We get a website, get somebody to design our website, we make the, the logo, two hands holding the world that's, that's brimming with the brilliance of God's love, that was Perfecting Church [Detroit, Michigan]. And people found out we had a website. Then people found out where the church was. All of a sudden they found out what our address was, the mail starts coming in by the bundles, and people are sending checks, they're sending money. The, and I'm saying what the name of god is this. I told the people in our church, I said, "we're not gonna be on a big, you know, building fund rally, I'm not, we're not asking you to give what you don't have, if God wants us to be in this place, God's got to do this. I'm not gonna try to break you, and I'm not gone give it, this is God's responsibility. I'm a sow like everybody else sows, I'm a give my tithe and offering and I'm gonna even give a thousand dollar seed but I'm not going on a campaign for this, God you called this, you gotta do this." Six months go by, we go down and pay $465,000 and close on this $1.3 million building because in six months, in six months the monies that have come in are miraculous, $615,000 from people around the world giving. We have never in the fifteen years, and I'm not gonna cry, in the fifteen years I've been pastoring, we have never been in the red in any shape, form, or fashion. Whatever we've needed God has provided. We take one offering, we don't take multiple offerings, if you gone give, you gone give, I'm not, I'm not gone pump that well, I'm not trying to get you--. Give, and if not, that's between you and God. Story_ID: 527196 Speaker 1: We've been able to buy properties, the store across the street and the apartment above, the empty lot next to it, the house next door, we've been able to buy a bus, two vans, and all the equipment, all the stuff we print out comes from this church, we don't have to send it out, we don't have to outsource it, it's right here. Speaker 2: And so, are the buses and vans picking people up just like when-- Speaker 1: (Nods head). Speaker 2: --when you were young? Speaker 1: Picking 'em up, dropping 'em off. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: We had a, the head, the first head of our transportation department in Detroit [Michigan] was a guy named Prentiss, Prentiss Brunson [ph.], and he was so cool, so, "Ah, yeah, Pastor, yeah." We made him the head of transportation. We're in our, in our department head meeting and, "Brother Prentiss tell, tell what your department does, transportation. What's, what's, what's the function of your department?" "Well, we pick 'em up and we drop 'em off" and sat down. And that's been a running, running line since then. Every, we have twenty-three departments in this church [Perfecting Faith Church, Freeport, New York]. Everybody who joins the church is put on a department, everybody, because we wanna, want, the motto of this church is, "Perfecting Faith Church where ministry means people and working members only." Everybody can do a work in the kingdom. And so, each department leader has got to organize and construct and configure their department so that they have people who walk alongside them, president, vice president, secretary, you know. And, and from that point I say you have to take care of everybody that's assigned to your department. So, if anybody is missing the department leaders gotta be aware of it, if anybody has a death in their family, tell your department leader, they'll bring it to us, if anybody has a birth, tell your department leader, a birthday, they'll bring it to us. So, we, we configured a hierarchy so this way everybody can be accounted for. So, right now we've got on roll about 3,062 people. And our job is to make it, make it so that all of them are working and that we're accountable for all of them, you know (simultaneous). Story_ID: 527197 Speaker 1: You were telling about the size of your congregation and you have the two services but also now you broadcast. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: When did that begin? Speaker 2: We started live streaming I think the beginning of this year, I think, I believe, it's the beginning of this year (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So this new year, '16 [2016]? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We started live streaming, using technology as a tool of evangelism, you know. So, we've got such a large following of, of people, I don't wanna call it a fan base but relationships have developed around the world throughout these decades, excuse me, throughout these decades. And we give services and only maybe a thousand people can fit in here but there are people in different regions, different time zones, different continents, that want to be a part of this. I have 1.3 million viewers and likes on Facebook, and I've got over 600,000 people following me on Twitter, and got a 134,000 on face-, I mean, on, on Instagram, and you got all these different fingerprints on, in, in social media, well, you gotta put 'em all together. And being that they, they really have supported me all these years, we just set up a live streaming video for Sunday services so people can watch it and literally from around the world on Sundays people are watching to the degree I don't know how many which I guess I should have had that information but, but it's, but we do now. And now with Facebook Live and Periscope, we incorporate that into the Sunday mornings too. So, thousands of people on top of thousands can participate. Speaker 1: And so, all of these social media platforms, a challenge that many busy people have with such a, a big footprint is managing it all. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Are you writing the tweets and the, all of these things or are you getting support, you have staff (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We have, we have a social media team. Speaker 1: Good. Speaker 2: We have a PR team here, public relations team. And they handle the content of what's on social media and they handle what comes in and what we address and what goes out. And I, I get involved if I wanna send a message, I'm sit down and I'll do a video, I'll connect the, the church's video to my video and I'll use my video, or use my websites or social media sites to drive people to the Perfecting Faith Church's [Freeport, New York] website. But I would be stark rave, stark raving mad if I tried to address the volume of stuff that comes in, it's impossible. And I, I'm addicted only to a certain degree, only to a certain degree. But it would, it would become too problematic because, you know, we not only have good people that come on and leave their comments, we also have some not that good people that come on-- Speaker 1: Sure. Speaker 2: --and make themselves known in very, very special ways. Speaker 1: Well, anonymous voices are often-- Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: --loud. Speaker 2: Cowards always have more strength in anonymity. Cowards live in anonymity. Throw a rock, hide your hand. You can't find me or trace me. That, you know, and-- Speaker 1: Sure. Speaker 2: --that's the only, that's one of the downfalls of social media is, you know, everybody is behind or in front of their computer and behind the screen. Story_ID: 527198 Speaker 1: From the beginning, you have had these two tracks: the, your music track and your ministry. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And when you first started this church [Perfecting Faith Church, Freeport, New York] here in New York, was a time when in 2001 you started this church, you, you published your book ['Eternal Victim, Eternal Victor,' Donnie McClurkin]-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --you were at that point very present nationally-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --in your career. Can you talk about your choice to reveal yourself so fully in this book that you offered to the public at this time when you are very large in the public eye? Speaker 2: It wasn't a conscious choice. Again, following God, and it happened holistically, it just happened in ministry. The ministry level was conducive to the transparency. It was, in order to reach people you've gotta become open. And preaching is easy 'cause you just stand on the pulpit and you proclaim with exuberance, you know, thus said Lord, this is what the Bible says but teaching is different 'cause the teacher has gotta lend himself to the message in order to drive that point home. And so, it was never anything that was calculated or, or even considered. I, I think I was just, just as surprised when I said it as those who heard it, you know. But that, it was never something that I sat down and said, okay, this is a good time to do it. Speaker 1: Well, and, and revealing so much about yourself, becoming transparent, how did your congregation react and how has the public reacted 'cause I know it's been mixed? Speaker 2: Well, remember, my, my revelations happened before the congregation began and so they came in knowing a lot, well, a lot of them came in knowing a lot. And those who came afterwards, you know, you press a button you find out what you need to press, find, find out. And it's never been problematic, that's the one thing I can say it hasn't been problematic, (laughter) that's the one thing I can say it hasn't been problematic. No one shown any or voiced any angst over my transparency. So, I, I, I-- Speaker 1: So, the challenges that you've gotten have been from the outside, people challenging you about your-- Speaker 2: My sexuality, my integrity, you know, my character. Yeah, but that's, that's anybody, that's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Sure. Speaker 2: --everybody who takes on a public persona. They're going to be scrutinized and vilified, commended as well as, you know, condemned, that goes with the territory. Speaker 1: And how do you find strength when you're being vilified? Speaker 2: (Laughter) How do I find strength? I detach myself. I used to read all this stuff people would write until finally, you know, Kirk or Yolanda, one said, Kirk Franklin or crank (makes sound), Kirk Franklin or Yolanda Adams, one, said, "Why do you read all of that?" And it hit me, why do I read all of that 'cause out of the 10,000 good things somebody writes, I'm going to obsess over the two bad things that somebody said. So, I stopped really engaging in, in hearing or reading or being concerned about what people think about me. It's a peaceful life. I have a peaceful life. So, I can go in my room, close my door, and watch my Cartoon Network like I told you, and my judge shows, and be at peace with the world. Jump on a plane, fly wherever I gotta go minister or fly wherever I choose to go on vacation and not be concerned about what people say 'cause my thing is, all right, it's gone be there when I get back so it doesn't really matter, so just leave it there, let it live long enough until it dies, 'cause it all does, a lie always dies, truth will always remain. A lie doesn't have the endurance, it can't, it, it can hit hard at the beginning but it peters out as it goes. So, if you just remain silent, hold your peace and the Lord will fight your battle, that works every time. Story_ID: 527199 Speaker 1: You mentioned Kirk Franklin-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and Yolanda Adams, who are good friends. Speaker 2: Great friends. Speaker 1: How do you develop friendships in the midst of everybody's looking at you, everybody-- Speaker 2: Hm. Speaker 1: --is looking to see what's your next step-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --how, you know, so, developing meaningful friendships when you're in the public eye can be tough? Speaker 2: Yeah, it is. It is, it's extremely difficult and friends are few and far between when you're in the public's eye. So, the friends that you, that you have are friends that were friends before you became public, that have proven through the endurance of, of life and the test of time that they really are your family. I often say I don't have friends, I've got family and I've got friends like family, I don't have friends. Family, people who are like family to me and associates, that's what I have. To develop new friendships, it's hard for me and I really don't do it. People holistically come in and they become a part of the family and I become a part of theirs but to say that I go out and make friends, I'm not a talker on the telephone, excuse me, that gets on so many people's nerves, I'm a texter, so I'm not gonna have long and drawn out telephone calls, and I'm not comfortable with company, and so you gotta love me for who I am 'cause if you think you're coming over, well, that's not gone happen. Speaker 1: And you're busy. Speaker 2: And not even busy I just like being Donnie [HistoryMaker Donnie McClurkin] and if you think you gonna come over and knock on my door, ah, that may not happen either. There are times that I, I feel like having company and I call certain friends who will come and sit, eat, laugh, joke, and talk, play Phase 10 or Taboo, and go home. And friends like Kirk and like Yolanda, CeCe [CeCe Winans], Fred Hammond, and the list goes on, and the list goes on, they became that through the, through the course of time. You know, Kirk started calling me Uncle Donnie in, in the '90s [1990s] and it caught on, now everybody calls me Uncle Donnie. Yolanda, I met her about almost twenty-five, twenty-six years ago, we had to sing in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] and this tall, lanky, beautiful, fashion model of a girl, she had to wait for me to come out of my room to get in a car and go to the venue. And I know that she doesn't like waiting, she's a, she's an ultra-timely woman and I am running by the seat of my pants guy. And she's sitting in the lobby and I said, "Oh, I'm so sorry." She said, "I don't mind waiting for an attractive man." Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter) Like yes. And we became friends from that point on. Literally, that one meeting in, in, in D.C. made us friends for, for all these years. CeCe, well, we're family, you know, but you, you can't help it, I'm the eleventh Winans. Fred Hammond, I don't know, I don't know to this day how me and Fred became so close. We would, we would sit and we would talk about different things and developed this bond and that's how it happens, time. And in this business, this business of music, the one thing you don't have is time. And everybody here's my number, here's my e-mail address, here's my CD, can you call me? Can I talk to you? Can I see you? I'm coming to the church. Do you have a moment for me? You hear that so much and you know that you don't have that, you don't have that moment. And you, you minister and then you pull back and you go into the, through that corridor into your office, you sit, sit and wait until the next time of ministry, come out and do that again and go home 'cause there's no way that you can facilitate all these people who would be friendly, and they would be, but I, I, in order to have friends, I must first show myself to be friendly, that's the time I don't have. And that's unfortunate 'cause I'm a people person, I love people. Speaker 1: And that's tough, you know, because there's the part of you that sees the light in that other person, that-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --sees what could be-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --if you had time, and they see it too. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And so, there's a longing. How do you, how do you walk away gracefully? Speaker 2: You walk away gracefully. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: That's it. You hug them, God bless them, you have small talk with them because there's something in them that's more than usual, and you ask them the questions based on what you see and they talk to you based on what God showed them, and you shake hands, hug, or kiss 'em, and go on. And if in time the paths cross again, you know, we're reminded of our meeting and we keep on going until finally it develops into a friendship. Story_ID: 527200 Speaker 1: I wanna go back to Yolanda [Yolanda Adams] for, for a minute. She, for many years, had a radio show ['The Yolanda Adams Morning Show']-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and you have a radio show ['The Donnie McClurkin Show']. Speaker 2: (Nods head). Speaker 1: Do you ever talk shop about radio? Speaker 2: No. We never talk shop about radio, we never talk shop about music. When Yolanda and I are together we are laughing and joking, talking about our kids, talking about how much of a genius Yolanda is, how beautiful she is, this is our constant conversation, you know. What am I doing? What are you doing? You know. Speaker 1: Family. Speaker 2: Family. You know, oh, my god, Taylor [Taylor Crawford] is so big. Her daughter's name is Taylor, my son's name is Matthew Taylor [Matthew McClurkin], and they're both like a year apart in age, my son is a year older, they're both as tall as trees, and, and we talk that, and I talk about Yolanda's positivity, we talk-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --when we're, when we're together I talk, you know, Yolanda, you just are not human, you're an alien. Because Yolanda will not complain, now she'll tell you if something is right or wrong but if you ask her about herself, there's, never anything negative you're gonna hear Yolanda say. "How's the, how's the ministry?" "Oh, it's, everything is fine. You know, you know, you know, how it is, everything is fine." You know, no matter what, all these years, all of these years. I only heard her hurt and cry one time and because we were family, because we were friends, she could, she could show that vulnerability in front of me but that was only one time in, in almost three decades because she has such a positive outlook on life. She lives life on purpose, you know. And so, that, that's always intrigued me about Yolanda. She likes to be around people who know what they want, who are assertive, she likes to be around people who are thinkers, she likes to be comfortable, you know, in an environment of people like her. So, when she sees anybody and everybody, she loves on them but then she goes back into this great woman with great vision. So, that's what we talk about, we never talk about the radio. We never talk about music. You know, we may talk about ministry somewhat but, you know. And the same thing with Kirk [Kirk Franklin], same thing with CeCe [CeCe Winans], same thing with Fred [Fred Hammond], we don't talk industry, we just sit back and clown. Me and Fred sit back and clown. Me and Pastor Marvin Winans, we are, we are two, Emmett the Clown [Emmett Kelly] and Bozo the Clown meet together, you know, and we laugh, we were together last night laughing and joking and then when it's time to preach, we go into the, and we go into the preachers' mode. Then when we finish, or even while I, I was preaching last night, and I got to a point in the message and he got there first and he said it out loud and I repeated it but I did it with a different twist, we broke out laughing in the middle of the service. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: We're not good together, we're not good together. But that that's, that's the friendship, that's the camaraderie, that's the love, that's the family and without that, we're just, we're just entertainers, we're just people, two ships that pass in the night, only perform together, shake hands and go to your corner but thank god this is not that, we are truly, you know, brothers, sisters, friends. Speaker 1: Excellent. Speaker 2: It, it, it's, it's the most wonderful time in gospel music history. Story_ID: 527201 Speaker 1: I wanna talk about some of the film projects that you've done. Speaker 2: That'll be a brief conversation. Speaker 1: Yes, well-- Speaker 2: I'll tell you that much. Speaker 1: Well, we start with your story, 'The Donnie McClurkin Story:-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --From Darkness to Light' ['The Donnie McClurkin Story: From Darkness to Light']. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And that came after the book ['Eternal Victim, Eternal Victor,' Donnie McClurkin], a couple of years after the book. What prompted you to make that? Speaker 2: It was supposed to be just a small little, small little video to be used, you know, randomly. Stephanie Fredericks [sic. Stephanie A. Frederic] was doing this, she produced it and filmed the whole thing. Speaker 1: And that's in 2004? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And nobody thought that it was gonna become what it was. It was never meant to be a documentary, it was just supposed to be a small little clip of a video, excuse me, and that was supposed to be it. Well, everything started added on, everything start adding on, the more we talked the more things added on, and the family came into it, then that started adding on, then my testimony came into it, that started adding on, and then the story about my two-year-old brother [Thomas McClurkin] came, that added on, we had to go to the house, find the, see the location and, and it just started growing into this documentary. Then Stephanie started going to other people and artists and asking them about me. I didn't even know a lot of these artists felt this way about me. And she went to Mrs. King, Coretta Scott King. Miss King did about a ten, fifteen minute interview about me and how, how we met and how we were friends and what she thought about me and how Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] would feel if he heard me. And, and I'm saying, and I talked to Miss King, I said, "Why did you do that?" She said, "They just asked me what I thought about you Reverend McClurkin [HistoryMaker Donnie McClurkin]." They talked to Beyonce [Beyonce Knowles]. Beyonce is like, you know, "When he opens his mouth and," 'cause Beyonce when we started she would come here when she was on the East Coast she would come and just sit in the service. And I'm saying all these people Kirk [Kirk Franklin], you know, Yolanda [Yolanda Adams], CeCe [CeCe Winans], and, and because we never talk like that when you hear it, it's like, oh, wait a minute, you know, and CeCe, "I'm a fan of his." Sister, I'm a fan of yours. And, and you're sitting back, gob smacked, totally in awe, just gob smacked, hearing what people think, hearing how they see you, hearing how you've impacted them. And it, it brings you to a point where, you know, you know, who am I, 'cause I, I thought I knew but that just, the whole project just grew into something that was larger than life. Never thought in a million years that it was gonna have the impact globally like it has. And, and to this day it's still viable. I can't watch it today 'cause it's got my mother [Frances McClurkin] in it, my father [Donald McClurkin, Sr.] in it, you know, my sister, Cheri [Cheryl McClurkin], my sister, Olivia [Olivia McClurkin], all those that have passed away. So, I, I, I really literally cannot watch it. Got my dad talking junk, you know, my mother and her, 'cause that was the cheerleader of cheerleaders. So, it, it grew, it becomes Stephanie produced and, and, and made a wonderful project. Speaker 1: Which supports a lot of people in their own-- Speaker 2: Journey. Speaker 1: --journey. Speaker 2: In their own journey. And, and, you know, anything I do now dealing with chronicling my life, I take it so seriously 'cause it can grow into something that can be a tool of, of ministry and help to somebody else. I never considered myself to be articulate, nor did I ever consider my story worth being told in such a grandiose way. And all of these things proved a part of me that I never knew. Developed and showed forth a part of me that I didn't even know was there. I discredited and devalued myself and these are the things that showed me that there was more to me than my myopic and small view, you know. It helped develop me. Story_ID: 527202 Speaker 1: You appeared in the movie 'The Gospel' in 2005. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, but before that I appeared in 'Fighting Temptation.' Speaker 1: Ah. What's that? Speaker 2: 'The Fighting Temptations' was the movie that Cuba Gooding, Jr. and Beyonce [Beyonce Knowles]-- Speaker 1: Oh, right. Speaker 2: --did with Rue McClanahan and, and Angie Stone and, and I forget who else, a whole bunch of 'em. And they wanted me and Yolanda [Yolanda Adams] to come and do a cameo appearance as ourselves and be the judges for the end of the competition and award the winner with, with, with the award. And they flew us in to, what was it? Columbia, South Carolina, where they were doing the taping. And we had all of four lines. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: All of four lines, "And the winner is Fighting Temptation. Where are they? I hope they come before Jesus gets here." And that was it. Speaker 1: That was it (laughter). Speaker 2: That was it. And that was my claim to fame woo hoo. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: I'm a star. And Beyonce was the one that got me on that (unclear). I don't know why they wanted me and Yolanda. And it was, we were, as a matter of fact we were doing Hopeville at the time, a, a, a tour. So, that must have been about 2003. Story_ID: 527203 Speaker 1: And so, what's Hopeville? Speaker 2: Hopeville was a tour that Kirk Franklin put together. And it was the epitome of tours. Tours usually went like, you know, there's a headliner and people who build up before the headliner takes over, you know. You got a A, B, C act and then the headliner. My thing, me and CeCe did a tour in 2001, right after 9/11 [September 11th, 2001]. And I told Ce, "Sister," I told her, "I don't wanna do it like, you know, me do mine and then you come out and I don't want there to be a headliner. If we're gonna do this, we gotta do this together." So, we came up with this fabulous tour. It started off with the both of us on stage together at the same time opening with all the singers and all, all the musicians and we would sing praise and worship for twenty minutes, songs that the whole audience would sing. And then we would, we would switch off songs, she'd start a song, then I'd start the next song and we'd just segue into songs. I, I did the last song, she would run off stage into a change booth right on the side of the stage, change clothes, and then my thing is, and brothers and sisters CeCe Winans. Her music would start, she'd come out, I'd run off stage, I was supposed to change but I always run on, back on stage and sing with her backgrounds and she'd run me off the stage. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: 'Cause I always loved singing background and I would wait until a certain song, (singing) "Everybody wanna pray, anybody wanna pray with me, anybody wanna pray with me." ['Anybody Wanna Pray'] And I'd run back on stage and she'd be singing, soon as she turn around and saw me, "Donnie [HistoryMaker Donnie McClurkin], get off this stage," every night. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: Then she'd start looking that one way and, and, at, at stage right, and I'd come off stage left. And it, and, and, and it was fun and we interacted through the whole thing. Then I would come out after she finished her twenty minutes. And then at the end of my twenty minutes she'd come out and we'd join the song together and then we'd end together. Beautiful. So, when we did Hopeville, I told Kirk, I said, "I'll do it if you make it so that we all can interact together," that's all you had to say to Kirk Franklin. He's got a mind like a whole production company. Had a back, backdrop that had apartment buildings, apartment buildings, a general store, and a church, that was the backdrop. And we started off the Hopeville tour with the song that I'd put out, (singing) "Ooh child, things are gonna get," I did a remake of 'Ooh Child' that Kirk produced and that was our opening song. (Singing) "Ooh child, things will get brighter." It's, as a matter, no, it started off with a video and three kids, young Donnie, young Yolanda, and young Kirk sitting on a, on the steps of a, in the projects, and we were like eight or nine. And, and one Kirk, Kirk said, no, Yolanda said, "What you gonna be, what, what y'all gonna be when you grow up?" And, and, and, and Yolanda said, "I'm gonna be a singer and I'm gonae sing and everybody is gonna know my name," and then it showed the little girl singing. "And, Donnie, what you gonna be when you grow up?" "I'm gonna be a preacher, and I'm gonna be a pastor of a church," and they showed the little boy preaching. Little boy preaching, yeah. And they said, "Well, Kirk, what you gonna be?" "Yeah, what you gonna be?" "I don't know." "You don't know?" "What you gonna be?" "I'm gonna be a dancer like Michael Jackson." Showing-- Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: --the little boy dancing. "And you can't be no dancer." Yeah and, you know, and that's how that, the screen would go up and the lights would come on and this music would start playing, people riding their bicycles across stage, or people sweeping the floor in front, sweeping the grounds in front of the grocery store, people in the window of the projects. And Kirk would come out, no, no, Kirk wouldn't come out, Yolanda would come out and she'd start off with, (singing) "Ooh child things are gonna get easier, ooh child things will get bright." And I'd come out the church door, (singing) "Ooh child, things are gonna get." And then at the end, Kirk would ride his bicycle on, get off, all three of us together and he'd do his little talk and go into the show. It was a work of art. Story_ID: 527204 Speaker 1: So, while we were doing it [Hopeville tour] we got the call to come and do 'Fighting Temptations' ['The Fighting Temptations']. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So, that was 2003. And we, they sent a jet for us, we flew down, we did the part, we flew back to the show and kept on going like it wasn't nothing. And then the year after, was it 2004 or 2005? Speaker 2: Well, it, the, the film came out in 2005 so you probably-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --made it in 2004. Speaker 1: Two-thousand-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And no, it's at the beginning of 2005 and the end of 2005 the movie-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --came out. And I just, they asked me to come and do a part in a movie. And I sat with the producers and I'm saying y'all, I'm not good at acting, I'd already done, had I done 'Girlfriends' already? I think I had done 'Girlfriends' already and 'The Parkers.' And I'm saying I'm not good at acting. Speaker 2: And on those were you being yourself or you were acting? Speaker 1: I was acting, well, I was being myself on 'Girlfriends.' Tracee Ross [Tracee Ellis Ross] and them, I was the preacher of the church they came to and I sang 'We Fall Down' and, and invited all those that wanted to receive Jesus and they came down. And we had to do that scene three times 'cause the girls kept breaking out crying, they kept breaking out in tears. And when they would get closer to the front Tracee would just break out crying, (makes sound) "I can't do it." And God just moved. And that led to 'The Parkers.' And I did 'The Parkers,' no I did The Park-- Speaker 2: And when, when is this? Speaker 1: No, I did 'The Parkers' first. That must have been about 2002, 2000, 2003. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Around 2002, 2003. And when I did 'The Parkers,' I was a janitor and they were going for a competition with the choir and their lead singer became a diva and didn't wanna do it and then got hoarse and they heard me singing while I was cleaning and they brought me on, we still lost but I was the, the guy that they brought in to be the ringer. And it was fun because Mo'Nique is hilarious. Speaker 2: She is. Speaker 1: It was fun. And but I was, you know, I was horrible at, at best, horrendous at worst. And when they were talking to me about doing this movie ['The Gospel'], I'm saying Lord Jesus, I'm not an actor, I'm terrible. They just wanted me to do it so, I did it. And it, it was with Boris Kodjoe. Now, me standing next to Boris by myself it's like oh, my god, can you make me feel any worse? The man is gorgeous, the man is absolutely, he is like a, a, a Michelangelo sculptor of a, an Adonis gorgeous. And I'm like dog. And then Idris Elba, he's the sex symbol who all the women on the set are like oh my god, oh my god, just don't let him take off his shirt Jesus. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: You know. And, and these are seasoned actors, Nona Gaye, these are seasoned actors and I'm like oh, Jesus. I ain't never really acted before. They, I've got tons and tons of lines, I'm the, I'm the, I'm the number two actor in the movie, you know, Boris and, and Idris and, and Nona were the number one actors, I'm the number two guy. And, and, and Idris had to teach me how to act. When we did our scenes, our argument scenes together, he wouldn't talk to me all day, stern, walked passed me, suck his teeth. And when it came to the argument scene, he would go at me and he would force me. And, and when we finished I didn't even know he was British 'cause he did everything in his American accent. We're in the, in the van going back to the hotel, Intercontinental hotel [Intercontinental Buckhead Atlanta] in Atlanta [Georgia], and his thing is, "You know, you know, mate, you know, you, you got to come at me, man, you got, you got to come at me." "Come at you?" He said, "Yeah, you got, you got to come at me." He said, he said, he said, "You've gotta be mad with me, you got to be mad with me." I'm saying "Oh, Jesus, I said I can't do that." "Yeah, you can." He said, "Because every day, I'm mad with you, I'm mad with you, you're not my friend." So, I had to come in and I had to be angry and walk around with a chip on my shoulder, people speak to you, you don't speak to them. And when it came time for us, when we had that argument in the hallway, we were going, I mean, we were literally like this. (Laughter) And when we finished and they said, "Cut, that's a wrap, speed." He said, "Oh, man, that was good, that was good, that was good." "How do you switch like that? How do you switch like that? Now, I gotta be your friend that quick? I've developed a hatred for you, now, I've gotta," and they taught me. And, and even at the best of their teaching I was still horrible but it was the greatest experience. And then when it was, when we had the debut, Tyler Perry is sitting in the audience, him sitting next-- Speaker 2: Wait, I want you to tell me that in one second. Let's pause. Boris used to be model, that's how he started. Speaker 1: I can see why. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: I can see why. Story_ID: 527205 Speaker 1: I wanted you to tell me about your show, your, your radio show, 'The Donnie McClurkin Show.' Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Which you began in 2006, right? Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: And it's ongoing? Speaker 2: Ten years, for a whole decade. I did a concert with and, and with [HistoryMaker] BeBe Winans, the two of us did a concert on the same stage in California and his singers sat on one side, my singers sat on the other side and we just switched off songs. He did one of his songs, I'd do one of my songs. And, of course, my singers won, my, my singers were much better. Amen. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: And our set was much better than BeBe's and I have to say that otherwise, you know-- Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: --I, I, I'm in breach of contract. But when he finished he said, "Donnie [HistoryMaker Donnie McClurkin], I wanna interview you for my radio show." And, and we did an interview, he said, "Donnie, you need to do a radio show," 'cause BeBe, now I'll tell you, BeBe Winans has been key in everything that I've done, BeBe. 'Sunday Best,' BeBe Winans got me on there, take my place. Oprah Winfrey, BeBe Winans pushed me in front of Oprah. And even with the radio. And I said, "I don't know. Radio, nobody is listening to radio." He said, "Donnie, you need to do radio." And he set that thing up with the producers of his show and they came to me the next year and offered me a radio show. BeBe has not one selfish bone in his body. He is so giving. He is so secure. Now, when, when I, when I think about security, BeBe Winans is so secure and he knows who he is and he doesn't mind sharing with everybody else. And we started the show. And I didn't think it was gonna go well, and I didn't think it was gonna go long but we started adding all of these different elements to it where the kids can be a part of the show too. Speaker 1: What's the format? Speaker 2: There is no specific format, music and mayhem. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: That's it. We've got Stumper, he's a robot and his job is to try to stump me with cartoon trivia and sitcom trivia. And-- Speaker 1: And is that someone else or are you playing this part? Speaker 2: No, there's someone, that's-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --that's, that's Stumper. Speaker 1: Stumper, okay. Speaker 2: He's Stumper. He's a robot that every now and then he'll wheel in while I'm recording-- Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: And he'll say, "Hi, Pastor Donnie," and get, tell me his clues, he'll give me clues, then he'll play the snippet of the song from the cartoon or the sitcom and I've gotta guess what it is and I only have like a minute to do so. Well, not even a minute, that whole segment is about a minute. Speaker 1: So, this is you bringing cartoon element into your-- Speaker 2: (Nods head). Speaker 1: Yeah, your love (laughter). Speaker 2: It's, I've gotta, I've gotta be able to do what I love. And it makes people laugh and it brings back memories to older people and it makes me lame to the kids. And so, he, in ten years he's only stumped me nine times, nine times in ten years out of multiple attempts. And then we had Kid Bits. It's a bit where kids send in their question, any question they want, by video or by e-mail and I gotta answer it. And then we've got, we had a, we had a, a segment where we would teach people how to count in Swahili, excuse me, in Swahili or in the different languages, anything. Or we had a segment where Michelle Obama gave us a drop or, you know, a PSA [public service announcement]. We make it multi eclectic. It's, it's, it's so, it's music based but then, you know, if people need a job, hey, listen, you need to sign up with Uber, you know, if you got a car, you don't need to have a specific commercial license, sign up with Uber and start making money now. And anything that can be beneficial to the listener, you know. And for ten years, it's worked 'til it became number one in the New York market during its time slot and then in Pennsylvania, in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], and, and, and in eighty-seven or ninety of the major markets in America, of the top major, of, of the top 100 major markets in America. We're in Jamaica, Kingston, Jamaica, we're in Nassau, Bahamas, we're in London, England. And now they just added us four months ago in Lagos, Nigeria, on the secular station. And-- Speaker 1: And how often do you broadcast? Speaker 2: Every day, every day. I carry my remote with me and every day and then it's syndicated so the different radio stations and syndications take it and put it on the air there. Speaker 1: And so how often are you taping, do you aggregate? Speaker 2: Once a day or once a week, it's all according to what, what my schedule is. If it's, if my schedule is crazy I'll do one, one, one day and do all five shows or seven shows and then let them parse it out. But other than that, one a day. Story_ID: 527206 Speaker 1: And there is also Donnie TV? Speaker 2: Brand new, brand new, Donnie TV. Donnie TV is where we realize that after ten years, the social media and the digital age has changed and shifted so that without visuals you're behind the time. You know, between YouTube and the Facebook Live and the Periscopes, and the streaming videos, if you don't have that capacity then you're only dealing with a small demographics of people. So, Donnie TV was the next evolution. It was just, you know, the next progression. And so, we got so many cameras and we've got the equipment, now we just need to use our creativity. And we inherited, what, what, well, how can I, what can I call it? We inherited this art, the archives, there are archives of black movies and black music concepts and historic black images and we have total usage of it. Billie Holiday, Cab Calloway, Duke Ellington, Louis Armstrong, you know, Ethel Waters, Rochester [Eddie "Rochester" Anderson], 'Amos 'n' Andy', which NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] got taken off decades ago but my thing is I want them to be able to see 'cause 'Amos 'n' Andy,' although they in, on radio they did it, white, white voices, you know, caricatured 'Amos 'n' Andy,' on the television they had the black actors, it was an all-black cast. And they, they missed the whole point of 'Amos 'n' Andy,' NAACP during that time. They didn't wanna, you know, you know, humiliate us with those images. But when you look at the true dynamics of 'Amos 'n' Andy,' everybody owned their own home, everybody owned their own car, they were lawyers, they were business owners, they were affluent people, they weren't living in the projects in broken-down shacks, you know, Kingpin [sic. George "Kingfish" Stevens] was, was a lawyer, you know, Kingpin and Sapphire [Sapphire Stevens]. You know, it, it was a funny show, it was hilarious, and it's a shame that they took it off and, and, and generations missed the opportunity to see us in a, in a, in that light. You know, we wanted to be seen as serious actors, well, that's comedy, that's serious. And (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Do you show this on-- Speaker 2: So, so, that's what Donnie TV is for, to bring back these images and to put 'em on so the generations, the five, the six, the seven generations that have gone by can see these things and can see that we played a major part. Let's play 'Stormy Weather,' let, let them see it. You know, let them see all of the jazz artists at that time and all of the dancers at that time, The Mills Brothers, you know, see them dance, see the Nicholas brothers [HistoryMaker Fayard Nicholas and Harold Nicholas], see Fats Waller, see Bojangles or Bill "Bojangles" Robinson, Lena Horne, the whole nine yards. Let them see 'Cabin in the Sky,' Lena Horne, Ethel Waters, Rochester, you know, Paul Robeson, let them see all of these images. Speaker 1: And you say you inherited this? Speaker 2: (Nods head) Someone who, who found these things have, have, has given us carte blanche to have this, you know. Speaker 1: What a gift. Speaker 2: And so, now, art, and my job is, if it was, if it was made available for us, now, let's make it available for everyone, and let's play these images and play these movies, play these things and educate a people. Not just the black people, educate a people, an entire, entire globe. Let them see that everyone from all walks of life needs to have pride in their culture and where they come from, and this affords me the ability to do so. Number two, it also affords me to be able to use the platform to bring new artists in. Story_ID: 527207 Speaker 1: I worked for a show called 'Sunday Best' on BET [Black Entertainment Television]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And Sunday (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And you started there in 2010, right? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: No, no. Speaker 2: No? Speaker 1: Unh-uh. Speaker 2: When? Speaker 1: Was it 2009, 2000, either 2008 or 2009. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: And that's where you started because [HistoryMaker] BeBe Winans brought you in? Speaker 1: BeBe said, "Donnie [HistoryMaker Donnie McClurkin], I'm going, I'm doing something else. I need you, I want you to take my place." Speaker 2: And just for context, 'Sunday Best' is possibly the most popular program on BET? Speaker 1: It was. Speaker 2: It was, yes. Speaker 1: It was. Speaker 2: (Unclear) (Simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I hope that they put it back on because it had the largest-- Speaker 2: So, at that time? Speaker 1: --it had the largest viewership even 'til the time that they took it off last year. It had the largest viewership on the, on the networks, on the networks. Speaker 2: And so, what's, what's the format of 'Sunday Best?' Speaker 1: 'Sunday Best' is a competition for new artists and we give them the platform, almost on, on the line of 'American Idol.' And we bring them in from all churches and, and there is such an eclectic array of people that come in. And the ones that make it, you know, stand on the stage and, and they do the hardest music in the world, gospel. It's hard singing gospel. Speaker 2: What's make it hard? Speaker 1: Because you, you have to be, you have to be genuine, it has to be believable. You know, I can sing any song and, you know, and you accept it. But gospel has gotta come from the soul of the person, from the heart of the experience. It's not just emotions, it's a spirituality and if, and if it's not real, then it's just like, you know, 'The Blues Brothers' segment when they came dancing down the aisles and doing flips, it's all contrived. But 'Sunday Best' gave the best in gospel. Even those who didn't win had time in front of a, a camera that opened them up to the world. I can't walk through South Africa without them saying, "Oh, my god, that's the guy from 'Sunday Best.'" They had to take me out of a mall in South Africa because they were coming up and saying oh, my god, and they were telling the workers there, everybody started coming, it was in Cape Town [South Africa]. You know, and God gave us grace with that. And the, the, the, the formula works. Story_ID: 527208 Speaker 1: And so, that's what Donnie TV is gonna help do too, bring new artists in and give them a platform so that the platform that I have can be advantageous, advantageous to those who have something to offer. Not just a good voice but something to offer in spirituality, in character, and integrity, and in vocality, musicality. I wanna be able to use Donnie TV to get people who people say are no named but have that in the words of Kim Burrell, that it factor. That's what Donnie TV is gonna be for too. Speaker 2: And so, this is the vision. Are you-- Speaker 1: Hm. Speaker 2: --doing all of this now? Speaker 1: Yeah, we, we, we're just putting it in play now. It just begun I think a month ago. Speaker 2: So, it's-- Speaker 1: Two months ago. Speaker 2: --two thousand sixteen [2016]? Speaker 1: Yes, 2016. Where you can hear ministers who may not be a, a Bishop Jakes [HistoryMaker Bishop T.D. Jakes] or may not be a Creflo [Creflo Dollar] but they have the same kind of anointing and the same kind of power, charisma. Well, let me give you a, a, a, a spot here so that somebody, and let this be a launching pad, this isn't, doesn't have to be your home where you stay, but let this be where you're launched from so that greater networks can find you and greater people can, can, can hear you and take you to another level. Story_ID: 527209 Speaker 1: I wanna talk about your son. Speaker 2: What about my boy? Don't you say anything about my boy. Put 'em up (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Nothing bad. Speaker 2: Put 'em up. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: Put 'em up. Put 'em up. My boy, Matthew [Matthew McClurkin]. That's my, that's my, that's my heart. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: My daughter, Michelle, my son, Matthew. Speaker 1: And in 2012-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --you made a conscious decision to be more active as a parent. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And I'd like for you to talk about that. You know, there are a lot of black fathers who aren't present-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and we know it's a challenge in our families. And you've been very vocal-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --about it. Speaker 2: Yes. In order to support him in the manner that he should be accustomed to, I became that workaholic, became that workaholic, and didn't realize I wasn't spending enough time, I became my father, I became Donald [Donald McClurkin, Sr.]. And I wanted to make sure he had the accoutrements but what he needed more than the accoutrements was his dad, you know. And his mother [Kim] married to another man and, and he calls him, you know, dad, but he always wanted me around. And I did what I thought was best which really I should have got some help, some counseling. And in 2012 he was going through an emotional situation, very emotional. Speaker 1: How old was he then? Speaker 2: He was twelve. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He was going through a very emotional situation and they, they took some measures that I did not approve of and I, my thing is go out there and save your son. Well does, do you, how does it do you any good to save everybody around the world while your son is going through that? And I picked up and I got a place out in California, about eight miles from where he lived and commuted back and forth because the bottom line is, no, that's not gone happen with my boy. And his mother who is very diligent, we raised him the best we could, his stepfather which is a great man, but the only problem is, you know, the mother syndrome is, you know, this is my baby, this is my boy, this is my only boy. And, and, and it became a little problematic but overall it wasn't because her heart wasn't right. I don't agree with all the things she did and I'm sure she don't agree with all the things I, I did or didn't do, but it, it was, it was a chore but the bottom line is that's my boy and I gotta save my boy. Speaker 1: How long did you live out there? Speaker 2: Three and a half years. And I may have to go back out there, you know. Speaker 1: Does he come and stay with you here? Speaker 2: At times. But most of the visits are out there in California because, you know, the emotional situation, so. But, you know, that's, that's my heart. You can catch me on a plane flying to England or flying to California. Story_ID: 527210 Speaker 1: What does it mean to be a good father? Speaker 2: It means being a support and emotionally, physically, financially, being visible, being there, being the security, the one to secure him, being the one to laud him, to push him forward, to be that cheerleader, to be that silent cheerleader, not to smother him but to teach him how to fly. You know, the mother's job is to smother him, the father's job is to teach that boy how to fly. And you need that balance because a mother cannot be a mother and a father, it's impossible. She can be a super mom but she can never take the place of a father. I hear so many mother, some mothers, so many mothers going by talking about, now, I'm mother and father, no, you can never be, that's totally impossible. You don't have the testosterone, you don't have the genitalia, and you don't have the mentality. Being a man is more than just supplying food, it's got to be the whole package, you've gotta be the security, the role model, the example, you've got to be the one that really invests in that child, boy or girl, you've gotta become the man that your daughter's gonna look for when she's, when she has the privilege of being found by another man. You've gotta be that living example, I want a man just like my father. My son [Matthew McClurkin] broke me down just a couple of weeks ago, sixteen years old, "Dad, can you take me to Disneyland [Disneyland, Anaheim, California]?" "Boy, you sixteen." "And I wanna go to Disneyland and so we can talk." Like my mother [Frances McClurkin] heard something in me if I said something, I heard something in him. "Come on let's go to Disneyland. Can you take off from school?" "Yeah, mom, said I can take off." Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: Out in California, I go and get my boy, we go to Disneyland, we're going to Disneyland. I was late coming and he was, he was on me like white on rice, "Are you coming, are you here?" And I heard it, he expects me. Okay. "Son, I couldn't get there tonight but I'll, I'll be there in the morning." Morning comes, "Are you, Dad, are you on your way?" Now, I'm hearing. "I'm coming, son, I'll be there by eleven." Got there at twelve, L.A. [Los Angeles, California] traffic. You know, he's anxious, he's standing outside waiting for me. This is my boy. We get in the car, do our small talk, get to Disneyland, get on a couple of rides, talking all the time we're there. Then after spending $310 at Disneyland (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 2: --for two people, (laughter) for two people, I'm still mad about that, (laughter) we sit down and we talk for a few hours. And he's saying, "Dad, I wanna be like you." Wait a minute, this is a guy that didn't wanna be anything like me at all. This is a young man who said at thirteen, "I'm, I'm agnostic, my best friend is an atheist, I don't believe like you believe, I don't wanna do anything you wanna do. I don't wanna do music, I don't wanna go to church, I don't go to church. We don't have to go to church, none of us go to church in our house." You don't go to church? You know, (makes sound), I'm turning into The Hulk. Just totally against me, puberty. God had to tell me, don't worry, you'll get your son back at about eighteen or, seventeen or eighteen when puberty starts to balance out. And, and God was right. Yeah, well, he is, no surprise. "I wanna be like you." "What?" "I wanna be like you. You, you know, so many people. How is it knowing this one?" "Well, I was with the president [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] last week." "Oh, why didn't you call me, Dad? I, I would, oh, I wanna meet him before he leaves office." And you've gotta act like it's normal 'cause you don't wanna spook him but inside I'm going (makes sound), you know. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: And we talk and we talk. Story_ID: 527211 Speaker 1: We talk about my relationship with my, my, my, my fiancee and, "I don't know if I'm, I don't, I don't, I don't agree with that." "What? Son [Matthew McClurkin], your mother [Kim] is married." "I know but I don't, I don't agree with that. Does, does he have a child? Does she have a child? I know she has children," I said, "Yeah." "Are they gonna live in the house with you? I never got a chance to do that." "You can move in with me any time, you always could have." I said, "Have you ever seen 'The Wizard of Oz,' boy?" "Yeah." I said, "You had the power all along, all you had to do is say there's no place like home, click your heels together and say, Dad, I wanna live with you and ipso facto." I said, "And you still can." "I don't wanna leave my friend, I don't wanna leave my mom." "Okay. You can always come back and visit." And we talked and we talked, "And, son, you don't want me to be happy?" "I just don't, I don't know if I'm gonna be able to." "Think about your dad for a minute 'cause I've spent your life thinking about you." And finally there's a breakthrough. "Okay, if it makes you happy. Well, he'll be my brother?" I said, "You'll be his older brother." "Okay." I said, "Just like Michelle is your older sister, you've gotta treat him like Michelle treats you." "I know but she's been my sister all the time. I, I was born knowing her as my sister." And I said, "I know. And he's just three years younger than you but he needs to know you as his brother." "All right, could you get her on the phone?" (Nods head) I FaceTime her, "Nicole [Nicole C. Mullen]? I got somebody wants to meet you." Speaker 2: So, he hadn't met her before that? Speaker 1: Unh-uh. They talk, he's still a little. Hang up, "She's cute." "So, that, that's what you're going for, cute?" "No, you don't need to be with anybody that's not cute, Dad." Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: You know, "Did you think mom was cute?" "No, I know your mother was cute." I said, "We're not the best of friends right now but I know your mama was cute." And we made light of it and then we just became this bonded unit, driving home, talking, he leans over and hugs me in the car, kisses me on the side of my face, get out the car, I get out, I gotta hug him again before he go, texted me, I can't text and drive, son. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: You know, and just that loving, that loving guy. That's my boy. Speaker 2: And does, does this now give you permission, the blessing to get married? Speaker 1: Yes. He and my daughter are the two that give me the permission to go forward. And the counseling will tell us whether we're gonna marry or not but I need them to be together. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: And I need them to give me the release because they are family first. They are family first. When you don't do things according to the scheme of God's plan and marry first and then have children, you've got to consider the children that you brought into the world. And you can't just throw something on them, you know. So, I had to consider them first 'cause they're my first family. Story_ID: 527212 Speaker 1: I wanna ask you about Flint you know-- Speaker 2: Flint, Michigan? Speaker 1: Yeah, you know, it's just this year-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --there's been so much-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --challenge with the water and lack of clean water-- Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: --contaminated water. Speaker 2: The lead (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And you've taken-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --you've taken a-- Speaker 2: We took six thousand cases, not bottles, cases of water to Flint, Michigan. Pastor Winans [Marvin Winans], myself, and our Perfecting Fellowship organization, and the people that we told about it, the people that found out about it through the Internet, through the church and churches around here, it made it possible to buy six thousand, and Walmart [Walmart Stores, Inc.] gave us a discount and gave us wholesale price on the waters. And we were able to purchase six thousand cases of water to bring to Michigan and to have the semi-truck from Detroit [Michigan] drive all of that to, to Flint. And, you know, not, not bottles, cases. And you would think that that was so great until you realize that everything we do is water based, from the washing of our bodies and hair, to the cooking, to the cleaning, to, to everything that goes along with this, the cooking of our foods, the whole nine yards, it's water based. So, the bottled water that we bring you can drink but what are you gone use to wash up with? Okay, then there's the bottled water you use to wash up and drink with, well, what you gone use to do your clothing with? You know, how are you gonna clean? How are you going to exist? And that, you didn't realize how, how, how awful it was until you got there and went through the considerations, considered how would my life be with lead infested water and I have to drink it and my kids have ingested this and it's caused diseases in the elderly? How do I cook with this? How do I, how do I, how do I make this work? And the government did this. Story_ID: 527213 Speaker 1: How important do you think the role of activism is for the church today? 'Cause that's-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --you know, bringing that water is a role, is activism? Speaker 2: It is but it's such, it, it, it shows you the difference between real activism and, and opportunities. Some people are opportunists, other are activists. Opportunists takes an action, a dire action and uses it for them to stand and be pedestaled and it's a photo op at best, and when the cameras are gone, so are they. If you're gonna really be active in a matter, you've got dedicate yourself for the long haul, otherwise you are just somebody with, who wanted to take a photo and put it up in your resume that I did this. We went to Kingston and, Jamaica, Kingston, Jamaica, in Marvely Park [sic. Marverly Avenue] and we brought all of this, these supplies for all the kids for, for the civic center there, school supplies, medical supplies. And the local ex-gang members came around and started speaking in such a hard patois I couldn't understand and standing around us in a circle and (unclear). And, and, and the, one of the pastors, Pastor Al Miller, he was interpreting, they were saying, don't come through here giving out all this stuff and acting like this is Christmas for a photo opportunity and then you leave us here and we have nothing when you're gone. If you're not gonna be committed to this, don't come into our area. It hit me to the core. Am I just coming in here for a moment? We don't have any plans to come back here. These guys are telling the truth. I make you a promise, we will be here every year. And thus, we've had to come every year and do this. And with Flint, Michigan, it's gotta be the same thing. Just because the, just because the cameras are gone doesn't mean that the water situation has been rectified, it's gonna take a couple of years for that to be rectified. Even if it's rectified it doesn't mean the damage hasn't already been accomplished, there are people with lead poisoning. Speaker 1: True. We're gonna pause (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And we've got to continue to, to, to, to keep this initiative going. Story_ID: 527214 Speaker 1: I'm thinking about contemporary gospel music-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --now and into the future. And, you know, you mentioned social media and how important it is in getting the word out. Well, the digital landscape is important in general for music but-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --but gospel music only accounts for 2 percent of digital records sales and all these, you know, Spotify, Apple Music, Google, all those, they don't seem to be including gospel music in the way they're including other genres. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: With that in mind since that's seem to be the way that music is being sold and heard, what, how do you see the future of gospel music in terms of its growth and, and access to people? Speaker 2: I have no clue. And I would be probably quite foolish to try to address that subject not knowing what tomorrow is going to bring technologically. All of this in and of itself caught us off guard because the advancement of media and technology and--has, has, has been so rapid and, and, and not just rapid it's been so extreme, extreme that we had no remedy for it, not in sales, not in, in how to market it, you know, we, we had no remedy and we're learning as we go. As far as, you know, gospel music only making up 2 percent of the digital sales, hey, gospel music has never really been a mammoth genre of, in sales. We, we've done better than most but we were never at the level of R and B or adult contemporary-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --or pop music or country music. You know, we, we, we were always on the kind of the lower rung of the success totem pole. But it has never stopped us before because all of the music forms that we just mentioned, R and B, adult contemporary, pop, you know, what else I say? Country. Speaker 1: Yep. Speaker 2: All of them, R and B, adult contemporary, pop, country, all of them have their foot on the base that, that, that, that foundational music called gospel, every one of them. You can't have R and B without gospel, you can't have pop without gospel, you can't have, have, adult contemporary without gospel, you can't have country music without gospel, it all comes from the church, it all comes from that experience. We have, being that we've never really been, we, we, we've never had sales commensurate to those genres, it's no different today. We will find out the best way to monetize and market, we will find the best ways in order to get the word heard but it will be heard. We're still doing concerts. The one thing that, that cannot take the place, that cannot be replaced by the digital is the live performance. You know, it allows people to see it but they gotta be there to feel it. And, you know, and, and we'll, we'll work this out as we go but I do not, I do not have any type of lack of faith in gospel's ability to sustain, thrive, and grow in any environment that it's put in. So, this digital age will be the same. In this digital age gospel music will be the foundational music it's always been, you know. It can't help but be that. Story_ID: 527215 Speaker 1: How many albums have you produced so far? Speaker 2: Oh, I think six or seven. Speaker 1: And, and as, in, in the busyness of your life now are you working on another? Speaker 2: No, we just released one called 'The Journey (Live).' And that was my last project on RCA [RCA Inspiration] slash Sony [Sony Music Entertainment] slash Verity [Verity Gospel Music Group], whatever you wanna call it. On my-- Speaker 1: And when was that released? Speaker 2: Hm? That, that was released in August, 2016. Speaker 1: And are you touring with it? Speaker 2: I incorporate it in whatever I'm doing but I don't have a specific tour. We're working on a tour now but it's not based on promotional for the CD, it is based on touring, you know. Being that it's my last CD with the record company I leave it to them to either promote it and push it or to let it flounder and languish. Speaker 1: And why is it your last with the record company? Speaker 2: Because my contract is up. (Singing) "Hallelujah, oh, god, hallelujah, hallelujah." My contract is up. Hey, whew, it's up. It's like being in prison-- Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: --and serving your time. Speaker 1: Why is it like that? Speaker 2: Because the contracts are so absolutely unreasonable and artists in their beginnings sign contracts because of their excitement and not because of their education. And what I signed was in excitement and I signed a pretty good one though. It's not as bad as some of the other ones that have deals that they call 360 deals that, that the record company deals, everything that they do that brings in money, that is untenable and it doesn't make sense. So, once my deal was over 'cause I only had a five project deal, yes, we are out of here. We're mythology, we're history, we're gone, we're out. Speaker 1: Can you imagine ever signing with a label again? Speaker 2: Oh, not as long as I'm breathing 'cause I can do it myself. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And not, all the monies that they extrapolated from that, they took from it was double dipping, triple dipping, you never could recoup. It's like, it's like me selling you a house and you paid for the house and I still own the house, it's never really your house. I would sign a contract with a record company and they own all of the property, every song that I write becomes a part of their catalog. You never recoup and it's never really yours. Speaker 1: Even when you go, gold and platinum? Speaker 2: Even though you've paid for it three times over, it's never really yours, it's not yours. Speaker 1: That was a big argument that Prince had with the-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --music industry. Speaker 2: Yes. It's legitimate. Speaker 1: And now, because of all the platforms you have and you can obviously get the music because it can be digital only-- Speaker 2: (Nods head) Um-hm. Speaker 1: --you have the ability to crank it out. Speaker 2: Just gotta learn how to monetize it. We just have to learn how to monetize it. But it can at least be mine. I can own it. Let me, let me figure that out but for a record company to have such an, an untenable and really unreasonable contract which most of them do-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --it becomes problematic to the artist. You sit back, you write the songs, they want 50 percent of the publishing, they want total ownership of the property, you know, you got a license, you gotta pay to utilize your own stuff if you want to, you know. And it, it became ridiculous. So, this last project--my thing is, fellows, now, I don't care how you do it now 'cause the industry has changed to the point where the record companies are closing up and going defunct and they're firing everybody 'cause they don't know how to make money out of us anymore. It's not that cash cow that it used to be. And so, consequently, it's the age of the independent artist. So, with that I say goodbye with the last project that I did and, you know, smile and kick up my heels as I go and find my own farm, my own plantation, where I'm a free man. Story_ID: 527216 Speaker 1: You had mentioned Tyler Perry before when we cut. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So, you didn't get to tell the story about Tyler. Speaker 2: Well, Tyler Perry, was in the, in the audience while we were having our debut viewing, and-- Speaker 1: Of? Speaker 2: Of 'The Gospel.' Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: With Idris [Idris Elba] and, and Boris [Boris Kodjoe]. And, you know, we had to sit on the stage and give little depictions of what was going on in this part that we're about to show and answer questions afterwards. And I didn't realize until then how bad of an actor I was. And to do that in front of Tyler Perry was even more insult to injury. And, you know, and Tyler's very gracious, a humble man, nothing like the personas he plays. And he was so encouraging, so encouraging but I told him point blank, I'm going to stay in my lane, you stay in yours, and the, and never the two shall meet again. And, and I've kept my promise thus far, I've kept my promise. Story_ID: 527217 Speaker 1: When you look at your career, your-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --two-pronged career, and you think about what it means, what, what is the legacy that you hope to leave? Speaker 2: I'm often asked that, I'm often asked that in interviews. What is the legacy that I look to leave? I don't know. I'm not sure. What do I look to leave? I wanna leave a litany of accomplishments that will glorify God and that will encourage anybody and everyone to believe that they can do above and beyond what they think they have the capacity to do. That there is no real limitation except for that which is in our mind. But that if we allow our mind to expand, we can through the help of God and through the purpose of the Lord, accomplish feats and, and, and, and aspire to greatness that we've, that would boggle the mind. There's one big globe, we through our ingenuity and by God, God's grace have been able to leave this globe and go to the moon and circle and orbit this earth, even go to Mars. There's no limitation. God made us so fearfully and wonderfully, the Bible says we are fearfully and wonderfully made, that we have such a, a godly ability to achieve, to accomplish, to, to manifest, that the, the only limitation we have is ours. You know, a little girl from Mississippi can grow and become the most, the most pronounced and profound and strongest voice in media by the name of Oprah [Oprah Winfrey], such a name you've never heard? Simply by parlaying everything that she had into the next thing and never being satisfied with the level of success you're at. She proved that it could happen, anyone that you name that became successful, they're living proof that there are no limitations, you know. With Paul Allen and Steve Jobs get together [sic.] and they work on something called Macintosh, Apple [Apple, Inc.]. And Bill Gates along with his contemporary [Paul Allen] get together and they do something called Microsoft [Microsoft Corporation] and, and a whole globe now functions by it. Everything functions by these discoveries from people who dropped out of college, who knew, who never followed the American path or the, the, the prescribed way. Did these things. Tyler Perry who was sleeping in his car, who took an idea of old blacks mother, grandmother, who is feisty, turns it into a stage play that traveled across the country from its humble beginnings to being one of the greatest screenwriters that, that's out there. What are the limitations? What was the limitation for the Spike Lee? What are the limitations for a guy that's born in, in Hawaii to a mother who's white and a father who's, and who's Kenyan? What are the limitations to this biracial young man, who grows up without a father in the home, who's got a, a Muslim name, he could never achieve any level of greatness until he's an activist in Chicago [Illinois] and gets so tired of, of all that he sees that he runs for [U.S.] Senate and wins the Senate, only a senator for one and a half years, one and a half terms, who would have ever thought that a man by the name of Barack Hussein Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama], when we're looking for Saddam Hussein, Barack Hussein Obama would be sitting, laying, sleeping, governing from the White House, forty years after the death of Martin Luther King, Jr. [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]. There's no limitations. Win by a landslide. That, what, what, who sets the limits and why do we have to believe them? What I'd like to leave is in, in, in a legacy is that there are no limitations except for that which we impose upon ourselves. And with God, the Bible said, well, Jesus said with man it's impossible but with God, with God, all things are possible. Man with God makes all things possible. We've gone from building pyramids, which we still, our architects to this day still don't know how those pyramids were constructed and last all of these four thousand years. We've done things that, that are unbelievable, unbelievable. There are no limitations, I want that to be the legacy: there are no limitations, with God all things are possible. Story_ID: 527218 Speaker 1: To young black boys-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --in particular who are seeing black males who look like them not valued-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --often killed, just not valued, what do you say to them so they can see that there are no limits? What's your message to them? Speaker 2: I really don't know because this, this situation has become so egregious, I'd have to pray about how I would address these, these, these generations, these young black men today. Things have become so disheartening for them and they don't have a Martin King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] that we had. They, they don't have the, the true essence of leadership that gives them a sense of pride in who they are. They're fighting a battle seemingly alone, with nobody at the helm. They lost confidence in church because of how we've conducted ourselves, it's not because they've lost confidence in God, they've never had the opportunity that we had because we presented such a broken relationship and calling ourselves holy that it's caused them to say, why, why do I need to go there? Y'all doing the same thing we doing out here. You don't have any answer in there. And so, they become hopeless in society, hopeless in religion, they become hopeless in, in, in education, hopeless in finance, hopeless in employment. In society they seem like they're the, the, the, the deer in deer hunting season, you know. Open season on young black men. And, and, in, in, in the, in the business world they're hired last, if hired at all. What are you gonna do? What, what are you gonna do? Speaker 1: And you have a sixteen year old son [Matthew McClurkin]? Speaker 2: And I, and I have to pray about what I tell him. See I don't wanna sit and seem like I've got an answer. Speaker 1: Sure. Speaker 2: Because the bottom line is Jesus is the only answer that I can give that is the definite answer. But to the ills of society and the, the demons that we're dealing with today, to, to deal with, oh, man, the heartbreaking scenarios that are going on in the streets of this so called godly country, and it's not, America has never been a godly country. Story_ID: 527219 Speaker 1: The [U.S.] Constitution was configured and built on godly principles that the men who built and constructed it and configured it never used. Godly principles without godly practices, there's just a writ, it's just a paper, it's just something that they've etched but they haven't lived and so if you don't put into practice the principles, although you've got the format for a great country, you, you don't have it activated, it's not actualized, there's nothing there. So, you've got people owning slaves and saying the Bible says it's legitimate, that these are lesser creatures, that these are lesser beings, they are to be treated less than the, the cattle, less than the, the farm animals that we own, and the, and, and God ordains it by miss appropriating scriptures. It's never been a godly country. It was founded, how can you find something that somebody owns? That's like me coming to your house and saying I discovered this house and I claim it in the name of Donnie [HistoryMaker Donnie McClurkin]. You'd shoot me through the head and that's exactly what the native, the natives of the land did. We've trusted you, we accepted you, we let you come and then you tried to take it, so, yeah, we go to war and then you vilify us and make us seem as though we were barbarians. We weren't barbarians, we were owners, we were owners of this that you came and usurped. So, how do you paint us throughout history? We're the red skins, that take and chop off scalps and, oh, they're just so barbaric. This nation has never been godly. Nothing about it has been godly except for the, the principles of the Constitution. But these men were far from practitioners of this principle and thus we find ourselves as we are today. That was just, that was just slavery, that all by itself is such a heinous, heinous thing, way to just view a man, but that, that mentality has been perpetuated and it's just mutated with the time but its essence is still there. It's still there. So, you go from that to the sharecroppers, to the Jim Crow era. And now, oh, no, you can't vote, what are you talking about? You can't even live in the same neighborhoods, you can't go to the same school with our kids, you can't shop in the same grocery stores, you can't eat the same foods we eat. Story_ID: 527220 Speaker 1: To this day there's still a disparage--a disparity in our grocery stores. If you go into the hood, which I hate the classification, like it's some urban oh, no, the hood is more than just a bunch of urban people speaking slang, it's where we grow great people, it's where we grow Oprahs [Oprah Winfrey], it's where we grow Barack Obamas [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama], it's where we grow Spike Lees, it's where we grow Angela Bassetts, it's where we grow people, it's where we grow them. It's not just some kind of a, a, a throw away place. And we're, we're sitting back and we're seeing all of these things and we're not doing anything about them. This nation has never been godly. So, when you ask what do you tell the, the, the young black men, I gotta pray about it so I don't say the wrong thing. I gotta pray about that so I don't speak out of my anger and disappointment. I gotta pray about it so that I don't speak out of my hurt by seeing young men, the young men for the last five years gunned down in the street and only reason why we're seeing it now is because we have something that we didn't have twenty years ago, a camera in our phones. This has been happening for, for since, since slavery. And we've been made to seem like we are just oh, alarmists and just sensitive and paranoid, we've been losing our young black men forever. Now, you can't even record it, no, it's not what you even recorded, you have proof positive, no, no that's not what it is, no, you're absolved of it, you're let off, go ahead, no. Six of you grab one guy selling loose cigarettes on the street, throw him down, put him in a choke hold, kill him, in front of the camera, every moment of it caught on film, caught on digital display, and you let everybody off, nobody is guilty of this death? He wasn't committing any crime he was selling loose cigarettes, his name is Eric Garner. That's permissible? It's permissible to kill a twelve-year-old boy, Tamir Rice, who is just simply outside in a park playing. He's gotta, they gotta a, a, a, a, he's got a plastic gun. You pull up and ask no questions, you screech up to this place, jump out the car and shoot, he's twelve, he's twelve. A sheriff down south just last month, fourteen year old going to school with his saxophone in his hand, sheriff shoots him, who happens to be the head of the Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK], shoots him 'cause he's carrying a saxophone and says in his interview well, he should have been dribbling a basketball instead. And there's no outcry? I'm trying not to become emotional here now. You know, and, and that's just a few of them, we're not even gone talk about Sandra Bland. We're not, what do you say, what do you say about Philando Castile who is sitting in the car with his daughter and his girlfriend, who is not reaching for anything but the cop thinks he's reaching for a gun and shoots him right in the car in his, in his seat belt. What do I say to this generation? What, what, what do I say to 'em? What do I say to them about Alton Sterling who's thrown down on, on, on a minor charge, thrown down, he says, I have a gun in my pocket, and you shoot him dead. He's not reaching for it. Story_ID: 527221 Speaker 1: What do I say to the generation, what do I say to these young black men? Don't walk with a hoodie on. Don't walk at certain times of the day. Don't walk in certain neighborhoods. I gotta give you protocol now on what to do if you see a cop and those things still don't work. You follow the protocol and it's still based on whether that cop feels like they're in danger of, of their lives. What do I say? And I am not racist nor am I militant but we're dealing with some facts here. We're dealing with the facts that you pulled Sandra Bland over and you arrest her because she got a big mouth and then she's found hung in jail. The coroner says it's a homicide but we're gone brush this aside. The next week another young black woman killed in jail. What do I say to these young black men? I'm a pastor, I'm a father. My son [Matthew McClurkin] wears a hoodie literally every day. What do I sit back and say to them? What is the remedy to this? How do I give them hope? The only thing I can give them is Jesus 'cause I can't give them any remedy to this epidemic, this epidemic of black murder, I can't give them a remedy to that. I thought I came at the end of that. I thought I was born, I thought I was born at the end of that, that, that civil abuse, that racial divide, that prejudice, I thought I was born at the end of it. I saw Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] marching on television. I, I, I thought I was at the end of it. Story_ID: 527222 Speaker 1: So, is there a role for the black church today in the way that the church really was an organizing force during King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] time? Speaker 2: I don't think it's just the black church 'cause I don't believe that there is a black church. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I cannot, I cannot, I cannot classify the church by ethnicity. The church is built on Christ. Every church that has any sense of moral compass or decency, every church that has any knowledge of that Bible, every church that claims to be Christian, every pastor, white, black, yellow, brown, and red, need to be incensed and co-joined and marching, just like Dr. King had in his day. It wasn't the black church, it was the poor man's party, the, that party (unclear) that he was about to start before he became president. Speaker 1: (Unclear) (Simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's why they got him, got him taken out. It needs to be where everybody who claims to be such a Christian stands up and screams and, and kicks up sand and forces government to develop policy and addresses the ills and marches through the streets as one unit and demands justice, demands it, or removes people out of their seat, take these politicians out of their seat, there will be no election for you, you've allowed this to happen and now, you, you sit back at election time and, and address it, we're not impressed by that. We've got the power to move you and we need to become that one united front, no, not just the black church, the black people included, specifically, but not just this one dimension called the black church, they poo, poo us, but it's when all churches and all religious walks come together and demand, demand. My doctrine does not coincide with the Islamic doctrine or the Buddhist doctrine or the Hindi doctrine, no, not Christianity, no, sir, we do not, we do not believe in the doctrines of those other faiths, we respect them but we do not believe that but when it comes to crying out against injustice and it comes for the faith based community to come together, the faith based community must join arms and we'll, we'll hash out our religious differences as we go, but this demands every one of us that claim that we know who God is. When I see different religious leaders not addressing it or declaring that this is a godly nation, we need to support those entities that have committed these crimes against our humanity, I have a problem with that. I will never judge another man's Christianity but I have a problem with that. I don't believe that any of us should be cop killers, and I don't believe that any of us have a right, 'cause the cops that we kill at, are, the, the majority of the innocent policemen that we call on should something happen. Cops that were killed should, should have never died like that. It was just as wrong as the civilian that was killed by whatever police officer, just as wrong. And we cannot say that the chickens have come home to roost, that is not acceptable. We gotta be the voice that cry out against that too. We've gotta be the voice that stands up and says no, this is wrong and whoever did this needs to be brought to justice, just like whichever one of those police officers did this. It needs to be evaluated, really, not with the blue code but evaluated, it needs to be brought to court and prosecuted, and they need to be brought to justice. That's why I have a problem with the class, the different classifications of the black church, Hispanic church, man, if we don't get this thing together, we, we, we wind up impotent on our own little island, black church island, Hispanic church island, Ukrainian church island, white church island. We become these islands unto themselves and accomplishing nothing. Jesus said this, the house that is divided against its own self cannot stand. When you take away the pillars of a house the, the, the support walls of the house, the bearing structure of the house, that house cannot help but collapse and that's what we do when we do the black church, the white church, the Hispanic church, the Korean church, that's what we do when we do that. It works better when we're all co-joined together but there's still so much rac- racism in the church-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --it's not funny. Story_ID: 527223 Speaker 1: Before we leave, is there anything that you'd like to share that I haven't asked you? Speaker 2: (Speaks sarcastically) Yeah, Donald Trump [President Donald John Trump] for president. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: John, Donald J. Trump for president. I miss the plantation. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: Donald Trump for president. We need to get all these illegal immigrants back over the border, come over here with your Mexican-selves, with your, with your Muslim-selves, we only take Europeans. Don't come over here from Jamaica, get back down there. Donald J. Trump for president. Yeah, women are pigs, yeah, grab a woman in the groin, yeah. Donald Trump for president, woo hoo. Donald Trump all the way, baby. He gonna make America great again. Woo, Confederate flag. America is gone be great, Robert E. Lee is resurrected. Donald Trump for president. He's gone, he's gone kill ISIS [Islamic State of Iraq and Syria], that man is gonna kill ISIS dead. He's gonna bomb the S out of 'em he said. He said I'm gonna, I'll bomb the S out of 'em. Well, Donald Trump for, why didn't we think of that, why don't we go over there and just bomb the S out of 'em? Donald Trump for president, baby, all the way. There's nobody better, nobody better fitted for the job. He's got the best judgment and if he does say so himself, he has the best temperament for the job. My god, is there anybody else that could do this job. After all it was through Donald Trump that we found out that Ted Cruz dad [Rafael Cruz] had something to do with JFK's [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] murder. Donald Trump for president. This is the man that we need to run this country doggone it. 'Cause if he, if he is elected he's gone build a wall only second to the, to the, to the wall of China [Great Wall of China], and it's gone be all across from California all the way over here to, to Florida, Florida. And we gone, we gone have a wall, we gone keep those Mexicanos out of here, don't let them come across that border, that wall is going to famous, gonna be like the Tower of Babel it is. Donald Trump for president, ain't nobody better. Look at what he, he's gone make the black, the African American communities safe again 'cause after all he told the truth, we're killing each other, he said we're living in poverty. We've got 58 percent of our black young people unemployed, our school systems are terrible, what the H we got to lose? I said, you know, he's right, what else do we have to do lose, we ain't got nothing no how. Donald Trump for president, all the way, baby. 'Cause, you know, our communities are so bad, we need him and we need him to come to our churches, our black churches and quote Two Corinthians, he didn't know it was II Corinthians, Two Corinthians, we need him to come in and we need him to (claps hands) clap during our praise services and we need him to be, we need him to act like a president. And boy is he putting on a good act. Donald Trump, that's the last thing I wanna say 'cause if it happens, it may be the last thing anybody says, praise the Lord. But you can vote for whomever you want to 'cause, you know, I'm [HistoryMaker] Donnie McClurkin and I approve this message. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: I don't know why people don't hear what they hear. I don't know why, if I say something, somebody has gotta come behind me and say, no, well, what he really meant was. No, I said what I meant and I meant what I said. What did Maya Angelus [ph.], [HistoryMaker] Maya Angelou say, what did Maya Angelou say, she said, "When somebody shows you who they really are, believe them." Speaker 1: The first time (laughter). Yep. Speaker 2: Believe them the first time. So, with the last thing I'd like to say is America, wake up. We, we are still in Jim Crow, we're still fighting a civil war just Robert E. Lee has a different look, he got orange skin and white around his eyes and, and a comb over. We're still in a, we're still in a bad place. We're in a very, very precarious situation that our enemies are going to see and take, take advantage of it. The last thing I'd like to say is this, we've gotta get back to God. It's not in Republican, Democratic, it's not in the Green Party, it's not in, in, in, in anything else, 'cause they'll always be who they are, it's in Jesus. If, if America ever wants to be great again, it's not about from the flailings of a sociopath or, or the, the, the, in the lack of integrity of someone who's disingenuous, it's from our faith in God. That's all we have and that's the only thing that'll work, exclamation point. Speaker 1: Thank you. Speaker 2: You're welcomed. (Speaks sarcastically) Donald Trump for president. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: All the way. All the way. Donald Trump for president. Can't trump Trump. Trump's no chump. (Laughter) Don't dump Trump. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: Pump up Trump (laughter). Donald Trump for president, all the way, all the way, all the way, Hercules, (claps hands) Hercules, Hercules, Hercules. Please Donald, make our country great again. How you get to be so sweet? I asked you very kindly, could you tell me very nicely? How'd you get to be so sweet, Donald? I'm named Donald too but I ain't as trumped up as Trump. You is trumped up, chump. Oh, I didn't mean that. We not gone dump Trump, we gone pump up Trump (laughter)...