 Story_ID: 10618 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm the interviewer for the HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. And, ma'am, will you please state your name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My name is Iola McGowan, I-O-L-A, M-C-G-O-W-A-N. Speaker 1: Okay, now, can you give us your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Born 9/08/36, born here in Chicago, Illinois. Speaker 1: All right, and what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is July 10th or 11th-- Speaker 1: Eleventh. Speaker 2: Eleventh. July 11th, 19--oh, 2002. I'm sorry. Speaker 1: Okay, and where are we? Speaker 2: We're at 5839 West Midway Park in Chicago, Illinois. Speaker 1: And what is your occupation? Speaker 2: At present, I'm a retired Human Resource worker. Story_ID: 10619 Speaker 1: Before we get into depth, there are five 'People' magazine-ish type questions we always. And the first one is, what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: My favorite food, spaghetti. Speaker 1: What is your favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue. Speaker 1: What is your favorite season of the year? Speaker 2: Spring. Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Not really. I've been so many places and all of them have been wonderful. Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: "Do what you can and do it well." Story_ID: 10620 Speaker 1: Can you tell us the names of your parents [Tanzie Mayer, Ernestine Martin] and spell them for us and--with their birthdates, if you can, and where they were born? Speaker 2: My father, his name was Tanzie, Tanzie Mayer, M-A-Y-E-R. And he was born in St. Louis, Missouri. Speaker 1: How do you spell Tanzie? Speaker 2: T-A-N-Z-I-E. And my mother was Ernestine, E-R-N-E-S-T-I-N-E. And she was born in Little Rock, Arkansas. Speaker 1: Okay, do your parents have stories about growing up or, or any stories about their family background you can share with us? Speaker 2: Well, my mom, she, in doing my heritage, family heritage, she gave me a lot of stories which I didn't know, about her parents and how they were in Little Rock [Arkansas], and how we were of the Indian descent. My father was from--his family was from the New Orleans [Louisiana] area. And they were more or less from the, the mixed Portuguese-type area--people, in that area. My mom told me stories about our great grandmother and our grandmother, how they were slaves on the farm--how the farmers, the, the cruel things that they did to them at that time. And it, it's just unbelievable, you know, that things like that happened to people. And she grew up with those kinds of things in her lifetime, so she portrayed it, gave us those traditional stories throughout our family. And I, I didn't--being the era that it is, I haven't had the time to really share those stories with my children [Rhonda Stivers, Gregory McGowan, Allison McGowan]. So I've written them down, and someday when I'm not here--I've prepared it in a booklet form that will be presented to each one of my children and their--my grandchildren. And I did this as a college course too. So it's, it's done very professionally. Speaker 1: Can you share a story with us? Speaker 2: Well, one of the stories was that my Mom said we had a grandmother, she was called, Grandma Clack. And she said that at that time they were slaves and that when they didn't obey the masters that they would, when they were even expecting children, they would make protrusions within their stomachs, you know, and did all kind of cruel things to them. She said, people hear of one thing, about sex and all of the things that happened during those eras, she said, but there were much more cruel things done to people, you know, humans, that you would never believe, like what they did to women when they were expecting, and she told us different stories like that. Speaker 1: Okay, alright, and so, but you've written these stories down? Speaker 2: Yes--I've written that one in particular because it really was moving when she told it to me. And I've prepared it so that my children will know what's happened, and a number of other things I wrote about our family that my mother shared with me, you know. Story_ID: 10621 Speaker 1: She [McGowan's mother, Ernestine Martin Mayer] talked about the cruelty, and she also talked about the good times. She talked about the free living style that they had in the southern, rural Missouri, even though they were in the, St. Louis [Missouri], they had an outskirts of St. Louis that they lived in, and how they lived in these rural--she said, it wasn't rural, but it was, it wasn't as well developed as the cities were; and how they grow--you know, how they grew vegetables, and how they took care of animals and how they would walk a long ways to go to school and--but she managed to graduate from high school, you know, and, and go on. And she took courses at a college here [Chicago, Illinois], and she went into nursing. So she, she faired rather well. But she was the youngest of five children. So, she-- Speaker 2: Okay, she was born in Little Rock [Arkansas], but she grew up outside of St. Louis [Missouri]? Speaker 1: Yeah. Right. And my Dad, he, he was born in St. Louis, but his family was from New Orleans [Louisiana]. And his life was--he didn't talk too much about his life, but from hearing stories from different people in the family, we knew that they also had a very hard time. But he was fortunate enough to go to school. And he was a lieutenant on the police department there, which was very uncommon, you know, for African Americans at that time. Speaker 2: In St. Louis? Speaker 1: Yes, in St. Louis. And he opened--that's the picture up there. He had a couple of bars down there too. Speaker 2: Do your parents have a story of how they met? Speaker 1: They did, but I'm trying to remember how they met. Oh, I know, in church. My mother belonged to the Church of God in Christ. My father didn't. And my mother would go to and from church, as she's supposedly going to church. And she would end up meeting my father at the store or they'd stop by the candy store or wherever, some place in the neighborhood. And that's actually, from him seeing her from time to time, that's really how they met, you know, at the store in the neighborhood, and on her way to church. Speaker 2: Do they--do you know how they came to Chicago, how they came to live here? Speaker 1: Well, my mom, after a while, their marriage was on the rocks, and my mother came to Chicago alone with us. And my father was still in St. Louis. And when she came here, that's when she went to school and got into the nursing profession over at Cook County Hospital [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Did she have relatives here in Chicago? Speaker 1: Yes, she did. She had cousins that had come from St. Louis and they were staying here. And she came here. And we stayed with the cousins for a while, you know, the extended-type family. And then we migrated--she found an apartment here on the West Side of Chicago, which is--we [on the far West Side] referred to as "down east" here. It was where the [University of Illinois at Chicago] Medical Center is now. That's where I was raised, and that's where I went to school, and that's where she ended up, and that's where we stayed until I became--I'm the oldest of three girls--until I was in my second or third year of high school. Then we moved farther west. Story_ID: 10622 Speaker 1: Can you tell us about the neighborhood that you lived in--or the neighborhoods you lived in, in Chicago [Illinois] as you were growing us, and tell us about the sights and sounds and smells of growing up here in--on the West side? Speaker 2: I, I am really fond of the fact of--I, I really feel good that I grew up in Chicago, and I was fortunate enough to grow up in an area where there were people from every ethnic group that you can name. I mean, my friends--we stayed overnight with Italians. They stayed overnight with us. We stayed overnight with the Hispan--well, they them, well, they were Mexicans then, the Mexicans. And they stayed with us. And we went to school like that. We jumped double dutch on the street together. We played hop scotch together. We shot marbles together on the street, traded coloring books. And we had the carnivals, you know, the Italians had the carnivals in their neighborhoods. And we all went to the carnivals together. It was a totally different atmosphere than it is today. Of course, our parents, you know, we had more rules then. And if you didn't do something, Mrs. Jones would make sure you did do it right. And children were just more, it was just a fact of life that we were young, whether we realize or not, the problems that were going on, we had, other than knowing when the War [World War II] came in the '40s [1940s]. I remember all of the Italian people had 'Victory Gardens', and we had to, we'd go and visit them, their Victory Gardens. And when the soldiers were being killed, they would get in the garden and cry and cry. And I'll never forget that as long--how those parents would just get in there and mourn. And they'd build monuments and different little, different kinds of things in their backyards and things. And that would be in homage to the soldier that had passed. And it was just something, the flags, the patriotism; that was just a part of life. But when Franklin Delano Roosevelt was elected President of the United States, that was, that was just it. I mean my Mom [Ernestine Martin], we were around the television--not the television, the radio. We were sitting around the radio listening. When Joe Louis would have his fights, those were some--all, the whole neighborhood would be together, especially the black children, you know, African Americans--Negroes--as we were called then. We would all gather together and watch, and listen to the fights. There were just a number of things that caused more togetherness, you know. And we had our one little shopping store, grocery store we went to. And if we didn't have the money, the man would write it down. And we'd come back the next week--my Mom would come back the next week and pay for it. And then when we got ready to, to do real big shopping, we would get on the streetcar and ride down to Roosevelt [Road] and Halsted [Street]. That was the shopping area for the, us at that time. And it was such a treat to get on the streetcar. And then the biggest treat of all was to get on the streetcar, go to Western [Avenue], and Western had the more modern streetcars, and ride it out to Riverview Park [Chicago, Illinois]. That was the biggest treat of all. But, you know, transportation was just part of the norm at that time. It wasn't anything where you, you know, we didn't, you got to have a car, if you didn't have car and you, you just, you couldn't get around. We just walked, and we did a lot of walking. We went to the shows on the weekend. We had the old, old, the Broadway Strand [Theatre] and the Joy Theatre was on Roosevelt Road. And we used to go up there on Saturdays and Sundays, and my mom went go on the weekend with her friends. And they would give her plates as gifts, or glasses, and there'd be all kinds of things that, incentives for you to come to the theater, you know. But it was--the Joy Theatre was the one that showed all the 'Lone Ranger' and 'Hopalong Cassidy,' those kind of movies. And then the Broadway would show all of the Ann Sheridan, and all the, you know, the more romantic-type movies. So we, we just loved looking forward to weekends and, as I said, in the summertime, were the carnivals, and jumping rope in the neighborhood. Again, everybody would make sure they had their baths in the evening. They'd come out in the street and, you know, jump their little ropes or do what they're gonna do. And, or else we walked down to get ice cream or--and at that time the Chinese had fried rice, Chinese fried--restaurant. We'd walk down and get the fried rice with the shrimp in it or without, just something to be doing. But, you know, and everything was inexpensive, nothing cost a lot--well, at that time, it was according to the cost of living, you know. But today, when you look at it, it was inexpensive. We went to church every Sunday, had to go to church. And we did not have, where we lived down there, we didn't have bathrooms like we have today. We had to use the bathtubs, the metal tubs, you know, to take our baths twice a week or whatever, to get ready--well, we took a bath every day to go out and play. But I mean on the weekend, we took baths, special baths then because we were going to church the next morning. We had to go to Sunday school. My mother sewed. She made all of our dresses, all--she had three girls. All three of us dressed just alike. For holidays, everybody would say, oh, "Here comes Doll's three little girls. Those were my mo--that's what they called my mom, Doll. And they'd say, "Here comes Doll and her three little girls". And we all looked alike, dressed alike, did everything alike. We were only about eighteen months, nine months, eighteen months, a year, like that, apart. So we're very close. I'm the oldest, so I had to be the one to set the trend. She looked to me to do, be the leader, more or less, you'd say, because--and I guess that's where my, my life began those leadership, you know, traits, because I had to, as a young person, I'd--when she worked, I was there, responsible for the other two sisters [Laverne Schaffer, Anna Jeff]. I shared, and when I was old enough to be a teenager, I got jobs. I shared then, and it was just a part of life. Story_ID: 10623 Speaker 1: You had a close family. Speaker 2: We're still close. My sister [Laverne Schaffer] lives upstairs, and the other sister [Anna Jeff] lives in Oak Park, which is about ten minutes from us. Speaker 1: How many people were in the household? Was it just you and your mother [Ernestine Martin]? Speaker 2: And the three girls. That's all, that's all. That's the way we lived. Speaker 1: So your--no grandparents lived with you? Speaker 2: No, my, my grandma died--I never got to meet her. She died from cancer at forty-eight years old, and I never got to meet her. That's why, those stories that my mother told, I had to write them down because I never met--and I'm named after her. My name is Iola. Speaker 1: Now, what did you mother do for a living? Speaker 2: My mother was, they call them LPNs [licensed practical nurses], at Cook County Hospital [Chicago, Illinois], and she also worked at U of I [University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois]. And when she resigned, she was the director--when she retired, she was a, a Director for Environmental Services for the handi--blind, Visually Handicapped Institute, the visually handicapped. Speaker 1: Did your father [Tanzie Mayer] ever visit? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah--. He would visit us. And he had his businesses after he retired from the police department. And we would go down and stay with him. My mom would go too, you know, and go down and stay. He had a lovely home. So we'd--that was sort of like our place away from home, you know. And it was, he kept involved with us, you know. Speaker 1: But he was one of the, probably one of the few black lieutenants in the St. Louis [Missouri] Police Department in those days, if not the only one? Speaker 2: Right. I don't know anybody but him that was one. But he was very fair-skinned so, you know, it's very, well, you can look at the picture up there and tell. So, that might have had something to do with it. Story_ID: 10624 Speaker 1: Let's talk about school. What schools did you attend? Speaker 2: Okay--I, I attended Thomas Jefferson [Elementary] School [Chicago, Illinois], which is here on the West side. I graduated from there. I--after leaving Jefferson Grammar School, I went to Farragut High School [Chicago, Illinois], and at that time, it was predominantly Croatian and Lithuanian. I think Kim Novak was going there, and Dinah Washington's chil--nephew or son or--anyway, Kim, Kimbrough (ph.)--I'll never forget him, 'cause she used to pick us up and bring us home from school. You know, she'd pick him up and she'd tell us all, "Get in the car. I'm taking you home, all of you", you know. So I got a chance to meet her. After that I went to Chicago Teachers College [ now Chicago State University,Chicago, Illinois]. And I was working too, and I decided I wanted to work. So then I, I didn't go back. And I started getting jobs, and I was, you know, kind of pleased with what I was doing. Speaker 1: Let's just go back to grade school-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and spend some time there. Can you remember your first day of school? Was school a big deal in your household? Speaker 2: Oh, definitely so, especially for me cause I was number one, and it, I had to be the one to make sure--every, I had to get the As because that--it was Es then, excellent. It was E. It wasn't A. And I had to get the Es because that meant the other girls would want to do what I had to do. So we--and my mother [Ernestine Martin] spent a lot of time with us. She's a very intelligent woman. And on weekends, we would just--all of three of us [ Laverne Schaffer, Anna Jeff] get into bed with her, and we worked crossword puzzles, and she'd have all kind of books and make us read, you know. And then we'd all listen to the radio together. And then when I went to school, you know, I was well prepared. I was like a top student in my class. I was a top student. I won the Chicago Spelling Bee for Chicago, and I was sent away--the Spelling Bee that they have here, I did that every time. And I got there and couldn't spell the word "house." (laughs) I was so nervous. Speaker 1: What year was this? Speaker 2: That was in, I think I was in the sixth grade or something like that. And I, I was the top speller from the whole school. I mean all over, people would come, and I'm spelling. And when I went to the major, then my mother said, oh, she--and everybody was around, "Oh, you were just nervous". I was, I was so nervous, you know. So that, that was one of the experiences I had. And in addition to that, I received a lot of awards from community groups, not a lot, I'd say about three or four awards from different community groups, that were--at that time, I didn't understand. I thought that was, yeah, but these were neighborhood groups, you know, that gave out little incentives to students that were graduating from grammar school. And I got those awards. I had a very high average when I went into Chicago Teachers College, you know, when I went into--not, when I left there, I went into Farragut [High School]. I went into Farragut. And that was quite a challenge, going into a high school that was predominantly, all white. And it was like, three and four students per class, you know, blacks. And I'll never forget, in my civics class, the teacher asked one day, he said, "What ethnic group," he asked everybody what ethnic group were they from. And when he got to me, I said, Indian. And everybody in the class burst out laughing. And I felt so belittled, and I said--he didn't understand what I was saying. My mother told me that our family came from an Indian descent, you know. And that's why I said that, you know. I knew I was black. I knew I was a Negro at that time and whatever, but I knew I was that. But I meant he asked, where, you know, where did we come from, where--cause all the others were saying, I come from Lithuania, I come from the Polish [sic, Poland], you know, or something like that. But when he got to me, I said, where--but, and that just, oh, that threw me for a loop that--and I didn't even try to explain it to them cause I just felt he wouldn't have understood. For him to have that attitude to sit there and laugh when I said it, it just dismayed me so, you know. So that was one of the disappointments I had going to school with predominantly white kids. I didn't have any problems as far as, you know, somebody being nasty or anything. I haven't--I didn't have--the only time I really had that, and it had nothing to do with the schools, when I applied for a job one time as a teenager, you know. So, but other than that-- Speaker 1: Did you feel that you were culturally prepared to deal with that kind of question when he asked that or did--? Speaker 2: No. I, I don't, I don't. I was only going by what my mother said, you know. I mean I, I don't think--that, maybe that's why I didn't go any farther with it, with him cause I wasn't culturally prepared. But my mother told us, she said, we, we came--she said, even though we're black, she said, we came from Indian descent, you know. And that's what I said to him. And I just wasn't ready to, you know, I didn't know how to explain it or just to say, "My mother said," you know. I'm gonna tell him-- Speaker 1: It's a complicated thing. Speaker 2: --So, today it's not. I mean today they put on their, on the forms--what are these forms that they go from house to house on--the Census. They put on the Census form, you know, different, if you're a different ethnic groups, they have--they don't put down black or white. Now, they put something else down, I understand, if you're mixed, you know, and you--you know, or you come from a different heritage. I'm not mixed, not at all. I don't believe that I am. But it's just that our heritage was Indian, you know. So that's, that's primarily one of the major problems that I had in high school. Story_ID: 10625 Speaker 1: The one thing, problem we did have, on our social life, you know. It's, it was limited. But the one thing, I did learn a lot, I learned how to do the polka, and I learned how to do square dancing and all those things. You know, I learned how to do it. And I--it served as an advantage later on in life, even though at that time, I felt, this is the pits, you know. I want to go hear the, the Miracles or the Temptations, and I got to sit here and listen to this. But I learned. And it has helped me. When I'm with other groups, I can understand, and I, you know, I--when they talk about things like that or, even in my elected position, I've been in areas where they've had polkas and things. And I can fit right in, and that's because of my early beginning. So it helped, you know. It has its--at the time, when you're going through it, you're like, oh, no, this can't work. But then when you get older, you say, oh, there was a plus there. Speaker 2: You said your social life was somewhat limited at Farragut [High School, Chicago, Illinois]-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --you know, between minorities in the school, but were you involved in any school activities? Speaker 1: Oh, yes, I was--we couldn't be, I wasn't a class president and all of that, other than helping with different events that was going on in the school because, you know, naturally, if it's only two or three of us, we don't get the support that the other students were getting. So I, I helped with different events that were going on. Then we had some black football players, and we would be with them all the time, you know. And we sort of made our own little fun with them. And whatever event they were involved with, we'd get involved with them, make sure we were there to support them at the games and get our--we all wore jackets, you know, we had little jackets. And our jackets said--in fact, we formed a social club. It was called the 'The Gay Teens'. You wouldn't say that today. (laughs) But at that time, it was the 'Gay Teens'. And it was blue and yellow, I'll never--in fact, I think you have a photo of me in that jacket. And that, that was our social thing, you know. At the school, everybody knew when we came, we were supporting, you know, our little group was supporting the football players. And they knew which ones we were supporting, you know. So that, that kind of way we got involved. And when you go to a school that's primarily, or at least for me it was, you're not as involved as--you have more of your social life on your own because, don't forget, we didn't have cars, where we could go and visit somebody that lives over, you know, South or--so we had to take public transportation. So everything was primarily done in our neighborhood. And, you know, we had those quarter socials, (laughs) and Saturday night socials and things like that. So that was more or less--but school, I, I worked very hard, and I was a good student. Story_ID: 10626 Speaker 1: Did you have any idea at that time of what you wanted to do with your life, or what direction your life was gonna take? Or did you have a career goal? Speaker 2: You know, ever since I was in grammar school [Thomas Jefferson Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois], I always thought I wanted to be a teacher. And, but I guess when we're young those--we have role models, I guess that's what we're looking at, the educat--I was in that system, going to school there, and I wanted to be a teacher. And that's all I wanted--I went, that's when I went to Chicago Teachers College [now Chicago State University, Chicago, Illinois] 'cause I wanted to be a teacher. And then after I got into it, started taking the courses, I felt it really wasn't for me, because I'm a people person. And even though teaching, you're dealing with humans, but you're limited because you're dealing with either, you know, young--I was thinking of young children, you know, in school, in elementary schools and things. So I felt that, I don't know, I just didn't, I wanted something more challenging, you know. So that's why I didn't pursue it any further. Story_ID: 10627 Speaker 1: After high school, what did you do--after high school? Speaker 2: Well, I went to Chicago Teachers College [now Chicago State University, Chicago, Illinois] for about a year. And I decided that I needed to work, and like I said, I really wasn't interested in the teaching profession, you know. So I went to work, and then I got married. And I got a family, started with my first child [Rhonda]. And then a second child [Gregory], and then I started working for the county [Cook County, Illinois], I think it was. And I worked for the county for a while, and then I--after that I, after I left the county, what did I do? Oh, after I left the county then I went to--I decided I should go back to school. I, I got a job with the city [Chicago, Illinois]. In fact, I worked where I was head of Consumer Services for [Chicago mayor] Jane Byrne. And I decided I should go back to school. And I went to Northeastern Illinois University [Chicago, Illinois]. And I got my degree. And-- Speaker 1: Now, what, and we're moving real fast, but about what year is this? Speaker 2: When I went back to school? Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: 1980. Speaker 1: Okay, can you tell us how you actually-- Speaker 2: That's when I graduated, in 1980. I went in 1976. Speaker 1: How did you meet your husband? Speaker 2: Let's see, my husband had a--his father was in business. And they had a--I'm trying to think, is this how I met him? (Laughs) And they had a restaurant and a pool hall. And I used to go out and, and I'd see him all the time. And one day he asked me would I like to go out. And I said, yes, you know. So we ended up getting married, you know. And that was it. Speaker 1: Okay, so this is like, this is right after you--well, you were at Chicago Teachers College [Chicago State University] for a year. Then you got married about a year after you-- Speaker 2: Yeah. It was about a year afterwards, yeah, cause it was 1950--sixty, fifty, yeah, cause Rhonda's fifty, yeah, Rhonda's born in '50 [1950]--yeah, it was about 1957, '58 [1958], something like that. Speaker 1: So for most of this time between then and 1980, you're basically taking care of your children and-- Speaker 2: Between that time and 1980? Speaker 1: (Unclear) --and the city. Speaker 2: No, I, I worked for--yeah, I worked for the city. Speaker 1: Oh, the city. Speaker 2: --I worked for the Model Cities Program. I had, I wrote a--I worked for Consumer Services, which was a ci--and when, was it [President John F.] Kennedy, one of the Presidents [sic, President Lyndon B. Johnson], they had this program, Model Cities Program. And I wrote a grant for the city of Chicago, Department of Consumer Services, and the grant was funded, you know. And so then I went into the Consumer Services throughout the city. They called it consumer--it was Consumer Scales, Weights and Measures, but it's not that anymore. Story_ID: 10628 Speaker 1: In 1969, about in the, in the '60s [1960s], the late '60s [1960s], it was '60 [1960], 1960. I--we decided to buy a home. And they had just built some new townhouses in North Lawndale [West side Chicago, Illinois neighborhood]. And we went over, and we bought the house. And when we got there, we bought it on contract, what they called contract. And we bought the house, and at the time we bought the house, they told us that we could--we would get a mortgage within a certain period of time, which was maybe two years or three years, we'd be eligible for the mortgage. Well, after the two or three years passed, we never got the mortgage. So what I did, I formed, all fifty-seven homeowners over there, we formed a group. And I did all the research with all of the--I did this on my own, all the research with all the different agencies to find out what rights we had. And at that time, it was very hard getting, you know, any kind of information from city agencies, the government. So one of the, the Joyce Foundation [Chicago, Illinois], the man who headed that, he found out what I was doing, and he called me. And he had, he told me he would help me. And he helped us get, do all the research. They flew me to New York to meet with the mort--the people who had the mortgage on it, and all those kind of different things. And lo and behold, everybody in that group, in that, those homes, I got them their mortgages. We got the mortgage, but it was a fight. It was not easy. We had to march. We had marches. We had press, you know, releases. We, and we, we did everything. We were on the radio, little neighborhood newspapers. We had all of them, you know, come and just everything. But we got it. We were successful. Speaker 2: Were you working with a neighborhood organization that was-- Speaker 1: No, there was a neighborhood organization doing that at that time. But we were sort of like separate on our own, and ours was called the Lawndale, Lawndale Estate, 'cause that was the name of the group, the Lawndale Estates Home Buyers League. That's what our, we formed, I formed that. I went and got it. When you go down and get it certified, and I had it all, you know, done properly through, legally. Story_ID: 10629 Speaker 1: So you organized this group [the Lawndale Estates Home Buyers League] yourself, did you have any prior training in how to organize people? Speaker 2: No, never done anything like that before in my life, but I just knew that we couldn't go on paying all that money and not getting a mortgage, you know, and not going towards the house; everything was going towards the interest. And something should have been going towards the principal. Speaker 1: Okay, but there was nobody that guided you all in (unclear)? Speaker 2: Well, as I said, the Joyce Foundation [Chicago, Illinois], they showed me how to, you know, file papers and do things like that, but I mean I'm, I'm the way that got the organization, the people together, the citizens together and all the residents. And I'm the one, when we had the meetings, and I would lead the meetings and all of that. That's how it was my first involvement civically. Speaker 1: Was the Joyce Foundation involved from the very beginning? Speaker 2: No, no, no. They heard about it through the press. They heard about it. And this man called me, and he said, we understand that you all are, you know, trying to get your mortgages over there. And he met with, not just me, other people from the group too. And we all sat down, and we decided that they could, we let them help us. And they didn't charge us anything. They were just, you know, nice enough to do it. Speaker 1: Do you remember the person's name? Speaker 2: I don't remember, nice man too. I don't remember. That's a shame. Speaker 1: All right, well, it sounds like they made a real commitment and you developed as a leader-- Speaker 2: Um-hum, um-hum. Speaker 1: --as a result of this experience. So what happened next after you all got your mortgages? Speaker 2: Well, we got the mortgages, and we kept the neighborhood, you know, group going. And the houses were built in '62 [1962], so they were fairly all new homes, you know. And after that, then--I just became--I was always involved with my children [Rhonda, Gregory, Allison], you know, at their schools. They always went to Lutheran schools, and I was very involved with the Lutheran schools. And I've, I've just done a number of things, you know, in the community. And then when I got this job with Consumer Scales--Consumer Scales, Weights and Measures, it really took me into the community because that was my job. I went out and gave speeches before community organizations and community groups and--that was before Model Cities. And I got a chance to really see other community groups, how things happened, and the way people organize and get together. And I--so it really broadened my spectrum on, on civic, you know, involvement. In addition to that, I can't think of anything specifically, so through the Consumer Scales and Consumer Services, I was able to expand, you know, myself civically. I just got involved with a lot of other groups, you know, not just doing neighborhood type of stuff, but just--if it was a school, you know, a problem at a school. And I did work for, I jumped over, so I did for the Human Services, for--not human--for the EEO, what do you call it, when Denton Brooks was the head of it, and Lenore Cartwright (ph.)? She was the head of it, and-- Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: But anyway, I worked for them, and that too got me involved in a lot of neighborhood involvement, you know, a lot of neighborhood work in, in different meetings and things. I was just everywhere, doing a lot. Then I went to Consumer Scales after that. Denton Brooks. I can't think of the name, Urban Opportunity--Committee on Urban Opportunity, that's what it was. And it was at Kedzie [Avenue] and Roosevelt [Road]. Story_ID: 10630 Speaker 1: So you went to school in '76 [1976], you went to Northeastern [Illinois University, Chicago, Illinois] in '76 [1976], I think it was? Speaker 2: --I went there seventy, '78 [1978]. I was in a non-traditional program, where you could bring all your credits and your life experiences. And that's how I got my degree so early, but I had to have the basics. You couldn't just, you know, go in there and get a degree, bring that and get a degree. I had to have 132 hours, which was required. And I had to meet certain specifications to get that 132 hours by state law. Speaker 1: Okay, did you have any--were there any particular or special teachers over there at Northeastern that guided you (unclear)? Speaker 2: Oh, yes, Dr. Sherman Beverly [Jr.], wonderful, wonderful man. He--I was in his--he was my counselor, I think, at the beginning. And Dr.--oh, it was Sherman Beverly and, oh, he's gonna kill me, I can't think of his name, 'cause it's another. He's over--African American Studies. I can't think, but anyway, Dr. Beverly took me under his wing, and he made me an, sort of like an intern. And he headed a program on--he got funded--a program on teaching students how to get jobs and prepare them for the work life, you know, and that. And I interned--career, Career Education it was called. And I worked with him on that. I assisted him in getting that together. I assisted him in working with the students, and it was really, really wonderful. And he--we really got to be great friends. His--my husband, him and his wife, we got to be really good friends, you know. And it was because of my experience there that I was able to, to really go out and, that's when I really decided I was going into Human Resources, was through that little program, Career Education program. Story_ID: 10631 Speaker 1: What did you do after, after school? Speaker 2: Well, when I was at Northeastern [Illinois University, Chicago, Illinois] my last year, I was appointed to the Chicago Park District Board. I had just gotten my degree, I think, and that was '80 [1980] and Mayor [Jane] Byrne was elected mayor. And she appointed me to the Chicago Park District Board. Speaker 1: Now, prior to that time, were you involved in party politics at all? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes. I, I-- Speaker 1: How did you get involved (laughs)? Speaker 2: That's all (laughs). At the time that I was working with the, when I organized those families, I was also a precinct worker in another ward, though not where I lived, because that was not the ward. We were in that ward, and they redistricted and cut me out, and it was just a thing. But anyway, I've been involved in politics since I was--at the time that I, you had to be twenty-one. And I was involved since I was twenty. And I started out as a Judge of Elect--no, first I started out working the precinct with my precinct captain, you know, walking door-to-door, and talking to the people. And at that time, we had Jewish precinct captains. And doing that, I learned the community real well. And so there was a position open on the Board for an Election Judge, and I took that. And I worked there, and then when I left there, I went--I became an Assistant precinct captain, and I worked very hard at that. In fact, the people thought I was the precinct captain 'cause I worked so hard at it. And when--that's how I got involved in this political stuff. And then from there, I became a Precinct Captain and then I was made a Committeewoman [29th Ward], which is an appointed position from a ward, at that time. You were not elected, you were appointed. Speaker 1: So you were appointed by, by the-- Speaker 2: The committeeman. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: See, and whoever the committeeman, he, he appoints a committeewoman. And I, and at that time, it was Senator Bernard Neistein. He was a Jewish guy. And he appointed me to committeewoman. Then when I got the job, I was doing this with the neighborhood organization, working for the Consumer Services, and with the Consumer Scales, when I got that job, I became--Mayor [Jane] Byrne got me involved with--'cause she knew that I was out in the community a lot. She got me involved with a lot of things through--politically, with the mayor, Mayor Byrne--Mayor Daley, Mayor Richard M. Daley, Richard J. Daley. And-- Speaker 1: Okay, so you worked for the Department of Consumer Affairs when Jane Byrne was in charge of that? Speaker 2: Right-- And so [Mayor] Richard J. Daley, he was really, the one that really pushed me for Committeewoman, when Cardiss Collins ran--when her husband [George Washington Collins] died, and she ran for [U.S.] Congresswoman. He called me personally and asked me would I handle her campaign, you know, work with her. And I did do that, her very first campaign. And I worked very hard with her in getting her elected. From there, I was more or less, just--I traveled a lot with the Democratic Party, you know, with Jane Byrne and that was different things that--'cause she headed the Women's Group for the Democratic Party. And we would go in different places and do--and I was always there. You know, and I just got involved with a lot--education, you know, making sure the money--we got money from the state [of Illinois] for the city of Chicago for educational funds, and just a number of things we, we did, you know; health programs, making sure that lead poisoning was taken care in the inner-city neighborhoods cause that's where the problems really were. And in addition to that, I was involved politically, and then I had this thing at home, then I'm dealing with the Lutheran schools, 'cause I always got involved with my children at school. You know, I'd go up to different events and got on different committees and things like that. Story_ID: 10632 Speaker 1: Let's go back to when Richard [J.] Daley is still the mayor, and you're working for the Department-- Speaker 2: The father? Speaker 1: Yeah, the father is still mayor. And I know Chicago political life, really gets stirred up when he dies because he had amassed all this power, and had all the pieces in place. And then, you know, Mayor Richard J. Daley dies in 1977 [sic, December 1976], right? And then there's, you know, there's sort of--what are your reflections on what happened in Chicago when (unclear)--? Speaker 2: Well, I was in a lull at that time when the mayor died, those few years, that's when I went back to school [Northeastern Illinois University, Chicago, Illinois] because when [President] Richard Nixon came in [1969-1974], he cut out the Model Cities program. So I didn't have a job at that time. Our program was cut. We didn't have any monies for it. And I guess I--and instead of looking for another job or anything, my husband said, why don't you go back to school? You've got too much going out here not to have a degree. And at that time, everybody's degree conscious. If you didn't have a degree, you, you're--you know, it just didn't count. So I, I said, and he just said, no, you've got to go back to school. And I said, okay. So I didn't go to work. I took a couple of years off. And so when Mayor Daley died, I was not active politically. I was in school, but I did see all of the, you know, all, everything was on TV I, and, you know, what was going on, but I, I really didn't get involved, you know. I, I don't know, you know--I'm saying that maybe it could have been handled differently, you know, but I wasn't there. And I'm gonna tell you, being in politics, it's one thing I know. You need to be there to know what's going on, to make a decision or make a, a judge--or pass judgment on something, because a lot of people--you know, we read the press and everything. But it's, half the time, not really what it's supposed to be, you know. So I really didn't--I, I was, I followed it in the papers because that was my, neigh--I've been involved with it all these years. And I knew that, but I just had no role in it. I didn't have anything to, you know, to, to say or, you know, I wasn't out in the community with it or anything like that. I was in school. Then when she ran for mayor, and she won, she called me, Jane Byrne. She called me and she asked me would I serve on the [Chicago] Park District Board. She said, what are you doing? I said, I'm just graduating from school. And she said, "Would you serve?" And that's how I got back into it. Speaker 1: Now, did you work on Jane Byrne's campaign at all? Speaker 2: No. I, I wasn't, I wasn't, other than reading in the paper, I did not work on her campaign at all--. She knew that. But she knew that I had been a good employee, you know, and that I had always been honest with her and loyal, you know. But I, I didn't have a role in her campaign. Speaker 1: At that time, were you still the committeewoman for the [29th] Ward? Speaker 2: I was, but it was sort of like inactive because, as I said, we were redistricted out. I was like--that wasn't the 29th Ward then, I don't think, where I was living. But anyway I, I took time off cause I was going to school, you know. And, and with my other--I just didn't get involved, period, you know. If he had called me and asked me to do it, I would have done it. It's no-- Speaker 1: And the Alderman then was--was that Ike [Isaac] Carothers? Speaker 2: No, no. He was with the 28th Ward. This was the 29th. It was Biggs. I can't think of his first name, but it was Biggs. He owned a funeral home on Fifth Avenue [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Okay, so, well, this--did Jane Byrne's call come as a big surprise, 'cause I mean that's a big deal, being on the Park District Board? Speaker 2: It didn't come as a big surprise. But I, I don't know. I, I was very excited. I felt good about the fact that she asked me. I was honored, you know, but I mean, I mean she knew what I was doing. She knew that I had to go to school. She--I told her that. She and I had talked about it. And so it--when she called me, I was flattered, you know, and I, I felt it was an honor and all that. But I, I don't know if I was surprised, you know. I--not that I think she had to do anything for me, that she, you know, would. I didn't think that. But I just felt, you know, we had this relationship, and she knew what I was doing. And she felt that I would be there for her because I was loyal. And, and that's the way I would do anybody that sits in the Mayoral chair, that calls asking you--if you're a part of it, then you have to be loyal to them. And that, that's, you know, that's part of the political business. Story_ID: 10633 Speaker 1: The Chicago Park District has--is different from city government, different from [Illinois] state government, is set up almost separate, right, from the, from the other, from any other governing--but the mayor could appoint the Board members-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Okay. Yeah, but, okay. Give us some idea (simultaneously) (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Well, the reason why they say it's separate, the reason why they say it's separate is because of its funding. It's funded through the state from your taxes, and so much comes from--nothing hardly comes from the city. That's what, that's why they say it's a separate municipal, you know, part of government. But the Mayor has the power, like he has on just about all of the Boards in the city to appoint different people to fulfill those positions. And, but that does not mean that it's funded by the city, you know. Speaker 1: And the city really is as an administrator. Speaker 2: Right, right, right, it depends on who the mayor is (laughs). It depends. Some mayors, you know, they-that's that, we'll let--but some mayors, they're like, I say, some of them want to have their hands on everything. But anyway, it was, that was an exciting period for me. I, I was the first African American woman to be appointed to that Board. And I went on the Board with five--four, four or fi--four white men, men that had never--you know, I, I don't know whether it was the fact that I was a female or the fact that I was black, but they had never had this exposure that they had to have with me, including [Edmund L.] Kelly, he was right with them. You know, it was totally different. Whenever I said something, they disagreed. If I--Douglas Park, I'll never forget it, if I said the bathrooms over there were horrible, 'cause I visited all the parks. I didn't just sit in the office and--'cause I didn't have a job. I was on this board, unpaid position, but I had the time. I would visit every park. I've, I'd go in. I'd introduce myself to the supervisors. I met the staff, you know, and it got so they would be on the phone, "That Commissioner is coming around." They were prepared for me. And I'd go out to the lakefront, the theater on the lake, all the different places that had been a secret to a lot of people within the city of Chi--I visited. And they were just shocked 'cause no other Commissioner ever did that. In addition too, when I was appointed to that board, I started at the top floor and met, went around and introduced myself to every employee in that building, and told them that if they needed anything, you know, if there was some dis--to let me know. And believe me, they--I got so much, you know, favorable--not that they came to me with a lot of complaints, but the fact that I opened, you know, up the line of communications with them, it meant a lot to them. The four Commissioners, they--I was talking about Douglas Park, how I was complaining about the bathrooms because I was visiting the park, how they weren't the way they should be and the one Commissioner told me--he's dead today, I'll never forget, he told me, "Well, that's the way 'those' people do things" and, you know, and it was just, it was just wasn't the way you were supposed to settle things. So then I knew what I was up against. I said, "Well, you know. So then, the other thing was that they would get a room and they would talk about all kinds of things like sports and all things that I'm, I'm not, you know, the Be--what happened at the [Chicago] Bears game and all this, and I'm not really privy to all this 'cause I'm not looking at sports. My was husband was though, but not me. So I came home one day, and I told my husband, I said, you know, I said, "I'm so tired of them talking about all of these," and I--so I said, "tell me about the Bears." He explained all about football to me (laughs.( He explained to me about all the different sports, and I went back in that same room, and they were talking, they started talking about the passes that were made, and then I got in the conversation. And they looked at me (laughs). And I said, oh, yeah, that was a good throw, good pass, that was a good touchdown, whatever. And they got, and I got involved with--and then they, the whole, it seems like the whole world opened up. They had a different attitude towards me. I was--I said, I'm beginning to fit in the big boy network over here because I could talk sports, you know. So, (laughs), you know, people think things like this don't count. That's why I told my children, learn how to play golf, learn how to do this and do that, 'cause you have to know those things if you're gonna be in this world. People do--all kind of decisions are made in different ways, you know. So anyway, that kind of broke the barrier, after I did that. And then one day, Ed Kelly and I, we had a tete-a-tete, and I took him in the room, and I told him, I said, "As long as I'm here, you're not--you don't ever have to like me, but you will have to respect me." I said, "'Cause I'm on this board, and I'm gonna be here." I have been his best friend--I'm not telling you the whole story the way I said it, but he and I have been-- Speaker 1: You used stronger language than that? Speaker 2: (Laughs) And I told him I said, "And you and I are gonna get along." Speaker 1: Now, Ed Kelly was one of the staunch supporters of Richard J. Daley and one of his-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --I mean he handpicked and installed in that position, and-- Speaker 2: And he loved the mayor. He--but, but Kelly is just like most Democrats. They respect the leadership, you know. Now, he and Daley probably had a closer relationship, the father Daley, but he--once Jane Byrne came in--in the beginning they had their little--but he began, he respected her. And he, he did the same thing with me. He and I are good friends today. You know, I can pick up the phone and call, "I," that's what he's calls me. "I," and we talk, talk, talk. But there's that barrier that when they have, you know, people hear all these horror stories about another, I don't know if it's just an ethnic group or the female, the gender or what it is, you know, but you got to break that barrier, and being both of those things, it was twice as hard for me. So, but I, I overcame it, and it came out to be a good working relationship. I earned a lot of respect. I was voted the vice president of the board, the first black vice president to ever be on that board. So I felt that, you know--and I didn't go take my troubles to the streets. I didn't go out, call press conferences, "They said this," because it didn't have to be handled that way. Story_ID: 10634 Speaker 1: You were talking about your activities in the Chicago [Illinois] Park District. Speaker 2: Right. So after, after, you know, after a while we began to have a meeting of the minds. And I still, whenever I had concerns about things that went on at the District, I raised them. I did a lot of things at the District that had not been done before. For an example, I brought women on as carpenters. I brought women on as truck drivers. I brought minority on as--African Americans, on as carpenters into craftsmen trade, I should, not just carpenters, but the craftsmen trade. In fact, when I go out today, I see people, "Oh, Ms. McGowan, you got me this job. Don't you remember me?" And I can't remember them--"oh, can't, don't you remember", and you know, and things like that. So there was a lot of inroads made. There was a decree that was put on, a Federal decree that was put on the Park District when I was there because they had--there was a charge that they were not doing, for minority parks as they should have. That was done prior to me coming there, but the decree was assessed while I was there. But I mean that, the fact that they weren't doing, that was done before my time. Anyway, a lot of (unclear), this park, right up here where they have the water park now in Austin, the new--there was a, I had a new pavement put through there, had--just a lot of things in different parks throughout the city, you know, a lot of changes I had made that weren't done before. And the other Commissioners did things too. But I'm not just saying I did--everything I did. But I did do a lot of thing, you know. And I'm very proud of the legacy that I have at that Park District. I, I just feel that it was a time in my life that I was very happy that I was able to give back to the citizens, you know, for growing up here and being able to be a part of the citizenry of Chicago and be able to give something too. And as I was looking yesterday on television, they were talking about the roses they were giving away from the park, that people could come--and I thought about that beautiful rose garden, nothing--there is a reason why they're doing it. I'm not saying anything about that, but it brought it back memories of how I used to go down and see that beautiful rose garden at the park, you know, at Grant Park. And just different things that went on throughout the parks that a lot of people didn't take advantage of. At one time, we used to use the parks a lot, but, you know, I think the change of the neighborhoods had a lot to do with people not using the parks the way they used to. And a lot of it had to do with social status in our neighborhoods, you know. For an example, you know, we had the gang element and things like that. And then people began to work, and their children would go to daycare whereas when I grew up, we would go to the park and stay till our Mom came home from work or something. But they were afraid for them to walk the streets to get to the park, just a number of reasons why it changed. But now, it seems like it's sort of coming back. It's just like the pendulum. It goes this way, then it comes back that way. You know, and so I just happened to be there at a time that there was a lull in using the parks. In the Hispanic areas, their area had just changed, and they really use their parks, they really do because half--Douglas Park, one half of it, the African American community uses, and the other half, the soccer and the Hispanic community use for their, in their leisure time and their recreational activities. So it's, it's, it's something, you know, and the next ten years, people are--they've got the water parks, the next ten years, they will be out. And it'll be something different, something new, you know. Ice skating used to be a big thing in the parks. It's not as much as it used to be, you know. Am I putting you to sleep? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: (Laughs) Okay. So that's, that's primarily it, you know, with the parks. I really enjoyed it. I loved--when I see the fire works when they have it, like they had at the 4th of July night, and I've spent a many a fourth of July night on the lakefront with the fireworks. So, you know, things like that you know. And you'd say, "hey, I've been there," you know, I, I know the enjoyment that the people are getting. Story_ID: 10635 Speaker 1: Now, 1983, there's--Chicago, you know, has its first--well, not first black mayoral candidate, but first serious, you know. I guess. I mean, in fact, Harold Washington ran in '77 [1977], but nobody expected him to win, but in '83 [1983], the climate was different because there was a lot of criticism of Jane Byrne. The community was really stirred up, and Lu Palmer's refrain on the radio was that "We shall see in '83" or "We will see in '83" and the community was gearing up for this campaign. Now, how did you feel about all of that. I mean you were very close to the Jane Byrne administration, and how did you feel about that? Speaker 2: Well, I felt that there was going to be a change. I felt that we were destined to have a change. And it, it didn't have to be Jane Byrne. It could have been anybody. It was time for a black mayor, and we were gonna have it. I felt loyal to Jane Byrne because all the years that my political life that I had been there, she was there too, you know. And, if it had been Harold, if he had been there, I would have been there with him, you know. So you just, you know, I'm, I just don't change in the middle of the stream cause, you know--and we can't say cause you're black and I'm white, and I don't look at it that way. I think that, the thing is, is that it was--this, this city was destined for a change. And if it hadn't been Jane Byrne, it could have been Jane Jones. They were gonna make that change. But I, I--and I felt that I was--I had been on Jane Byrne's team, you know. And it's just like in sports, you know, you play with your team, you, you're with the team. You can't go switch and say, oh, the Raiders gonna win, so I'm gonna go with the Raiders. You know, you can't do it like that. So, that's the way I, I believe. I, that's the way my, my beliefs are. I'm loyal, I'm there, and I'm--I couldn't switch teams, and that was it. Speaker 1: Did you think that Jane Byrne made some mistakes that she didn't have to make or did you try and advise her to do things that she maybe did not listen to or did you think that she could have, in any way, she could have avoided this big show down in '83 [1983]? Speaker 2: You know what, Larry, hindsight is something (laughs). You know, we can always talk about the, what do they call it? Twenty-twenty, something (laughs), afterwards or Saturday night, Monday night football and all that stuff-- Speaker 1: We can see it (unclear) (simultaneously)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, we can always see it after it's all done, you know. And, and then, you know, it seems that it's--who knows it's gonna happen--like I say, it was not destined for her to be Mayor again. I mean whoever was in, they wouldn't have gotten that, that--I don't care who it was. It was time for Harold to be Mayor, and that was it. The black community was at a point now where they were making the change. And someday, they're gonna get to that point again. You know, they're not there yet, but it happened at that time, and she was the mayor. Now, as far as her making mistakes and all of that, I can't--I'm sitting there. I don't know what, you know, people are telling you, what she's apprised to, what, you know, decision, I never knew that, you know. I, I would go in and advise her on what I was involved with, if it was the Park Board, and she called me and said, "Iola, do you think that we need such and such a thing at the park or is this a good move to make? " Then I would say, I would talk to her about that. But I could not talk to her about running the city of Chicago. I could not give her any advice on that because if I had done that, then I should have been mayor, cause nobody, it's nobody in the world could tell somebody that's sitting--even the present mayor. He, he can have all the people around him, he still has to make decisions for himself. He's got to make a de--people can tell you, but they don't know the full scope. Nobody knows the full--and I didn't know it. I did not know. All I knew what I read in the papers. I knew that the black community was becoming uneasy with her and all that. And, you know, in talking to her, I knew that she had some problems to deal with. But I didn't go in there and say, "Now, look, mayor, you do this and you do that." I couldn't do that, you know. If she asked me, I would have said something. But she didn't ask me, and, and if I did, if she did ask me, she probably wouldn't have listened to me anyway (laughs). She was only going to listen to somebody much closer to her, you know. Story_ID: 10636 Speaker 1: I'm wondering how you felt about--now, I know that the black community had been indignant about a great number of things before Jane Byrne and as well as Jane Byrne's administration, but and then years of tension built up, and did you think that, I mean what did you think about this rising tide of indignation? Speaker 2: Well, I thought there was some merit to it, if that's what you're asking me because I remember the 'Willis Wagons', you know. I remember all of the things that were going on, you know, "shoot to kill" and the grocery stores, how they rip off the consumers cause I was one of the persons that made a change with the grocery--the Red, Red Rooster Grocery Stores that were prevalent in the black community, and they were known for ripping people--I was one of the persons--'the' person that went in there. They had me on camera, and they were going in there writing tickets and making sure that they go to court for cheating people, housewives and poor families out of, were selling rotten meat and things like that. Those were the things that brought all this to the head. I knew that was going on, but it was more to it. But then some things that happened, I don't know, you know, I, I wasn't in position to--cause it happened during my time, and I was busy doing something else. I wasn't there, you know, like when you're on the outside, you're reading and you're keeping up. It's a little bit different, but when you're there, and I'm there at the Park District, I, I can't worry about what's going on at CHA [Chicago Housing Authority] and the Chicago Fest and the School Board and all that because I'm not involved with that, you know. So it was hard for me to make a decision for her or to say to her, "Mayor, you shouldn't do this and you shouldn't do that". That was hard to do because I wasn't involved with that. If I had been involved with CHA, and I knew what was--I would have told her, "look, this is not the decision to make", you know. I'm saying, if, if it justified that. But I was not. Now, if she had--if it was the Park District, and like all the problems we had over there when I came in, you know, and talking about the parks weren't being taken care of in the poor area, now, I, I'd let her know. And that's why I visited all those parks, to know for myself. So when I'd talk to her, I didn't say what somebody down the street told me or what a supervisor wrote me a letter. I saw it for myself. So I was able to really dialogue with her about things that I knew about. And I couldn't do that about CHA and Chicago Fest and all--and it wasn't that I was, I felt that I, I didn't want to go against this community or do this--I was from the community, sure. But I still felt that I, I could say what I wanted to say. I don't care, you know, (laughs). Maybe I can't do much. Speaker 1: No, this is real, this is where all the tension, you know, hit. I mean you have, from what I have heard, and it's just, you know, I've been out, and your reputation in the community is pretty good, people like you, and-- Speaker 2: --thank you. Speaker 1: --but yet, in this, during this period of time, you seemed to be on a track with, that isolated you from a lot of people that, who otherwise, would have been in support of you. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So, and-- Speaker 2: But what, what could I do? Would you have-- and I know, you're interviewing me, I'm not interviewing (laughs), but I mean, and, you know, you, you just can't do that. I mean that's me. Some people can, well, you're right. Some people can. They would say, "Ah, to hell with that, they gonna lose, I'm going over here." They think like that, but I don't think like that. I, I think about all the things, you know, that's the person I am, cause I, I would want people to be that way with me, you know. I don't want nobody to think that I, I'm just gonna desert them cause, you know, as I said, the good example is, the football teams or, you know, sports, you know. Story_ID: 10637 Speaker 1: You ran for alderman, I think you ran in '83 [1983]. Speaker 2: Yeah, I probably did. Speaker 1: And then in '87 [1987] I believe, but in '83 [1983], who were you running against in '83 [1983]? Speaker 2: Danny [K.] Davis. Speaker 1: Okay, and he's now a Congressman. Okay, so what was that like? Was he the incumbent at that time? Speaker 2: Yes, he was. I was the committeeman. I was elected Committeeman, so I was running for the alderman. And it was at the time that I was moving into this house. I lived over there, I lived in the building behind temporarily. But we would do all the repair over here. And that's when all that came up, she don't live in the house, and all that kind of stuff. Speaker 1: For those who see this in the future, I guess we have to set this up. Walter Jacobson, TV commentator for WBBM [channel 2], at that time, had a segment of the newscast where he would, he was doing a expos, and I forget what they called, but it was expos, right? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: And he, they staked out this, the building that they said was the address that you gave (unclear) (simultaneously)-- Speaker 2: Um-hum, right here. Speaker 1: And, okay, and they said that there was no heat on and no electricity, no (unclear) (simultaneously)-- Speaker 2: It wasn't, it wasn't. There was electricity, but there was no heat on. And he's right, because we rehabbing the building. This is a rehabbed building, and we had-- my husband would come and, we had a cot, right on that wall right there. And we didn't stay here every night. But many nights we'd stay here 'til late at night cause we would working, pulling the paint, stripping, doing a lots of--don't forget, I'm a committeeman in the daytime and my husband worked for the city. And we had to do all these different things, you know. So they came out, and--oh, one day they came and I was sweeping the snow off the front, and the cameras got there. And then they said, Walter Jacobson said, "she can't even get down the back steps". There is a way out the back, you know. And there's no electricity and how is she eating? There was electricity cause we kept a crock pot in here with soup and beef stew, you know, when you get cold or when you're working, you'd have something to eat. I would keep that in here and I--so I had to have electricity and all that. So they, and then, the-that's when Harold Washington was running too. So they brought all their crowd out here from the South side and the Danny Davis's and all of them. They all came and walked on my lawn and said that I didn't live here. Now, there are people, numerous of people that live in this community. We got a house right down the street now. They're rehabbing. People stay in it, they might stay in one little portion of it, you know. And I could have had heaters in here, kerosene heaters. It doesn't mean that--and which we did. I had a kerosene heater in that dining room, and which we did. But I'm saying that you can't say where a person lives and where they don't live cause it's abandoned, you know. But we were repairing it. So that's what happened. I actually lived here. My attorney knew I lived here, every--but that's why I say the press makes up what they want to make up. Now, he could say what he wanted to say, but I know I lived here. Speaker 1: Well, the story really seemed to have sunk the campaign, you know,-- Speaker 2: Yeah, it did. Well, that was their aim. That was their--and Dick Kay and him-- that was their aim. And they were successful. Speaker 1: But you continued on the Park District Board, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, I stayed on the Park District-- Speaker 1: (Unclear) during the Harold Washington administration, right? Speaker 2: I stayed on the Park District Board through '87 [1987]. Speaker 1: Was there a lot of tension in the ward between you and Danny Davis? Speaker 2: No, not, you know what, Danny Davis and I never fought. We never had any mean words for each other. It's always the people around you that keep the, the fires going, you know, keep the brush fires going. And but as far as he and I, we're very courteous to each other. You know, I've invited--he's been here in my home. I've invited him here. He's invited me to his home. His wife and I are very--we were in New York. I was at the Convention, and I provided a car for them, you know, cause I'm over the Democratic, you know, I was over the Democratic Party and all that stuff. So I, I mean we have very, we have a good, courteous relationship. We're not buddies, you know, but we do, we are civil, you know. And I've never had an unkind to say to him, and he's never had an unkind word to say to me. But it's always the people around that want to try to make things, you know, more than what it is. And that's what happened out here. That was primarily it. Story_ID: 10638 Speaker 1: What are the, I guess the major issues on the West Side in terms--what have they been and what do you think they are now, I guess? Speaker 2: Well, the major issues has been economics. There has really never been, like a real area that people could shop at on the West side, you know, where they could--take this area for an example, if you want a pair of pantyhose, you've got to go to Oak Park to the Walgreen's or something. You don't have that in your, in our neighborhood, you know. There are little, small shopping places being developed. I've noticed on Central and Lake, they're trying to have--it's like a little, but still don't cater to, you know, the primary business--there needs to be anchor store, you know, at least one anchor store in the community to kind of bring it together where people can shop. Now, I see we're getting, we've got a Sav-A-Lot recently, which is equivalent to Aldi's and we've got a brand new Aldi's, but I mean, there is not a place we could go like a Wal-Mart or a K-Mart or, you know, an overall service type of store, where you could, run in and get something and come--you've got drive way away. That's one of the biggest problems, and, and with that, it brings jobs. And so when you, you can see there aren't that many jobs. If you don't have an economic backer, then you don't have jobs. In addition to that, we got a great health problem out here in Austin. We have a lot of HIV, and TB is on the rise. And I read in the paper the other day where HIV is prevalent amongst, you know, African Americans, where a lot of the problem is in this area. When I ran for County Commissioner, that's one of the things that I really talked about, was how we need a health program out here. We have, we have to either go down to Damen and Harrison, it's a new health center down there, HIV Center, or I think they might have a small one, it's North of here, you know. So, but there's really no concentrated program for that. In addition to the economics, the health, the, the drugs. I understand it's a great, great drug problem out here. And that lends to HIV too, you know, that's all part of it, the needles and all that. And I understand that the police are trying to do a lot, a good job and trying to take care of it, our present Alderman, I understand he works with the Police Department in trying to curtail that. But I, I, I don't know what we could do to solve that, you know. That, that's a problem that's not--it, at one time, we could say it was neighborhood, but now it's universal (laughs), I mean it's all over, the suburbs, everywhere you go, it's drugs, drugs, drugs. So that, that I think been a major problem for Austin in addition to the health and the economics. Story_ID: 10639 Speaker 1: Tell us how you became the Democratic Committee-- Speaker 2: State Central? Speaker 1: Yeah, State Central Committeeperson. Speaker 2: In 1984, I think it was--no '87 [1987], Jane Byrne was out of office when I got that, they had just--[Illinois state senator] Phil Rock who as the head of the Senate at that time, they passed a bill where if there's a Committee, State Central Committeeman, there has to be a State Central Committeewoman. That's to give the women equal, you know, equal representation within the Democratic Party. And so it had never been done before. The law was brought into effect, and they had to appoint a State Central Committeewoman from every district. All the Committeemen met out here in this district at Phil Rock's office, from the Congressional district, each--it's done by Congressional districts. And this was the Seventh District. So they all met at Phil Rock's office, and they appointed me as the State Central Committeewoman. I was appointed the first two years. After that I had to run, be elected the next four years throughout fourteen wards, throughout this district. And I campaigned, and I won. I ran for that, and I won. And I served there eighteen years in, in that position. And being State Central Committeeman, Committeewoman, I also--and a Democratic National Committeeperson, I go, you know, to all the National meetings and the conventions that are held. I have something to do with that, and being the Vice Chair of them, and also I was appointed Vice Chair of the Party, which means that next to Mike Madigan, I'm next to him. When it was the other, Gary Lapelle, I was next to Gary Lapelle. I served under four or five Committee, Presidents, you know, Chairmen's of the Party. And I've always stayed. As a result of being Vice Chair and Democratic National Committeeman, we have an organization nationally that's called the Association for State Democratic Chairs. They just gave me that award. And I served on there for seventeen years as an Executive Secretary, and I just stepped down two months ago. And that was quite a prestigious position. I got a opportunity--I've been all over the world, and just--it was just tremendous, you know, the things that I was involved with and making policy for the Democratic Party. Speaker 1: What are some of the highlights of that position? Speaker 2: Of the--which one? Speaker 1: Well, the State-- Speaker 2: The State Chairs? Speaker 1: Yeah, and the National, well, all (unclear) (simultaneously)-- Speaker 2: Oh, all of it? Well, the highlight is that being--first you got to get elected for State Central. Once you get elected, then you have the opportunity of being appointed. And I was appointed. The highlight of being Vice Chair was that I served--I had a role with the parties here in the State of Illinois, the State of Illinois party. I would sit in, you know, the Executive level, making sure that the votes were tallied. And when we had the platform to present to the full body of Democrats, I would be part of making sure the platform was presented. In addition to that, I also helped in getting the Convention together. You know, if they had in Illinois, I had a bigger role. Because it was in Chicago, we had a real big, real big role, but if it's in other states, it's just getting people, and making sure the other Democratic National Committee people are on board, and that things are--and we plan the weekend for them when they get out there. It's--I'm involved with the President. I, I've--President Clinton. I was very much involved with-- David Wilhelm (ph.), who was the Chairman of the Democratic National Committee, and I are very close. I, you know, they'd call me. In fact, they call me all the, right now, all the time, do this meeting here; go here, do that. We're doing this. And then, and it's involvement, you know. I have a picture with Clinton, so. I had one with Gore. I don't know who took it. But anyway, I'm saying all this on tape (laughs), I forgot. But anyway, basically, it, it's a, it's an unpaid position. There's no salary involved with it whatsoever, but it's a rewarding position, you know. And you can become State Central Committeeman, but the, the real best part of it is when you're the Vice Chair, you know. If you don't have that, it's just, you know, you just go to the meetings twice a year and, but when you're Vice Chair, you're involved at every level, you know. Speaker 1: That's the exciting part of the-- Speaker 2: Yes, it is. Okay, now, tell us how you became the Democratic Committee-- Speaker 1: State Central? Speaker 2: Yeah, State Central Committee President. Speaker 1: In 1984, I think it was--no '87 [1987], Jane Byrne was out of office when I got that, they had just--Phil Rock who as the head of the Senate at that time, they passed a bill where if there's a Committee, State Central Committeeman, there has to be a State Central Committeewoman. That's to give the women equal, you know, equal representation within the Democratic Party. And so it had never been done before. The law was brought into effect, and they had to appoint a State Central Committeewoman from every district. All the Committeemen met out here in this district at Phil Rock's office, from the Congressional district, each--it's done by Congressional districts. And this was the Seventh District. So they all met at Phil Rock's office, and they appointed me as the State Central Committeewoman. I was appointed the first two years. After that I had to run, be elected the next four years throughout fourteen wards, throughout this district. And I campaigned, and I won. I ran for that, and I won. And I served there eighteen years in, in that position. And being State Central Committeeman, Committeewoman, I also- and a Democratic National Committeeperson, I go, you know, to all the National meetings and the conventions that are held. I have something to do with that, and being the Vice Chair of them, and also I was appointed Vice Chair of the Party, which means that next to Mike Madigan, I'm next to him. When it was the other, Gary Lapelle, I was next to Gary Lapelle. I served under four or five Committee, Presidents, you know, Chairmen's of the Party. And I've always stayed. As a result of being Vice Chair and Democratic National Committeeman, we have an organization nationally that's called the Association for State Democratic Chairs. They just gave me that award. And I served on there for seventeen years as an Executive Secretary, and I just stepped down two months ago. And that was quite a prestigious position. I got a opportunity--I've been all over the world, and just--it was just tremendous, you know, the things that I was involved with and making policy for the Democratic Party. Speaker 2: What are some of the highlights of that position? Speaker 1: Of the--which one? Speaker 2: Well, the State-- Speaker 1: The State Chairs? Speaker 2: Yeah, and the National, well, all (unclear) (simultaneously)-- Speaker 1: Oh, all of it? Well, the highlight is that being--first you got to get elected for State Central. Once you get elected, then you have the opportunity of being appointed. And I was appointed. The highlight of being Vice Chair was that I served--I had a role with the parties here in the State of Illinois, the State of Illinois party. I would sit in, you know, the Executive level, making sure that the votes were tallied. And when we had the platform to present to the full body of Democrats, I would be part of making sure the platform was presented. In addition to that, I also helped in getting the Convention together. You know, if they had in Illinois, I had a bigger role. Because it was in Chicago, we had a real big, real big role, but if it's in other states, it's just getting people, and making sure the other Democratic National Committee people are on board, and that things are--and we plan the weekend for them when they get out there. It's--I'm involved with the President. I, I've--President Clinton. I was very much involved with-- David Wilhelm (ph.), who was the Chairman of the Democratic National Committee, and I are very close. I, you know, they'd call me. In fact, they call me all the, right now, all the time, do this meeting here; go here, do that. We're doing this. And then, and it's involvement, you know. I have a picture with Clinton, so. I had one with Gore. I don't know who took it. But anyway, I'm saying all this on tape (laughs), I forgot. But anyway, basically, it, it's a, it's an unpaid position. There's no salary involved with it whatsoever, but it's a rewarding position, you know. And you can become State Central Committeeman, but the, the real best part of it is when you're the Vice Chair, you know. If you don't have that, it's just, you know, you just go to the meetings twice a year and, but when you're Vice Chair, you're involved at every level, you know. Speaker 2: That's the exciting part of the-- Speaker 1: Yes, it is. Story_ID: 10640 Speaker 1: What do you plan to do in the future or are you pretty much (unclear)--? Speaker 2: You know, I really haven't made up my mind. I'm thinking about doing something privately, you know, going into private work. I love to do interior decorating (laughs), I love to decorate. And my children tell me, "Mom, maybe you should do that, go into interior decorating." Well, I don't know. And then I was thinking about getting involved with the, Domestic Violence Programs throughout, you know, get involved with that cause I, I really would like to help. You know, and I like, I like to help people, you know, and I, I'm service oriented. And I just feel that just, you know, sitting and not help--it's, it's just not me, you know. So I was thinking about looking into that, and then I was thinking about I need to make some money (laughs). I haven't made any money in a while, so. That's--I've got a lot of things to look into. I haven't really made up my mind what I'm gonna do. Story_ID: 10641 Speaker 1: After being involved in the community so long and in politics, what are your concerns or aspirations for the black community, you know, in general? Speaker 2: I, I--I would just like to see a better educated, black community. I, I'm not saying that everybody got to be smart, cause I was just looking at a show the other night on television, and it was called "Family Feud." And this guy interviewed all the family on this show. And the one--all of them were Ph.D's, this, that, and they got to the last--it's only five. And he got to the fifth one, who was the last, and he was a driver for Federal Express. Well, I want you to know, he, he had an education, but he was the only one--but he won the $20,000 for them (laughs) on that (unclear). So I'm not saying that everybody got to walk around like they're geeks or nerds. But just be educated enough where they could go get jobs, language, speak the American--the English language, you know, and cause it just bothers me when I see, I talk to people on the phone, to business. I call different companies. Uh, ooh, ah, everything is one syllable. And I just say, I think that, that, number one, would help us, because then we would be better, in a better position for better jobs, our own businesses. I'd like to see more of our people have their own businesses, flourishing businesses, not just--you know, I know that we made it all these years with our little corner businesses, you know, our little barbeque houses and hair salons, things like that. But I'm saying today, it's getting beyond that, you know. Entrepreneurship is getting to a different level. And I would love to see if, if our people were educated, that our community, the people from our community, that they could give more in that way. I think that's gonna be the basis for the survival for our community, is that we are educated and where we can take care of ourselves. We don't have to go and buy our milk from somebody at, you know, a Jewel. We can go to a nice store in our own community. That's what I would like to see. I think that that, if we do that, we'll, we will have done a lot. Story_ID: 10642 Speaker 1: What do you see as your legacy. You've still got some history to make, but what do you see as your legacy? Speaker 2: My legacy, I feel, is helping others. And it wasn't just political, believe me. You know, people say, well, they did it cause it's politics, it's good. But it wasn't political. It was because that's a part of me. I'm a--as I said before in this interview, I am a service-oriented person. I love to help people. If people--and it's, it's not that I'm looking for somebody, but if you come to me and say, well, how do I do this? I'm gonna do everything I may--if I tell you something, I'm gonna make sure that it's right, and I can do everything to help you. And that's the way, that's the kind of person I am, you know. Story_ID: 10643 Speaker 1: Did your parents get a chance to see you become successful and-- Speaker 2: Yes--My mother and father. My mother is still living. My father died, he died. When he died, I had just gotten elected to ward committeeman. And my mother, she's still living. She's in the senior citi--not a senior citizen. She's in the nursing home. Speaker 1: Okay, well, how do they feel about your political life? Speaker 2: Well, my mother, my father, he just thought it was good, but they, they really didn't understand, you know, the dynamic--you'd have to be--well, my father couldn't really appreciate it cause he wasn't from Chicago. You have to be from Chicago to, you know, it's like a sport here, for politics (laughs). And he, he thought, he said, "Oh, that's nice." You know, he took that attitude. But my mother, she's a little bit more involved, but not too much. She's scared for me, "Oh, you be careful," and, you know, and that she had that fear, you know, more or less for me. But she was happy, you know, and she felt that--she seemed proud, you know, and everything. And every time she'd go somewhere, people would say, "Oh, you're Iola McGowan's mother?" She said, they didn't say, you're, she's my daughter. They said, you're her mother or something or other. She said, and the other thing she'd say, oh, that's, oh, that's Iola McGowan's mother (laughs), that kind of thing, you know. So, but she was very proud. Story_ID: 10644 Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: I really would like to be remembered as a person that was sincere and really, whatever I did, I did it from my heart. And if I hurt anybody, I didn't do it intentionally. It was because I, I really didn't know what I was doing or I wasn't aware of what I was doing. But everything that I did, I just want people to know it was from the goodness of my heart. And, you know, I had a heart transplant. So that, so that means my second heart too. Story_ID: 10645 Speaker 1: Tell us about this heart transplant? Speaker 2: Well, I, I did gain quite a bit of weight. And my cholesterol was out of hand. It had gotten very high. And I would--on my diet--I really was not aware of the cholesterol rate. I went to St. Thomas [Virgin Islands] with the Democratic Association, Chair's Association. And Bill Clinton, President Bill Clinton was there, and we had like a party for him. He had just got elected, and everyone was just having a good time. And I, I just started feeling sick. Speaker 1: This is 1992? Speaker 2: Yes, and I got a call when I got back--we had rented a villa. I had my whole family there. It was over the Thanksgiving holiday. And I had all my sisters, my Mom, everybody--my children. We were all in St. Thomas. And I started not feeling good. And I was perspiring and I, I, I just felt horrible, you know. And the kids would say, "Oh, Mom, you ate too much junk," you know, or--and my mother, she was there, and she said, "just sit down," cause we were, I was having all dignitaries over for Thanksgiving dinner, cause we had this big villa. And my sister, and we were preparing the food and everything when I got sick. So they rushed me to the hospital that night. And when I got there, the doctor told me, he said, you're having a major heart attack. And boy, boy, you don't ever want to be in St. Thomas and have a heart attack on an island in the Caribbean (laughs). And they were moving so slow, "Hey, man, oh, man" (imitating Caribbean accent). And I'm laying up there and could hardly breathe, and so finally this African American doctor came in. And he was from Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts]. I was very, very lucky that he was there that weekend. And he told me, he said, you're a very sick young lady. He said, you've just had a massive heart attack. And he injected a medication in me, and that--and the doctors here told me that's what saved me. As a result, I had to get back to the states. Everybody in the states, they were calling. To backtrack a little bit about my cholesterol, my doctor called while I was there cause I had my calls transferred to my sister-in-law. And she had her call me in St. Thomas, and she said, "Iola, be very careful. Your cholesterol is really high." And then that night, that's when I had the, the heart attack. So we got a plane to bring me back. They called a lot of people here, Cardiss Collins got the plane for me, and they flew me back to the States. And when I came back, I went down to U of I, that's where--and, oh, it was horrible. They just, they took care of me, they did wonderful, they did everything and gave me all kind of tests and everything. And I stayed in the hospital about a month or so. And then when I came home, I went back and the doctor told me, he said, you're gonna have to have a transplant. That was a massive heart attack. My heart was only beating like fourteen, twelve or fourteen ejections a minute or something like that. And he said, you're not doing well. So he called the family in and everything. And the only person who objected to it was my mother. She said, you're gonna do that? How could you do it? But see I could understand her you know, her era, you know. And I said, "Ma, I got to do something." I said, "I can't walk around like this not breathing," you know. So anyway, they put me on a list. They sent me to Loyola [University Medical Center], and I went over there, and the doctors, they said, we'll put on a list. Then I went over to Rush, and they put me on a list. And I was--then my insurance company called me, and they said, we are recommending that you go to two hospitals. We will send you the list. You look it over, and you decide which one of these hospitals you want to go to. We will not pay for you to go to Loyola or Rush. Loyola had just broken their Cardiology Team, had just broken up. And Rush was just like in the beginning stages with this. And U of I [University of Illinois] did not have a cardiology program for transplants. So I had to either go to Wisconsin or Minnesota. So I had--I called them, and I had them mail me all their literature and everything. And I decided I was going to Minnesota because their mortality rate was much lower, you know, than the other. And we went there, and then that's when the challenge began. You are evaluated for a heart transplant. You just don't walk in and they give you a heart transplant. They have to do all--and at first, I said, I don't want to go. They told me I had to move there and everything. And I said, I'm not leaving my home to come here. I'm not gonna move. But when I got there, Larry, it was so competitive, so many people were there trying to get into this transplant program, I said--so I started thinking. And then I started saying, I got to pass this test, (laughs) you know. And they did all kind of evaluations and everything. And they--I had never smoked in my life. That was one of the things that helped me, I never smoked. And he said, that is number one. So they said, they would take me. I went there--so then I had to go on a waiting list there. I met the surgeon, and her father did the first heart transplant in the whole United States of America. So you know I was in good hands too. And it was, it was just a, just an experience you would not believe. Then we met people, they had us meet all the people who had had hear transplants. Some of them had been ten years, fifteen years, twenty years, and they, they were still, you know, going well. And my son was with me, and he was saying, "Mom, this is, this looks, you know, you could do this." You know, we're thinking and every--so then, they did accept me. And they told me to go home, and they would call me. I was on the list, but I was on like the top part of the list, and I would be called. I came home, and I still went to U of I for all of the intermediate care, which I had a great cardiologist down there, Dr. Steven Debreeze (ph.), great man. I mean bedside manners you would not believe. I would be here. He'd call me up. "You got air conditioning? Are you comfortable?" I mean he'd be driving home, you know, that's the kind of person he was. And it just made me feel so comfortable, you know, and have--and sometimes I'd sit up in the chair all night long, couldn't breathe, you know. So eventually, the election came up that November. Bill Clinton was running, that was 19--he was running again [1996]. And so she called, the coordinator up there, and she said, "Iola, she said, you prepare--go vote. After you vote, you can come to Minnesota." I said, but right? She said, come to Minnesota. So then I didn't have a place to stay or anything. Speaker 1: This was '96 [1996], right? Speaker 2: Yeah--'cause '97 [1997] is when I had it. And I didn't have a place to stay. So when I got to Minnesota--no, here, I started going through the newspapers and everything. So then one of the social workers called me, and she said, she was playing like, I don't want to be involved, but I don't know this person. I don't know anything about them, but this lady said she could talk to you and maybe you could stay at her place. They wanted me to stay at a Ronald McDonald House. I didn't want to stay there. I had been there. So you have to share the bathroom. It's like you're down the hall, you cook in one kitchen. And I, I just couldn't live like that. So when I got there, my son drove me down, and we got to Minnesota that Sunday. And I went to see this lady. And she was a Swedish woman, and she lived in the outskirts of Minnesota. And so when I went there, we talked and everything. And she was very nice. And so she told me she wanted me to take the place. And I told her, again, a lovely home, lovely townhouse and everything. She gave me a private bathroom, private bedroom and everything. So then I took the space, and I stayed with her, and we had so much in common. She worked for Human Resources at the University of Minnesota. I worked for Human Resources at the University of Illinois. She worked--her husband's name was Donald. My husband's name is Donald. Her husband died in '88 [1988]. My husband died in '89 [1989]. We had so much in common, you know. So we, I stayed there, and it was just like, just like somebody I'd known for years, you know. We developed a great relationship and everything. Then they called me one day in March and told me they had the heart. So I, I was very strong 'cause I went to the, the country club and worked out, and did all sort--they told me to do that. And I had to do all that. So I didn't have to have the, not an ambulance come pick me up. They just-- Speaker 1: Did you change your diet and all that? Speaker 2: Yeah, oh, yeah. I changed now (laughs) (unclear). So then I went to the hospital, and about 5:00 o'clock [a.m.], they called my son, and he came up and every--and about 5:00 o'clock that morning, I had, I had the heart. They brought, they told me they were gonna, they had the heart at (sigh). And I was, I was out. When I came to, I had the heart. No pain, no bleeding, no all, and you know what people go through with surgery. I mean it was just a blessing. It was totally, totally--and, of course, I, I have a scar, but I mean there was nothing--I didn't feel all--I was, I was weak. When I came home, I couldn't walk. I had to, I couldn't like sit in this chair. I couldn't even get up and sit in the chair. I had to either lay down--everything had to be high. I couldn't sit on anything low because all my strength went to my--all, I lost--I got strength in everything but my legs. I lost the strength in my legs. But--because once you, they take that heart out, you lose everything in your body. Some people lose their teeth. Some people lose their hearing. Some people lose their eyes, you know. And they told me that, they said, now, Iola, you know, there are chances, you--and so I told them, I said, well, I just believe I can do it, you know. So that was that. I went through that, and it was--I came back here, and I got back with U of I [University of Illinois at Chicago Medical Center] for all my transplant, you know, problems and things. And I'm doing well. You know, I've, I've got on my feet. I went, and a lot of people, oh, maybe we shouldn't have her elected or the--but, you know, it's just the norm now. You know, I take medication. And I'll take it the rest of my life, but a lot of people take it, everyday for other things, don't they? They don't have to have a heart transplant or they take vitamins every day. Well, I take medication every day, and there are times that--I asked my doctor, my Cardiologist at U of I, Dr. Debrea (ph.), I said, "Doctor, when I have this, will I be able to move about and do"--he said, "Iola, you're gonna be able to jump off this table, you're gonna be able to do things, you're--" He said, "just, just wait and see." And it has happened, you know. I take ex--I do my exercise, right now, I'm at Weight Watchers 'cause I gained too much weight and my doctor's complaining. And, but it, it was quite an experience, you know, but I, I thank God that he was there for me, you know, in addition to my medical health. I, I know he was there with me, you know. And I have second chance, and I volunteer. I go to the Lutheran, work with Lutheran groups, 'Jump Rope for Your Hearts', it's called. That's what it's called. And they, they have a exercise program. I talk about the kids about how not to-- Speaker 1: Do you jump rope? Speaker 2: Nope. (laughs). No, but I go there, well, I, I'll turn the rope (laughs). But they, I talk to them about how not to eat fast food, you know, hamburgers and french fries. I said, when you go out try to eat fruit and things like that. These are little, young children, you know, trying to change their eating habits, habits now. And those are some of the things I do, you know, volunteer. A lot of the Lutheran schools call me and ask me would I come in and talk to the kids about heart transplant. It's been a, a good experience, you know, that I'm having as a result of having it because I feel so blessed, you know what I mean? I just feel like there's a reason I should be here. I believe that, and I--sometimes I believe it's so I can take care of my mother, you know, be with my mother. She, she's, she's not sick. She's doing very well, but she still needs, you know, somebody. And then my children too, you know, I'm here for them. And anybody else that needs me, I'm here for them, you know. That's it. Story_ID: 10646 Speaker 1: This photo is Iola McGowan, Iola Stewart at that time. And she was a part of a social group called the Gay, G-A-Y Teens. And they supported all the football teams at Farragut High School [Chicago, Illinois]. And it was just a fun type of group, social group, non-sexual (laughs). Speaker 2: [Iola Gowan as a member of Gay Teens at Farragut High School, Chicago, Illinois, ca. 1950-1954. From the collection of Iola McGowan.] Story_ID: 10647 Speaker 1: Iola, Laverne and my mother in the center. It was one of her birthday at our home. And we were just there having fun, enjoying the evening and thought we'd get together and say Happy Birthday, Mom. Speaker 2: So from left to right, is this Anna? Speaker 1: Anna is left. Anna's left, Iola's in the center and Laverne's on the right. Mom is seated. Speaker 2: Okay, and what's your mother's name? Speaker 1: Ernestine. Speaker 2: Okay, and this is about what year? Speaker 1: Oh, I knew he was gonna ask me that. I forgot. Speaker 2: You can approximate it. Speaker 1: Oh, about 1960 [sic, 1980s- note the clothing styles]. Speaker 2: [Iola McGowan (center) with her sister Anna Jeff (left), sister Laverne Stivers (right) and mother Ernestine Martin (seated) at her mother's birthday celebration, Chicago, Illinois, ca. 1960. From the collection of Iola McGowan.] Story_ID: 10648 Speaker 1: Now here's you, right here. Speaker 2: Right there. Should I start? Speaker 1: Yes, please. Speaker 2: This is a picture from Jefferson Grammar School [Chicago, Illinois]. Iola was in the sixth grade, and she's taking it with all the students in her classroom. And as you could see, it's a, all different ethnic groups were in that class. I was, a very good time in my life, a time that I really look upon with fond memories. Speaker 1: [Iola McGowan with her sixth grade Thomas Jefferson Elementary School class, Chicago, Illinois, ca. 1948. From the collection of Iola McGowan.] Story_ID: 10649 Speaker 1: From left to right, Cardiss, Honorable Cardiss Collins, Congresswoman, and Iola McGowan at a social event held on Iola's behalf. It was approximately 1987, '88 [1988]. Speaker 2: [Iola McGowan (right) and U.S. Congresswoman Cardiss Collins, ca. 1987-1988. From the collection of Iola McGowan.] Story_ID: 10650 Speaker 1: Ed Kelly on the left with Iola McGowan when she was a Commissioner with the Chicago Park District. And he was at a function on her behalf. Speaker 2: That's when you were running for Lieutenant Governor? Speaker 1: No, that was Committeeman [sic. for lt. governor-note sign in the back] . Speaker 2: [Iola McGowan with Chicago Park District Superintendent Ed Kelly, ca. 1980. From the collection of Iola McGowan.] Story_ID: 10651 Speaker 1: That's my mother, Ernestine Martin, when she graduated from beauty school. She decided to do that after working all those years, she decided to go into business for herself. And we were very proud of her. This was in the late '50s [1950s]. Speaker 2: [Iola McGowan's mother Ernestine Martin at beauty school graduation, ca. late 1950s. From the collection of Iola McGowan.] Story_ID: 10652 Speaker 1: This is Iola McGowan, who is third from the right with the bag, yeah, that's it. And this was at an event for Consumer Scales, Weights and Measures, when they had the Consumer Service Centers in the Lawndale [CHicago, Illinois neighborhood] area. And these were some of the people who came by to view the center. It was set up as a home, and a place where people could learn how to shop for food, for furniture and other items. And it was sponsored by the city of Chicago and the Model Cities Program. Speaker 2: What are the uniforms? Speaker 1: Those are the Police Aides, when there used to be Police Aides. Speaker 2: [Iola McGowan with attendees at a consumer sales event, not dated, from the collection of Iola McGowan.] Story_ID: 10653 Speaker 1: With Bill Lee, Commissioner of the Chicago [Illinois] Park District and over the Federation of Labor, Ed Kelly, who was the Superintendent in Chicago Park District, and at that time, Sheriff Elrod, Richard Elrod, and to the far left is Commissioner Sydney R. Marovitz. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So that's Abraham Lincoln Marovitz' brother. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: [Iola McGowan with Chicago Park District Commissioner Bill Lee, Chicago Park District Superintendent Ed Kelly, Cook County Sheriff Richard Elrod and Commissioner Sydney Marovitz, not dated, from the collection of Iola McGowan.] Story_ID: 10654 Speaker 1: At a function with Judge [Eugene] Pincham on the left. I don't know who the other--another distinguished gentleman, Iola McGowan, and another guest, who was, attended that function as well. Speaker 2: And do you remember what the function was? Speaker 1: It was a fundraiser for Iola McGowan. I think that man owned a McDonald's. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, not--it wasn't Cirillo [McSwain]. Speaker 1: No, not Cirillo. He's a West side owner, up there. I can't--. Speaker 2: [Iola McGowan with Judge Eugene Pincham (far left) and two unidentified men, not dated, from the collection of Iola McGowan.] Story_ID: 10655 Speaker 1: Iola McGowan at a function, a fundraising function with Lenore, Commissioner Lenore Cartwright (ph.) , who was over the [Chicago] Department of Human Services. And they were attending this fundraiser on the behalf of Iola McGowan. Speaker 2: [Iola McGowan (right) and Lenore Cartwright, not dated, from the collection of Iola McGowan.] Story_ID: 10656 Speaker 1: Niles Sherman on the left, Committeeman Niles Sherman, Alderman Niles Sherman with Iola McGowan at a fundraiser. Speaker 2: [Iola McGowan and Niles Sherman, not dated, from the collection of Iola McGowan.] Story_ID: 10657 Speaker 1: Marge and Neil Hartigan with Iola McGowan at a fundraiser. Speaker 2: And who was Neil Hartigan? Speaker 1: He also, he's running for Judgeship now. Oh, he was Attorney General of the U.S--of the state of Illinois. Speaker 2: Cause he ran for governor, and he didn't win, got beat by--. Speaker 1: Um-hum, but he's running for judge now. Speaker 2: [Iola McGowan with Marge Hartigan and Illinois Attorney General Neil Hartigan, not dated, from the collection of Iola McGowan.] Story_ID: 10658 Speaker 1: ..Iola McGowan, house being on tour for the Austin Schock area and being photographed by the 'Chicago Sun-Times' and '[Chicago] Tribune'. This is her home. Speaker 2: [Iola McGowan in her home while her house was presented on a tour of homes, not dated, from the collection of Iola McGowan.] Story_ID: 10659 Speaker 1: '29th Ward News', a local newspaper, discussing the platform of Iola McGowan, who was committeeman at that time from 1980 to 1984. Speaker 2: [Iola McGowan featured in the '29th Ward News', ca. 1980-1984. From the collection of Iola McGowan.] Story_ID: 10660 Speaker 1: From right to left is Fred Kitchen (ph.), Walter Simmons (ph.), Iola McGowan and Clarence Thomas, presenting an award at a ceremony at the Hilton Hotel [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: [Iola McGowan with Fred Kitchen (right), Walter Simmons (left of McGowan) and Clarence Thomas (right), not dated, from the collection of Iola McGowan.] Story_ID: 10661 Speaker 1: This is Iola with her family, my husband, Adam. My oldest daughter, Rhonda, my youngest daughter, Allison and Iola. We were on a family trip in Hawaii. My son [Gregory McGowan] wasn't able to be with us. He had just graduated from college, and he was on a job, a new job. Speaker 2: [Iola McGowan with her husband Adam, daughter Rhonda Stivers and daughter Allison McGowan, Hawaii, not dated, from the collection of Iola McGowan.] Story_ID: 10662 Speaker 1: This photo was taken in 1992 in Arkansas, Little Rock, Arkansas. Iola with President Bill Clinton. Speaker 2: And what was the occasion? Speaker 1: It was a fundraiser for the President. It wasn't a fundraiser. It was like a get-together for us. It was a get-together. Speaker 2: [Iola McGowan with U.S. Presidential candidate William Clinton, 1992. From the collection of Iola McGowan.] Story_ID: 10663 Speaker 1: This photo was taken in the late '70s [1970s], my husband, Adam, my oldest daughter, Allison, my son, Greg, young--no, my oldest daughter, Rhonda, my son, Greg, my youngest daughter, Allison and myself, Iola. Speaker 2: [Iola McGowan with her husband Adam, daughter Allison, son Greg and daughter Rhonda, ca. late 1970s. From the collection of Iola McGowan.] Story_ID: 10664 Speaker 1: This photo was taken in the early '70s [1970s]. Iola on the right and her father, my father, Tanzie at one of his package liquor places in St. Louis, Missouri. Speaker 2: [Iola McGowan with her father Tanzie Mayer, St. Louis, Missouri, ca. late 1970s. From the collection of Iola McGowan.]..