 Story_ID: 120070 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please. Speaker 2: Henry L. Marsh III. H-E-N-R-Y, L, M-A-R-S-H, III. Speaker 1: All right. Now what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: December 10, 1933 in Richmond, Virginia. Speaker 1: And, sir, what is your occupation? Speaker 2: Well, I'm an attorney and I'm a member of the Virginia Senate--the Virginia Legislature. Speaker 1: Okay, and you were mayor of Richmond at one time, too, right? Speaker 2: Yes, I was a member of the Richmond City Council for twenty-five years and during that time I was elected vice mayor for seven years and mayor for five and a half years-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --while still serving as a member of the Council 'cause the mayor and the vice mayor were also Council members. Speaker 1: All right. Sir, what is today's date? Speaker 2: November the 18th, 2003. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're in my senate office in Richmond, Virginia. Story_ID: 120071 Speaker 1: All right, now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that I'm compelled to ask you and-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --they only require a short answer. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: The first one is, sir, what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: Favorite food, probably salmon. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Ah, brown. Speaker 1: Okay, time of the year? Speaker 2: Spring, I try to play golf and I get more opportunities in the Spring. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Las Vegas, New Orleans, San Antonio and Monterey, California. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And Paris, France. Speaker 1: All right. Now do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: It's not a--"It doesn't impress me to say that something has never been done before because everything that was done for the first time had never been done before." Story_ID: 120072 Speaker 1: Okay, now, I'm going to ask you about your family history. I'm gonna ask you about your mother's side of the family and your father's side of the family. We'll start with your mother's side. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Lucy Phillips Marsh, L-U-C-Y, P-H-I-L-L-I-P-S, Marsh, M-A-R-S-H. Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: I don't know her date of birth. She died when I was five years old and I really have very few recollections of my mother. From age five, I was raised by aunts and uncles until I became twelve and then my father reunited his family and raised us by himself. Speaker 1: Okay, now, were you raised by--is there any one particular relative that was-- Speaker 2: Yes-- Speaker 1: --responsible? Speaker 2: --three of us were sent to live with Otis Phillips, my uncle, and Amy Phillips, my aunt, and they raised the three of us. Amy Phillips died. She married a Palmer and it was--her name was Amy Palmer. She died about three years ago and Otis Palmer's still alive but they really raised me during those formative years and me and my, one of my brothers, and my sister, and my other brother was raised by an aunt in Newport News. So--but my father reunited us when I was twelve years old and from that point on he raised the four of us. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Do you know very much about your mother's side of the family? Speaker 2: No, not really because, as I said before, when she died, I was five years old and my youngest brother was six months old. So he was sent to an aunt in Newport News. The three of us were five, six and three years old, were sent to Amy and Otis Palmer, so I only know anecdotal stories that I'd been told about my mother. Story_ID: 120073 Speaker 1: Okay, well what about the family? Are there any stories about the family ancestors going back in time or-- Speaker 2: Yeah, my father's [Henry L. Marsh, II] side, he--his father was a landowner in North Carolina, near the South Carolina border and his name was Henry Marsh and I think his father was a slave and he owned a lot of land and my father was probably the only sibling to get an education. He had to go three or four hundred miles to get a high school education and then he went to Hampton, Virginia, to attend college and while in college he met and fell in love with my mother and he dropped out of school to support his family during the Depression. And we were born during the Depression and he--well, he supported his family by waiting tables, becoming a waiter, and later on he was called to preach. He became a minister in the AME Zion Church and he subsequently became a successful minister, pastoring churches in Andersonville, North Carolina and South Bend, Indiana, where he was pastoring when he died. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He started off pastoring churches in rural Virginia. Speaker 1: Uh-hum, okay. Speaker 2: And he went back to school while his children were in school and completed his college education. He got his bachelor's degree. He went to the School of Religion at Virginia Union [University], where he got his bachelor's degree and he got a Bachelor of Divinity Degree and then he took further courses in Union Theological Seminary in Richmond. So he was determined to get his education. He attended Union and the School of Divinity and Union Theological Seminary while waiting tables, supporting his family, working twelve hours a day, six days a week. And we were brought up by him. And he was attending school while we were attending school. So we didn't need anybody to motivate us to get an education. Speaker 1: You can see it, yeah. Speaker 2: He set the example. Speaker 1: Yes, sir. Do you know your father's birth date and birth place? Speaker 2: He was born in Marvin, a place called Marvin, North Carolina. It was a--December the 14th was his birth date but I don't know the year. Speaker 1: Okay. What would you guess? Would you--can you hazard a guess? Speaker 2: It would have been around the turn of the century. Speaker 1: Do you think he would be older than [HM] Oliver Hill or younger or-- Speaker 2: Probably about the same age. Speaker 1: About the same age. Speaker 2: I was born in '33 [1933] and he was in his late twenties or thirties when I was born. So-- Speaker 1: Okay, yeah about, okay. Speaker 2: --that would be around the turn of the century. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Probably in 1910 or something like that. Story_ID: 120074 Speaker 1: Now, are there any stories about his [Marsh's father, Henry Marsh, II] father, Henry--I guess his father's name was Henry Marsh [I], too, right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And any stories about his father or-- Speaker 2: I really haven't heard much about him. He was a landowner who owned a lot of farmland in North Carolina and during the summers he used to send his children to farmhouse--the farm place--the family farm place in North Carolina to work the farm and get to know the part of the family in North Carolina. So, that's how I, you know, know about that. And I was--I spent my summers, really, on the same place where he was raised, initially, before he went away to school. Speaker 1: Did you ever meet your grandfather? Speaker 2: No, he--I think he had died before I was sent down for the first time. Speaker 1: Okay well just, maybe just one more time, trying to explore--did you--are there any stories about how the family got land or anything about what the family's doing in the 19th century during the Civil War before or after? Speaker 2: I really haven't--I really haven't heard. He acquired quite a bit of land and--but I don't know how he got it. He said his father was a slave and he--he must have been a pretty industrious person to acquire the amount of land he acquired, you know, during that period. Speaker 1: Right. It was hard to come across land there. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 120075 Speaker 1: Well--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: One interesting story, during the summers when we visited the family home place, the students went to school in the summers in rural North Carolina because they had to come out of school in the fall to harvest the crops. So, when we would go down to spend the summer with our cousins and uncles, we would attend school in the summers, in North Carolina, which gave us extra education, which probably helped us overcome some of the disadvantages of an inadequate education that we got under the dual system of segregation in Virginia. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It probably helped us to spend those summers going to school in North Carolina, even though that was inadequate, and inferior education too, it was still education. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And it also helped our socialization because we were forced to interact with new friends and students and to deal with the social situation of being thrust into a strange county with new friends and new enemies. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 120076 Speaker 1: --I was going to ask you about the sights and sounds and smells of growing up. Speaker 2: Well, of course, my experiences in Carlton, Virginia, where my aunt and uncle raised me, were primary. I went to a one-room school from--I began my elementary education in Isle of Wight County, a place called Moonfield School and I had to walk to school every day and the school was located about five miles from where we resided. So every morning at six o'clock, we would start off walking to school except when the weather was so inclement that my aunt and uncle would have to transport me to school, but I literally walked to school every day from age five until I left at age eleven. Speaker 1: So, this is a black school? All black school? Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a one-room school-- Speaker 1: Okay, Moonfield, okay. Speaker 2: --was seven grades, one teacher and about seventy-five to eighty pupils and the pupils were from basically grade one, or kindergarten, up through the seventh grade. And some of these students in the sixth and seventh grade were students who were held back and they were literally grown. They were actually grown men, so to speak, and the teacher was commuting from Newport News. She would come over on the bus every Monday and go back to Newport News on Friday. She lived with someone in Isle of Wight County and she was about four feet five and eighty-five pounds soaking wet and some of those students were strapping six foot three, 210 pounds and somehow or another she managed to teach seventy-five to eighty pupils in one room, one teacher, at the same time. And all the kids walked to school. Some of them not quite as far as we did but-- Speaker 1: Now this is in-- Speaker 2: --if you can image a cold winter morning, it's dark when you leave home, walking five miles to school, leaving school, and by the time you get home it was dark again, in the winter months and while doing that, the white children rode past us on a bright yellow school bus going to, what they called Training School, where you had separate classes for each grade and separate teachers for each class and they rode to school in the comfort of the school bus. Story_ID: 120077 Speaker 1: And the ironic thing was that when I became a lawyer, it was my task to desegregate the schools, to file lawsuits, to desegregate the schools. And I filed lawsuits all over the state and basically I handled those suits myself and ironically one of the places I sued was Isle of Wight County [Virginia] and I sued them to desegregate the schools. And the school board lawyer defended segregation on the basis that busing was illegal. And the judge who tried the case was a famous. He's the judge who tried Spiro Agnew, Walter Hoffman. The courtroom--the court building is now named after him but he and I became close acquaintances during the litigation. I had about fifteen or twenty cases before him and I took the liberty of testifying, which lawyers aren't supposed to do, when we got to Isle of Wight by pointing out to the judge that I attended that school and I walked to school every day and some of those winter mornings and some of those winter afternoons, I would loved to have been on the bus like the white children were who rode past me on the way to school and on the way from school. And Judge Hoffman apparently was moved by that and he chastised the school board lawyer. He said, "How dare you stand before this Court and argue that busing, or transporting children to school in a rural area, is illegal." He said, "How dare you make that argument". And I thought it was extremely ironic that I would be the lawyer arguing that case. Speaker 2: It's like what goes around-- Speaker 1: It was poetic justice. Story_ID: 120078 Speaker 1: Okay, what else about growing up? Now you grew up in a--how do you spell that county again? Speaker 2: Isle of Wight is the county. I-S-L-E, Isle of Wight [Virginia]. Speaker 1: Isle of Wight, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's a British--English-- Speaker 1: Is it--do they spell it White, W-H-I-T-E? Speaker 2: No, W-I-G-H-T (simultaneous). Speaker 1: W-I-G-H-T, okay-- Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: --just like the British one. Speaker 2: --the particular place was Carlton, where I lived, and the school was located between Rescue, Virginia and Smithfield, Virginia. It's a rural area. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, I said, I spent five and a half years of my life there and when I became--I was in the fifth grade, I think I was eleven and a half years old, my father called his family back together, reunited his family in Richmond. So I completed my elementary school in George Mason Elementary School. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Ironically, there's a wing of George Mason named after me, the Henry L. Marsh Wing of George Mason [Elementary] School [Richmond, Virginia] but I attended their fifth and sixth grade in--at George Mason and then I went to Maggie Walker High School [Richmond, Virginia] and I attended grades seven through twelve. Speaker 1: Now, Maggie Walker School is named for Maggie Walker who's a famous person around here, I believe. Speaker 2: Yes, she was the first--she founded the St. Luke's Savings Bank which has later became Consolidated Bank and Trust, which is the oldest African American bank in the country. She was the first woman president of any bank, white or black, and she founded the first, well the only bank that's still surviving, the only African American bank, and they named the school after her and I attended that school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And from there I attended Virginia Union University [Richmond, Virginia]. Story_ID: 120079 Speaker 1: Now I just want to backtrack a little bit and ask you what kind of a young man were you? What did you like to do? Did you like music, sports? Did you-- Speaker 2: I was sort of studious when I was--as soon as I got to Richmond [Virginia]. I got a job carrying newspapers when I was in school and I kept newspaper routes. For years I would take a route, seventy-five or eighty customers, and I built it up to 120, 130 and then when we moved to the West end, I got a route, seventy-five or eighty customers. I would build that up to 130 and I enjoyed carrying papers. It was always the evening papers, and that was my first introduction, really, to the world of work. When I was living in Smithfield, Carlton, I--my uncle--my aunt and uncle owned a store and I guess my first job was waiting on customers in the store and I used to count on my fingers but I never made a mistake making change with people in the store. So I guess that was my first job as a young person, before I was a teenager. They would leave me in charge of the store. Story_ID: 120080 Speaker 1: And as I grew older, I got different jobs but I was always working while I was in school. I washed dishes. I bused dishes. I drove an ice cream truck--delivered ice cream to wealthy families. I parked cars and in the summers I would go to Asbury Park, New Jersey to work to save money to go back to school. All the way through my high school and college education, I worked at night and worked in the summers. I carried mail. I worked in the post office during the winter season and it wasn't until my senior year in college that my sister, who had finished school and who was working, said that you never had a chance to go to school without working so you don't know what you can do so I'm going to help you so you don't have to work during your senior year. And I was a B minus student at the time and for the first time I didn't have to work and I was borderline honor student so I needed twelve A's and four B's in my senior year to graduate with honors and I made nine A's and three B's, an extra A, and I graduated with honors, while playing with a tennis team, gained my only letter I got during my whole academic career. And I'm probably more proud of that letter than I am graduating with honors from Virginia Union [University, Richmond, Virginia]. But that year gave me an opportunity to know that I could perform academically and I'll always be grateful to my sister for giving me that opportunity. In law school, I didn't have to work except in summers and Christmas holidays, and holidays, so I was able to perform in law school. And then when I took the bar and passed it the first time, I was relieved because I really wanted to be a lawyer more than--more than anything. Story_ID: 120081 Speaker 1: Now what inspired you to become a lawyer? Had you thought about it for along time or when did you first-- Speaker 2: I knew--I knew as early as high school, late high school, that I learned about [HM] Oliver W. Hill and Spott Robinson [sic, Spottswood William Robinson III] and while I was in college [at Virginia Union University, Richmond, Virginia] I actually went to a court argument and I heard Mr. Hill and Spott Robinson arguing a case, one of the cases involving the--leading up to the segregation and that's when I decided that that's what I wanted to do for my life. And I knew from that point on that I wanted to be a lawyer. Speaker 1: Now did you have teachers and--at Maggie Walker or--that inspired you to do that or try to point you in that direction? Speaker 2: Not to become a lawyer but they inspired me. I was always sleeping in class because I worked until midnight every night, six nights a week, and the teachers, instead of ridiculing me, they challenged me. They said, you're a bright young man, said, but you're not going to sleep in my classes and so they would call on me, often, and I was challenged. When I got home from work, I would do my homework assignment or while I was--had a lull on the job washing dishes, I would go into the bathroom and do my homework. If I didn't finish, I would finish at home. So I would be tired the next day but the teacher would call on me and I would always give them the answer. I was half-sleep. I could hear but I was, you know, my eyes were closed and people were amazed, all the way through high school [at Maggie Walker High School, Richmond, Virginia], how I could wake up and answer the question the teacher asked without hearing the teacher's lecture. And some teachers called on me often because they didn't like the idea that I wouldn't--I wasn't alert in their class. And the more they challenged me, the more I performed. And that happened in high school, and I graduated with honors in high school, and it happened in college too. My major was sociology and Dr. McGwinn [ph.] took a liking to me early on and said, "Young man, you're going to have to perform in my class." And he would call on me and I'd have to go to the blackboard and explain the socialized principles. And I would be nodding and he'd call on me and I would go to the board and explain the concept of consciousness of kind by Franklin Giddings and I would explain it so well and he would be challenged and the more he called on me, the more I performed and I think that helped me. And then in my senior year when I didn't have to work, I was able to perform without sleeping in class. Story_ID: 120082 Speaker 1: Now-- (simultaneous) Speaker 2: So it carried onto law school [at Howard University Law School in Washington, D.C.] because I always took the attitude that I had to--I had to get it myself. I couldn't depend on the teacher to teach me so I would always go back with my book and try to get it myself, which meant I spent a lot of time studying. And what I was concerned about in law school was that a lot of people finished law school with honors but could never pass the Bar exam and I wouldn't take the shortcuts. They had canned briefs where you could--instead of reading a fifty-page case or a sixty-page case, you could read a synopsis of the case in five or six lines and you memorize the synopsis, then you could answer questions on the exam. But I was afraid to do that because I was afraid I wouldn't be able to recognize the fact pattern on the exam if I didn't read the facts. So, I did it the hard way and, of course, it helped me get past the Bar. So my colleagues who graduated with honors never passed the Bar or had to take it two or three times to pass it. So I felt vindicated by my approach. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But my colleagues would go off for the weekend to party and I'd wait until they left and I locked the door and most of the time I would spend Friday nights, or Saturday nights, digging it out for myself, and it paid off in the long run. Story_ID: 118500 Speaker 1: Yeah, I want to ask you about Howard Law School [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] and some of the personalities of Howard Law School, some of the professors and the other students who were there with you. Speaker 2: Um-hum, okay. Speaker 1: Go ahead. Speaker 2: Oh, well, Howard Law School was perfect for me. I tried to go to--I--to apply to some of the white schools and, of course, money was a big consideration for me. I had to spend a couple of hundred dollars to take a test to see if I had the aptitude to attend some of those schools which weren't accepting blacks, anyway, and when I wrote to Howard, they accepted me. Upon my request, gave me a scholarship, a little scholarship, and said because I was out-of-state, Virginia offered, what they call a, "tuition grant" for African American students who attended schools in other states. So Virginia was paying me not to attend Virginia law schools and I was thrown into association with a lot of other persons who had similar aspirations as I did or who had been out in life in jobs that were principals of schools but to a job coming back to law school sort of as a second career. So it was an interesting mix at law school. I was one of the few students who, one of several students who, came back through the educational process without the interruption of the Army and right into school. So it was helpful to me to be thrown into association with others who had similar aspirations about civil rights and to be in law school at a time when the Brown [vs. Board of Education , 1954] decision was percolating--in the decision to implement Brown was percolating, Howard University Law School became the center of the discussion. We had moot court sessions. Every time a case would be before the Supreme Court, they would assemble at Howard Law School with the top think-tank lawyers, and they would have a dry run at the law school, and being a student there, I would always attend and learn. So I really got indoctrinated with the civil rights philosophy while I was at Howard, not to mention that I had professors who were involved in the civil rights effort, Herb Reed and Dorsey Lane. Constitutional Law was paramount at Howard. And I was thrown into association with a lot of young people who, from the South who, or not so young people, who came to Howard with a mission and that rubbed off on me. I might have gotten business contacts at some of the white law schools but this was what I needed, what I wanted for my career. Story_ID: 118501 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, you started law school [at Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] in '56 [1956], right? Speaker 2: Fifty-six [1956]. Speaker 1: Okay, and you were there till '59 [1959]? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Right so, yeah, that sounds like an exciting time period. Speaker 2: It was. Speaker 1: Who--well, which of the teachers had the most impact on you? Or can you look at it like that? Speaker 2: Well, there were several 'cause Constitutional Law was something that I was very interested in because I wanted to be a lawyer to really assist in the segregation struggle. Dorsey Lane taught me Constitutional Law and Herb Reed was one of my teachers who I later came to know, otherwise I think those two had a greater impact on me. While I was at Howard [University Law School, Washington, D.C.], I had a chance to go to some of the court cases that were being argued in Washington, as a student, and I had an interesting experience at Virginia Union [University, Richmond, Virginia] which tied me into my legal career. I was a senior at Virginia Union and did general assembly in Virginia, and a body which I now serve on, was having a meeting to discuss whether or not they would change the state constitution to siphon public funds into private schools to maintain segregation. And I attended this public hearing as a student. I was the only student, and thirty-four speakers, to speak against this law and while there, I met [HM] Oliver Hill, first time I met him in person, I'd seen him in court. And Oliver Hill was the Chairman of the Virginia State Conference NAACP [National Advancement for the Association of Colored People], fact is, he was the main person in our position of what they were doing and he spoke eloquently. He was in the prime of his career. He was fearless and he was about 6'6" and 230 pounds and he spoke while shaking his fist and I was amazed that a black man was standing before 140 legislatures in a joint session, and they were all white by the way, and all male, and mostly elderly, and challenged them that way he did. I mean I was, at one point, I was afraid because he said if you do this, we will beat you and he shook his fist and I looked for a place to duck down. I didn't know what was going to happen but I was really impressed with his speech. So I spoke and when I finished he came over to me and patted me on the shoulders, say, "Young man, what are you going to do when you grow up?" I said, I want to be a lawyer, like you. And he turned and said, why don't you come work for me? I'm going to need some help. Now, I was a college student. Hadn't gone to law school. He offered me a job. And we shook hands and I knew I had a job. And I kept in touch with him over the years while I was in school. But that was a defining moment of my life, to see him in that role and to feel the power of his statement and his strength and we've been close friends, and not only law partners, but close friends ever since. Story_ID: 118502 Speaker 1: And another defining moment of my life was when I had the honor of presenting him [Oliver W. Hill] to the Virginia Senate. And I'm a member of the Senate because of him, because of his leadership, and I extolled his leadership to the members of the Senate. And here he was in his nineties, blind, and I talked about his struggles against the same general assembly that took a stand for segregation. And when I finished my tribute to him, and I mean it was from the heart, he got a standing ovation, one of the most profound ovations that I have ever seen from the very body that he had challenged back in 1955 and this was 1995. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I mean it was a vindication of his life right there and so most of the defining moments of my life are associated with Mr. Hill. And when he got the Medal of Freedom from President [William H. "Bill"] Clinton, a few years later, he--there were other people in his age group being honored and Mr. Hill stood up, he had a walker, but he stood up and got his medal and it was a very moving thing. He towered over the other honorees because of his life. And there was one other moment when the American Bar Association gave him the highest award, the Pro Bono Award, in New York City. He got the award along with four or five other people. Now some of these people had worked for twenty years doing this and fifteen years doing that, Mr. Hill had a lifetime, a lifetime of fighting for freedom and for justice, fighting the establishment, not just the Attorney General's Office and the governance, but the best law firms that the state could buy and he beat them. And when his tribute was read, about four or five thousand people stood and applauded, and applauded. And I was sitting way back in the audience, people didn't know who I was, and Oliver got up, blind, and lectured to the American Bar Association. I mean he lectured to them and two elderly lawyers sitting beside me, said, "Good gracious, listen to that, ninety-five years old, blind, and still fighting." It was a very moving experience. And they didn't know I knew Mr. Hill but I was moved to tears because of the power of his statement and, you know, that was one of the defining moments of my life because I could see how Oliver Hill had made a difference. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 118503 Speaker 1: Now, when you graduated from Howard Law School [Howard University School of Law, Washington D.C.]-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: --what did you do immediately afterwards? Speaker 2: [HM] Mr. [Oliver] Hill had promised me a job and we kept in touch and he said, well, Henry, I don't have any space right now, why don't you work in Washington [D.C.] for a little while until I get my office straightened. And my fiance was a dental student and I didn't want to leave her up there anyways with those medical students, so I got a job in Washington until Oliver called me for about a year--a year and a half or so. And he called me back, I came back, and I worked in the Labor Department and this was during the Kennedy administration. And I remember one experience where I was on a job and they said the Kennedy administration is going to come by and look at the Labor Department and I was a law student who had passed the Bar, working in the GS-5 position. I mean, not a law student, a lawyer, and there were law students at Georgetown [University, Washington, D.C.] and American University who were still in school working a GS-7 positions and the supervisor was afraid that I would be discovered. They hid me over in a corner somewhere and didn't want me to be seen 'cause they were afraid that the Kennedy administration would have someone's head for having a lawyer working in the GS-5 when there were law students who were white, young students, working in sevens and nines and I didn't--I knew what was going on but I didn't make a fuss because I knew this was just a temporary thing for me. I was waiting for Mr. Hill's call but that was an example of how segregation manifested itself in the early '60s [1960s]-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --after Kennedy was elected. Speaker 1: Now, Mr. Hill got a position in the Kennedy administration-- Speaker 2: When I joined him, and he called me back in '61 [1961] to join him, Kennedy had just offered him--in fact he had offered me a job to come back before Kennedy gave him the appointment but Kennedy gave him an appointment which required him to travel around the country in Housing, and he couldn't work so he turned his law practice over to me and another lawyer who had been helping him, Sam [Samuel Wilbert] Tucker, and we met when I came to join the firm and we shook hands on the partnership and Mr. Tucker had twenty-five years experience. I was right out of law school. Speaker 1: Yeah, Tucker went to school with Oliver Hill. Speaker 2: With Mr. Oliver Hill, they were friends and he was going to bring us back together. He didn't realize he couldn't practice if he took this job but he did and it was a good rest for him from what he'd been doing. So, that's how Hill, Tucker and Marsh came together and that's how the law firm was really born, out of that association. Story_ID: 118504 Speaker 1: Okay, now--I mean I get all this chronology straight but I know this one--he was telling me about an important case that had to do with the tobacco industry which you were involved in. Speaker 2: Yeah I--Title VII, the Civil Rights Act of 1964 came along during my career as a lawyer and as a political figure so I went up to Washington to testify to help get Title VII and, of course, Title VII was part of a comprehensive Civil Rights Act, you know, Title II, part a combination, Title VI Education, Title VII Employment, and I litigated the first case in the country on the merits on Title VII. What happened was these defense--these companies would raise procedural questions and most of their early litigation involved class action procedures in all those cases. So until those procedure questions were resolved, we couldn't get to the merits. Well, I held a case clause versus Philips Morris and in that case there's a court condemned the seniority system which Philips Morris and other companies had where blacks would be relegated to low paying, poor condition departments and if they wanted to change to a higher paying department, they would have to lose years of seniority and they called it the department seniority system. My case outlawed that system and one of the provisions of Title VII was equal pay for equal work. Well, part of this case I challenged the pay that they were paying to some African American workers doing different jobs but equally equivalent jobs to what whites were doing but that whites got more pay. So it was the equal pay provision of Title VII. I got the first precedent under that and those precedents were used to unravel segregation in other companies. And also I had a case against American Tobacco Company that tried to get bumping, a very complicated process, but if--because of discrimination, a black was denied a job because of race and a white got in that job, my theory would have had that since the white got into the job that the black should have had, the white would have been bumped out of the job and a black put in it. Of course, it didn't go that far. The five to four vote that Judge Powers--Justice Powers ruled against me was that instead of bumping the white from the job which he shouldn't have had, the black would be entitled to, what they call "front pay", that was they would have to pay him until a job became open so that you don't harm "the innocent white" but you still remedy the situation in part for the black. That was a compromise. But those were the kind of cases I was litigating and by that time [HM] Mr. [Oliver W.] Hill had sort of moved on to other things so I became the principal litigator under Title VII in the law firm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I had several precedents that were valuable in employment law and also in school desegregation. I was arguing cases also for the legal defense fund that created some precedents. So I had a very satisfying career as an attorney in civil rights which was what my dream, as I grew up, you know-- Speaker 1: Now--now-- Speaker 2: --to be a civil rights lawyer. Story_ID: 118505 Speaker 1: Right, now you had a desegregation--school desegregation case that came up around the same time as [HM] Julius Chambers' Swann case-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Swann v. Mecklenburg County [Swann v. Charlotte-Mecklenburg Board of Education, 1971] and yours was called a-- Speaker 2: No, Becker vs. Norfolk or Brewer vs. Norfolk [1968]; it had two names. Actually what it was, the defendants of segregation kept moving from one defense to the other and busing was the last hurrah. They used busing to say that you can't transport students to school when blacks had been denied busing when whites were transported to school but Swann vs. Charlotte-Mecklenburg and Brewer vs. Norfolk were the two cases all the way up to the Supreme Court that presented the issue for the court and they choose Swann vs. Mecklenburg. It was a (unclear) question and [HM] Julius Chambers got to argue that case and that case outlawed desegregation practices that most school districts were employing. But in reality, by the time we broke down the barriers in school desegregation, a lot of the white children had moved out into the suburbs or moved into private schools. They stalled long enough to permit a lot of the young people to avoid desegregation by taking other measures. So even though we won the battle, we probably lost the war because there's almost as much segregation in the system today as it was, you know, twenty years ago. Speaker 1: Now but what you did do you like stopped the state from supporting these--these private white schools-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --alternative schools, right? Speaker 2: Yes, we had cases in every state. I--Mr. [Samuel Wilbert] Tucker and I had a series of cases that I would argue the tuition grants in Virginia so that, you know, there were a lot of battles during the years we--we had to defend the rights of whites who, and blacks who, supported desegregation. They were hauled--in Virginia, they were hauled before the legislature and called communists and challenged and harassed by the state and I had the distinction of representing some of those people before the legislature where I now serve. Speaker 1: It seems to me--maybe we can return to that for a minute to see how those relationships are as a-- Speaker 2: Or the people who were in the legislature then are no longer here-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --but some of the--some of the practices and some of the ideas are still-- Speaker 1: Remain. Speaker 2: --prevalent in different forms but it's an interesting experience for me to be in the legislature now. I haven't represented people before the legislature during the '60s [1960s]. Speaker 1: Now did we cover the most pivotal cases, you think? Or should we--is there anything else we need to talk about? Speaker 2: Well, we could probably spend several hours talking about-- Speaker 1: This is true. Speaker 2: --some of the cases. There were cases involving voting rights. There were cases involving jury and in jury discrimination. There were cases involving higher education. The state tried to create segregation in higher education that failed to dismount the dual system of higher education. There were litigation cases involving that. There were a lot of different areas we litigated, my law firm, just about every area of segregation you could imagine. And that's an interesting story. But part of my career really involved a political area. I was working in dual tracks. Story_ID: 118506 Speaker 1: Now why did you decide to get involved in politics in the first place? Speaker 2: I discovered that the law is very slow for bringing about change. I guess I observed that in the Brown v. Board [of Education, 1954] case because even though the [U.S.] Supreme Court decided Brown in '54 [1954], in '55 [1955], they came back and gave the Southern states more time which permitted whites chosen to move, or white parents to make arrangements, to avoid segregation. In '59 [1959], a case came before the Supreme Court where they could have struck down segregation of summary judgment and they refused to do it. In '61 [1961], a case came to the Supreme Court, they denied it. I took a case before the Supreme Court in '63 [1963] and the Supreme Court outlawed faculty desegregation but they didn't address the issue of students which meant that you had to desegregate your faculties to give the students a choice. But that was providing time and it wasn't until 'Green versus New Kent', which is a case Mr. [Samuel Wilbert] Tucker and I took to the court that they finally said, now means now, in capital letters. So '68 [1968] versus '54 [1954], it was fourteen years and in '66 [1966] I decided to enter politics because I could see change happening because of politics quicker than the change in the law. So in '66 [1966] I ran for City Council and I won and became involved in the political struggle and that was at the same time I was handling cases involving civil rights. So I had a dual career and my political activity got me involved with the national black political figures and so I rose to the Board membership of the National League of Cities, fifteen thousand elected officials, thirty-six board members, I became a member of the board of directors. Story_ID: 118507 Speaker 1: Now I want to go back a little bit. Now, when did you first run for [Richmond] City Council? Speaker 2: In 1966. Speaker 1: Okay and you were elected in '66 [1966] and served the City Council member-- Speaker 2: For twenty-five years and during that time I became vice mayor for seven years and mayor for five and a half years. And I've been in office, by the way, since 1966 and this is 2003, so I'm in my thirty-ninth year, consecutive elected service. Speaker 1: Okay, now have black people in the state of Virginia always had the right to vote? Or did they have to be reinstated or-- Speaker 2: Well, Virginia had a poll tax in order to vote and this wasn't outlawed until 1965. You had to pay your poll taxes for three years plus interest in order to vote until 1965. Speaker 1: How much money would that represent? Speaker 2: It was about five dollars--it was about five dollars but that was a lot of money in the '50s [1950s] and '60s [1960s]. It was a lot of money. Speaker 1: So three times five plus-- Speaker 2: It was a dollar and a half per year-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --plus interest and it came to about five dollars to vote if you had not voted--if you had not paid it before and that lasted until 1965 and then there were other forms of discrimination. Virginia had what they called a "blank registration form" that ten questions you have to answer to register and there was a lot of illiteracy in the black community. So they would give you a piece of paper, a blank piece of paper. You had to remember roster questions in sequence and memorize the answers and the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] taught classes teaching people the questions, name, address, occupation. I mean, some of the questions were tricky. They had words that people couldn't even understand, hardly, in the questions, but they taught people to understand those questions and understand those answers and to memorize them in sequence and that's how they registered. They had practices such as getting an elderly white person to be the registrar in a rural area and her home was where they'd have to go to register but blacks were afraid to go--black males were afraid to go to these homes because they would be afraid they'd be accused of crimes, so they wouldn't go. I mean, all kinds of practices like that. We held litigation to outlaw that since I've been practicing. My firm held a case to outlaw black registration. I mean there were so many practices you wouldn't believe that kept African Americans from exercising their rights. Speaker 1: So it's the Voting Rights Act of '64 [1964], I guess, that opened the door for-- Speaker 2: Virginia--Virginia was kept under the Act, that's why we are under the Act right now. The Virginia Attorney General went up to Washington and testified that Virginia shouldn't be under the Act because they didn't discriminate and I went up and Mr. [Samuel Wilbert] Tucker and Mr. Banks. I covered the Senate Hearings, they covered the House, and the Attorney General testified and he testified before lunch that Virginia shouldn't be under the Act, he made out his case. So when they took a lunch break, I caught Senator Ted Kennedy in the hall, and I said, I'm a lawyer, I was young at the time, this is '64 [1964], and I said, I'm a lawyer from Virginia, I've got evidence that Virginia should be under the Act, that they discriminated. He said, okay, you talk to my assistant here. And I spoke to his assistant during lunchtime. When we got back on it, before the committee, they called me to testify. And [Senator Ted] Kennedy took that information I had given him and whipped the Attorney General to death and I became really impressed with how brilliant he was because I spent about fifteen minutes giving him the information and he beat him so bad that--and Mr. Tucker and Mr. Banks said the same thing on the House side and Virginia was kept under the Act. Harold Washington, who later became the Mayor of Chicago, was on the committee and he whipped them to death. So, I mean, that's how Virginia got under the Act. Story_ID: 118508 Speaker 1: But I was talking about my legal career when I became mayor [of Richmond, Virginia], I became one of four standing committee chairs in the U. S. Conference of Mayors. I'm from a small city. Cities like Chicago [Illinois] and New York and L. A. [Los Angeles, California] and New Orleans [Louisiana], all those cities, normally chaired these committees but I was from Richmond and I was chairman of one of the four standing committees. Speaker 2: Now how did you do it? Did you--you think you kind of sneaked up on them or what was it? Speaker 1: No, I was respected as a civil rights lawyer and as a leader and I found a way to end up guiding these organizations to operate in such a way that I could rise to the leadership positions. Almost every organization I've been in I've been able to negotiate. For example now, I'm in a minority party in the Senate but I'm the chairman of the Martin Luther King Jr. Commission, State Commission, honoring the memory of Dr. King. I'm chairman of the Virginia Alcohol Safety Program even though my legislatures controlled, firmly by Republicans, in both Houses and I, you know, I just for some way I've managed to rise to leadership positions. Speaker 2: Yeah, it seems to indicate that you know something about diplomacy to be able to because I'm sure that being involved in civil rights is probably antithetical in some of the--interest of some of the mayors in our country and I just wondered. I mean, for what they perceive as their interest. Speaker 1: Well, I found that people respect you, even though they might not agree with you, if you respect them and you're straight up with them. I can think of one experience when I was attending a meeting of the National League of Cities. I think we were meeting in Hawaii and I wanted to get a resolution through to have the National League of Cities to take a position of affirmative action but I had not taken the issue to the resolutions' committee which meant that I had to get a two-thirds vote on the floor. So I rounded up my colleagues, who were African Americans, and tried to get them to come to the floor fight so we could get affirmative action approved. We needed two-thirds vote which was almost unheard of. But I ran to the beaches and took--social events and snatched people and brought them to the hearing and we got sixty-three percent of the vote. This is a white organization of elected officials. And we got sixty-three percent of the vote to oppose--to support affirmative action. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And for that reason, my colleagues made me the president of all of the local elected officials--black elected officials. Story_ID: 120175 Speaker 1: Well tell us about being Mayor of Richmond [Virginia]. Speaker 2: It was an extremely exciting experience and a culmination of a lifetime of struggle and work. It was something about being the mayor of Richmond, the first African American mayor that was special because Richmond had once been the capitol of the Confederacy and that was a certain symbolism in that position and a certain conservative way of thinking in Richmond because Richmond, you know, used to be almost a slave capitol in the country. So next to New Orleans [Louisiana], we had more slaves traded here and bred here than anywhere in the nation. So that was a strong tradition even in the African American community about recognizing the superiority of whites in white leadership position. So I ran for City Council really to get someone else to run because I was caught up in the legal struggles and I tried to get some other blacks who were independent to run. Everyone I went to said, I don't have time, you do it. Well, I had less time than any of them. I was litigating in the national scene and fighting for precedence and I had little time, but time was running out. So I said, well I'll go ahead and run one term, it's a two year term, and while that term is going on, I can find someone and I can get back to litigation. Well, when I went to the first meeting, and heard those people talk and operate, I said this is--I can't believe this is awful. I said, heck, I could do better than this. And I almost immediately shifted from trying to get someone else to do it to setting out to get a team of people to provide leadership for the city after my first meeting. And my team was integrated, I had whites and blacks. In fact, I think I had three whites and two blacks on my team, and we went for it two years later, in '68 [1968] and we just missed. So in 1970, the city was trying to annex--the annexation would not have been completed until after the election. So the city quickly compromised the annexation, gave up the land that they had sought to get the rich taxable land, gave up the vacant land that they could grow in just to get 45,000 white people. And they brought them in and we--when they were taken to court, it was brought out that they did that to dilute the African American vote. In the words of the mayor [Thomas J. Bliley, Jr.] at the time, "We don't want the niggers to take over the city." That came out in the court. Speaker 1: In the words of a mayor. (simultaneous) Speaker 2: And one time he said we don't want Richmond to become another Washington D.C. Of course, Washington had an African American mayor at the time [Walter Washington]. So all that came out in court. And he had made those statements to white people not knowing that they would come forward and tell the truth. So when that came out, the courts said, okay, you can keep the territory but first you have to get the territory back because you got it illegally but if you want to keep it you've got to switch to a ward system. And the city chose to switch to a ward system and cut the city into nine districts and we won five of the nine districts and, of course, I was selected as the mayor. So that's how I got to be mayor and it was a very exciting journey. I served three terms as mayor and then I was defeated as mayor 'cause the mayor's a limited Council but I was still on the Council and I served on the Council until 1991 when I was elected to the Senate and I've been elected to the Senate three terms, in fact, four terms now. So I've been in office for thirty-eight years. I'm in my thirty-ninth year of service. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I'm going to quit while I'm young. I'm not going to do this when I get old. Story_ID: 120176 Speaker 1: So, now what about the--now, in 1981, you gathered together like 1500 black elected officials? Speaker 2: Well, actually it wasn't me by myself, it was a group of African American leaders around the country. We've been talking about this for a long time and I was in the leadership circle because I'd been president of the National Black Caucus of Local Elected Officials and I had been groomed in the Atlanta [Georgia] leadership circle where most of the black leadership in the country was in Atlanta at one point. And so we planned this conference. The only other conference had been in Gary, Indiana conference in 1968 which really was a conference of activists that didn't have many elected officials. Speaker 1: National Black Political Assembly, yeah. Speaker 2: But this was a comprehensive conference with members of the Congressional Black Caucus, the National Conference of State Legislatures, the National Conference of--the National Black Caucus of Local Elected Officials, civil rights organizations, SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] and NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], Urban League and we all met here in Richmond [Virginia] and-- Speaker 1: What were the issues that-- Speaker 2: Well, Andy Young--I selected Andy [HM Andrew Young] to be the keynote speaker and Andy summed up the essence of the conference in one phrase, "We've integrated the lunch counters, we've integrated to some extent, the schools, now the job for the '80s [1980s] is to integrate the money. That was in 1981. And if we held a conference today, anywhere of black leadership, that would be the same principle. We've integrated the housing to some extent. We've integrated schools to some extent. We've integrated certain things but the board rooms, the ownership of the country, the equity in the country, that's still a challenge. It was a challenge in 1981 and it's still a challenge today and I wanted Andy Young, who's a person I admire almost more than anyone, to be the keynote speaker. I said, Andy has to be the keynote speaker. He was the Ambassador to the United Nations at the time and he summed it up perfectly. And that conference stands now as the only time--the only time in history of the country that black leadership at all levels have come together, and it hadn't been done since. It was a tough--it was a tough assignment to do but it was pulled off and it went well. Speaker 1: Okay, so, not even a Congressional Black Caucus meeting accomplishes this kind of pulling together people-- Speaker 2: Well, I have friends on the Congressional Black Caucus and I used to attend their anger meetings and they make a lot of money and they spend a week in Washington [D.C.] but very little is accomplished. I mean there's some nice parties and, you know, there's some issues discussed but not the kind of dialogue and discussion that we need in this country at this time more than ever before. The caucus dinner is a highlight and they have a dinner speaker and the president, if there's a democratic president, normally comes by, sometimes a Republican president may come by. This is a powerful political event but it doesn't deal with the issues and it doesn't help blacks at all levels of leadership coming together in thoughtful discussion. Speaker 1: Okay, so nothing like the conference in '81 [1981] has taken place since-- Speaker 2: I'm very proud of my role. Again, I didn't do it by myself but I'm very proud of my role in being the host mayor for that conference in Richmond. It was--it was--what I convinced my colleagues was, if we're going to have this anywhere, it should be in Richmond, which has an African American mayor. (Unclear) Richmond's history as a capital of the Confederacy. This is the place we should have it and they agreed. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you foresee this ever happening again? Speaker 2: I hope so. We really need to come together as a race now more than ever before. The enemy has found a way to divide us and that's the strategy for halting black progress, divide and conquer, and if we don't find a way to unite, and stay united, we're not going to progress. One of the side things that I do is something called Unity Day. I work to promote communication and unity between the different elements in African American community. That's a tough thing to do because of institutional jealousies and everything but we have to do it because the enemy has found out that the way they can defeat us is to divide us. Story_ID: 120177 Speaker 1: Another one of my hobbies is developing black leadership. We need black leadership oriented in the civil rights history so that they can continue the movement, continue the struggle, and we don't get too much of that. Most of the leadership training now is done by white groups. They control the speakers. They control the format and they indoctrinate people the way they want to and that's why we're losing--we're losing out. And a third area where I'm working is in early childhood education primarily involving, we are failing in the education system because we aren't catching the children early enough and we're not getting the parents involved in their children's education so I have a group called Support Committee for Public Education which is supplementing what the school system is doing, trying to get private money to demonstrate that parental involvement is the key and that the school system hopefully will pick it up and make this a part of what they're doing. So these are some of the hobbies I have because I don't have enough to do in running a law firm and being a senator-- Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: --and trying to learn how to play golf at the same time. Story_ID: 120178 Speaker 1: Tell me about a couple of these other things that you're doing--there's something called the Richmond Renaissance. Now this is something that you were co-founder of. Speaker 2: Well actually I'm very disappointed. The climate was so thick when we became leaders in Richmond [Virginia] that we reached out to the business community and formed what is called Richmond Renaissance Partnership between the public sector and the private sector, between the black community and the white community. It was a way of sharing the leadership with people who couldn't get elected but who had been this expertise and influence. But over the years the business community sort of laid back and when they found an opportunity they now are trying to take over the leadership of the city and they're achieving that goal because they are attacking the incumbent leadership and they are in the process of putting in a system that would permit them to govern the city and take away black leadership. I'm very disappointed. My dream of Richmond becoming an ideal place where blacks and whites can work together is going up in smoke because the people who were appointed and participating in the shadow government had decided that they want to take over the whole thing. But at one point that was an achievement that I was very proud of but now I'm disappointed. Speaker 1: So you're still struggling with that I guess? Speaker 2: I'm still a member of it but they, you know, a partnership is an entity where you defend your partner when your partner's attacked. You don't join in when they're attacking against your partner and that's what the business leadership in Renaissance has done. So I'm very disappointed in that. Story_ID: 120179 Speaker 1: Okay, now what about the Metropolitan Economic Development Council? Speaker 2: That was something that I was president of when I was mayor [of Richmond, Virginia]. I started--Richmond [Virginia] is an independent city because of our Constitution but we're surrounded by very affluent counties with plenty of vacant land and so that tax rate is much less than ours and so in order for us to attract businesses, we have to work together. So the Richmond Economic Development Council was a way of cities and the county coming together, pulling their resources, trying to attract businesses, and once they get here, then we fight over who's going to get them but let's come together to bring them here. And that was a concept that started when I was mayor and I was very proud of that and as a result we've gotten some outstanding businesses that have come to Richmond. A lot of them are located in the counties but Richmond is better off because they're here than it would be if we didn't have them. Story_ID: 120180 Speaker 1: Okay, okay, now you were president of the National Black Caucus of Local Elected Officials [NBC-LEO]? Speaker 2: Yeah, that's the organization that I told you I was selected president because they--I was so gung ho at the time that they decided to reward me, or punish me, by making me the president. We were a significant force in the National League of Cities and NBC-LEO, the Ford Foundation, provided some funds to empower the John Center of Political Studies [John Goodwin Tower Center for Political Studies, Southern Methodist University, Dallas, Texas] to help us organize and to operate. And so I became involved in that organization. When I would go to the National League of Cities, I would attend the NBC-LEO of meetings and I rotated up to the presidency of the Black Caucus. I mean, they said I managed by luck to somehow gravitate to the leadership positions and the National League of Cities was an umbrella organization I rose to a board membership in that. And the U.S. Conference of Mayors was another group that I attended when I became mayor and I became a member of--a chair of a standing committee on that. So I guess I've been lucky. I've been in the right place at the right time, had some good friends that I managed to hold a lot of leadership positions. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 120181 Speaker 1: Now the new Millennium Leadership Institute, I think you just talked about that a few minutes ago, right? Speaker 2: That's the group that I'm trying to start to train future leaders in the tradition of the Civil Rights Movement. I mean, they need to know how they got where they are and so that they can make the right decisions in the present, in the future. Speaker 1: Well, we talked about the Unity Day celebration and-- Speaker 2: That grew out of my perception that there's a need for the different organizations working for the same goes to communicate with one another and work together. We shouldn't be planning events on the same day that cause our supporters to choose between which group they're going to attend. I mean, there are a whole lot of mistakes we're making, working independently, that we should all work together and pool our resources and pool our efforts, that's what that's all about. Speaker 1: And you're-- Speaker 2: And also we need to instill pride among African Americans in their history and in their achievements. Speaker 1: All right, and you host a Richmond [Virginia] Annual Juneteenth celebration too, which I-- Speaker 2: That's the same thing as Unity Day. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Speaker 2: We combined Juneteenth into Unity Day because it's all related to that. Speaker 1: Is it that--did most black people in Richmond realize the significance of this history here and Richmond being--having once been a capitol of the Confederacy and-- Speaker 2: Some do. Speaker 1: --Petersburg being right outside here with those last battles of the Civil War, black soldiers facing the Confederate Army and pushing in here? Speaker 2: Some do and some don't and it's a feeling we don't do a good job of passing that on and we need to do a better job of passing that on. You know the Jews would never let you forget the Holocaust. I mean they always remind you of it, and there's nothing wrong with that, but we should remind our people of the struggles we had to go through to get where we are. Speaker 1: Now I hear you saying two things to--and not--I guess there are two things that I'm sure you can reconcile but I'm going to let you speak to reconcile it but the need for black unity on the one hand and the need to--for everybody in the city to be able to work together, these are two things that sometimes, you know, leaders have--seem to be confused about or people become confused-- Speaker 2: They're not--those two things are not incongruent. One of the important things is that together as a people, as a group of African American organizations, together we're strong, we are almost invincible but separate, we are nothing. It's like a broom. You can break a straw in a broom, like that, but you put enough straws together and tie them together and you can sweep away anything. And we're the same way. We have to find a way to unite around common goals and purposes and pool our resources and our efforts. If we don't do that, we are lost and there's nothing wrong with that in promoting racial harmony because you can't have any peace without justice. Justice is first. So if you want peace at any price, then you can submit to slavery. And, you know, one of the mistakes that was made was when they taught us--when I said mistakes in quotes, how to read because they were probably smarter in killing people who were assisting blacks in learning how to read because once we learned how to read and learn how to understand the principles in which this nation is founded, then a lot of us who were gullible became indoctrinated with those principles and, you know, I live a few blocks from the spot where Patrick Henry uttered his speech, "Is life so dear, or peace so sweet, as to be purchased at the price of chains and slavery?" Speaker 1: And he's-- Speaker 2: "Forbid it, Almighty God. As for me, give me liberty or give me death." I mean I learned that as a student and I'm fortunate enough to have been mayor of the city where he uttered that statement but I believe it and-- Speaker 1: And he was a white man in Virginia-- Speaker 2: --white man fighting against the tyranny of England but-- Speaker 1: --but--and he wasn't even a slave and he was talking like-- Speaker 2: No, but he was fighting against the tyranny of England, taxation without representation. He was fighting to establish freedom. Well, I learned that in these segregated schools, and I believe that. So I'm indoctrinated with the same spirit and I want to be free. I am free. So I can't submit to slavery in any form. I said the mistake was they taught me how to read and understand. So, it's too late, you can't put the genie back in the bottle. I'm free and a lot of other people are free. So that's why the struggle goes on but now the struggle is not just with white people, 'cause there are a lot of white people who support us and believe in us, the struggle now--the great struggle is in African American community and to some extent we are the victims of our own success. The Civil Rights Movement has had some successes that people who've gained, they've gotten some benefits from it but a lot of those people, once they've gotten those benefits, are afraid to look back. They'll say, well I don't want to have anything to do with civil rights any more, you know, I don't believe in the civil rights stuff until the layoffs come and the--the companies merge and all of a sudden they're laying off and they come to me, a civil rights lawyer, and say, "Senator Marsh, can you help me, I lost my job?" "What happened?" "Well, they had a merger and, you know, I don't have a job and what can you do to help me?" I said, "Well, are you a member of NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]?" "No." "Have you ever been a member of anything?" "No. But, you know, what can you do to help me?" And a lot of times the answer is not very much because companies have a right to merge and management decisions about who to lay off are so fluid that you can't get a legal handle to say that this person was not kept because of race. So a lot of times there's nothing that can be done but the people who are benefited from the Civil Rights Movement, many of them, not all of them, have turned their back on it. That's why we need unity today, that's why we need training--leadership training for people who become leaders because if we don't have that, we're going to lose out, so the struggle goes on. Story_ID: 120182 Speaker 1: Sir, what would you consider at this point to be your legacy? Speaker 2: I first laid hands on a golf club at age fifty-eight. Golf is a very complicated game and now I'm sixty-nine and I'm able to play golf, respectably. No, seriously, I really don't know. I--I think being a son of the civil rights struggle and growing up to effectively participate in litigation to advance the struggle is something I'm proud of and being a part of the political system, moving up to become mayor of Richmond, and influential in national political circles, is something that I'm very proud of and perhaps the most important thing is raising a family of--of children who are making a contribution, who have turned out to be outstanding citizens, which is not that common these days. It is very difficult that-for them to be brought up in a home where I wasn't there a lot and still become a normal contributing outstanding citizens, and have a wife who has permitted me to do what I have done and still stick by me. I think that's probably the most important thing that I can point to as a legacy. Story_ID: 120183 Speaker 1: Is there anything that you would do differently if you had to do it again? Speaker 2: I probably would spend more time with my children and my wife [Diane Marsh]. You know, when I got to a certain point, I looked back and I really wanted to spend more time with them and at that point it was too late because they had been emancipated and they had their own interests and that's the one thing that I think I would find time to do more than I did. I mean, you know, I love them and I think they love me but I missed out on a lot of things that I should have participated in. That's the one thing I would have probably changed. Other than that, no. Story_ID: 120184 Speaker 1: What are your future plans and-- Speaker 2: Well, I'm going to-- Speaker 1: --you were talking about retirement but-- Speaker 2: --well, no, I'm going to quit while I'm young but I'm--no time soon. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I'd like to play more golf and do more traveling and spend more time with my family-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --but that's going to have to wait a while. While I'm young, I gotta fight on a little bit more. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Is there anything we haven't touched upon that we need to-- Speaker 2: A whole lot but we don't have time to do it. An awful lot. It's been a wonderful life and very challenging and it's still going on. Story_ID: 120185 Speaker 1: Okay, and sir, one last question we ask of everybody. It's similar to a legacy but a little different and that's, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: I really haven't thought about that very much. I don't know. I guess as someone who tried to make a difference, you know, tried to leave it better than I found it for the people who come after me...