 Story_ID: 196332 Speaker 1: My name is Regennia Williams, and I'm the interviewer for The HistoryMakers. And our videographer today is Matthew Hickey. We're very grateful to you for letting us come into your home to talk with you about your life and your work. And I just want to say that your interview will become part of a videotape, oral history archive. We hope to have, by the time the project is done, five hundred interviews in the collection, and we're approaching now the one thousand--I'm sorry, five thousand interviews, and we're approaching the one thousandth interview this year. And so you're a part of a great project, and again, I think you'll be very pleased with how this turns out. We have an interview structure that actually has three parts. The first part talks about your early life and your immediate family, your parents and siblings. The middle section tends to focus more on education and then the last section talks about your career and your adult life. So I'd like to get started by asking you some questions about yourself. And we describe these as People magazine-ish type questions. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Well, I will ask those questions, but first, if you would please state and spell your name, including your middle and your maiden name? Speaker 2: All right, it's Dorothy Arline Layne McIntyre. So then spelling is D-O-R-O-T-H-Y, Arline, A-R-L-I-N-E, Layne, L-A-Y-N-E, and McIntyre is M-C-capital I-N-T-Y-R-E. Speaker 1: And would you please state your date of birth and the location of your birth? Speaker 2: 1-27-17 [January 27, 1917] in Le Roy, New York. Speaker 1: And what is today's date for the record? Speaker 2: I thought it was 6-18 [June 18, 2004], but correct me if I'm not correct. Speaker 1: No, you're correct, 6-18. Speaker 2: --[Zero] O four [2004]. Speaker 1: Thank you. And the location of this interview with the address? Speaker 2: This is Cleveland, Ohio at 3703 East 140th Street, Cleveland 44120, Ohio. Speaker 1: And finally, would you state your occupation? Speaker 2: Retired, retired school teacher, public school teacher. Speaker 1: And also a pilot, former pilot (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) At one time, pilot at one time and an accountant at one time, several little occupations like that. Speaker 1: All right. Story_ID: 196333 Speaker 1: Now, back to my People magazine-ish type questions. They're just five things that we'd like to know about you right at the start of the interview. Could you please tell me what your favorite food is? Speaker 2: My favorite food is perhaps chicken, okay. Speaker 1: All right. And do you have a favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Favorite time of year-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --is summertime and the living is easy. Speaker 1: (Laughter) And do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: No, maybe blue or rose, blue perhaps. Speaker 1: And how about a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Of the vacations I have been or would like to go? I have been, there was one favorite. Which one did I like? I like Morocco, North Africa. I enjoyed that because it was a learning experience, and France because I knew French better than Spanish because I had French in high school. Then in Spain, that was a favorite also because I had had Spanish, just the places I knew what was going on. Speaker 1: Okay. And do you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They certainly treated you nice as a tourist. Speaker 1: Yeah. Do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Oh, favorite saying. You're kidding; go away, you're kidding. Speaker 1: That's your favorite? Speaker 2: You're kidding. You know, I'm surprised with the knowledge they're giving me. When they tell me about something, and it's amazing, I said, "Oh, you're kidding." That's it. Speaker 1: Great. Thank you. Story_ID: 196334 Speaker 1: Now, as I said before, this first section focuses on your early life, and we'll begin by asking about your mother. Can you please tell me what her name was? Speaker 2: Her name was Lena Charlotte Hart. Lena Charlotte Hart was her maiden name, and of course, she married the Layne [McIntyre's father, Clyde Layne]. Speaker 1: And do you know where she was born? Speaker 2: Yes, she was born in Culpeper, Virginia. Speaker 1: Did she also grow up in that area? Speaker 2: Yes, she grew up in that area. She finished school in that area. She went to a normal school. I think it was called Manassas [Industrial School for Colored Youth, Manassas, Virginia] then. It was called, it's still there, I think. And then she taught school in a one-room schoolhouse where we were in Virginia, segregated, country schoolhouse. Speaker 1: Well, did your mother ever tell you any special stories about her life in Virginia or did anyone else tell you about her early life in Virginia? Speaker 2: Not, I don't know. I just knew it from visiting Virginia when we were small. I mean we've always visited there. My father had taken us back, but because, she didn't tell me because she was five when she passed-- Speaker 1: Or you were five? Speaker 2: I mean I was five years old when she passed, but I saw her last when I was three years old because she was, she had to go into a hospital, what they called a tuberculosis hospital in New York State. Yeah, we were in New York State then. So, don't, I know very much after, you know, three years old was when she went to the hospital, but she didn't return. Story_ID: 196335 Speaker 1: And can you please tell us your father's name? Speaker 2: Clyde Charles Layne. Speaker 1: And was he also from Virginia? Speaker 2: Yes. They [McIntyre's parents, Clyde Layne and Lena Hart Layne] were both born and raised in Virginia. Speaker 1: Do you know what town he was from? Speaker 2: Culpepper. Speaker 1: Also from Culpeper. Speaker 2: Culpepper, Virginia. Speaker 1: So your parents met in Culpepper? Speaker 2: They must have met down there. They met down there. Speaker 1: Did they ever or did your father ever talk with you about how they met and decided to marry? Speaker 2: No, he never did, that I can recall. She was from the, she was Hart, but her mother [Lizzie Lightfoot Hart] was from the Lightfoot family. They were well known in Virginia too, the Lightfoots. The Lightfoots and the Harts and the Laynes. And--don't record this-- Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, we're recording. Speaker 2: And then in my background was a great-great-grandmother. And the Layne family, I have a chart of that. I have a family tree. And Mariah [ph.] was straight from Africa. I mean she was, my aunt called her Guinea, but it must have been Guyana [sic.] and that she was fifteen years old on the beach. And she was from a wealthy family. I think they dug for gold or something down there then, you know, in Africa. And she was playing on the beach one day, and she had her jewelry and all on. And there was a ship out there, near the beach. And they came in to the beach and lured her to the ship with more jewelry and brought her straight over here and enslaved her in Virginia. Speaker 1: And you said she was your great (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Mariah-- Speaker 1: --Mariah, is a great-great (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --on the paternal side. So that's be back--my father's grandmother, yeah, that's right. My great aunt told me about it too. Even his aunt, his father's aunt was my great aunt. She told me all about her. That's what happened. Mariah. Speaker 1: Do you remember any of your other ancestors on that side of the family (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The Laynes? Speaker 1: Do you have information on them? Yes-- Speaker 2: Yes, it's in the chart. Speaker 1: --descendants of Mariah. Speaker 2: It's in the chart there. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, well, we can take a look at that and perhaps include that in the archive. Speaker 2: Archive, yeah, those Laynes and Mariah especially cause she's the first one that we knew of. And she was enslaved, right. That's what it was. And I don't know about the Lightfoot family. I think they were too, yeah, in Virginia. Story_ID: 196336 Speaker 1: Now, you said your family was in [Le Roy] New York, residing in New York at the time of your mother's [Lena Hart Layne] passing? Speaker 2: Yeah, my father [Clyde Layne] had moved to New York State, upstate New York because he was a farmer, and he was an expert in his field. So they made him head of this five hundred acre farm. That's what we lived on. And he hired men, you know, to work the farm. He knew how to rotate crops and all like that. And he was, he was really good at it. So what he did was, whenever he needed more help on the farm, he would get someone from Virginia, a young man from Virginia who would be young enough to come up and help in the summertime and then go to school for a better education in New York State. He was a good guy, my father. He helped his own, he helped his people. Hope I can say that. Okay. Speaker 1: Do you remember when the family moved to New York? Speaker 2: I was born there. Did he move up there before we were born? He married my mother in [Culpeper] Virginia, came up there. My sister was born first. It was just the two of us. Speaker 1: And both children were born in New York? Speaker 2: Both of us, uh-huh. Speaker 1: What was your sister's name? Speaker 2: Ruth Elizabeth Layne Marshall. She died maybe less than ten years, maybe ten years ago. She was living in Baltimore [Maryland]. She was teaching too. She was teaching in Baltimore. Yeah, so it was just the two of us, really close. And then I had two, you call them, my father remarried [to May Sellers] in New York State, and I had two-- Speaker 1: Stepbrothers? Speaker 2: Yes, stepbrothers. Speaker 1: And what were their-- Speaker 2: Both of them are gone to glory. Speaker 1: Okay, what were their names, please? Speaker 2: [Clyde] Ned Edward [Layne, Jr.] (laughter)-- Speaker 1: Ned? (Simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Edward and Louis [Layne]. Story_ID: 196337 Speaker 1: Now, did you and your sister [Ruth Layne Marshall] attend the public schools in Le Roy, New York? Speaker 2: Yeah, that's all the schools we've been to, in public schools. That's the only schools we were in. Speaker 1: Do you remember the name of the school, the elementary school you attended? Speaker 2: Yes, sure. Speaker 1: And what school was that? Speaker 2: Le Roy Elementary School [Le Roy, New York]-- Speaker 1: Okay (laughter). Speaker 2: --and Le Roy High School [later, Le Roy Junior-Senior High School, Le Roy, New York]. Speaker 1: Okay (laughter), that makes it easy (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was so small. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It [Le Roy, New York] was a village. It was a small, and the Oatka Creek ran through one wooded part of it. It was called Oatka. So, Oatka, it was the Oatka Indians who lived there. And then when I was a girl scout or something like that, we could, when we would go on trips, we would, could find arrowheads in the woods. You know, and oh, we all thought we were something when we could find an arrowhead. I never saved them. Should have because the Indians were prevalent in that area, the Oatka Indian, you know, before the United States was taken over, I mean what happened? Before the invasion of Europeans, of Europeans, isn't that right? That's where the Oatka Indians had settled. However, a lot of them remained. They were placed in, it's not concentration camps. They were, I remember, they were taken from the land and placed in, what do you call them? Speaker 1: The reservations. Speaker 2: Were they reservations? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: And I remember when I was a little girl, we would going from Le Roy on a Sunday or a Saturday on a trip to Niagara Falls, you know, just to go to the falls, and we would eat up there, then take a little a trip on the Maid of Mist or something like that. So when we would go past this reservation [Tonawanda Reservation] I, there was a fence, a real high fence, and I remember seeing especially one Indian, the Indians with, in their gear, you know, the gear that they wore and whatever they, the stick that they had. And I remember looking, seeing them as we drove by. And they had such longing in their eyes. Oh, as though, "I wish I could get in a car and go." But they had on their garb and I could see their tents in the background. That's where they lived in the tents. Now, I remember that. I guess they wouldn't have anything like that today, but it's the truth 'cause I'm eighty-seven. No, there were several states that they had reservations in, and New York State was one and I can't remember the others, historically, I can't remember, you know, other states and the name of the Indian [Native American] tribe, but I know that it was right there. Story_ID: 196338 Speaker 1: Can you tell me what your earliest memory is from your childhood? Speaker 2: The most, one memory, the saddest one was I blamed my mother [Lena Hart Layne] 'cause she didn't come home. I blamed her. Speaker 1: So you remember her passing? Speaker 2: I remember her passing because she didn't come back. And then at that time, she was buried in [Culpeper] Virginia and that time, they placed the casket in the living room--it wasn't called the sitting room, at my grandmother's house. And my father [Clyde Layne] wanted me to pick up, picked me up and look at her, "Tell your, tell your mommy goodbye," and I just screamed and hollered. I said, "No, she left me, she left me." (Laughter) I remember that. And then other pleasant things in my childhood? Yeah, then my father took us to Virginia to stay with our grandmother for a few years. And we went to a segregated elementary school there from first to third or fourth, something like that. And then I met a lot of relatives down there. I enjoyed that, and it was segregated. I mean the whole town, but everybody loved everybody in the town. Speaker 1: In Virginia? Speaker 2: You know, everybody helped each other in that town even though it was segregated, you know what I mean? It was, I think it was a law or something during that time that we will segregate where you live, that, your education, you won't go to school with the whites and all like that. That was, that was, those were the times, and that was south. I'm sure the same thing was going on in Washington, D.C., the capital, the capital, okay. Story_ID: 196339 Speaker 1: Did you find growing up in [Le Roy] New York that segregation was a problem or an issue? Speaker 2: We weren't segregated. Speaker 1: You weren't segregated? Speaker 2: Not at all. You can't take one person in the class and segregate them. And not only that, since we were just so few in the state, in the town, they all, oh, they respected my father [Clyde Layne] and they all treated, they treated us so nice. And we had friends. We visited each other and everything on that road, on the Warsaw Road, on that road. We helped each other getting back and forth to school from the country, you know. And then after we got older, my father used to--or a neighbor used to drop us down. Then we got to be sixteen, each of us got our license and we would drive to [Le Roy] High School [later Le Roy Junior-Senior High School, Le Roy, New York] and we'd take some of the neighbors with us too. We were just, people were neighborly then. I guess they still are. I don't know. You know, things changed after the invasion of, where we are totally segregated now, mostly, you know, you don't have to be, but a lot of people are, where you live. And it was due to, I remember this in history, in the South they stopped picking cotton like colored folks picked cotton. And the cotton gin came in and the southern farmers, the masters or whoever they were, farmers, they said we can no longer take care of you and, you know, pick the cotton. And we can't give you welfare so we'll give you a one-way ticket, a bus ticket to any place in the North. You've heard that? Speaker 1: The [Great] Migration story? Speaker 2: The migration. Speaker 1: Especially for the 20th century, yeah, after-- Speaker 2: No, it was later, too. The cotton gin? Speaker 1: Well, the cotton gin was the end of the 18th century. Speaker 2: They had it, but I mean they quit, I mean they stopped. Speaker 1: Oh, sure. Speaker 2: Wait a minute, wait a minute. They stopped picking cotton, and the cotton gin came in. Speaker 1: Well, more so in the World War II [WWII] era, I think with, I think it was International Harvester and the heavy equipment that could harvest the cotton much faster-- Speaker 2: Yeah, faster than picking. Speaker 1: --than human beings could pick. Speaker 2: Than they could pick, you understand? Whatever came in. Speaker 1: And so in the 1940s, a lot of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, that was the 1940s. And then I came to Cleveland [Ohio] in the 1940s 'cause I met some of those people. And they said they said they gave them a one-way ticket to any place they'd like to go in the North. And that, when you get there, you will be taken care of. You will be housed and you will be fed until you get employment, and then what they did, they were sending them, they were coming so fast to northern cities and this one too, that they threw up those projects in the black downtown, near downtown areas. They threw 'em up so fast that they almost fell to pieces. And then I said one lady I graduated with, she was a social worker, she said she had to go in and teach them how to take care of indoor toilets and everything in the hallways to keep it up, you know. I knew one lady who was head of that housing too, head of housing. Yeah, all those things were going on years ago. Story_ID: 196340 Speaker 1: Your family's migration to the North [Le Roy, New York], proceeded by a number of years that great black migration [Great Migration] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh no, we didn't migrate. My family-- Speaker 1: Well, from [Culpeper] Virginia--your parents [Lena Hart Layne and Clyde Layne]. Speaker 2: --we went from Virginia, yeah, they did. Speaker 1: To New York. Speaker 2: To New York (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And I'd like to talk more about that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) because he was such a good farmer that they wanted him up there. And he had a brother, Ed Layne [ph.]. Speaker 1: What's his name? Speaker 2: Ed, Ed Layne. And guess what he was? See, he was good with horses. Guess what he was? He was a jockey. And he was commended for his, he ran in England and different places. He wasn't commended as a black jockey. You know why? Speaker 1: Why is that? Speaker 2: 'Cause he didn't act, look like he was black. That's why he was commended. And he used to tell us how they kept his weight down. You know, to be a jockey, you have to be little. My father was big, but he was, you know, smaller. And guess how they kept his weight down? You know how you can reduce now and go these spas and things, but this is the way they kept his--they would take a barrel of manure and straw and that gets hot, that's heated. And they had to stay in there so long to reduce. Never heard of that either. I'm sorry you never heard of him, but I did because it was my father's brother. Story_ID: 196341 Speaker 1: Can you tell me a little bit more about your father's [Clyde Layne] work as a farmer in [Le Roy] New York? What did he grow on the farm? Speaker 2: There were big fields of wheat, I remember that. They had equipment to cut it, you know. I know there was a big, there was an orchard up on the hill, orchard. I guess corn, but, you see, we had our personal garden, you know, right there near the house. But I forgot those crops except the big wheat fields and the equipment was something. What's a thrasher and all, that cuts and, and all this equipment was there that they had to run. I could hear it running and those trucks and all in the barn. The barn was down from the house and beside the back of the barn and sort of back behind the house, was a pond of water. That's where I learned to swim in the pond, okay. I remember that. Speaker 1: Are there any other sights and sounds and smells that remind you of home in New York? Speaker 2: Horses, yeah, horseback riding. Oh, I could ride a horse pretty good too. Speaker 1: So you had horses there on the farm? Speaker 2: Farm, horses, yeah. There were some we could ride, and then hunting. I could hunt, but first, in a grove of trees we had a target. And we practiced, you know, with the rifle, whatever we had to hit the target. And then we could go hunting with our friends, and I learned how to climb a fence with a rifle, without shooting my foot. They, the guys showed me how to do that. I was athletic. I don't look it, but I was at the time. I was never real big, powerful old woman, huh (laughter). Story_ID: 196342 Speaker 1: --You'd mentioned that you attended the Le Roy High School [later, Le Roy Junior-Senior High School] in [Le Roy] New York? Speaker 2: Yeah, that's all they had. Speaker 1: Were there opportunities for you to be involved in athletics there? Speaker 2: Oh, yes, yes. Oh, yeah, I was a good runner and tennis player. I played tennis there too. Speaker 1: Was that a varsity team sport or just for recreation? Speaker 2: No, no, it was for recreation, but I learned there, and I did pretty good. I remember being, I remember racing. I don't remember what else I did but I was pretty good in athletics there in Le Roy. They still, liked me so well, they even had reunions. I went to the fiftieth at least. Speaker 1: Okay. So the high school is still there? Speaker 2: Oh, yes, everything's standing in Le Roy. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: When they said something about I sent that thing from the [Cleveland] Plain Dealer, and I sent it up there, and they got a hold of it. And boy, they were in touch with me, "[HM] Dorothy Layne [McIntyre], you mean you went away from here and did that?" (Laughter). Story_ID: 196343 Speaker 1: Mrs. [HistoryMaker Dorothy] McIntyre, you'd started to tell me about your [Le Roy] High School [later, Le Roy Junior-Senior High School] days in Le Roy, New York. And you said you played tennis and were very athletic in that farming community (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I did good, I did good in high school. I only had one occasion, one thing that wasn't good. I had one friend in school [at Le Roy Elementary School, Le Roy, New York]. I don't know whether it was sixth grade or what. It was just before high school. And it was a principal. But anyway I had completed, they said if you complete this--I used to remember the subject, "If you will do this paper on such and such a subject and if it's sent to the cap--to Albany [New York], you'll, you know, if it's one of the best, if it's the best paper in the class, it'll be sent to Albany, and you'll get a fifty dollar prize." And see fifty dollars was a lot of money in that day. So I wrote it and my teacher said, "Dorothy Layne [McIntyre], yours is the best in the class and I'm sending it to the principal because it's up to the principal to send it, to okay it, to go over it again and okay it and send it to Albany". And so I was just so proud. That was a lot of money, right? So then I didn't hear any more, and finally they told me, "Well, you, let's see you have to see the principal so she can go over it. And then she'll send it over, you know, to be sure that it was grammatically correct and all right." And I said "Okay, but it is the best one. My teacher said it was the best." Guess what happened? I had another friend of mine, her name was Dorothy Lauer [ph.], you know, she was white, she was (unclear), Dorothy Lauer. And then, guess what they told me. They called me and said, "We made a mistake. We meant Dorothy Lauer, not Dorothy Layne." I said, "Oh, well, the names are"--but Dorothy wasn't really screwed on, she was screwed on good, but not, she hadn't excelled. So then Dorothy lived right back on the next street from me and guess what she, we were good friends. She said, "They called me over to the principal's office," and she re-did the whole thing, all of my sentences correctly and sent hers in, and sent hers in for the prize. Yes, she told me. See, they never know who your friends--I mean Dorothy Lauer and I grew up together. She was, we went through the fence back there, you know, in town. We lived in town at that time. Speaker 1: And you think that was racially motivated? Speaker 2: It was. They were not gonna let a little black gal get a fifty dollar prize. Well, I was disappointed, but that was life. What could I do? Speaker 1: Well, that was in your senior year or just during your-- Speaker 2: No-- Speaker 1: --high school years? Speaker 2: No, I don't remember what, it wasn't, it could be junior high, something like that. "Dorothy Lauer, Dorothy Layne," the teacher said, "it's the best one. I'll send it to the principal for--she's the one that sends it in." I said, "All right." Went home, told my daddy [Clyde Layne] and everybody, "My paper's the best!" Come back and said, "She made a mistake, it's Dorothy Lauer." I told Dorothy, I said, "Huh!" I knew that Dorothy hadn't excelled in the classes, I said, "You really did it?" And she said, "Well, I'll tell you. They called me over and sat me down and corrected everything on the paper and sent it in." She got the fifty dollars. Okay, was there anything I could do? Huh? No, you don't have anything, you don't know anything about what I could do. It's all right. That was years ago. I don't care where you are, if you're black, step back. That, that's my, that's the way I look at it. Today, you will find so many people that say, I know, and they're big shots too, that say, oh, no, I've never, you know, had to step back. But they don't know what happened years ago, okay. It's all right. I'm here, did what I had to do. Story_ID: 196344 Speaker 1: Do you have some pleasant memories from [Le Roy] High School [later, Le Roy Junior-Senior High School] in Le Roy [New York]? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, but there's so few of us friends, you know, there were so few black, and I enjoyed it very much. Speaker 1: What year did you graduate from high school? Speaker 2: Thirty-six [1936]. Speaker 1: Thirty-six [1936]. Speaker 2: Thirty-six [1936]. Speaker 1: And did you plan to go to college right away after graduating? Speaker 2: I think I waited a while because my father [Clyde Layne], see, my sister [Ruth Layne Marshall] finished before I did. So he told me to go, you know, to get ready for Geneseo Normal [Wadsworth Normal and Training School, later, State University of New York at Geneseo, Geneseo, New York]. That's a training school in New York State. Geneseo wasn't far from us. And that's where she was going. "So are you going to follow your sister?" And I said, "I have to think about it." So I thought about it a little bit. And then said, I told him that I didn't want to go to any New York State schools. And I had a cousin in New York, in [New] Jersey or New York, who said, "Well, if you're not going there, and you don't wanna go to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.]?" My uncle [George M. Lightfoot] wanted me to come to Howard University. I had another reason for not going 'cause you would, I would live with them and go to school with no tuition and all. But it was a simple reason because my, his wife, my aunt, who was not my, you know, his wife, Uncle George, she had had other girls come there, you know, and stay and go. But you were the maid. You had to do all the house work. You know, that was silly for me not to do the housework, and, but I said, "No." And then I heard that West Virginia State [College, later, West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia] was very well accredited. So I went down there for business administration. That's what I did. Speaker 1: Okay, was it also a teacher training program, to train you to teach business and administration or just to work in that field? Speaker 2: Just to work in that field. Speaker 1: Okay, and West Virginia-- Speaker 2: State (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) State, what city is that in? Speaker 2: Institute [West Virginia], it's called. It's out of Charleston [West Virginia], it's out of Charleston, about twenty-five miles [sic, about ten miles] from Charleston. Speaker 1: West Virginia. Speaker 2: Right down there in the mountains. I enjoyed that. So I went down there. I enjoyed my years down there, all black, at the time. I think it's not now because they get the state funds, and you know, everybody has to get the same state funds today. But it was then. Story_ID: 196345 Speaker 1: And then, what year was it? Third year, fourth year, first of the semester [at West Virginia State College, later, West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia], you could sign up, they would take you if you could pass certain things in aviation, you know. They had that training just before World War II [WWII] because they needed, they needed pilots, right? Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So, they would take one, they would take one woman and a group of ten men. I had no better sense than to sign up 'cause I wasn't afraid of flying. I had been on a, when I was twelve years old in Le Roy [New York], they used to have air shows. And you could go up, you know, take a flight, you know, ride with the pilot. My father [Clyde Layne] would go up with us, you know. So I wasn't afraid of that, but there was a very strenuous health examinations and so forth that you needed. I passed that, went on. When I finished that, some of the men went to Tuskegee [Alabama], Tuskegee. Do you know why they were trained at Tuskegee? Speaker 2: No, why is that? Speaker 1: I'll tell you. Yes, you do. You don't know. Well, they were trained at Tuskegee because they were trained on pursuit planes. They weren't bombers. They were on pursuit planes because these guys were over there bombing, you know, around Germany and all like that in this great big plane, you know, the bombers. And the Tuskegee Airmen on the smaller pursuit planes escorted them. In other words, they would shoot the Germans away before they could get to our bombers. Did you know that? Did you know that? Speaker 2: I knew that they flew escort. Speaker 1: They were the escort, and if any flack came, it came to them first because they were protecting. That's what they were. I belonged to them too. I have, I have a life membership in the Tuskegee Airmen because I flew with guys who were training in the basic training, see. And then they went to Tuskegee. I didn't wanna go to Tuskegee, too far south for me. Speaker 2: We hear a lot about the Tuskegee Airmen and the 99th Pursuit Squadron [later 99th Fighter Squadron], the Black Eagles. We don't hear a lot about women pilots of your day (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, I applied. Oh, they have, they had those WASP [Women Airforce Service Pilots], those women down in Florida? Oh, yeah, they had women. They could transport bombers over there to Europe. Speaker 2: Okay, so there are some women who were flying? Speaker 1: Yeah, so I was capable of going, taking that training and flying those planes over there-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --for the bombers, sure. Sure, I applied, and I had my license, you know, especially, if you had a license. I applied, and guess what? They were all filled up. I don't know why, when they were begging for women. I had the good examinations and all, you know, my health was good. I don't know why, but they never had a black one any way. I didn't get in there. And then when I was in Baltimore [Maryland] with my sister [Ruth Layne Marshall], they were begging for pilots to come in to do something. All you had to do was have your license and come in. They were having a meeting for you to do, you know, before World War II, you did protective work in the sky, something we did, some kind of surveillance that we would do. And they said, "Oh, you can come and if you have a license, and we'll train you, and you can, you know, be one of those surveillance pilots." So we called before we went down. My sister went with me. We came to the door, had my license in my hand. They looked at me. They looked at her. They said, "Oh, I'm so sorry"--we came early, came early, and they said, "Oh, we just, we just have, we're just all filled with people." I said, "Look at all those vacant seats over there." I'm crazy. And they said, "Oh, I'm sorry." We were thrown, we were turned away at the door. But I'm used to it. I mean you have to be old and ready. Today you're not turned away. I know that. See, they, young people don't know what it was like. But I've been turned down in a way, and when there was no reason for it other than, the black (whispering). Story_ID: 196346 Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: Now, you had your license then at the start of World War II [WWII]? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: So what year did you earn your pilot's license? Speaker 1: It's there. Forty-one, [1941], forty-something, I don't know. Speaker 2: I believe I read 1940. Speaker 1: No it's--wait a minute. I wanna show you something that-- Speaker 2: Okay, shall we pause then? Speaker 1: Wait a minute. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Hold on. Do you have your-- Speaker 1: This is when they made plastic. This is the kind of plastic it was, and it's turned yellow. You can turn it back and forth, and here's when McCurdy [ph.] signed it June 9, 1940. You can read better than I can. Speaker 2: Okay. I'll take a look at it. Speaker 1: My log book is getting to be in shreds too. I had two books. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Thank you. Speaker 1: Okay, Mrs. [HistoryMaker Dorothy] McIntyre, I'm looking at your pilot's license, and it's dated February 23, 1940. So you did have that license in hand at the start of the U.S. entry into World War II-- Speaker 2: Right, we were getting ready (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) which happened in 1941. Speaker 2: That's right. That's, I think that's why, we were receiving, they said, this was a well accredited school. And not only that, we could walk to the airport. There was a path. We could just walk to the Charleston airport [Wertz Field, later Yeager Airport, Charleston, West Virginia] which was out of the city, of course. And we could, Charleston, West Virginia, and we could just take that path and go over there and learn. And they came to the school to give us the other courses that we took. But then we could go over there for the training, and I learned all, even about the structure of an airplane, and I, while taking the training, I was a pretty strong little woman, and how to, on this little plane, to put the chocks under the wheels, set the controls first, had to spin the prop to start it. Speaker 1: Propeller? Speaker 2: Yeah, the propeller, I had to spin it, okay, put those wooden chocks, chocks under the wheels like that, and the controls are already set, you know, the spark and everything like that, and then spin that propeller, but they warned you, if it catches right now, when you do that spin, you have to step back. And there was a certain position you'd go in and step back or it'll cut your head off. Well, you know, if you fall forward and the propeller starts, well what happens? They said, so, you know, we really learned how to do that. These were little flimsy things. They even showed us the structure of the plane with linen and cotton that they went over it with, you know, this real strong liquid. Some time ago. So, that's history of airplanes somewhat. Story_ID: 196347 Speaker 1: So when you received your license, how many other African American women were flying planes? Speaker 2: I don't know. They have, no, the reason why, I don't know how many. It could have been others that, I have all this. She was flying, what is? She flew for a little while. Speaker 1: Now, they're saying, Bessie Coleman-- Speaker 2: Bessie Coleman. Speaker 1: --was the first African American woman? Speaker 2: Yes, she was. Now, there's a difference between me being first in America. She wasn't trained in the United States. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She was trained in France. She couldn't train in the United States. Other women might have trained, but I was trained by the [U.S.] government, not by just going to someone who was a pilot and who could train, you know, train me and get a license and pass the test. That's why, they said I was the first government woman flyer, not the first woman. See, she trained, and she came back to the United States and she couldn't, the only way she could fly from any airport was to be a stunt flyer. So she went up one time and came right down, and doing stunts. You know, we, during those days, you didn't have an entrance to even the airport or the airplanes sometimes. Okay, with her, with Bessie Coleman, that was years ago, and because they have a lot on Bessie Coleman at the women's--International Women in Air Space [sic, International Women's Air & Space Museum, Cleveland, Ohio], over here, by the Lake [Erie]. Speaker 1: Yes, Burke Lakefront Airport [Cleveland, Ohio]. Speaker 2: Burke Lake--and they have a whole file on me. Speaker 1: Okay, so there's a hall of fame for women aviators? Speaker 2: Yeah, they have everything on women aviators. They got Bessie Coleman there. They found out I was here some way. They got quite a bit on me over there, and it's like a museum place for women, International Women's Air and Space Center. And they're--and I'm a member of that group so they're always telling me, come on over. And they have me in their galleries, pictures over there. They're real nice to me. Speaker 1: So you were one of the first African American women to earn a pilot's license in the United States (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, the first licensed by the government. You see, that's a government license. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, first government licensed, not the first flyer. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Some of them got their license, but it wasn't necessarily through government training like mine. That's all. It's explained in some kind of places over there in the history, in my history. Story_ID: 196348 Speaker 1: Now, when you received that [flight] training did you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was for, in all-white schools. It was for training for wartime [World War II, WWII], you understand? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: So it just happened that that [West Virginia State College, later, West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia] was the school who would train you because of the facility and the proximity to the airport [Wertz Field, later Yeager Airport, Charleston, West Virginia]. And then the accreditation, you know, they were well accredited. And it was real nice because I could fly over those mountains, getting up speed up. I was gone. It wasn't bad. Speaker 1: All right. So during the war period, from 1941 to 1945, basically, how did you use your training? Speaker 2: Mostly for pleasure, I think. It's in the book where I flew from different airports. But mostly I would take up my family. I flew from the Rochester [Municipal] Airport [later, Greater Rochester International Airport, Rochester, New York], flew from airports here [Cleveland, Ohio], Cincinnati [Ohio], had different friends with an airplane, fly with them, okay. It would be mostly for pleasure. Speaker 1: What did you enjoy most about flying since you say you flew for pleasure? Speaker 2: Yeah, it was beautiful to get out there and get away from all these things that are going on in the world, just get up there and go up above it. But the most pleasure was going through the clouds and then when you were just flying over a country town or country, you could see how well planned everything was in the country, the fields and the fences and all like that. And the city, oh, those, everything was just chalked off, just exactly, you know. You were away from the confusion of the city. You let all those little, little bugs running around and all the little cars, you know, and you were away from it, don't have, nobody's holding me back. Huh? You don't believe that? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I believe it. Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Don't you enjoy flying? Speaker 1: I like the speed associated with flying. I do enjoy it. Speaker 2: No, you just enjoy it to get there quicker. Speaker 1: That's part of it. Speaker 2: That's part of it, but don't you get a thrill flying through the air? Speaker 1: I like flying above the clouds, being close to the sun. Speaker 2: You like that. You get close to heaven that way? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Did you get close--that's the closest you're gonna get to heaven right here on earth. You didn't know that, okay (laughter). Story_ID: 196349 Speaker 1: Well, I want to ask you some more questions because I read somewhere, I believe I read somewhere that you also had an opportunity to teach young men about airplane engines, is that correct (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I did it. Oh, I taught 'em. Speaker 1: All right, and where was that? Speaker 2: That was in Baltimore, Maryland because Bennie [McIntyre's husband, Francis Benjamin McIntyre] left me and went to the war [World War II, WWII], went to war. And I was here in Cleveland [Ohio]. So while he was away, I went to stay with my sister [Ruth Layne Marshall], and while there, I worked at the [Greater] Baltimore Urban League [Baltimore, Maryland]. You know the Urban League. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: I was working at the Baltimore Urban League doing bookkeeping or something, you know, in the office. And they heard of an opportunity for, they needed a teacher to teach night school [at War Production Training School No. 453, Baltimore, Maryland], two or three evenings, about three evenings a week to teach men, just before the war, aircraft mechanics. And they looked at me and said, isn't that part of your training? The boss of my office said, "Isn't that part of your training?" "Yes, I took aircraft mechanics before I could fly." "Okay, go down and apply." So they took me right away. And these men were working in factories where they were building aircraft engines, you know, quickly, they wanted--they were good jobs, you know. And they wanted them, but they wanted somebody with some kind of training of engines. So what I did, it was really easy, what I did was, I'd get an airplane and an automobile engine, put them side-by-side. Then I got a manual, a book on aircraft mechanics, you know, planned my lessons and all like that. And those men just loved to come to the lady's class (laughter). Speaker 1: So you were a popular teacher? Speaker 2: Well, they liked it. They liked to come to my class. And they were very respectful, you know. You know, you'll find that there are men who are respectful of women achievers too. They're not hitting on 'em or anything. They just respect, give you respect that you're doing what a man usually does, you know. You can work with technology. I think that's what they think. Don't you? Speaker 1: Sure. Speaker 2: So somewhat I think they do. Story_ID: 196350 Speaker 1: --Let me make sure I have the chronology of events right. You said you graduated from [Le Roy] High School [later, Le Roy Junior-Senior High School, Le Roy, New York] in 1936? Speaker 2: I think. Speaker 1: And then you went to college to study business in administration at West Virginia-- Speaker 2: West Virginia. Speaker 1: --State University [West Virginia State University, formerly West Virginia State College, Institute, West Virginia]. Speaker 2: West Virginia State. Speaker 1: Okay, and then by 1940, you've earned your pilot's license. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: [U.S.] government trained. And you also have the opportunity to teach [at War Production Training School No. 453, Baltimore, Maryland] just before U.S. entry into World War II [WWII]. You're teaching young men how to maintain engines for airplanes? Speaker 2: Oh, that's not all I taught, while I was in school, while I was going to college. Oh, oh, this is what happened. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: When I was in New York State, I took bookkeeping, some business subjects. Speaker 1: Before you graduated high school? Speaker 2: Yeah, before I graduated high school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So when I went down there, I was gonna take business administration which I did, but when I signed up, I knew everything they were doing in the bookkeeping and accounting. So my professor said, "I'll tell you what we'll do. If you will teach what we call a lab, which is re-enforcing the students, if you will teach the lab, we'll call you a lab teacher. We'll take it off your tuition," cause this was out of state. I felt so bad, my father [Clyde Layne] sending that money down there. And guess what they did? They took it off my tuition. All I had was room and board. I couldn't help it. I looked at this stuff that they were throwing at me, and I said, oh, I had that. I had that in bookkeeping. I had all this. I was getting all A's in everything. You know, it wasn't that I told them that. It's just that I was a modest person, and it's just that it happened that way. He said, "Well, if you know, if you know this and all of this bookkeeping which is our accounting, then you can teach it, but we'll call you a lab, who, you're teaching lab which is re-enforcing what we've already taught." Took that off my tuition went down there. Speaker 1: So the fact that you were a good student in high school paid off when you got college? Speaker 2: I think so, yeah, because I'd had that training. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I'd had that training, wait a minute-- Speaker 1: Okay, I'll wait. Speaker 2: --I'd had that training in the North, okay. Now, you know. Story_ID: 196351 Speaker 1: Now, you mentioned a name, and we didn't formally introduce this person, and you said, "Bennie went to the war." Can you tell us who Bennie is? Speaker 2: Bennie McIntyre. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My spouse. He's Benjamin. He's Francis Benjamin [McIntyre]. They called him up--we were engaged when I came to Cleveland [Ohio] to work doing accounting and all. And we were engaged, and then they started, they were calling people up [for military service in World War II, WWII], and he said, "Are you going to wait for me?" He was very polite, while, you know, "When I have to go, if I have to go because time was approaching," you know. And I said, I was so flip, "Well, how can I? There are no guarantees." He said, "That's all right." He went downtown and got that license, bought it back and one of my roommates in school, her husband-- her father was a minister, and we were married by her father. So he was sure I was gonna be here when he came back. I said, "Okay." Now, we've been married sixty-two years. That wasn't bad, is it? Speaker 1: Not bad at all. Story_ID: 196352 Speaker 1: Mrs. [HistoryMaker Dorothy] McIntyre, you said that you and your mister, Francis Benjamin McIntyre, have been married now for sixty-two years? Speaker 2: Sixty-two years in January, yeah, sixty-two, it was in January, yeah. Speaker 1: And you married in the era of World War II [WWII]? Speaker 2: Just before they were calling him up. His number would be coming or something about that. Speaker 1: So when he went abroad to serve the country, where were you? Speaker 2: I first was married to him, I first went to stay with my sister [Ruth Layne Marshall] in Baltimore [Maryland]. She was teaching there, and I didn't know how long I'd be so I went for employment to the [Greater Baltimore] Urban League [Baltimore, Maryland]. You know, I had finished school [at West Virginia State College, later, West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia], and so I got work there. And that's how, I worked in the office, and they had heard of, the Urban League hears of employment for black people. And they heard of this night work I could do. That's why I taught aircraft mechanics [at War Production Training School No. 453] in Baltimore. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: It was in Baltimore. Speaker 1: And where did you meet your husband? Speaker 2: Let me think. Oh, I came here. I came to Cleveland [Ohio] when I graduated to work for some man [Alonzo G. Wright], a millionaire saw me on the campus. He needed a good accountant or something-- Story_ID: 196353 Speaker 1: Was that the [accounting] job with Alonzo [G.] Wright? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I worked for him while Bennie [Francis Benjamin McIntyre] was gone, I guess--no, yeah. Oh, he didn't want me to marry Bennie. I don't remember why. But anyway I married him anyway, and then after that time I heard of other jobs. I remember where I went from there in accounting. Yeah, from there I did public accounting with a man who was an accountant. And we helped, there were stores. They were little stores then that black people owned. And we did their accounting and their work for them. And we were helpful to them because they weren't using their money properly, and we refilling, pretty soon they weren't refilling their shelves because they weren't paying the supplier, and then we taught them how to do those things. We were accountants. Speaker 1: Now, that's-- Speaker 2: Cyril Crawford [ph.] and I. Speaker 1: Yes. Well, as the war [World War II, WWII] is beginning, that's just as America's coming out of the Great Depression? Speaker 2: Yeah, it was, yeah, it was. Speaker 1: Do you have any vivid memories of that Depression? How it affected workers in Cleveland [Ohio]? Speaker 2: Yeah, there were a lot of people on welfare cause after I did that work--wait a minute. I was a social worker too. I signed up to do some social work, and people were getting food, you know, I would visit people who were eligible and so they would do that. And after that, wait a minute, wait a minute, I don't know if Bennie was gone then or not. Then after that time I heard at the state hospital for the insane [Cleveland State Hospital, Cleveland Ohio], there was one out here, I forget the name of the road it's on [Turney Road]. I had another classmate, a man who was admissions officer, and I had finished in business and all with him at West Virginia State [College, later, West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia]. He was leaving for some reason. He was going to live out of town. He says, "I'm leaving. I want you to come out here and see if you can get that job. You know, it would be a better job than going around doing accounting." So I went out there, and they took me right away as admissions officer for the mentally insane. That was an experience. I didn't, I had to work with a psychiatrist. I didn't work with the, with the patients necessarily. I didn't work with them, but I talked to their families. A family would have to, a family member would have to bring them in because they could describe their behavior and all like that. Well, I was good typing and writing history. So I would write the history for the psychiatrist, and then he would see them behind bars, not me. I only admitted them through the behavior of the, you know, the families brought them in because they were dangerous to other people and themselves at times, you see. So they put them behind the bars to tend to them. I met some people out there, where is it? Turney Road, it was Turney Road, that's where it was. That was an experience, working with a psychiatrist and families. I even admitted a preacher man one time because the congregation was concerned about his behavior, just different things. And a lot of people need help, and they don't get in there in time, and pretty soon they're gone. They're doing something, they might do something quite dangerous to other people. So I learned that too. That was a learning experience, but they paid me. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, all of those positions that you just described were jobs that you had in the 1940s? Speaker 2: I guess, '50s [1950s] maybe. Oh, yeah, and then, then after that I had another position. Speaker 1: And when was that? Speaker 2: Then I finished in business administration, I told you. Then I decided I wanted to be a school teacher. So I took what you call retraining in night school. I was working, I don't know where I was working, during the day, raising children, had my two children [Donna McIntyre Whyte and HistoryMaker Dianne McIntyre] to raise too, you know. But I wasn't thinking of staying at home getting somebody to sit with the children. But anyway, no, Bennie, Bennie always arranged his work at the [U.S.] post office, he was a postal employee, so that if I weren't here, he would be here. You know, there were three shifts that he would, that's right. So we didn't often have to have someone, maybe just after school for a while until I got home, something like that. Story_ID: 196354 Speaker 1: So, let's back track a little bit then because we haven't talked about your husband's [Francis Benjamin McIntyre] homecoming from the war [World War II, WWII] and your settling down in Cleveland [Ohio]. So let's talk for a minute about that at least. So the war's over in 1945, and then after the war, you both come back to Cleveland. You come back from Baltimore [Maryland] to Cleveland and he's coming home to Cleveland too? Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. And what community do you live in right after the war? Speaker 2: Over there off of 105th Street on Westchester [Avenue], it was called-- Speaker 1: Okay, I think that's part of the Glenville [Cleveland, Ohio] community. Speaker 2: Glenville, that's where it was, right up 105th Street because I know Mount Sinai Hospital [Cleveland, Ohio] was close to us at that time, and, because both of my children were born there, at Mount Sinai. Speaker 1: And can you tell me your children's names? Speaker 2: Well, let's see. You met Dianne Ruth McIntyre [HistoryMaker Dianne McIntyre] and Donna is Donna McIntyre Whyte, W-H-Y-T-E-. That's Donna, right, Dr. Donna. Speaker 1: Yes, and you have two daughters? Speaker 2: Just two. Speaker 1: Okay and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Two daughters, two granddaughters and two great-grandbabies, children, little ones. Not bad. Speaker 1: Not bad. Now, when were your children born? Speaker 2: When? Speaker 1: Yes, what year? Speaker 2: I don't remember that, 1950s. Speaker 1: But after the war? Speaker 2: Bennie was home, yeah. I couldn't have any while he was away. Speaker 1: Well, no (laughter). That would be difficult (laughter). I'm just trying to date it because we're--no, I'm not trying to say (laughter)-- Speaker 2: I didn't misinterpret that. I tried to, I tried to misinterpret (laughter). I hope he didn't record that. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Yeah, yes, I did. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): It's very funny though people will enjoy it. Speaker 2: Okay, so your husband's back home and then together you have two beautiful daughters. And you're living in Glenville, in Cleveland. Speaker 1: In that area, I believe it was Glenville, I believe we, yes, because it was a duplex house. And his brother was on, his oldest brother was on one side of it, his family, and we were on our side. And he had, I think he had two children. They were older, but they were both back from the service. Speaker 2: What was your brother-in-law's name? Speaker 1: Cyril [McIntyre], he lives in California now. He's pretty well disabled too now. He, Bennie had, there were four brothers, four. Bennie's the second. So most of his family lives in California, his, the McIntyres. He stayed here. Speaker 2: All right. So he's a native Clevelander who chose to raise his family here as well? Speaker 1: Yeah, he's native in that, wait a minute. He came here from, he was born, I have his birth certificate, in Florida 'cause his mother, I don't know. His mother was there in North Carolina, and his father was a boatman or something from Jamaica, Jamaica, Kingston, Jamaica. So he met her and they married and came to Cleveland so their children were born, Bennie was born in Florida, I think, the first two, and then when he came to Cleveland, when he came to Cleveland, for some reason Bennie's father was associated with [John D.] Rockefeller as his chauffeur or something. He did something for Rockefeller. Speaker 2: So Mr. McIntyre was actually not a native Clevelander, just a long-time resident? Speaker 1: Who? Speaker 2: Mr. McIntyre, Mr. Bennie. Speaker 1: His brother, no his father was Jamaican. Speaker 2: Oh, his father is Jamaican, okay. Speaker 1: But his children were all born here in the Cleveland area. Speaker 2: All right, okay. So for a time you lived as a young family in the Glenville community? Speaker 1: Bennie and I. Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 196355 Speaker 1: Now, when did you move to Mount Pleasant [Cleveland, Ohio]? Speaker 2: Gee, when his [McIntyre's husband, Francis Benjamin McIntyre] parents became older, and they lived at 142nd Street for years, right in the next block on 142nd. And we moved here to be close to them to help 'em when they were older. And his father was a very smart man, self-taught, you know, those Jamaicans. And he did something. He was a photographer, but then he was an inventor too, sort of like that. And his mother [Albertha Simmons McIntyre (ph.)] was from North Carolina [sic, Summerville, South Carolina], and she was half American Indian and half something else. And her hair was so long, she, when she'd comb it, she sat on it. She could sit on her hair. Can you imagine? It reminds me of [HistoryMaker] Dianne [McIntyre] the way she rolls her hair. Don't tell Dianne I was talking about her. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay. Now, you had mentioned earlier that your husband worked at the [U.S.] post office-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --at the same time that you were teaching and both of you were raising two daughters [Donna McIntyre Whyte and HistoryMaker Dianne McIntyre]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So I suppose that took some careful planning to make sure that everyone was accommodated during the day. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: So how did you manage that? Speaker 2: I'm trying to recall. Now, wait a minute. Was I working when we were on Westchester [Avenue]? Can't remember; might not have been working. Women didn't always work in my day, you know. Oh, no, I wasn't working at that time because his post office work at that time was on the train. Before flight, before flying these, the letters and things, he worked on the train. He worked, he worked the mail on the train from here to Syracuse [New York]. He'd work for six days going and coming, lay over at one time, come back on the train for six days. Then he'd have six days off. We were on Westchester. They thought my husband wasn't working, I know, the neighbors, but that was his job. In those days, before airmail, and then he came in town. And at the lakefront they had mail. You know, he was gonna work in town then after they stopped that, transportation. And he came in town, and he was on the lakefront, and he was boss. He was the boss on the lakefront. And they liked him so much. He was the boss of whoever the people were, you know, sorting mail in those big bags and all, transporting them from the Lake [Erie]. Yeah, he had an interesting career; he's had an interesting career. Story_ID: 196356 Speaker 1: At what point, then, do you begin to teach in the public schools in Cleveland [Ohio]? Speaker 2: After I retrained in the evening, retrained in education cause my degree was in business administration. And we could take, in the evenings, it used to be Fenn College [later, Cleveland State University, Cleveland, Ohio] subjects in the evening. And then Kent State [University, Kent, Ohio] transferred their evening classes over there just before Cleveland State [University, Cleveland, Ohio]. See, just before Cleveland State. See, I remember when Cleveland State came along and now look at what they've got. Speaker 1: So that, Cleveland State was launched in 1964. So it was about in that era when you're taking the coursework to go back? Speaker 2: I thought it was later than that. I don't remember, wait a minute. Speaker 1: Well, Fenn College had been around for a while, but-- Speaker 2: Maybe I did something at Fenn because I remember their swimming pool. Speaker 1: Yes, in Fenn Tower [Cleveland, Ohio]. Speaker 2: Um-hm, Fenn Tower. Speaker 1: But it was incorporated as part of Cleveland State University-- Speaker 2: Yeah, it was. Speaker 1: --in 1964. Speaker 2: Was it? Speaker 1: Um-hm. So in the 1960s you're teaching in the public schools? Speaker 2: No, I don't know how I started, but I didn't have that much seniority. I just had enough, yeah, I retired from there. I was not only a teacher, you see, I did the other things first, and then finally I was a sixth grade teacher. Speaker 1: But you had mentioned at one point in our conversation that your husband [Francis Benjamin McIntyre] was able to adjust his hours at the post office-- Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah, he did. Speaker 1: --so that either you or your husband could be home to help take care of your daughters [Donna McIntyre Whyte and HistoryMaker Dianne McIntyre]? Speaker 2: Yeah, when they, and then when we couldn't, when we were doing that adjusting then, one time I remember just having a neighbor from 142nd Street, she would be here, you know, for them after school. We never left them at home by themselves. You know, we only had two of them, Donna, Dianne and Donna. We made them both "Ds" and [HistoryMaker] Dorothy [McIntyre], don't forget Dorothy. Speaker 1: No, I won't forget you. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: All right. Now, you said you retired from teaching in the Cleveland school system. Speaker 2: Which that was my last employment, wasn't it? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: I retired, and this is something I don't understand. Oh, I know what it was. You know why I retired? Because my arthritis caused it. Now, I didn't have arthritis, but that was when I had my first hip replacement, and then I've had two since then. No more. If they fail, he said, "Get in a wheelchair and your walker, that's all I can tell you." I've had three hip replacements and congestive heart failure at Cleveland Clinic [Cleveland, Ohio]. I've been there for congestive heart failure too cause I fell a couple of times. Now, I have to be very careful about not falling because I break my bones. I take care of myself and my husband too. We have someone during the day. And see, I sleep right there to watch him take the, if he gets restless or something. And I think we do well at home. Speaker 1: Sure. Speaker 2: Of course, I know they have other homes for you, but I don't think we're ready to go. He wouldn't last any time, raised around the corner, right here in Mount Pleasant [Cleveland, Ohio]. And we have another thing that came, where his family, the McIntyres are being installed in a heritage house they're making here on 120-some street. They're building a heritage house for older, for Mount Pleasant, older residents, first residents of Mount Pleasant. And his family was one. I don't know they ended up here, you know, that's their history. Story_ID: 196357 Speaker 1: Well, I noticed in looking through some of your background material that you've received a number of awards since your retirement. Some for being a pioneering pilot, one of the first African American women to become a licensed pilot in our history and also a number of awards for outstanding teaching. Speaker 2: That's what they tell me. They have affairs and I mean every time, and even the last time in February, I got one from the [Ohio State] Board of Education, and my picture and all is gonna be downtown [Cleveland, Ohio] in their hallway or gallery. That was February, they gave me the last one. I think they're just giving it to me because I'm still here. But I got all these award, you know, award certificate from the board of education, I mean from, and some of them were affairs that they had that I attended to go to the affair. And the last one I received was--Barbara Byrd-Bennett was there. And I think they had a [Cleveland] City Council meeting. We were late getting there and she was giving the awards, you know, that day too. But I remember last--I've got a picture of her on the piano, of us. But you know what? I think this was the beginning of the trouble they were having with teaching. She really looked sad. She asked me, she said, "Do you remember me?" I said, "Well, I sure can't forget you." Speaker 1: I think we should probably state for the record that Dr. Barbara Byrd-Bennett is the CEO of the Cleveland Municipal Schools. Speaker 2: Yes, Barbara Byrd-Bennett. She's a nice person, but they're having problems now. She came here from New York, New York City which is a much larger, you know. Yeah, [HistoryMaker] Dianne [McIntyre] was a New York City person, but she's here now, in the country. Speaker 1: Well, with all of the awards and recognition that you've received, do you have one award or citation that's especially meaningful to you? Speaker 2: In what way? See, they keep giving 'em to me. You know, they're all on the table, and I tried to place them nicely. And some of them I hang, proclamations, get 'em from a congress--who is the congresswoman? Speaker 1: Stephanie Tubbs Jones. Speaker 2: Stephanie Tubbs gave me one, yeah, and then I get to meet them at their affairs, you understand about the schools and all like that? And I meet all of those big shots. You'd be surprised at who I have met, but those awards that I have over there, they're for teaching and flying aviation. And I have some books, I've been in some books, within books. Speaker 1: Yeah, I'm looking now at two of the books over on the table that look at the history of women especially in flight. Speaker 2: Yeah, women, yeah, they're proud of women achievers because years ago, women were kind of, you know, you're the housemaker. And they didn't think you would be capable of doing those things like teaching men mechanics, and, you know, like my husband [Francis Benjamin McIntyre] and car. Oh, he knew everything about a car. What do you think? I know, you don't know. That's the way men are about cars (laughter). Speaker 1: But not about airplanes. I suspect you probably knew more about airplane engines than most people around you, male or female. Speaker 2: Sure did. Don't come messing and everything on me 'cause I'll tell you what's wrong with it (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) That's why you're a HistoryMaker. Because you were (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Is that why? Speaker 1: Yes, well, one of the many reasons-- Speaker 2: One of them-- Speaker 1: --that we're here today because you were one of the first people to do that. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Now once you left the Baltimore [Maryland] area and West Virginia [State College, later, West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was just during the war [World War II, WWII]. Speaker 1: Were you able to fly anymore after that time period? Speaker 2: Um-hm, I've flown from various airports. You have to show your license to rent an airplane. I think it's in the log books, you know, the places. Rochester, New York was one of my favorite places. I'd fly there, and I had an experience-- Story_ID: 196358 Speaker 1: --Experience in Rochester? Speaker 2: Yeah, and flying from various airports (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, this is the famous one, Rochester, New York, up there. That's right near home [Le Roy, New York], right. So we used to have a minister from Rochester. He as a Baptist minister. He was this big. And I had to put the passenger in front, and then I had the controls behind. You know, it was just a two-seater like, but the pilot was here. So we said, all right, he says, "I'm not afraid to go up with [HistoryMaker] Dorothy Layne [McIntyre] 'cause I can trust her. Everybody say they afraid to go up with Dorothy Layne, but not me." I said, "Well, come on Reverend Rose [ph.], let's go." So I got him down there in the plane, went down to the end of the, you know, runway, and was ready, had full blast on that engine. And come on, and we were getting ready to take off. But I had a long runway, you know, enough running for me to get up. You know, I needed really a lot of force to get a big man up. And honey, when I was taking off and what was in front of us, the hangar, cause I had plenty of room to get over the hangar. And that hangar just came closer to me and closer to me. And he didn't know what was going on. And guess what I said out loud? "Help me, Lord," and that just plane just went up (laughter). It went, I'm not telling a tale, and it went on over that, over that hangar, and we kept on going, and he never knew what was going on. You're right. I said, "Help me, Lord," cause I knew I was gonna scrape that hangar. And he wasn't afraid to go up with Dorothy Layne. So I did that, and near misses. And then there was another guy, when I was training, he said, "Dorothy, you haven't learned how to loop yet, have you?" You know, we did loops, dives, everything that would teach you if the atmosphere puts you into that condition, know how to get out, right? If it got you hanging on your head, know how to get out of that. You know, if you go in a spin, like this, know how to get out the spin. The atmosphere will put you in that condition. You know, you've heard of weather, you know, weather all the time. If you're flying, how's the weather? Okay, so this student pilot and I, he said, "Come on, I'll teach you how to loop." I said, "Okay." So, we went down. You had to dive first, then come up and loop over your head and then come back down that same way. Guess what he did? He looped, he was showing me with the controls. He--I followed and I came up like this, and guess what? He got frightened and it hung, we hung on our heads. I said, "What's the matter with you? Reverse the controls." And he froze at the controls, and gasoline was coming out of the nose. You know, that's where the tank is, and I could smell something, and it was, I saw the gasoline dripping out of the nose. Honey, I knew what to do. I kicked those reverse to control, I kicked those pedals, reversed the controls, brought it out of the loop and came on down and landed. I said, "There you go. I'll never go up with you again." And guess what? He never, he never talked about our experience, never. Speaker 2: He was probably embarrassed, you think? Speaker 1: He was embarrassed. And then I never talked about it until years later because I didn't want him to be embarrassed. He got his license too, but that gas really got on me. I could smell it. Story_ID: 196359 Speaker 1: Well, thank you for sharing that story about the loop and how to get out of it (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The loop. Yeah, the near misses. Speaker 1: Near misses. Speaker 2: Near miss. Speaker 1: Were there a lot of those? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: I think there might have been, but I knew what to do to pull out of 'em. But there weren't, not many. No, not at all. I was a safe flyer, safe. You had to be a safe flyer, especially because they don't really make that type of Piper [J-3] Cub anymore. It was so flimsy, and they made them years ago like that because they had to be lightweight in order to get, you know, to maneuver them like that. Speaker 1: So the plane was called Piper-- Speaker 2: Piper Cub. Speaker 1: --Cub. That's the two-seater that you were describing? Speaker 2: Um-hm. No, yeah, two-seater, but back and front. See, it was narrow too. Yeah, I enjoyed the little Piper Cub, especially going by myself. Then I flew from Cleveland Airport [later, Cleveland Hopkins International Airport, Cleveland, Ohio] to Rochester [New York], wherever I was that I could rent a plane, couldn't buy my own; didn't have enough money. It's all right. I knew friends who had planes, and I had men friends who had planes, not men, romantically, just friends cause the men appreciated my flying too, you know what I mean? They said, "Oh, [HistoryMaker] Dorothy Layne [McIntyre], you'll fly it? Come on, let's go." Yeah, they enjoyed it. Story_ID: 196360 Speaker 1: There seems to be a growing interest, not only in women in the history of flight, but especially African Americans in the [U.S.] military, a lot of new publications coming out on the Buffalo Soldiers and the Tuskegee Airmen and now (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, read that somewhere. Speaker 1: Yes, well, to what do you attribute that? Why do you think there's so much interest in (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, it's--I'll tell you what was my feeling, is that they didn't receive the acclaim when they were in there, you know. And I think now they're giving them their due after years, you know. I mean they were black and they were supposed to do this, you know, be protective of whatever they did. And they were put in that position, but they didn't necessarily receive the acclaim that they should have. And now they're just bringing it forward, that's all. Don't you think? Speaker 1: I think that's part of it, yes. Speaker 2: It's part of it. What do you think? Speaker 1: Well, I think another part of it is the men and women who participated in that era of America's military history, I think they've somehow been emboldened to tell their own story, so there's part of this belated recognition coming from the government and other places, but also men and women who are secure enough in themselves to tell their own story to the rest of us (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) To tell it. Because it was segregated. Now, this is what you must remember. It was segregated. And there was a reason for it. I told you the reason of the Tuskegee Airmen, didn't I? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: To protect them. Now, I'm not familiar, but I had one friend who was a Buffalo Solider. What did they do? Speaker 1: Well, many of those units fought out west, something similar to border patrol but were also involved in some of the [American] Indian Wars out on the western part of the United States, in the early, late 19th, early part of the 20th century, various skirmishes out there. Speaker 2: Yeah, they did. Yeah, but they were segregated. Speaker 1: And sometimes that term Buffalo Solider is used and maybe not accurately, but to refer in a very general way to African American men in the military. Speaker 2: In the military. Speaker 1: But I've heard people use it for the 92nd [Infantry] Division [of the U.S. Army]. Speaker 2: Well, Bennie [McIntyre's husband, Francis Benjamin McIntyre] was in the military, but he was in a segregated unit during World War II [WWII]. They were there, and he described his foxhole and all that he had to dig and all--he was in Rome [Italy], I think, yeah, and all of this that would fall on top of him after he had dug it, you see. He remember his foxhole and all that. Yeah, he was right outside of Rome. And recently, we saw something about Rome, and he remembered the street that goes towards, you know, some of the buildings in Rome, way back then. But he has a good memory. That's good. Story_ID: 196361 Speaker 1: Many historians describe that World War II [WWII] era as one in which black Americans began to realize that there were other opportunities. There were other opportunities for them to serve in the [U.S.] military. They began to press for the opportunities to be officers, you know, in branches where they had never served as officers and to be something other than mess men in the [U.S.] Navy. Speaker 2: Yes, during World War II, there were opportunities for education too. And then when they went into the service, they would just keep on going, didn't they? I think, you think that they, the service gave them opportunities, right? Speaker 1: I think that was part of it. Speaker 2: That was part of it. Speaker 1: But also among civilians, I think there were additional opportunities, and you tell me if I'm correct, but when I recall the activities of A. Philip Randolph and his threatened March on Washington [Movement (MOWM)], he wanted blacks to have jobs in defense industries. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Do you remember how people reacted to this (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah that defense--oh, right, no. No, those--no, in the defense industries, they have enough brains to do that work. But it was all holding us back, wasn't it? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: In everything, in housing, everything. That was the way of living. That was their perception. But I remember my grandmother [Lizzie Lightfoot Hart], my grandmother in [Culpeper] Virginia, when we were little, and she used to talk to my sister [Ruth Layne Marshall] and I. We were small then. My mother [Lena Hart Layne] had died, and she said, "Remember children, get your education, children. If you don't, you'll have to work in the white folks' kitchen." And I said, "What is that?" It scared me. I said, "Whatever it is, we better keep on going to school." We were little (laughter). But she was preaching to us then because she was saying, during those times that's the best that women could do, you know. I said, "I sure am scared of the white folks' kitchen," (laughter). But I never, I never balked on going to school. It was just a matter of fact, you know (laughter). It was just about, this was after my mother had died, you know. She said, "Children, listen, children," (laughter), and they were just, they were just like this, my grandmother's family, that Lightfoot family, they were just, like the one that was taught at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], they were just up and coming black folks, you know, after the Civil War and all like that. Speaker 1: And you said that was an uncle of yours who taught at Howard University? Speaker 2: Great, great-uncle. Speaker 1: Oh, great-uncle, okay. Speaker 2: Great-uncle, yeah, and that's a long time ago. Speaker 1: Yes, do you remember his name? Speaker 2: Uncle George [M. Lightfoot] from Washington, D.C. Yeah, he lived in Washington. I think, yeah, we had visited him even before he passed, Uncle George and his family. Speaker 1: Was that on the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And [HistoryMaker] Dianne [McIntyre] knew one of the daughters I think, granddaughter, granddaughter, granddaughter, she knew. Speaker 1: Do you remember his last name, Uncle George? Speaker 2: Lightfoot. Speaker 1: Lightfoot, okay. Speaker 2: Lightfoot. He was a Lightfoot. That's what, the maternal side. It was Lightfoot. That's what my grandmother was before she married the Hart [Tazwell Hart], that Lightfoot family. They're the ones that would have family reunions, but we haven't had one for a few years now, in different areas. Story_ID: 196362 Speaker 1: I'm wondering about the talk in the community, in that era of World War II [WWII], since there were so many major events from your life that are associated with that period, your teaching and your husband's [Francis Benjamin McIntyre] [U.S.] military service and your marriage all happening around that same time, when the Fair Employment Practices Committee [FEPC] came into being in 1941, was there a sense that there were gonna be better jobs for blacks working in defense industries? You said the perception was that black people just didn't have the brain power to work in that capacity even if it meant national defense. They just weren't ready. But did you sense at that time that things were about to change, that they were going to get better? Speaker 2: I had that feeling because I married him after I finished school [at West Virginia State College, later, West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia] , didn't I? And what he was doing, he was working, and another man, he knew another man that I was at West Virginia State with too. But men weren't--black men weren't getting really good jobs. But he was working, Bennie [Francis Benjamin McIntyre] was working at a factory called Westinghouse Electric [and Manufacturing Company], and his job was to do something about molten iron or something. They had to smooth out, oh, it sounded so dangerous to me. And then, during that time, of almost [the Great] Depression, I don't know what it was, they went on strike. And then they came back for a little while. They made good money. He was making good money. Then I think they might have been on strike twice. I said, "Bennie, think of it. Take the test for the [U.S.] post office. We'll help you with everything." They had to throw cards and everything like that. Reluctantly, he did and guess what happened to that plant? It closed down. He said, "But I won't make the money." But I said, "Look at what you get." You get, I think we got insurance, you got so many benefits, you know. It was less than making all that money in the factory, but the whole thing closed. Mama knew, didn't she? No, I was just thinking, we had two kids [Donna McIntyre Whyte and HistoryMaker Dianne McIntyre] and these people are going on strike, and then he'd just do what he could. What'd he do? Drive a cab or whatever in between, you know. No, those were the good ole days. Speaker 1: So some of those industries with defense contracts were hiring more blacks? But sometimes the jobs were very dangerous too? Speaker 2: Sure. You didn't know that. Some, they would put, sure, you were put into jobs, but they would be the most, you know, fearful part of production. That was steel and iron and stuff. What if some of that spark came on you? Honey, I didn't want him in there--he made good money, but the poor--how can you make money when they're on strike? Huh? Then pretty soon they closed down. I remember it was going towards the west side [Cleveland, Ohio]. It was sitting up on a hill and every time we'd drive by afterwards, I'd say, "See, it closed down, told you," (laughter). I'd rather he made less. It was sure money for the government, right? They had to fire you and they'd never fire him because, I'm gonna tell you about, he is the most precise person you ever saw. Everything must be done like that. Before he became disabled, I didn't even run the vacuum. He did it cause I might not get in all the corners. That's the way he was, but he's a good husband, honey, sixty-two years. And now he's disabled, but you can't last for--he's eighty-nine. I'm only eighty-seven so I'm a lot younger than he (laughter). Yeah, we had a good time. Story_ID: 196363 Speaker 1: I understand from your daughter [HistoryMaker Dianne McIntyre] that Mr. McIntyre [McIntyre's husband, Francis Benjamin McIntyre] grew up in the Episcopal church? Speaker 2: Yes, he's--from a little boy, I've got a picture of him on the altar. I think he was seven or eight years old, St. Andrew's [Episcopal Church, Cleveland, Ohio], down here on 49th Street. It's still there. So when I married him, I was Baptist, Antioch [Baptist Church, Cleveland, Ohio]. I used to go to Antioch when I came here cause, you know, Colgate University [sic. Colgate Rochester Crozer Divinity School] was in Rochester [New York] where we had a lot of ministers came from, you know, all around. And so I went there and Rev. [Wade Hampton] McKinney was from Colgate. So, guess what he would do? Bennie [Francis Benjamin McIntyre] would drop me at church, and then come back to pick me up, and he says, "Oh, that Baptist church stays so long." We were getting ready to have children, and we had children [Donna McIntyre Whyte and HistoryMaker Dianne McIntyre], he fussed so that when we had, before we had children I changed to the Episcopal church. So both of my children were baptized, confirmed and everything in the Episcopal church. After they grew up, they could be what they wanted to. Speaker 1: So the whole family then eventually joined St. Andrew's? Speaker 2: Episcopal, St. Andrew's, I belong to St. Andrew's. They had me there speaking a few weeks ago for the educational program that they have there. I'm a speaker at times, different places, and I always say, I can't even stand up to speak. That's all right. We'll give you the pulpit. Okay, and the last month I was at, was it February or March, I had the pulpit. I spoke from the pulpit but with everything, with everything in front of me like that. You don't believe me? Speaker 1: Oh, I do believe you. I think I saw a picture of that. Speaker 2: Okay, speaking from St. Andrew's 'cause I'm a Daughter of the King for years too. That's a national organization of women, [The Order of the] Daughters of the King, for Episcopal. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Episcopal. That's an old church if Bennie was there when he was seven years old; got a picture of him beside the same brick building, with the acolytes. Yeah, Bennie was, we did good for old folks. We decided to stay together. I couldn't find any reason to separate from him. I tried so hard, but there was no reason. You have to have a reason, don't you? You can't just float away. And I never found a, never looked for a better man, you know what I mean? Why? One of those things, he couldn't do without me and I couldn't do without him (laughter). We had to figure it out, huh? But you hear of so many people now that are not together, but in this age and all, they can be together, but not married too and have children too, you know. That's, I mean it's just ordinary, isn't it? And you're not supposed to be critical of it either, but see, the good Lord tells you, told you what to do years ago, didn't he? So we go by the scripture, okay. Story_ID: 196364 Speaker 1: You know, I heard you say earlier that you are a member of the Tuskegee Airmen's, is that alumni group, and I see you have your wings on your vest? Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm a life member. I think that's the Tuskegee. I, it's one of those. I am a life member of the Tuskegee Airmen. They framed the last one they gave me. It's on the wall. Yes, I am. They have meetings regularly, and whether I can come or not, they send me their bulletins every month, whatever activities are going on, they like me. Speaker 1: I know that members of their group have become important symbols-- Speaker 2: They are symbolic of what (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) for African American community, very proud of the way)-- Speaker 2: Yeah they're proud of the way they-- Speaker 1: --that they served. Speaker 2: That they served, World War II [WWII]. So I've belonged to them for years. And I flew with some of them, you know, when they went, they left--when I flew with the men, some of the men went to Tuskegee [Alabama], yeah, I knew them too. Speaker 1: In many ways, their activities during World War II are positioned in the history textbooks as sort of the precursors to all that began to happen after the war, as part of the Civil Rights Movement? Speaker 2: Yes, it was, wasn't it? Because they were protectors, I mean in the war. And they were efficient. They found out those folks could learn. And I mean that was a dangerous position in those pursuit planes and being fired on. Speaker 1: I heard that that 99th Pursuit Squadron [later 99th Fighter Squadron] of the Tuskegee Airmen never lost a bomber. Speaker 2: Bomber. Speaker 1: That they flew escort, with a perfect record? Speaker 2: No, they did, and I was at an affair at, what is that theater, black theater? Speaker 1: Karamu House [Cleveland, Ohio] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Karamu one time. They had asked me to come down too for that because they had a big picture of me in the hallway. So we went down and they had a speaker there, and the Tuskegee Airmen were there. They were all there. And I knew some of them, and guess what? That's when they had a white, a white bomber speak, man speaking, you know, retired bomber. And he told the whole audience, he said, "I'm here today because the Tuskegee Airmen surrounded me," he said, "otherwise, I would not be here." And he described everything that they did. He said, "Those pursuit planes, those pursuit, those armed pursuit planes, they were excellent. They even knew how to dodge bullets," he told us. Yeah, it was something just listening to him. See, that was the beginning of respect for us too, I mean one of the beginnings, don't you think? What else was going on after the war? Speaker 1: Well, in the late 1940s, during the Korean conflict, A. Philip Randolph was busy again trying to integrate the [U.S.] military (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, the military. Speaker 1: And so freedom to serve was supposed to be a plan for allowing blacks and whites to train together (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Train together. Speaker 1: --perhaps die together in Korea. Speaker 2: Yeah, Korea, how about it. Story_ID: 196365 Speaker 1: Someday, I can't be here that much longer, I don't know whether there'll ever be a lack of segregation. I don't know. You a historian? Well, what is your, what do you think? I mean will there ever be, I mean we're getting more respect from whites as individuals. You know, I can see it coming along, but it's still that lack of, lack of respect and lack of really acceptance. Do you feel it? See, I don't get out. Do you feel it sometimes? Speaker 2: Well, I do, but this is your story. Speaker 1: No, I don't get out that much. Yeah, it's some integrated areas. Yes, I went to a luncheon last week. It's okay, but we were all-black group, my club. It's okay. Speaker 2: Well, if you had to compare and contrast the treatment or the respect given African Americans in 2004 with the treatment they received in 1944, during the war [World War II, WWII] years, would you say that things have gotten better, that race relations have improved? Speaker 1: Could I say somewhat? Speaker 2: Sure, you can say it. Speaker 1: I could say somewhat, not totally. Is it all right with you? Not totally. I want, because you get out more than I, what do you think? I mean just give me your opinion. I don't know because you get around to different places. Speaker 2: Well, I think we've come a long way as a nation, but we have a long way to go. Speaker 1: Like we have [HistoryMaker Gen.] Colin [L.] Powell and what else? Not really. We have Colin Powell, okay. Speaker 2: Sure. We have Condoleezza Rice. Speaker 1: Oh, Condoleezza, don't forget Condoleezza. Condoleezza. That's two. Speaker 2: Okay, out of how many millions? Speaker 1: (Laughter) Think about it. It's all right. I respect your opinion. Speaker 2: Are you optimistic about the future? Speaker 1: It's not immediate. I mean the future of total, no. Speaker 2: Of this country? Speaker 1: No, no, because I've lived for years with, with the other race being so superior, not only to us, but other races, not just us, but other races. I don't care whether they're Chinese, Japanese, and what did they do to them? They put them into concentration. I mean as far as the United States, I'm, I don't know. England, I've traveled England and France and different places, but as far as the United States is concerned, they have more, it's more accentuated if you are of another race other than white, step back, to a certain extent, depending upon where you are and what the circumstances are, okay. Story_ID: 196366 Speaker 1: 'Cause I've lived a long time, and you can get a feeling when you walk up to--my sister [Ruth Layne Marshall] and I were, my father [Clyde Layne] was a tall, light man with blue eyes. He had his hat on, you didn't know what he was, okay? The farmer. Okay, so we were, my sister and I were teenagers, and we were in Washington, D.C. We were traveling maybe either to Washington visiting or Virginia, you know, we were traveling with my father. And we were teenagers. So we went to a store where you're waited on, you know. They didn't wait on black people right away, I mean first, but anyway, my sister was browner than I. And then I would stand up there, then (unclear). So he was standing beside, behind us. They'd wait on white first, you know, even if you've been there forever. And they looked at him, and said, "Could I help you, sir"? And he said, "I don't know, my daughters, I don't know what my daughters want, they'll tell you." And then she said, "Oh, oh." So they waited us 'cause they wanted the money, okay. Oh, in Cleveland, Ohio, I've had it. I've stepped back in Cleveland. Speaker 2: Oh, there was a color line in Cleveland too? Speaker 1: Sure. Speaker 2: In the North? Speaker 1: This isn't totally North. Cleveland? Speaker 2: This is America's north coast, right on Lake Erie? Speaker 1: I don't care where it is. I'm history. I've been there. They're gonna wait on you last. I was for the longest time in a store, I can't remember the name of it now, but it wasn't, it was a lady's store, but they had lady's clothing. It was almost discount where they had racks of clothing, you know. And I had been there for a long time, and then what happened, the clerks would come and ask you if you found what you wanted, you know, they would take it so then you would go to the counter and pay for it. And I had been there for the longest time and this white clerk, she would walk past me and just, but never came to me, you know. And then finally there was another white woman that came, and she was searching with me, you know, we were looking for similar things. And we were looking for quite a while. And pretty soon, the clerk came straight to her and said, "Could I help you? Would you like for me to take your things?" to the white woman. And the white lady turned around and looked at her, and she says, "Well, this lady was a long time before I was. Ask her what she wants." Well, the clerk said, "Oh, oh," and she knew very well I was there, "Oh," you know. And I fixed them. I was in Washington, D.C.--did I tell you about those shoes? Honey, they don't wait on you in Washington, D.C. I was in Washington, I think I was grown then. Story_ID: 196367 Speaker 1: Mrs. [HistoryMaker Dorothy] McIntyre, at the end of the last segment, you were just starting to tell me about this color line in America, that it was present in the South and also here in [Cleveland] Ohio, in the North. And you said you even experienced that in the nation's capital in Washington [D.C.]? Speaker 2: In Washington, D.C. I had another experience in Washington, D.C. In New York City [New York, New York], I had bought a, I think it was called I. Miller Shoes. It was a well-known brand. And then I saw an I. Miller store in Washington, D.C. So I went in there, you know, to try on some shoes, and they kept trying on, going to the other white, the white people and all like that. And she came to me and said, "I'll tell you. I can't wait on you here, but if you'll go into the storage room with me, I will bring you anything you want." So I said, "All right." I wanted the experience. So she would come back to me every once in a while, and she'd bring me a pair of shoes, and I'd try 'em on, you know, my black feet tried 'em on. And I'd put them there aside like that. And I said, "No, there's a little bit of pinching on there." If you--and I did that, and her open these boxes and just leave it there cause I'll come back to it. And honey, when I finished, she finished bringing me, they were stored, they were back here with the tops off, like that. And I was very switchy. Pretty soon I put my shoes on, and she says, "Is there anything you want?" She wanted to sell those shoes. I says, "Do you know what? I just find that I just can't wear any of them." And honey, I had all these shoes with the tops off and the shoes thrown around like this on top of like this (whispering). And I switched out. Am I terrible? Yes, I am. That was not nice of me. I says, "Okay, I'll go in the closet where nobody can see me trying on the shoes they might try on." Was there anything wrong with that? Mischievous. Okay. Well you have to live, you have to live segregation to know what to do, don't you, to survive. That was a mean thing I did (laughter). They wanted the sale of the shoe. They wanted the sale. Speaker 1: Because they wanted the money. Speaker 2: They wanted the money. Okay. I'm not gonna ever do that again. Speaker 1: Mrs. McIntyre, when I listen to you recount these stories about how you dealt with discrimination in America in an earlier period-- Speaker 2: It was the earlier. Speaker 1: --I get the impression that you were a fighter. Did you see yourself in that role? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Sort of a pioneer activist type (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no. I just said, I'm a human being. I'm not uneducated. I'm black, but even if I was uneducated, why am I treated this way? What did I do to them? Huh? And just like my grandma [Lizzie Lightfoot Hart] said, and I'm not working in the white folks' kitchen (laughter). My grandma told, Grandma Lightfoot, "Get your education, honey, or you'll work in the white"--I said I'm not doing that. So, I just feel that I'm entitled to everything anybody is entitled to, so I just kept on going, you know. And you ask me do I feel that it's-- Speaker 1: Are you optimistic about it (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't know. I'm optimistic, but it's not total. You've never been anywhere where you got a feeling, feeling come over you? Speaker 1: Well, I've had that feeling in lots of different places. Speaker 2: Oh, really? Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. Speaker 2: I didn't know. See, I don't get out much anymore. So, I don't know. I really, in Cleveland, I just-- Story_ID: 196368 Speaker 1: But there must be something that can be done about that, that kind of treatment. Do you have any advice for young people today (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, I see what you mean. Speaker 1: --yeah, who might aspire to do things that haven't frequently been done? Speaker 2: And they don't do it because they know that I don't have anyone, you know, to tell me how to, you know, overcome. Speaker 1: But you didn't have a lot of role models, and you overcame. Speaker 2: I didn't? Speaker 1: No, how many women were, black women, were flying planes when you got your license in 1940? Speaker 2: No, when I did, when I signed up for it, they had told me it was health. You had, you had, I didn't think it was unusual. Your health must be perfect, your breathing, your everything, you know, must be exactly. Other than that, you can't pass because these weren't what do you call it, the cabins weren't as they are now, and you had to--so I thought that I did good just passing that health, you know, examination. That's all. But I mean you're asking me about the difference today? Speaker 1: Well, I'm just wondering, for the students who may watch this interview, and may need some encouragement as they make their way through school and through life, can you offer, do you have any words of advice that you would offer to them? Speaker 2: Don't step back. Speaker 1: Don't step back. Speaker 2: Don't let anybody tell you you can't do it. If you decide on, you're a young person, and you decide, well, I'm going to major, I'm going to do this. But then they turn around and tell you, "Well, that's a white folks' occupation," don't listen to 'em. Just keep on going and you can do it. What is it? Somebody said, that gave me one of those honors, it's a saying, she said, "I think I can, I know I can, I can do it," for the flying. Yeah, you can do it because don't let anyone tell you that you're not, you don't have the brain power cause you do. And then when I was teaching, I think I taught, it was a lot of white over there, teachers and I think some of them fail because there's an assumption that you're black so you're not gonna get the attention from me and I'm not gonna encourage you. You're black, step back. Story_ID: 196369 Speaker 1: White teachers might have that feeling 'cause they're always talking about black children failing. Did you hear that? Have you heard that in school? And I tried to figure out why. And my daughter teaching at, she was at JFK [John F. Kennedy High School, Cleveland, Ohio] in math, teaching math there. She-- Speaker 2: Oh, your granddaughter? Speaker 1: Granddaughter. She had taught, she had finished the University of Minnesota [Minneapolis, Minnesota] and she taught there and married and came here and wanted to be closer to us in this area, her mother and all. So she taught at JFK, math. And she said, this is what happens. The children were so bad, you know, and that when they became sixteen, they knew they could legally drop out. She said, "The only ones that remain are those who want to learn." They drop out at sixteen. They can't see a future. Or I think the main thing, they haven't been taught what their future can be at home. You come home, where's your homework (laugher)? Let me see your homework, you know, a parent. You don't have to be an educated parent, where's your homework? Right, get your homework in. This is the time you have to do it, something like that. But the parents today, most young parents are young, black and uneducated. Then I know that there's a lot of things going on with young people. And I don't know. They don't call it dope, whatever it is. So you have a lot of 'em out on the street. I'm afraid of 'em. Do you believe that? Or am I exaggerating? I'm not out there. Speaker 2: No, some of our city streets are very dangerous. I think you have reason to be fearful (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And they are drop outs too. A lot of them are drop outs. Who was it? Somebody told me that they were coming past JFK or one of these schools, and it was after school. And they weren't walking, they were playing and fighting in the street, in the street, after school. You know, that's not schooling, right? At the same school, my daughter [sic, granddaughter]--and guess what she did? She finished high school in Shaker [Heights, Cleveland, Ohio]. She grew up in Shaker and finished at Shaker [Heights] High School [Cleveland, Ohio]. She was teaching math at JFK and they're laying off all these teachers. She transferred to Shaker, but it's math and science she's teaching in eighth grade I think. But it doesn't matter if she can get out of there before they fire her, I mean lay off. They're laying them off. I think she's smart, isn't she? Well, they have a family. They have two little ones and all. And I mean it takes more than one person to keep going today, you know. Yeah, it takes some kind of income there to raise a family, doesn't it? Speaker 2: It does. Speaker 1: Um-hm, things have changed. Or have they? Okay. Story_ID: 196370 Speaker 1: Well, Mrs. [HistoryMaker Dorothy] McIntyre, as we approach the end of our formal interview, and we're gonna look at some (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Did I bore you? Speaker 1: Oh, no, this is fascinating (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, I did, yes, I did. Speaker 1: No, not at all. But we do want to allow time to look at some of the many photographs that you have-- Speaker 2: Where? Speaker 1: Well, all around your house, and, you know, put them in front of the camera so other people can see them too. But before we finish up here with our discussion, is there anything else that you would like to share with The HistoryMakers? Speaker 2: Oh, those awards. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: They gave me awards. Speaker 1: And photos. Speaker 2: And what? Speaker 1: Well, the awards and photos we'll talk about toward the end. Speaker 2: And photo. Speaker 1: But are there any other statements that you'd like to make about your life and the history that you've made? Speaker 2: I didn't think too much about it until they told me that I was a HistoryMaker. You know, I mean this is the way of living. This is the way of citizens live. I didn't say black. But this is the way, if there are opportunities here, take advantage of them. That's all I say. You can. There're opportunities, and don't step back, honey, never step back. You really shouldn't. I have gone where I, where they really didn't want me, but it's all right. I won't step back. I was feisty. Speaker 1: You were? Speaker 2: Somewhat, I think, because I didn't feel that I had to be, you know shunned. Speaker 1: And you're not feisty anymore? Speaker 2: I try. The only time I'm not feisty is because I had three hip replacements. Other than that, I could make it, honey. But I want to be a feisty old woman. Have you seen any other feisty old women? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: You have? Speaker 1: Another history maker, locally, Jean Murrell Capers. Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: I think Judge Capers is feisty. Speaker 2: How do I know her? Capers, I know her. Judge. Speaker 1: The first black woman to serve [Cleveland] City Council-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --in Cleveland [Ohio]. She's pretty feisty (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She's the one. Did I read here somewhere, she was at an affair somewhere. Yeah, Jean Capers was there. I have been at different affairs where I see some famous people. Speaker 1: And she also used to teach in Cleveland. Speaker 2: Maybe that was it. Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In Woodridge Elementary School [sic.]. Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, I've seen her since. She was elementary school too. Yeah, upstanding teacher. Story_ID: 196371 Speaker 1: But I enjoyed the children and I respected them. And if they had trouble for not bringing in their homework and all, we'd talk about it. And I remember one boy didn't come to school or he'd come late and all like that. And I would ask his friends, "Well, where is he? Is he in any trouble or anything?" They said, "Yes, Mrs. [HistoryMaker Dorothy] McIntyre, I wanna tell you what happened." Said, "One day he went home and at night, her, his mother's boyfriend shot her in the middle of the street." Well, Lord, I liked to had a fit. And when he came to school, he was just so broken down. And, you know, I was so careful with him and sympathetic, and he used to be a bad, little noisy boy. But things changed, you know. They would bring me all kinds of tales about, I'm gonna call your mother because you're doing so and so. They said, "No, you can't call my mother in evening after school because that's the shift she works on. She won't be home." I called mama, and all the children were running around and she's cooking supper and carrying on (laughter). I said, you know, I had experiences with the children, but they liked me. And guess what they did? I was in sixth grade and working on, I was on the second floor. You know, that was the last grade in the school at that time. I was on the second floor, and that was when, when my hip first bothered me. And I told them, I, no, I told the principal I'd probably have to leave because they were urging me to get this operation. And he said, "Well, in the meantime, you can have a first floor. Don't, don't take the steps. You know, you can't take steps with bad hips." I said, "Oh, I'll think about it." Then when I was telling the children that I'd probably have to go because of an operation I needed, "Oh, Ms. McIntyre, you come in the wheelchair, and we will push you where you have to be. And we had a meeting while you were out of the room or something," and they, he said, "this is what we decided. We will have sections, one, two, three sections, forty-two children and a monitor in each section. And they'll be sure that they behave themselves and each one of them like that, and you won't have to walk around to see what's going on. You stay at your desk and the monitors will care of it." Honey, they had a plan. They're smart, weren't they? "Ms. McIntyre, you don't have to go. You don't have"--I said, "Because I can't walk and take those steps and all anymore. I have to, you know." "Well, you don't have to, you don't have to walk here. We'll have everything ready." But they liked me. Why did they like me? I see them today once in a while. "Oh, Ms. McIntyre," (laughter). Mrs. McIntyre. I enjoyed 'em. I enjoy children. So they had troubles at home I know, but, and I'll never forget one boy. He, sometimes, their parents would come to the door, you know. And one of them told me that that was this little boy's parents, you know. And I said, and I went to the door. I knew that it was a, you know, someone coming to see one of the children. And he said, "Oh, I brought something for, so I want to see my, see him, so and so, just the name." I says, "Okay, wait just a minute." So I went, it was quiet in the room. I said, "So and so, your grandfather's at the door." And he looked up and he said, "Well, that's my father." I said, "Oh, that's what I meant to say." He was an old (laughter), really old man (laughter). I said, "Well, that's what I meant to say" (laughter). I would never insult him and say, this old man is your father (laughter)? I had fun. I enjoyed, I enjoyed the children, and they didn't want me to leave. Okay. Speaker 2: Well, I'm sure they enjoyed having you for a teacher. Speaker 1: I guess so. Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 196372 Speaker 1: Lena Charlotte Hart Layne, Layne, my name, okay. She was my Mama in Le Roy, New York. She came to New York, one room school house-- Speaker 2: And then. Look at Bennie [McIntyre's husband, Francis Benjamin McIntyre]. And are you ready for me to tell you? VIDEOGRAPHER: Yes, we're ready. Speaker 2: Bennie had just returned from the service [World War II, WWII], and he had been over there three and a half years. And I had gone to New York State up to Le Roy so he came up there to visit to me, you know, before he was discharged. And you can almost see his stripes on his arms; see the stripes on his arm? He was some kind of tech sergeant over there. So we were so happy. Did we look happy? Look at Mama. Okay. I don't know how old I was. I was young. I didn't have any children then because I couldn't have any children because he wasn't here three and a half years. So I was later having children, you know, I was almost thirty before I had children. But it wasn't my fault. He went away for three and a half years. You got that. And I had to finish college [West Virginia State College, later, West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia] before I even married him. That was the trend at that time, okay. VIDEOGRAPHER: (Unclear). Speaker 2: That's my mother. And look at it closely because she had this watch pinned on her. See, can you see the watch? Yes. And I have it on a chain, but in those days women pinned watches on. Did you know that? They pinned 'em on their breast like that. And she has her maiden name, initials on it. They're not worn. They're there, L-C, it's Lena Charlotte H., Hart. See, so she was teaching when she got this. But I don't know if you can find gold that looks like that today. VIDEOGRAPHER: Who's in the photo on the, the top photograph? Speaker 2: That's Dorothy Layne [HistoryMaker Dorothy McIntyre]. VIDEOGRAPHER: When was that taken? Speaker 2: It was taken, it was a photographer here, a black photographer took that picture of me while I was working in Cleveland [Ohio] and Bennie was overseas. Yeah, I was married to him at the time. I remember the dress, okay. Speaker 1: The stroke, and I brought him here. And this is out on the balcony from upstairs. He was in the blue room upstairs. And see this was before he passed. And he passed right here in this house with me. I can take care of him, took care of him right here. Bennie helped me. VIDEOGRAPHER: June 1961. Speaker 1: Sixty-one [1961]? VIDEOGRAPHER: Um-hm. Speaker 1: That's when he passed. I have the obituary there. We took him to Virginia to bury him. VIDEOGRAPHER: And that's your father [Clyde Layne], the farmer? Speaker 1: Oh, he was a farmer. He was a farmer up there in Le Roy. Speaker 2: Now, this is Grandpa [Tazwell] Hart from [Culpeper] Virginia. He was, I understand he was a water boy in the Civil War. You know, he was young, and then they had a celebration one time, and I don't know where the picture is but they had him in the horse-drawn carriage like to celebrate him as a Civil War veteran because he was a water boy. He was a tough old man, Grandpa Hart, sweet as he could be. Speaker 1: Guess where I got the picture from? I wanted an enlarged picture of him that I didn't have. So I found it on a New York State driver's license and I had it blown up. See it looks a little ragged on the end, but I still got his picture, didn't I? See the ends of it, from carrying in his pocket and all like that. And that was so expressive of him. That is him, his expression. Yeah, I took care of him when he had his stroke. He had pretty blue eyes. They twinkled, twinkly. Speaker 2: Now, I can't figure out where it's taken. VIDEOGRAPHER: It's on the left. Speaker 2: No, is that me? If it looks awful, it's me. VIDEOGRAPHER: You're not smiling. Speaker 2: Not smiling, I think that's me. Look at that dress. There, Ruth [Layne Marshall] is the one toward me and I'm beside her. Didn't I have a lot of hair? Ooh, yey, yey. Yeah, we were by, the shrubbery is so pretty there. That's what impressed me. That's my sister on the left. I think that's my sister. That is my sister, Ruth. Yeah, Ruth had arthritis so bad, she's gone to glory. It runs in the family apparently. Speaker 1: And Dorothy Layne. Now, see--oh, yeah, be sure you show the mountains. You see, oh, there was the Piper [J-3] Cub. See how little that plane is? Look at that. They didn't have the chocks under there. But, oh, the photographer at the college took that, and then, you know, and we got them later, after we'd finished. But see that's a Piper Cub. See how little it is. See the struts, how I'm holding onto 'em. And I put the, I put chocks under those struts and spun that thing and started it up, and I jumped back, okay. And see the mountains you had fly over. You get your altitude and get over those mountains. That was fun. No, it wasn't. It was a learning experience. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, I see. VIDEOGRAPHER: Where were you? Was this still at the school? Speaker 1: I don't remember. I think, I know a photographer took it, a photographer did that. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Yes, she how much, see how pretty she was? VIDEOGRAPHER: And that's Ruth? Speaker 1: That's Ruth, Ruth Layne Marshall. She lived in Baltimore [Maryland]. She got-- Speaker 2: (NEXT PHOTOGRAPH) Speaker 1: --you know, I married a good looking man, didn't I? You think he's good looking? I think so. I knew how to make my children nice. Does she favor him? I think so-- Speaker 2: (NEXT PHOTOGRAPH) Speaker 1: --See the haircut she had then. And Miata [ph.] [Whyte] and Mariama [Whyte], Lion King. Hello, Mariama, and Donna [McIntyre Whyte] and Miata. Speaker 2: Who's that white-haired woman? Who's that beside me? Speaker 1: DIANNE MCINTYRE: That's daddy. Speaker 2: Oh, that, you mean with the white hair? Hello, Bennie. I don't remember when that was taken, when he could move well. See, how white his hair is now? Speaker 1: Who is that? [HistoryMaker] Dianne [McIntyre]? VIDEOGRAPHER: I think that was you. Speaker 1: That's not me. VIDEOGRAPHER: 1929, Dots. Speaker 1: Twenty-nine [1929]? Twenty, what? Here, let me see what's written on there. That's me? VIDEOGRAPHER: That's you. Speaker 1: Okay. I was always afraid to smile to really show my teeth because I thought I was funny looking, you know. I just thought-- Speaker 2: --is that my daddy? He's a handsome man. I don't remember that picture. Wasn't he handsome? Yes, he was. That's Clyde Layne, the Layne family from Culpepper, Virginia, in the country. All of us were country. Speaker 1: And I don't know where that is. I'm on the, my sister and I, isn't it? Is that Ruth and I? Look at our twin dresses almost. Are we sharp? Wow. Speaker 2: Oh, this is my father with his children. I'm the little one on this end, you see, and my sister. But would you look at what we have on? I think we have all these hats and things on 'cause it was so cold in Le Roy. We just, they just took it like it was (laughter), all those snow banks. Yeah, that was taken a long time ago, Dianne. I was a little, kind of a little girl. I always had a sad look on my face, okay. Speaker 1: Is that my mother? VIDEOGRAPHER: I think so. Speaker 1: Yes, it is. Look at the way they dressed in the 1800s? That's elaborate, that's elaborate dressing. Is that a handbag? VIDEOGRAPHER: That's a muff. Speaker 1: Oh, a muff, that's right. They used muffs, to keep your hands warm. Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Speaker 1: Oh, that's what it is. A big muff. Everybody dressed the same, I think. Speaker 2: Bennie and one of his children. It's the oldest one. Oh, Bennie and Dianne. She's looking the other way too. What's she got? A ribbon in her hair (laughter). I think I put a ribbon in her hair. And look at Bennie, not a strand of gray in his hair. Doesn't he look like a Jamaican to you? That's my Jamaican background husband. Story_ID: 196373 VIDEOGRAPHER: Okay, so who's everybody in this picture? Speaker 2: This is, he was one of those flyers, he's a flyer, and he was on the lakefront, you know, to protect. We were supposed to go down there. I went down there for a while. He remembers me. And this is the, this lady is a superintendent of schools and you see her on television. Speaker 1: DIANNE MCINTYRE: CEO. Speaker 2: CEO of Cleveland [Ohio] Public Schools and you see her on television every day. VIDEOGRAPHER: And what's her name? Speaker 2: Barbara Byrd-Bennett, Byrd-Bennett, Byrd dash Bennett. VIDEOGRAPHER: And she's in the yellow? Speaker 2: She's in the yellow, yeah. And then she, there was an affair very recently that she was at. I think it was [Cleveland] City Council on the west side, wasn't it, [HistoryMaker] Dianne [McIntyre]? And she was over there, and I got another award over there. They're always giving me awards. So she was with me when I got one there too. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: She picked him out, didn't she? Yeah, right there, see Bennie [McIntyre's husband, Francis Benjamin McIntyre]. Wait, there he is. He enlarged him. VIDEOGRAPHER: Right in the center? Speaker 2: Yeah, right in the center, he is. Saint Andrew's [Episcopal Church, Cleveland, Ohio], same brick building. Okay. I'm Episcopal too. See, he's been Episcopal since he was little. I think it had to do something with his, had something to do with his Jamaican ancestry. You understand the Jamaicans? Speaker 1: Who in the world is that? Speaker 2: DIANNE MCINTYRE: Your mother-in-law. Speaker 1: Oh, that's Dianne's [paternal] grandmother--she was young. Wasn't she pretty? Guess what kind of hair she had? She was part American Indian. She would comb that hair out and ball, and she'd have a ball, and she could sit on her hair. I mean after she got it down, she could sit on it. I think that's why being married to a Jamaican, you see, and that's why her children, I mean Bennie's children look the way they do. VIDEOGRAPHER: What's her name? I don't think I got it on tape. Speaker 1: Her name, Bertha, Bertha McIntyre [Albertha Simmons McIntyre]. Bertha McIntyre. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, that's a good one of her too. Yeah, it's Bertha McIntrye, my mother-in-law, my children's grandmother. I think she was half American Indian, something like that. Speaker 1: Look at my children! Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Oh, I see. There they are. I don't know where we were, Dianne. You had on some fancy clothes. Speaker 2: DIANNE MCINTYRE: I think that's in the backyard. Speaker 1: Oh, but you were dressed up too (laughter). They were in the back. What are y'all looking for? Speaker 2: One of him? Let's see. What is this? I can't see that good. Is that a person? VIDEOGRAPHER: Um-hm. Speaker 2: I think it's my fa (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: DIANNE MCINTYRE: (Simultaneous) That's grandpa [McIntyre's father, Clyde Layne] and me. Speaker 2: Oh, I see. She's on the swing and he's swinging her. That's good. Speaker 1: Oh, I was a baby. My mother [Lena Hart Layne] had those pictures. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Now, I've got to distinguish. The one with the big face is me. The pretty one is my sister [Ruth Layne Marshall]. Now, I can't tell. No, that's my sister, but see, I came out looking like that. Okay. VIDEOGRAPHER: So, your sister's on the right side? Speaker 1: On the right is my sister. And the one with the surprised eyes is me. I was surprised. (Unclear) take my picture. Speaker 2: (NEXT PHOTOGRAPH) Speaker 1: He's a sweet as he can be, and toddles and gets into everything. He just rolls when he goes. Speaker 2: And what's his name? Speaker 1: What's his name? Aaron [ph.], Aaron, that's an odd name, isn't it? Aaron was, in November he was a year old. He's one and a half now. His mother is the one, the math teacher. He's sweet as he can be. He was here the other day. VIDEOGRAPHER: That's your great-grandson. Speaker 1: Great grandson, yeah. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, they're, she's just smiling. Pretty children. VIDEOGRAPHER: Who are they? Speaker 2: Great-grandchildren. I only have those two, Aaron and Amira [ph.]. Amira is the little girl and the Aaron, yes. Speaker 1: That's great-grandmother, what is it? Hart, is it? Speaker 2: DIANNE MCINTYRE: It's a picture of a picture. Speaker 1: Is that Hart, Dianne? Speaker 2: DIANNE MCINTYRE: Yeah. Speaker 1: That's a Hart, I mean Lightfoot Hart. Speaker 2: DIANNE MCINTYRE: Your grandfather's [Tazwell Hart] parents. Speaker 1: My grandfather's parents, and see the frame there, and it began to disintegrate. I had them upstairs, so then I restored the frame by painting over it, and took those pictures because they were disintegrating. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) VIDEOGRAPHER: And who was the previous one? Speaker 2: Great-grandmother. VIDEOGRAPHER: And what was her name? Speaker 2: Amanda, she was Amanda. Speaker 1: DIANNE MCINTYRE: Amanda Hart, born 1820, parent of Tazwell Hart. Speaker 2: 1820. There's another Tazwell. VIDEOGRAPHER: And who are we looking at now? Speaker 2: Look at the back and that's, see who, see what he says? Speaker 1: Washington. Speaker 2: Washington Hart. Speaker 1: Born 1817. Speaker 2: Grandpa's father. 1817. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Wow, I was born in 1917. Have mercy. Story_ID: 196374 Speaker 1: Okay, hello, Bessie, Bessie Coleman, hey. I have a lot of awards for some reason. I don't know they came from. See the [Cleveland] Plain Dealer [Cleveland, Ohio] wrote about me one day, one day. VIDEOGRAPHER: Okay. Didn't we get it? Speaker 1: I don't know where that thing is. The Women's Air and Space Center [sic. International Women's Air & Space Museum, Cleveland, Ohio]...