 Story_ID: 646420 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Melvin Benjamin Miller [HistoryMaker Melvin Miller], M-I-L-L-E-R is my last name. Speaker 1: And what is your--how do you spell Melvin? Some people spell it with a Y, some people spell it (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, M-E-L-V-I-N. Speaker 1: Okay, good. All right. Speaker 2: And M-I-L-L-E-R is Miller. Speaker 1: Okay and-- Speaker 2: And Benjamin is my middle name. Speaker 1: And sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth. Speaker 2: Seven, twenty-two, thirty-four [July 22, 1934]. As you can see, I'm on the verge of becoming a seriously old man (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, so--and where were you born? Speaker 2: Boston [Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Actually, I was born in Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts]. I'm a Roxbury man. Speaker 1: And what is your title and occupation? Speaker 2: My ti- my title is publisher and editor of the Bay State Banner. I'm also president, president of Banner Publications [Banner Publications, Inc., Boston, Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: Okay and you are a lawyer by training, right? Speaker 2: I am. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay and what is today's date? Speaker 2: April--what is it, 24th? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Yeah, 2013. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: Wha- what do you, what do you--what's the que- in Boston? Speaker 1: Yeah, well, where are we specifically right now? In--? Speaker 2: We're, we're in the offices of the Bay State Banner. Story_ID: 646421 Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we ask as kind of a warm up, and they only require a short answer. First one is: do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay, a favor color? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: All right, a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Yes, fall. Speaker 1: Okay, favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: And the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: (Pause) God dwells within you as you. Story_ID: 646422 Speaker 1: All right, well, I'm gonna ask about your family history. I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [John Miller] side. Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But we'll start with your--start with your mother's side first. So can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Louise Elvira O'Banyoun [Louise O'Banyoun Miller], O, apostrophe, B-A-N-Y-O-U-N. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: I think it's April 13th, I'm not sure of the day, in 1913. Speaker 1: Okay, and was she born in Boston [Massachusetts]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. All right, how far back can you trace your mother's side, and what are the stories on that side of the family? Speaker 2: Well, we can trace it back to my great-great-great-grandfather who was born in 1796. Speaker 1: And who was he and what was he doing? Do you know? Speaker 2: I didn't hear the question. Speaker 1: I said do you--do you know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) By the way, let me just tell you, I'm a little hard of hearing. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: So you'll have to speak up. Speaker 1: Yes. What was your--are there any stories about your, your great-great-great-great-grandfather [sic.]? Speaker 2: Yeah, there's some--there's some stories about it. I mean, he was--he was a slave, and he was the son of the slave owner. And I can't give you the exact date, but he, he found that the, the terms of employment in the Virginia, Kentucky area where he lived were not up to his standards, so he left and went to Canada. Speaker 1: So he, he fled slavery from--and struck out for his own freedom and went to Canada? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Now what, what was his name? (Pause) Can you tell us his name? Speaker 2: Let me see. I, I have his name down. His name is--I'm trying to think--it's--it might be Peter [Simon Peter O'Banyoun]. I forget his first name, but his last name was--the ni- last name he used was O'Banyoun. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. So, so he established himself in Canada. Speaker 2: Yes, he did. Speaker 1: And this would be in the early 1800s I guess. Speaker 2: In the early 1800s. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And in Canada he was a, a, a businessman and was relatively successful for the time. Speaker 1: Okay, and where in Canada did he settle? Speaker 2: In Brantford, B-R-A-N-T-F-O-R-D, which is a suburb of Toronto [Canada]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And one of his, one of his businesses was--he had a horse and wagon. You know, in those days you didn't have a truck. You used to--people wanted to move things that--make deliveries of large items, you used a horse and so he was a trucker. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He was also a minister, and he represented the A.M.E. Zion church [African Methodist Episcopal Zion] in Canada--established the Canadian branch of it. Speaker 1: A.M.E. Zion church, yeah. Now that--that's, that's an early A.M.E. Zion church, I think Peter Viereck [sic. James Varick] founded A.M.E. Zion, didn't he? Or is that not true (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. It was founded in Philadelphia [sic. New York, New York] by--I forget the name of the founder. But it was, it was founded I think in the late 1700s. And so my great-great-great-grandfather picked it up and started--it has a different name in Canada, but it's--really started out as a branch of that. And one of his sons became an instrumental member of that church--that denomination. Story_ID: 646423 Speaker 1: So the family lived in Canada (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) For several generations. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, and--then they tr- they traveled east in Canada to Nova Scotia [Canada]. And my--his son [Miller's maternal great-great-grandfather, Josephus O'Banyoun] visited Boston [Massachusetts] in the 1870s, and his grandson [Simon O'Banyoun] settled in Boston. And my grandfather [Ernest O'Banyoun] was born in 1884, my mother's father. Speaker 1: Okay. Now-- Speaker 2: Those dates are estimates, by the way, but they're fairly close. Speaker 1: Okay, so this is after the Civil War? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Yeah. He settled in Boston. And what, what kind of work do they do--did, did your ancestors do? Speaker 2: Well, my grandfather was, was a musician. He was well known, known as a singer and as a re- there was evidence that he sang in operas. And he was a classical pianist and organist in--near the end of his--as he was older, he used to play the organ regularly in local churches. I understand he could also tune pianos. Now, his, his grandfather was also a musician, and he had the jubil- jubilee chorus [Famous Canadian Jubilee Singers], which traveled Europe in the 1800s and, and sang in--for royal families in various countries. Speaker 1: So this is--you showed us a photo of him (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: --earlier. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And this is a large troupe. This is, this is about fifteen people in that (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't it-- Speaker 1: Is it not that many? About-- Speaker 2: Well, yeah. I think it's a little smaller than that. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: But, I mean, I think, I think it's--apparently, they were pretty good and in demand. Speaker 1: The jubilee chorus. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I know we've heard of the Jubilee Singers [Fisk Jubilee Singers] from Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee] travelling (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I know it (laughter). It has nothing to do with Fisk, yep. Speaker 1: Okay, just that--wanted to make that distinction. So--yeah, okay, all right, and, and what was your--what, what was this--this is your great-grandfather, right? Or your great-great-grandfather? Speaker 2: Who? Speaker 1: Traveling in Europe with the jubilee-- Speaker 2: No, that would be my great-great-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --grandfather. Speaker 1: And what was--can you give us any names here--or his name or maybe? Speaker 2: Yeah, I could give you the names, but I'd have to look them up-- Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) and make sure I got them right. I mean, we're talking about four or five generations here, so I could--I've got it all down. Speaker 1: But they're all O'Banyouns? The-- Speaker 2: They're all O'Ba- those, those are all O'Banyouns. Story_ID: 646424 Speaker 1: Now that's, that's my--you, you, you asked about my mother's [Louise O'Banyoun Miller] side, so that's her father [Ernest O'Banyoun]. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And now you wanna know her mother? Ella Stiles Harten [Ella Harten O'Banyoun]. She was originally from York, South Carolina. But she was, she was in one of those strange southern families where her mother and father weren't married 'cause it was against the law. But her father was from a well established family of German origin in, in York, South Carolina. And because of that, as youngsters, she and her siblings enjoyed special privileges, which didn't endear them to the impoverished whites in the neighborhood. So when, when her father was killed, she, she and her brothers and sisters fled. And they had the wisdom to flee in different directions so that they couldn't all be apprehended together by--if they were caught. And she came up to Boston [Massachusetts], where in no time at all she became--she became highly regarded and quite a lady. Speaker 2: Now, can you tell us something about why their father was killed? Now, now their father was white I assume, right? Speaker 1: Yeah. He--well, he was--he was also a hell raiser and, and he--I think he was--had a dispute with somebody and he got shot. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And the way, the way we know that is that I've--I had at one point somebody looking for stuff, and they found a, a record of it in a--in a local newspaper. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. So-- Speaker 1: An interesting thing: I think he was shot by a black guy (laughter). I wonder what happened to the guy who shot him. In those days it was a dangerous thing to do. Speaker 2: Yeah, it is. So (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But it was an interesting thing. Her, her family's--her father's name was William Harten, H-A-R-T-E-N. I, I think it was Wilhelm, but he was German and his, his family were German. Speaker 2: Okay, Wilhelm Harten. How, how did he spell Harten? Speaker 1: H-A-R-T-E-N. Speaker 2: H-A-R-T-- Speaker 1: H-A-R-T-E-N. Speaker 2: T-E-N, yeah, okay, all right. Speaker 1: Harten. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And the interesting thing is that I don't think there're any Hartens in the Boston phonebook. There might be one or two. But on a trip I had to take to South Carolina awhile back, there were a lot of Hartens in the phonebook, so I ga- guess it's a tra- tribe that has multiplied in the intervening years. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Now, her mother [Elvira Johnson Harten] was I think black and Cherokee, and her, her la- maiden name was Camp [sic.], C-A-M-P. But--and I, I sort of remember her. She died when I was a young, young boy; and I didn't--I don't remember much about her. Story_ID: 646425 Speaker 1: So your [maternal] grandmother [Ella Harten O'Banyoun] and grandfather [Ernest O'Banyoun]--your, your grandfather was a musician. And your grandmother, did she have an oc- occupation, or did she just take care of the home or (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, you know, I'm gonna tell you--I'll tell you what she really d- what she did. She, she had the old ladies who were wealthy women, for whom she would sometimes work, and you kind of say she was a maid 'cause she didn't do that kind of hard work. It was almost like she was a, a lady in waiting or something of that--more like a lady in waiting. Sometimes I can remember I used to pick her up at, at jobs. And she would be sitting there with her boss, and they'd be chatting and polishing silver together. So it was a, it was a--to, to say that she was a domestic would not accurately describe it. I--I'm not trying to soft, soft soap it, but it was really different. I mean, I had other relatives who were domestics, and I know the kind of work she--they did was entirely different from what my grandmother did. One of the interesting things: she had these really--these relationships with the families that she worked with, and she, she became a friend. And as a result, she acquired some valuable antiques, and she had--I mean, if you go into her house she had sil- silver candlesticks, and silverware, and crystal, and expensive china, and all that. And she was fiercely independent. And as she got older she refused to accept money or support from anybody, and so she, she got an apartment in public housing. And they came in and, and inspected her place. And they looked and s- saw her furnishings, and they said, "Well, wait a minute, wait a minute; you're supposed to be impoverished." She said, "Well, I don't have any money." She said, "But these things are worth substantial amounts of money." "You have to sell them all." She said, "No, I, I think I'll just move; these are my things" (laughter). So she moved out and got an apartment and, and that's how she kicked it until the end. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She, she and--she and my--she was divorced from my grandfather, but they died--even though they'd been divorced for years, they died the same year essentially. It was almost like she was sitting around waiting for him to die before she died or something. Strange relationship. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Remember--I showed you a picture of my grandfather. Sometimes I have to show you, because the, the way different people look is very funny. And you saw the picture of my grand- grandmother. She was very fair with blue-green eyes and the like. And so I remember after she, she died--he was in his sixties--I mean, I--no, I mean it--he, he remarried in his sixties. She didn't die then. And--'cause they both died when they were about eighty-four, eighty-five. And so he married a woman from Florida who was really, really robustly black. And he said, "Well, you know, I tried vanilla, time for chocolate" (laughter). So he made, he made that remark. And I remember coming home from Essie's [ph.] funeral and he was cheerful. We, we in our family--one of the things that was characteristic of Boston [Massachusetts] is that we really had very little interest in gradations of color, which seems to occupy the attention of blacks in some cities like Washington, D.C. and New Orleans [Louisiana]. We were, we were sort of shocked when we discovered that that was the case. Speaker 1: Okay. Yeah, you're right. In some places--Atlanta [Georgia], I've heard (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I mean, as a matter of fact, (pause) we, we find it--that so highly offensive and not acceptable at all. Story_ID: 646426 Speaker 1: What did your mother [Louise O'Banyoun Miller] say about growing up? Did she--? Speaker 2: About what? Speaker 1: About growing up. Did she have some stories to share about growing up here in Boston [Massachusetts]? Speaker 2: (Pause) Yeah, I mean one of the things--one of the things you have to really understand. A hundred years ago, in 1910, blacks were only 2 percent of the population of Boston. We were only about thir- thirteen thousand here so it was a very small community in which most people knew one another. And if you didn't know a person directly, if you gave anybody somebody's name in the morning, they could give you a full bio before the sun set, because it was that ingrown, and people had been there for many, many generations. The interesting, the interesting thing about the old, the old black community up here is that people never made much fuss about how long they'd lived here. And--for instance, I--I'm trying to think of the name of the--oh my gosh, I'm getting so forgetful. There was a, there was a black shipping magnate who in the 1700s-- Speaker 1: Oh, Paul Cuffee? Speaker 2: Yeah, Paul Cuffee. Actually, it was Paul Cuffee. And so my, my uncle who just died was--he was my uncle 'cause he was married to my mother's sister--his mother died. And you know, of course, what happens--you know how it is in the black community when there's an intermarriage, families meld. And so, you know, I knew his mother and everybody and thing very well. And I called her Mrs. Walker [ph.] and everything. And then she died. And then I saw her name was Cuffee. And I said to my uncle--I said, "Wow," I said, "the only Cuffee I've ever remembered was Paul Cuffee." He said, "Yeah, that's my great-great-great-grandfather." Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: And he had never told--he had never mentioned it all like that. And then when I--what I fa- found out, that the descendants of Paul Cuffity- Cuffee sort of have an organization and have meetings. And, and so now I have a couple of cousins of mine who are direct descendants of Paul Cuffee. And had, had his mother not died like that and--I never would have known. And, and I've--that, that happens very frequently for--with--I--and I think the reason for that, we had nothing to brag about, because there's no power or wealth, no political power or wealth in the black community so what else--what is there to brag about? That you've been here a long time and still haven't risen to the top? You know, that's certainly not something to be exceedingly proud of. And so Boston, interestingly, has always been an--a city of immigrants, and we've always accepted people who come in who, who migrate here. Particularly--we're particularly excited about competent people coming in because Boston has always been a brain drain. Because of the schools; people come in for the education and then they're gone. Story_ID: 646427 Speaker 1: Did your mother [Louise O'Banyoun Miller] have any stories about growing up that she shared, about going to school or what it was like in Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts] in those days? Speaker 2: Well, my mother lived a number of places. And, and she lived at--she lived in Cambridge [Massachusetts]; she, she lived in Littleton [Massachusetts] for a while out in the country. I remember growing up, when we'd go out in the fall and get apples and cider. She would meet--she would go to a farm where she and the, the farmers' people went to school together. And one of my, my great-grand--let me see--yeah, my great-grandfather [Simon O'Banyoun] had a--had another family out there after, after his--he was separated from his wife--his first wife. He--now let me tell you, his--the, the picture of my great-grandfather that I showed you was married to a woman named Martha [sic. Mary Jenkins O'Banyoun] from Canada. And she wa- she was--her mother [Emily Allan Jenkins] was Irish, and her father [Jackie Jenkins] was Anglo [Anglo-Saxon]. I believe that he was an Englishman. She, she looked like she was a white person. I, I never asked much more about it. I don't think--I never knew her. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So you see, we have--we have a whole lot miscegenation in my family. It's, it's--I always tell people that we, we have a perversion in the family that all the men love all kinds of women; Asian, blacks, European, they're all good (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, all right, well--so, well, still now, again, like what, what did your mother say about growing up? What did she-- Speaker 2: I mean, there wasn't--one of the things that's very peculiar about growing up is that people had no sense of being one wit- inferior. They felt they were very strong and very proud, and they knew that they had a conflict with whites. They, they, they--we understood that there was discrimination, but, but--and a lot of the discrimination was racial, but it was very pri- was primarily based upon tribes; and it was a very tribal thing. You see, you have to understand in, in Boston [Massachusetts] in the 1800s blacks were elected to the state legislature [Massachusetts General Court] and held high--some high elective office. What the problem was, that came to a grinding halt as the potato famine in Ireland got worse and worse, and the Irish came over in massive numbers. And of course, what they do is look, look out for members of the tribe. So the political districts was so--were reorganized, so blacks were gerrymandered out of any kind of political power. Interestingly, the Yankees didn't mind blacks holding public office because they had a different view of, of politics as being not a profession but a contribution everybody made to the welfare of the community and the society, and not, not as something to enrich oneself; you did that through your profession. So if blacks--competent blacks were willing and able to come up and serve the public at any given time, they were only too happy to support it. Story_ID: 646428 Speaker 1: Now where did your mother [Louise O'Banyoun Miller] go to school? Speaker 2: She went to public schools; and then she, she went--she did a year at Framingham state college [State Teachers College at Framingham; Framingham State University, Framingham, Massachusetts], which was a teachers college then, but then she got married and got pregnant and dropped out. Speaker 1: Okay, so she didn't have any, any stories about growing up she shared with you or, or any specific stories or anything? Speaker 2: Any stories? Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause I, I wanted to ask before I move on to your father's side if she had any stories that she shared? Speaker 2: Well, you know, there're just--I mean, the stories don't have any significance to--for black history--a history about being black. There's one--I'm gonna tell you one story that I find fascinating and it shows you what the community was like. When I was a little boy, I went to the funeral of my Uncle Charlie [ph.]. And so being very curious, the service went on and I pulled my mother's coat and said, "I can't figure it out; how's Uncle Charlie my uncle?" She said, "(Makes sound)." So later she told me the most extraordinary story, that her cousins and--actually, they're in that 1922 picture--at least Thelma [ph.] is--were--used to play in a--they lived in, in Cambridge [Massachusetts] and they used to play in a park, and there was a man who used to be in the park, and it turned out, you know, he liked the sauce and he was a drunk. And one day there was a sudden rain shower and everybody started running for cover, and of course, this man had no place to go. You know, he just got close to a tree. And so my cousin said, "Come on, come on Charlie. You gotta get out the rain." He said, "Go on girls, go on. Don't want you to get wet." And so they went on to say, "We're not leaving without you." So he went with them to keep them from getting soaking wet in this rain shower. So when, when he got to the house they went inside, and then my aunt--my great aunt came out and said, "You--you're gonna get pneumonia being as wet as that so you come on in; you can get--we have extra clothes here. You can take those soaking clothes off." So he went and, and had a--had--dried off and had some--put some fresh clothes on. And my aunt had a very demanding way of inquiry. Turns out that he, he was a drunk and unemployed. And she said, "Well, you know, we, we have an extra bed here," they had a big house, "and, and we have an extra bed here and you can stay, but this is a Christian house; we don't have all that booze, and you have to work." He said, "Well, okay." He had nothing, so he went and got a job, and he stayed there for a while, then things started looking better. And he met a lady and they got married, and--but he never left the family. He became adopted as my Uncle Charlie, and I always knew him as Uncle Charlie. And, and it makes me think. I think that, that was one of the stories that my, my mother told me that was--always touched me. And I said, you know, as I tell the young thugs today, I say, "You guys don't know how you've ruined the community." I said, "You know, if you look back historically, where did we have homes for the homeless? Where did we have people stay in, in these folk's places for the homeless?" I said, "We never had them and we had--didn't have a pot to piss in." And so I said, "What would happen if a person was homeless? There'd always be somebody who would take 'em in, 'cause we weren't afraid of one another." And I think that's a story that always stuck with me about my Uncle Charlie. And the funniest thing is that growing up, my brother [John E. Miller] and I have always taken in people. Speaker 1: That's interesting, okay. Speaker 2: And, and I, I wonder if that--I have to laugh at that because when I'd do something or--when we talk about my father [John Miller], I'll tell you how it works on the other side. But you wonder--I wonder if it's in the genes, because my brother and I were sort of well known in South Africa. Because this was before it was, well, big, there were a lot of South African refugees, and some of them used to--we have sort of big houses and they used to--some of them used to sta- stay with my brother; they had no other place to live. Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So that--that's a, that's a story. There are other little social stories that I think aren't really worthy. Story_ID: 646429 Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: John Johnson Miller [John Miller]. Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: December 31st, 1896. Speaker 1: And where was he born? Speaker 2: Boston [Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: In Boston, okay. Speaker 2: He was--he was about the last generation that lived on the north slope of Beacon Hill [Boston, Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: Now this is--that's down near, near the African Meeting House [Boston, Massachusetts] on Joy Street-- Speaker 2: That's right (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and all toward that area, right. Speaker 2: See--the, the African Meeting House is, is the beginning of the north slope of Beacon Hill. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, 'cause there was a black community there--the, the famous black community that people like David Walker-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --Paul Cuffee and all those people. Speaker 2: Not Paul Cuffee, he didn't live there. Speaker 1: He, he didn't-- Speaker 2: Paul, Paul Cuffee was from New Bedford [Massachusetts], that area. Speaker 1: All right, so-- Speaker 2: See that's-- Speaker 1: I, I thought--I thought he was a Boston man. I mean, he was a-- Speaker 2: The what? Speaker 1: I, I, I thought he operated out of Boston. It was out, out of New Bedford? Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, that's where the ships were. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. But this is the, the community--all right. That--now there's a--the African Meeting House is now a museum. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And--yeah. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: But-- Speaker 2: But you know, there are--there's, there's a lot of history that connected with that area of Beacon Hill. It was interesting that those houses that blacks used to own and live in are now highly valued and selling for several million dollars on Beacon Hill. Speaker 1: Okay, so do you have any--well, tell us now what do you know about the ancestors on your father's side? What were they-- Speaker 2: Well, you know, as I told--I know far less about them and, and there's a reason why I know far less. My father was of a generation where children were very subservient to their parents in a funny kind of way. And he felt that it was inappropriate to ask personal questions of his parents. So when I tried to find out from him certain things, he didn't know the answers because he--these are not--these weren't questions that he would ever put to his relatives. And he said--he said (laughter) funny things. Now his, his father [Daniel Miller] is from Jamaica, and his father came here in a- about 1880. And he came--I, I have a record of the ship he came on. There weren't that many passengers on it, and he said he, he was traveling on a Scottish passport. And I'm not even sure how he could have a Scottish passport in 1880. Maybe, maybe he meant an English passport, but his father was from Scotland, and his mother was Jamaican. Speaker 1: Okay, so, so your father's great-grandfather was from Scotland, right? That's what you're saying? Speaker 2: No, my father's grandfather. Speaker 1: Yeah, right, right. Speaker 2: It was my great-grandfather. Speaker 1: Right, okay, all right. So-- Speaker 2: See, my father's father was from Jamaica, but his father was from Scotland. Now my grandfather was a seaman. He was actually--he was a whaler and he, he used to do some scrimshander [sic. scrimshaw], you know, make things out of whale teeth and stuff? But my grandmother [Mary Miller], who was a very strong, fiery woman, said once she started having babies--said, "You're not going out to sea and leave me a widow," so he had to give that up, so he worked in a restaurant--started working restaurants in the hotels. His, his real skills were nautical, and when that was taken from him, he, he, he had to do what he could do to support his family. They had twelve children--a lot of children, and three of them died as infants. Speaker 1: Okay, that's a lot--now, now, was that considered a large family in those days for--? Speaker 2: Yeah, that was a large family. Speaker 1: I mean, even then? Speaker 2: I think it was. Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Story_ID: 646430 Speaker 1: And, and so I don't really have much information. I've been trying to find--the, the, the unfortunate thing is that Jamaica didn't have the best records at the time of wa- what would have been the time of my [paternal] grandfather's [Daniel Miller] birth so we haven't been able to pin anything down. And I have an idea of how we might be able to get, get more information, but to tell you the truth, you know, I, I don't have--I haven't had the time really to focus on that. Now my grandmother [Mary Miller] was also from--believe it or not she was from Canada too. She was from Digby, Nova Scotia [Canada]. And, unfortunately, I also don't have a whole lot of information about her, but she had very dark skin and she had high cheekbones. And my, my father [John Miller] and his sisters and brothers had hair like Indian [Native American] hair--hi- Indians, you know, it's heavy and relatively straight. And so we conclude that she was at least part Indian, but the Indian tribe--I'm, I'm not that familiar with the Indian tribes in Canada. The, the--there was one tribe that we're familiar with, but they were--she wouldn't fit in that tribe because they were fairer ski- had fairer skin, so I don't, I don't know how that works. Story_ID: 646431 Speaker 1: There was a colony of blacks from the thirteen colonies that was settled in Nova Scotia [Canada] right after the Revolutionary War by the British. These are people that fought on the British side during the war. Speaker 2: You're talk--yeah, you're talking about--now interestingly, those are the Abyssinians [ph.]. They call them the Ab- the, the, the--who--those who fought with the British in the--in the war, I'm related to them but on my mother's [Louise O'Banyoun Miller] side. And I have some relatives who, who never--they were never slaves really. They were transported over here with the intention that they should be slaves, but they went with the British in the Revolutionary War and, and were granted land grants in, in Nova Scotia. So I had--I have--my--let me tell you the--there's--there are a lot of complexities on my, on my mother's side. A person who is doing some work for me also believes that--now that you're talking about the people of that generation, some people also believe that I'm descended from a person who land- an Englishman who landed in, in I think it was Rhode Island, and he was a Tory. He wouldn't take up arms against the crown so he went to Canada and somehow got enmeshed (laughter) in, in, in my family which was as, as you can see very metropolitan (laughter)--very, very mixed. As a matter of fact, the, the Irish woman who was doing a lot of the works, who was also from Nova Scotia, when she started doing the work said, "Oh my god, we're married--we're, we're related by marriage" (laughter). You have to remember that it was easy to be related to people because back in those days the population was so small, so this is why I say that. For instance, for my great-great-great-grandfather [Simon Peter O'Banyoun] being--he, he has said that his father was white and he was--his name O'Bannion. There were two O'Bannions there who were brothers who came from Ireland, and the--it's absolutely likely that one of those is my great-great--my, my fourth level great-grandfather. And if you stop to think, the whole--the population of the whole United States at that time was only 7 million so that greatly reduces the possibility of not being related. And I haven't even begun the, the task of finding out who the parents of his wife were, were because she's also mixed. So you can see we were bad boys four or five generations ago. But what it--I think that what it did is that we inherited an independent spirit that being a--an obsequious black is so im- impossible for me. I can tell you that my sense of self confidence as, as a human being has been threatening--has been viewed as threatening to teachers and a number of other people over the years. Story_ID: 646432 Speaker 1: As we continue this history now, your--now what kind of work did your, your father's fa- father do? Speaker 2: What kind of work did he do? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: He, he was--he was a supervisor in the post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service]. Now let me tell you what that is. It's not a postman, but if you go into a major post office you'll see people what they call throwing a scheme, sorting the mail back in the old days. They, they do a lot of it by machines now, but in the old days you'd--people would--so a supervisor would be in charge of a whole floor or a section of a floor of people who were sorting the schemes. And his job was to make sure that all of the--all the employees were there, that the mail would--that the whole process was moving along smoothly. Now the interesting thing is that up until that time those jobs were never available to blacks. And then when John McCormack [John William McCormack] became speaker of the house, he decided that he was gonna break this Irish hold on, on those jobs. And so my father [John Miller] became--he, he, he moved up and took one of those jobs. Back, back in the day, there in Boston [Massachusetts], there were a whole lot of highly educated blacks who couldn't get any kind of job. I mean, you'd find graduates of the Ivy League working as Pullman porters or mailmen. Matter of fact, we have a mailman now who is a, a graduate of Dartmouth [Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire] and so--which seems strange. So--but, but back, back in the day that was very, very common. And so my father, who never graduated from high school, was able to move up and hold a job like that; that was, that was extraordinary, and the nice thing about it is that you, you work--the work was steady. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so he was able to provide a very comfortable life for us. I remember once in 1972, when I ran for office and I started campaigning, people started wanting me to, to say I was poor, and I said, "Why would I say I was poor?" I said, "I was never poor. I always lived in a house that my father owned. He alway- he had a car; I had my own bed; I had all the clothes I, I wanted--I needed or wanted; I had medical attention; and the best education money can buy. And all of this was a result of the effort of my father. Now why should I desecrate his memory by saying he left us poor? He worked his butt off and provided wealth for me, and I won't say that. If it means losing an election, so be it." Speaker 1: Now, now, now did, did your father have a chance to go to college? Did you--you hadn't mentioned it yet though. Speaker 2: No, my father never went to college. Speaker 1: Okay, he never went. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No, I--no, I said that one of the saddest memories of my father is that just, just shortly before he died, he--you know how people go--his--he was failing. And so my brother [John E. Miller] was taking him to a place, and he got very happy 'cause he thought he was going to college. And I--and, you know, you, you, you hold these dreams and these aspirations all your life and, and I guess near the end when you see that it might not happen you get excited when something emerges. I noticed the same thing, this sort of--you get lost in a time warp. That happened to my maternal grandfather [Ernest O'Banyoun] too. I mean, he ju- he'd see- he'd, he'd seemed to talk about things in a, in a--an unreasonable timeframe. Story_ID: 646433 Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your parents met? Do they talk about how they met and fell in love? Speaker 2: No, actually I don't know. My father [John Miller] was much older than my mother [Louise O'Banyoun Miller] you know. As you can see, he was born in 1896. She was born in 1930 [sic.]. He was--'13 [1913]--so he was four- seventeen years older than she. Speaker 1: So there's no story about how they, they, they, they met at all or if they met at church or in a social event? Speaker 2: I don't quite--I would never try--they never--they never made much--let me tell you, they were not a lovey dovey couple. So, so to tell you the truth--that--one of the things that I really learned: that is--that is a part of the old tradition when people married for better or for worse they assumed it was for life. And my mother--my mother and father had completely different ideas as to how things should proceed. My father was a hardworking man who--whose greatest aspiration was that he'd be able to pro- to educate his children, something that he was unable to do for himself. He educated his youngest sister and he was very proud of that. She, she was one of the first grad- black graduates of Simmons College in Boston [Massachusetts]. And, and so he lived a very Spartan life. I know the guys would come and try to take him out for a little bit of the sporting life where you had to spend money, and he just wouldn't do it because every ex- every extra dollar went aside to make sure that his children could go to college. And my mother wanted to go to this event or the other event, which would mean that, you know, you'd have to buy flashy clothes, and it cost money. And after a while, I, I had a sense that she really began to resent his, his--shall I say very Spartan type of existence, but they never--they never divorced, but they separated. Speaker 1: How old were you when they separated? Speaker 2: Oh, I was an adult. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, and I, I remember when my youngest sister [Karen Miller (ph.)] came home. It was sort of--I guess she was the result of one of those reunions that didn't take. And so rather than being elated, he said, "Well, I guess it's eighteen more years until she gets in college." And, and he did eighteen years of hard time. I've never, I've never seen anything like that. You would never see it today. People--the first time they have an argument, people run to the--to the divorce lawyers. But I asked him later; I said, "Dad, why'd you--why did you stay?" He said, "Because I firmly believed that my children wouldn't have had the best opportunity to develop without my, my discipline and presence there." So he sacrificed his life in a funny kind of way. I remember once in talking to him, he was talking about being in the First World War [World War I, WWI], and he said it was a--it's terrible down in the lines. He said sometimes the first wave out of the trenches had to throw themselves over the barbed wire so it was easier for the next wave to go over their backs. And that's how he saw himself, as the first wave going over the wire, and the rest of us were to go over his back. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You don't see men like that anymore. We're--I'm, I'm--I find--I find that we are less than the warriors we once were--too much posh life (laughter). I think my father had that right. Story_ID: 646434 Speaker 1: Now, I think I know the answer to this, but when consider your parents' personalities or sense of humor, the way they approach life and the way they looked, talked, acted: who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: (Pause) I think, I think I have the discipline of my father [John Miller]. And see, it's, it's a hard question because as time went by, my mother's [Louise O'Banyoun Miller], my moth- my mother's acumen deteriorated in a funny kind of way. I'm, I'm not trying to suggest that she needed any serious psychological help, but she was, she was a very astute and keen; she was a very intelligent woman. When we were young we were always impressed--she always knew how to trick us into doing the right thing, and we'll, we'd discover that, "Oh, man, we got conned again," you know, as she--she was--but she was excellent with little children. As time went by it seemed as--she moved out of that phase. So I would have to say I'm more like my father: steady and like a rock. Story_ID: 646435 Speaker 1: Can you name your siblings for us and place yourself in the order? Speaker 2: Well, I'm the eldest. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Gee. Then there's--you want me--John [John E. Miller] is my--is next in line. He and I are so close, it's unbelievable how close we are; then I have a sister, Gale [Gale Miller]; and then a sister, Linda [ph.]. I don't know--I forget now. I don't know whether Linda or Robert [ph.] are next. I think Robert's next and then comes Linda. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then come--okay, Robert, I know he's young--six years younger than me--and I think those two are close, and then Karen [Karen Miller (ph.)]. Now that, that should add up to six. I'm--what do we have? Speaker 1: That's--yeah, one, two, three, four, five, six; that's six. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Right (laughter). You haven't forgotten anyone. Speaker 2: No, but I, I make sh- make sure that you got 'em all down. Speaker 1: Okay, yeah. So--and Karen was born--when was she born? You, you-- Speaker 2: Every--all--everybody was born in Boston [Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: No, when was she--when, when was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, I, I can give you the dates. Speaker 1: Yeah, but was it long after you. I mean, 'cause you said that she was the last one that came along. Speaker 2: Oh, Karen? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, let me see. She's--ah, let me see--she, she's gonna hate me for doing this. She's about thirteen years younger than I. Speaker 1: Okay, so it was nineteen fifty-- Speaker 2: No, I'm not gonna give you any date. I will give you an estimate. I'll tell you it was a very--you know, it's an interesting thing. A Miller tradition is not to tell your age. That's from my--you know, my, my father's [John Miller]--could never have told you the age of his parents [Mary Miller and Daniel Miller]. That's why I don't have a record because they, they would never ask those kind of questions and so my sister's like that; she hates people to tell her age, and so I said, "Ooh, okay." Speaker 1: Okay, well we're gonna pause (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So there's a--there's a thirteen years' difference. Story_ID: 646436 Speaker 1: Do you have, sir, an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: What, what year? Speaker 1: No, an--no, an earliest memory. Earliest. Speaker 2: An earliest memory? Speaker 1: Your earliest memory, yes. Speaker 2: Well, I remember a lot of things from three years old but nothing, nothing that was really historically significant. One thing that a lot of us loved--we went to the Ellis School [David A. Ellis Elementary School, Boston, Massachusetts]. And there's a kindergarten teacher, Ms. McCance [Catherine McCance], and all of us who had Ms. McCance remember her and really loved her. So she, she--M-C-C-A-N-C-E--she, she really--she really got me interested in school and, and I, I was pretty good at it. And I learned how to read and write at a very young age. But there was an early memory in about the second grade that affected my whole academic career. And the, the work in the class was to read 'Little Black Sambo' ['The Story of Little Black Sambo,' Helen Bannerman], so we all had books. And people would be sitting up there--you have to understand, Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts] was not a black community; it was quite a mout- ra- multiracial community; it's all kinds of kids, and blacks were in the minority in the communities. So I--when you talk about a black community, it's not--it's not like Harlem [New York, New York]. And so the--these--each child would read a couple of sentences from 'Little Black Sambo,' then it would go on to the next one who'd pick up the story, then it came to me. And I told the teacher--this is not Ms. McCance; this is second grade--I said, "I don't read books like that." And she said, "This is a wonderful book, and I insist that you read it." And I said, "Well, I am telling you that I won't." And so she pulled me up to the front of the class and she tried to humiliate me, which was just something no one can ever do, and insisted that I read it. And I, again, refused and all the kids in the class began to snicker. Because you have to remember back in those days teachers had extraordinary authority and you never disobeyed the teacher. And so the teacher said, "Well, I'm gonna have to have your parents [Louise O'Banyoun Miller and John Miller] to come up for this, [HistoryMaker] Melvin Miller." And I, I said, "Well that's a good thing." And so my parents came up, and they were horrified to find that we were reading 'Little Black Sambo' in the public school. And so they made a complaint downtown, and the book was taken out of the school system [Boston Public Schools] as a consequence. Story_ID: 646437 Speaker 1: So that's my first really serious academic memory. Now, why that was important is that it made me lose trust and confidence in certain aspects of my teachers, a trust and confidence, which I never regained because it was reinforced when I got into the sixth grade. Because the teacher was putting together a, a little chorus. And this is at the Higginson school [Henry L. Higginson Elementary School, Boston, Massachusetts], and we were gonna put on a concert for the delight of the parents. And so the teacher wanted to include some slave songs like 'Shortening Bread' ['Shortnin' Bread'], you know, "Mama's little baby loves shortening." And so I advised the teacher, who was a very nice woman, a blond lady who lived down the street. Actually, she lived down the street from me. And I said, "Ms. Forsythe [Nina Forsythe], I don't s- sing slave songs." And she said, "Oh well, this is just a lovely song; everybody loves it." And I said, "Well, I don't and I won't sing it." And so she said, "Well, when we come to that song you could just stand up there." And I said, "No, well, I have more bad news; I don't want anybody to perceive that I might be singing it, so if--I will stay on the stage until we hit these slave songs and then I will lead--leave the stage." And she said, "No, you won't; I order you to say on the--." I said, "Well, I told you what I have to do, and I think that that's the best solution." So, you know, we were all singing, and it came to the slave songs and [HistoryMaker] Melvin Miller marched off the stage, so she failed me in music. And, and it--there are a couple of things that struck me. I liked Mrs. Forsythe, and I didn't like her any less. I said she's just ignorant. She didn't understand that that was not a good song for, for me, given my history and what my people had been through. She wasn't trying to be mean or, or racist. She, she actually was my neighbor; she lived right down the street, and so I used to see her after that and say, "Oh hi, Mrs. Forsythe." Yeah, we'd get along fine. She gave me--she did what she had to do and I did what I had to do. Sort of like the conflict some of the young thugs have with the police. Well, you know, if the police stop what we're trying to do, we try to get by the police or something. And--but that--that really--that was--that was, sort of gave me a very insecure attitude to the understanding of, of my professors going forward. And I've had countless experiences which-- Speaker 2: Now, now, in, in that incident, your parents [Louise O'Banyoun Miller and John Miller] didn't get involved in that one? Speaker 1: They what? Speaker 2: Did your parents get involved in that, after you got an F-- Speaker 1: I don't think they had to. There wasn't anything for them to get involved in. Speaker 2: Well, it's almost similar to the other story, where you--they didn't want you to participate in the reading of-- Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: --the book (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, no--I mean-- Speaker 2: 'Little Black Sambo' ['The Story of Little Black Sambo,' Helen Bannerman]. Speaker 1: Yeah. But she did--they got involved because the--they didn't want--they didn't want the--that book to be in the school system [Boston Public Schools]. Now, I, I, I can understand why they might not--if people wanted to sing slave--Mem- "Mammy's little baby love shortening," I'm not gonna tell 'em they cannot sing it if you wanna sing it, but you can't make me sing it. That's different. I think that's different from, from--I don't--you know, I never thought of--that they should have been involved, and they didn't. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And, and I don't see the incha- incidents as being identical. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: You might, but I don't. Speaker 2: All right, okay. Now can you-- Speaker 1: That's when I was younger. Now there are other ones when I get a little older which I'll tell you about. Story_ID: 646438 Speaker 1: Now I wanna go back a little bit and, and just--now where did you live and--where did your family live in Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts]? Speaker 2: I moved to an address on Harold Street, 70 Harold Street, when I was three years old. And that has always been, as a child, as a youngster, my major dra- major address. Back in those days people didn't move like they do today so, you know, when you get your--and it's a very funny thing because you identify people with a place. And I, I had a--an occasion where a chap called me up. I hadn't seen him for twenty years or something. And so he said--he gave me his name, and I said, "Well, this is--," let's say it was Joe Brown, I cannot really think of it--what it was--and I gave him his address, and he just started laughing. He said, "Man, I haven't lived there for fifteen years." But you see, people get a da- back in--the, the thinking was there's so much stability in a--in a sense in the community, people always identified with a place. And I can remember when I was young, when it was time--when the moving trucks would come to move somebody, it was a big event. All the kids would come around to, "Whoa, look at that. Man, you can fit a whole army inside." Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In fact, when I was young, because of the war [World War II, WWII], automobiles were--didn't operate like they ran be- because you couldn't get gas or tires, so we had a lot of horse and wagons. Speaker 1: Okay. Let me--you know, that- that's a lot different from today. Speaker 2: It is (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I mean-- Story_ID: 646439 Speaker 1: There are a lot of things that are probably different from it is today and when you were growing up. So we always ask this question: what were some of the sights, and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Well, one of the things--one of the things--well, I, I told you about the horse and wagons. I mean that was very--it was very common. You'd see--even the grocery--the furniture store would deliver--would make deliveries with horse and wagon during the war [World War II, WWII] because of rationing. And one of the things that was--that was very important back then is that youngsters used to read a lot. You gotta remember when I grew up television was hardly worth watching. It wasn't until I was about a senior in high school [Boston Latin School, Boston, Massachusetts] that I--I think we got a television then, but it was snow--full of snow and, you had to adjust the rabbit ears all the time. It wasn't something that would keep you in to, to watch a program, rather than go out and do something more interesting. But the, the fact that the--we didn't have the intervention of these technological elect- electronic devices would send is to the library, and we used to--we used to go to the library all the time. And I remember when my local library closed, I went up just to sort of, to--a bit of nostalgia. And, and I, I asked to see the record, and she said, "You cannot believe," the librarian said, "you can't believe the difference in the use of the library between now and when you were young." I mean, it didn't even seem like it was the same place at all, given the difference. We, we were--we were, in my community, voracious readers. And one of the most important aspects in the community is that the black concept that education was absolutely essential at providing the road upward was very, very strong in the community. And no mat- you couldn't turn around with--without that being shoved at you. And it, it wasn't--it wasn't dependent entirely on your, on your parents. It was at, the tune of the community that would direct you in that way. And--but the involvement of your parents was helpful. I can remember when I was a little boy, my father [John Miller]--as I said my father always had a car so--and he would take me in the car; we'd--when we had to go over to Cambridge [Massachusetts], and he'd drive around Harvard Square, and he'd say, "This is where you're gonna go to college, boy." And I'd say, "Okay, dad, fine, fine." And he would do that so many times that it was really absolutely in my mind. And to show you how this, this stuff really works, when I was a junior, Tufts [Tufts College; Tufts University, Medford, Massachusetts] was concerned because they hadn't had a sigif- a significant number of--a junior in high school--a significant number of applications from blacks, so they gave a series of tests. And if you maxed out on the tests, you could get admitted to Tufts as a junior in high school with a full scholarship. And I found that very exciting because I was aware that I was the oldest of six. And I told my father that and he, he, he seemed to be le- less than excited by it. And he'd say, "Well, that's very good." He was being politically supportive. And, and--but when it came time, he said, "Well, you're gonna apply for Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], aren't you?" And I said, "Oh, okay, okay," so I applied to Harvard, did everything, and then when I got accepted to Harvard, I said, "But, dad, they're giving me a full flight at Tufts." He said, "Boy, I always told you you're going to Harvard." And I said, "Yes, but, dad, I'm the oldest," and I said, "it's, it's not gonna cost you a dime." And he looked at me with really--I, I, I remember to this day. He said, "Why do you think I've been working so hard all these years? To save money so that you could go to Harvard." Now what do you think my answer had to be at that? It was because of my father that I went to Harvard, because there wasn't any way I was gonna in--disappoint this man's effort over so many years on my behalf by going somewhere where he was able to provide the opportunity for me to do what he thought was the best thing, which actually turned out to be the best thing. Speaker 1: Now that's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Isn't that amaze- I think that's an amazing story. Speaker 1: It's a powerful story. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 646440 Speaker 1: But let me just kind of go back to your schools, and just line them up; and talk, talk about high school too. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: You, you start--you went to Higginson Elementary School [Henry L. Higginson Elementary School, Boston, Massachusetts]? Speaker 2: Yeah, well, that was, that was--my last teacher was Ms. Forsythe [Nina Forsythe]. That's at the Higginson. That's when I had that--that was the--that would have been the, the sixth grade. Speaker 1: Okay, was that--was that a middle school or an elementary school or? Speaker 2: It would be the equivalent of a middle school today. Speaker 1: Okay, like--okay. And what, what was your first school the, and what was the name of the first one? Speaker 2: The Ellis (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Ellis. Speaker 2: David A. Ellis [David A. Ellis Elementary School, Boston, Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: Okay, Ellis School. And Higginson School, is that Thomas Wentworth Higginson? Speaker 2: I beg your pardon? Speaker 1: Is that named after Thomas Wentworth Higginson? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah [sic.]. Speaker 1: Yeah, I thought so, there you go. Speaker 2: The, the head of the, the Boston Symphony Orchestra. And that was the--that was what--that was--interestingly, that was one of the reasons why this concert was so important because it was very much a musical school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The interesting--the interesting thing too is that people who studied music in those days, even if they wanted to be jazz musicians or popular musicians, accepted the idea that you start out with the classics, and so every- everybody learned classical music. I don't know whether you know this, but Farrakhan [HistoryMaker Minister Louis Farrakhan] was a high school violin virtuoso. Do you know about that I guess? Speaker 1: I know he plays, but I want you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Ah, but-- Speaker 1: --to tell us. Now-- Speaker 2: He--yeah-- Speaker 1: --he--what--did, did he grow up with you? Was he in the same neighborhood? Speaker 2: Yeah--no, no, he, he was in a different neighborhood. The reason I say that--that's, that's important because when I wrote the story about 'The Original H-Block' [Melvin Miller and Howard Manly], I, I, I could only write about a neighborhood where I had personal memory to be able to do the story, 'cause it's based on personal memory. I couldn't--I--even if I tried, I couldn't have written such a story about his neighborhood [Roxbury, Boston, Massachusetts]. It was about a mile away. But as I--as--you had to understand, the black population was so small we all knew one another. You know what I mean? And, and I, I knew--one of the ways a lot of people knew Farrakhan is because of his outstanding musicianship. Speaker 1: Now in those days he was known as Louis Walcott, right? Speaker 2: That's his name, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Now and--so did you two go to the same high school? Speaker 2: For a while, but he trans- he transferred out and went to English High School [Boston, Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: I went to Boston Latin [Boston Latin School, Boston, Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, okay, so--well, was it thought in your family that you would become a musician? Speaker 2: No, there was no--there was no, no idea about that. I think my father [John Miller] wanted me to be a doctor for some reason. I don't know why. Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause I know you have a lot of musicians in the family, and-- Speaker 2: I know it. Well-- Speaker 1: --you're going to this school-- Speaker 2: --actually, that's on my mother's side. And my mother [Louise O'Banyoun Miller]--there was absolutely no pressure from either parent to follow any path. Speaker 1: So you, you-- Speaker 2: I, I think, I think they knew that I wasn't artistically talented (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, but, but you were academically talented, talented apparently to get into Boston Latin (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know, my, my academically--my academic talent is really bizarre in the sense that very rarely have I not had a conflict with my teachers, which always has a deleterious impact on my grades. But then what I, what I use- what I always have done in the past is--they rely on the--on these scholage- scholar--college acceptance exams, and even the LSATs. I, I said well, what you have to do is you have to really organize your mind and get everything in order so you can do well on these qualifying exams. So I made up, I made up for the deficiencies on these exams. Story_ID: 646441 Speaker 1: Tell us how you got into Boston Latin [Boston Latin School, Boston, Massachusetts]. Bo- Boston Latin is a fairly exclusive school, isn't it, is it not (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: It, it--it's--it was academically seriously rigid. And I remember--one of the things I can remember: here, again, I ran into, into difficults- you want me to talk about Latin School now or-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 1: Yep. Speaker 2: My, my early conflict happened I think in the eighth grade, when we were given a book on ancient history. And you know, it's one of those nice Houghton Mifflin [Houghton Mifflin Company; Houghton Mifflin Harcourt] books with illustrations. And I looked at it and I said, "My goodness, the Egyptians look more like Swedes than Egyptian." The teacher got furious. And I said--now at the time, Latin School was not too far from the Muse- Museum of Fine Arts [Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, Boston, Massachusetts]. Back in those days, you could walk into the museum without any difficulty, and I used to go to the Museum of Fine Arts all the time. And I used to go to the Egyptology section, and I knew what Egyptians looked like from seeing how they painted themselves or sculpted themselves. And I said, "Well, listen." So the teacher got offended, and I told him, I said, "Well, I, I think that there's been a, a mistake here because I go to the Museum of Fine Arts and this is not what they look like, not what the Egyptians look like in the Museum of Fine Arts," which made him even more furious. And so we, we had difficulty from that day forward. I had another teacher who was a clear bigot, and I can, I can remember he used to grade on four ten point exams that he would give in a marking period. And that would give 'em sixty points on performance in class. Well, I could never push my average above fifty, and so I said this is crazy. So here's another time I had to bring my parents [Louise O'Banyoun Miller and John Miller] in, because this man was really destroying my academic enthusiasm. And so the, the school system said, "You've gotta give sixty points of, of written exams in every period." Well, he certainly didn't like me for that. And I remember I talked to one of my family friends who was a--an old--by the way Latin School is the oldest public school in, in the United States. And so I spoke to a family friend and I told him about it. He said, "Charlie Ward French [Charles Ward French]?" I said, (makes facial expression). He said, "He's been doing that for a long time." And so there you go. And I said, so I--isn't that interesting, because this was a man from our parents' generation who had experienced the same sort of thing. Well, by this time, I'm getting to be very suspicious about the goals and objectives of people who were supposed to be my teachers. By the way, I never had a, a black teacher in my life--an official teacher. Story_ID: 646442 Speaker 1: I've heard that there were quotas at Latin School [Boston Latin School, Boston, Massachusetts]. Is that true? Did they have a quota for how many black students they would have at any given time? Speaker 2: I don't think so. Speaker 1: You don't think--well what, what were your--were there other black students there? And--say, give me a--like, what was the proportion of black students and the rest of the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, well, you know, if you--if you--if you had ta- good grades in your, your school before--if you were entering in the seventh grade, if you had good, good grades, there're two places you could enter: either the seventh grade or the ninth grade. And now there's a test, so just like for the exam schools in New York [New York], they look at your performance on the test. Back in those days, they look at what your standing was in--at the Higginson School [Henry L. Higginson Elementary School, Boston, Massachusetts]. There were only three people who were recommended for Latin School from the Higgy in my class, and I was the only black person. But, you know, the--you know, to tell you the truth, back in the old days, that wasn't unrealistic because it wasn't a black school. You know what I mean? There was--we were--it was predominant- predominantly a white school. I, I don't know--I don't think--you know, who knows if there were quotas, but I, I think you--people keep thinking about it in terms of the school battle in the '70s [1970s] over desegregation. And there were--there was a--the battle was really at--had something of a different focus. But that's-- Speaker 1: Yeah, I, I, I know, but I, I have heard pe- people that I've interviewed say that, that at--especially colleges--that they couldn't get into one school or another because they're actually told, we have a quota of two Negroes a year and we-- Speaker 2: You mean the colleges? Speaker 1: Colleges, yeah. Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Oh man, hey, when I went--I went to Columbia Law School [New York, New York]. Guess how many blacks were in every class ahead of me and every class that came in behind me? Speaker 1: Two (laughter). Speaker 2: Two. Speaker 1: Two. Speaker 2: There were--there were never more than six blacks in Columbia Law School when I was a student there. And-- Speaker 1: So that--that's why I'm asking about Boston Latin. I--you might not know if there was or not or--but were there--were there any other black students there with, with you? Speaker 2: There were only--there were four black students in my class (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Four black students, okay. Speaker 2: But, but to tell--but, but to tell you the truth, the reason it would be hard to say whether there was or not, because the others--other blacks who had come in had either flunked out or dropped out. And-- Speaker 1: Now what happened in the case of Minister Farrakhan [HistoryMaker Minister Louis Farrakhan]? Did he drop out or what? Speaker 2: I think he was--I think he went there in the seventh grade, and I think he--there are lots of smart people who dropped out. I mean, it was not a--it was not a pleasant environment. You know--I mean, you go to a school and you go and sit in the auditorium, and so someone would get up and say, "Look to the left of you and look to the right of you," and he said, "only, only one of you will graduate." Speaker 1: They say that in Latin School? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: In the--in high school. Speaker 2: I mean--oh, man, I mean, it was--it was very rigorous. And as a matter of fact, one thing might be helpful to know, that I got a serious illness where I had to miss months of school. So I had--I, I thought of trying to catch up but I said golly, they--that's a lot to catch up so I just--I, I had to repeat that year. It was--and, and it worked out well because I'd already done rapid advancement so I was a year ahead of where I would have been ordinarily. Story_ID: 646443 Speaker 1: Now did you have a favorite subject in, in school [Boston Latin School, Boston, Massachusetts]? Speaker 2: (Pause) No (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Not really (laughter). I mean, it's--it was--to tell you the truth, it was really--it was really survival. Now I'll tell you what would make people think--is that, there was a lot of--there was a lot of hostility there, and it wasn't all racial. And one of the things that I can remember is that we had a teacher, Dr. Galean [ph.], who--I don't know whether he had an accent or something, but I've never seen anybody's eyes were distorted like his. His, his eyeballs went round like they'd been--something had happened, and his vision was so bad he had glasses that looked like--as thick as Coke bottle bottoms. And guys in the class used to throw chalk at him. And he would be up there teaching and chalk would hit the board, and he couldn't see who was throwing it. And one thing happened. I grew up in an environment where we wouldn't--did not tolerate abuse. And I guess that's one story I skipped over about the Higgins- Higgy, but I'll go back and get it since we haven't fully left it. But I--he stepped out of the room. And I stepped up to the front and I said, "Dr. Galean is now under my protection." I said, "I'm not gonna be one to stand by while you guys abuse a blind man; that's not gonna happen on my watch. And anybody feels that they gotta get up and abuse him, just save a step and see me after school, and we'll take care of it then." Mr. Galean came in. This class was quiet. And he used to go around talking about--he said, "I can't believe what a marvelous class--," he--and I used--I've heard it and I had to chuckle. He didn't know that it was that way. And one of the things that I learned with my--I told you my brother and I were very close. And when, when I was at the Higginson [Henry L. Higginson Elementary School, Boston, Massachusetts], there was a gang of people who--gang up there who thought that they were pretty tough, so they decided they were gonna beat us up. And it was funny thinking about it when, when--as an adult. I said, "You know, Ja- Jack [John E. Miller]," I said, "you know, we weren't really afraid of these guys at all." It was sort of like a cat and mouse game. And so sometimes they'd be waiting out front for me to go to school. By the way, in those days mothers stayed home from work pretty much; mothers didn't all work, and we used to leave school for lunch. They didn't have a cafeteria. You'd go home and have lunch and then you'd walk back to school. It wasn't a very far walk. And so sometimes the guys would be up--they'd be hiding in the park across--thinking we didn't see them. So we'd go out the back door and skirt around, and we, we used to think it was sort of funny that we could trick these guys. One, one time--and it was a guy who was pretty bad. They made the mistake of catching us. I said okay. I whipped his--the, the leader's natural butt, and I became the alpha man. And I said, "Hey, there will be no--," that's why I look at all this stuff, teasing and stuff going on at schools. I said, why didn't somebody step up and say stop it unless you wanna deal with me? Because that's what I did, and we had--we didn't have any teasing and, and bullying in school when, when my brother and I were there. Story_ID: 646444 Speaker 1: Boston Latin [Boston Latin School, Boston, Massachusetts], now did you have--now you mentioned Mr. Galean [ph.], but were--did you have any teachers or any other adults around who were, other than your, your father [John Miller], who I know is--was a mentor. Who else was a mentor to you or did you look (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, my, my, my, my best one was--oh my god, he just--he, he died a couple of years ago. But he was a assistant minister at my church. I belong to the congregation of St. Marks Congregational church [St. Mark Congregational Church, Boston, Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: St. Marks Congregational, okay. Speaker 2: St. Marks Congregational. It has another union name or something now but, I mean, that's--when I went there that was the name of it. And he, he later be- he was a--he was the person absolutely responsible for opening my academic intellectual eyes, and he became a press- professor, a full professor at Amherst College [Amherst, Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: And what was his name? Speaker 2: And I don't--he's been dead for so long and I've forgotten his name. I'll--it'll come to me. Speaker 1: But he was the assistant pastor at-- Speaker 2: At St. Marks church (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) At St. Marks church, yeah, okay. Now, now was church a big part of growing up, I mean, as a source of values and that sort of thing? Speaker 2: Well, I, I--it was a good place to, to--for social connection, but I didn't--I, I wasn't much taken with the religious values. In fact, the, the minister (laughter)--I used to question the minister. He got--he got so irritated with my brother [John E. Miller] and me, he visited our house and told my parents [Louise O'Banyoun Miller and John Miller] it'd be quite all right if they left us home for--and left up--left us out of Sun- Sunday School class and out of church. And I thought that was a strange-- Speaker 1: Well, what--well, give us the story now. What, what would you do to-- Speaker 2: Well, I just never--I never thought that his religious messages had any--had as much spiritual content as they did financial entreaties (laughter). And so I, I absolutely rejected that. But I tell you, there was one experience at church that I remember and as--and it just came to me as I was thinking about this project. As I told you, I have always opposed, from the time that I was young, abusive people. I can't--I, I, I can't tolerate it. And I also have always opposed racial and religious discrimination. And we had a Boy Scout troop up at church that was an historic all-black troop. And so when I came--became old enough to become a Cub Scout, I got very excited about it. So I took one of my neighbors who was in school with me who--I think he was Jewish--to join this Cub Scout troop with me, and he got turned away. And I had worked and saved money and bought a Cub Scout uniform, and I thought I was pretty cool looking in my Cub Scout uniform. And so he got turned away and the scout master said, "Well this is a scout unit for black kids." I said, "What are you talking about it's for black kids?" I thought it should be for ev- everybody in the neighborhood [Washington Park, Boston, Massachusetts]. And, and I was so highly offended by that I left with my friend when he was asked to leave, walked him home, went home, took off my uniform, and gave it away and never went back. I was reminded of that when I was in the [U.S.] Army. Because I was transferred to--for training in San Antonio, Texas, so all the guys decided we're gonna go out to the movies, and we put on uniforms, and went down. And when I came up to the cashier they said, "Well, we don't have any Negroes looking--in this movie." I said, "What?" I said, "Have you noticed I'm wearing the uniform of the United States. I've been sent down here, I must say much against my will, to be trained to protect you." So she called her boss, "Get this guy out of here." So they acted like they were gonna get rough so I said it's time to leave. And I noticed all my--the guy--the guys I came with said, "See you back at the billet." And I said, "Okay." I remember that. I must tell you, that gave me a certain state of mind that was not a good one to have if you're gonna be in the [U.S.] military in combat with some other people. Story_ID: 646445 Speaker 1: At Boston Latin [Boston Latin School, Boston, Massachusetts] were you--now did you run for class office or anything? Speaker 2: No, no (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Or did you have any of that sort of thing? Speaker 2: No, I ran for the door (laughter). I, I--the, the, the only thing I--the--I, I participated in track a little bit where--'cause I was pretty good at doing a standing broad jump. As a matter of fact, I was the second best in the city doing that. And I went out for the football team and we had a championship team, but I noticed the coach was really a pretty bigoted guy. And I heard him saying some really racially offensive--making some racially offensive remarks when he didn't think anybody was around. So I went in and took off my suit, put everything in the duffle bag, and went to see him and told him to stick it where the sun doesn't shine. He got very excited about that because I was--it was an offensive remark to a teacher. And I said, "Well, that's fine." I said, "I heard what you said, and when you bring the complaint against me, I will, of course, make it clear as to what provoked it." And he, he, he, he just let it go. The next year our team wasn't that--wasn't that great. We'd lost too many seniors and he wanted me to come out again. But I said, "No, I don't think I'd play for you ever." And it was--you know, I look back and I say what a--what a wonderful thing because my knees are so bad even now and I've never really been a football player. I said if I'd ever played football, I'd probably be on some kind of painkillers, so I said it turned out well for me 'cause I didn't have really solid knees. But I was--I was big and strong for the--in those days. We didn't have three hundred pound agile guys who could run fast. I mean, there were--there were people probably three hundred pounds, but they were just sort of like a huge Jell-O guy who couldn't run or couldn't do diddly squat. I mean, I'm sharp at the athletic ability of people--I think they're gonna have to put a weight limit on, on football for the protection of, of the players. It's just too, too much. Speaker 1: Yeah, it's getting rougher and ro- rougher. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 646446 Speaker 1: So when you graduated from Boston Latin, did, did you graduate with any honors or anything, or? Speaker 2: I gradulated--graduated au laude. Speaker 1: Okay (laughter). Speaker 2: But I tell you (laughter), here's a funny thing that happened. As I told you, I knew that there was something in my disposition of not being submissive, submissive enough and not being subordinate enough to satisfy most teachers. So I was never gonna get any academic help in that regard on--grade wise. So what I used to do is I used to really put together a strategy for doing well in the scholaptic- scholastic aptitude tests [SAT]. So after I took the tests and results came in. I got a frenzied call from the headmaster's office, and I could--I remember Mr. McKim [George McKim] was sitting there. He said, "Melvin [HistoryMaker Melvin Miller], Boston Latin School [Boston, Massachusetts] has never been disgraced with someone cheating in the scholastic aptitude exams, and I am horrified to have to report that you have now broken that record." And I said, "What?" And he said, "There is no way except but cheating that you could have topped out the school in these exams." And so he said--he said, "You finished your college language requirement and you're failing German. How do you do that?" I said, "I didn't like Mr. Van Steenbergen [Albert Van Steenbergen]; I didn't like his class." "And look at these test scores. You're not doing that well in any of these things." I said, "Well, maybe so, but that's not evidence that I was cheating. These are multiple choice tests, and I trained myself to take them." And I said, "And until you can prove, prove some solid evidence let's forget about it, but rest assured that the school's reputation is still pretty much--very much intact." So that's, that's what happened then. That's how I got into Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: So he, he didn't pursue it any further? Speaker 2: Well, they were--first of all (laughter), it wasn't because I was cheating; it was because I was a good test taker. You know, there's some--some people can get all A's in the class and go and take a--take the--take these tests and blow it. You know what I mean? Now, as I told you, I'd already taken the tests at Tufts [Tufts College; Tufts University, Medford, Massachusetts] when I was a junior in high school and topped that out. I don't know why I just--I mean--you know, I, I do a- approach these tests strategically, but I just have been in the--when I was a young man, relatively good at it. That's how I got into law school. I mean, with the terrible academic record I had at Harvard, I should never have been admitted to Columbia Law School [New York, New York]. But what are they gonna do when somebody finishes in the 95th percentile on the LSATs and they're looking for blacks. What are you gonna do? Story_ID: 646447 Speaker 1: Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], so you, you told us about the story about wanting to take the scholarship at Tufts [Tufts College; Tufts University, Medford, Massachusetts], and your father [John Miller] like telling you-- Speaker 2: Yeah, right. Speaker 1: --that he'd been working all his life to send you to Harvard. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, so what was Harvard like when--tell us about your first day at Harvard. Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: This is what, what year now? This is-- Speaker 2: In 1952. Speaker 1: Nineteen fifty-two [1952] in Harvard, okay. You graduate from high school [Boston Latin School, Boston, Massachusetts] and enter Harvard. Speaker 2: Yeah. Now the thing is, the--one of the things that I haven't really mentioned much here is that I was always active in the community. And so when I went to Harvard my participation in the community didn't really--it slowed down. For instance, I went to Washington, D.C. in--with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] in the last effort--you might remember that the NAACP goal when the NAC- ACP when it was founded and for up until 1952 was to try to make lynching a federal offense, because once state law was applied to the lynching, it was--an acquittal was relatively easy. Speaker 1: So this was the--if I'm correct, it's the Dyer Anti-Lynching Bill that would--that N- NAACP was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, man, they had the--they did it again and again and again. They, they, they entered it more than once, and the last effort I think was in 1952. I was in Washington D.C. I think I--if you look at the--you can see I was only eighteen then--I was in Washington, D.C. for that, and because of the lack of preparation of members of the Massachusetts delegation, I quickly became the leader of that delegation. It seems like my brothers and sisters went there thinking of--they were gonna party (laughter) instead of going there to do the work. And so that's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So this was with the-- Speaker 2: This stuff never stopped while I was at Harvard. And so there, there was always an interference with what I would call a purely academic involvement. And that's one of the reasons why when I decided to go to law school I said I gotta get out of Boston [Massachusetts] so I can work. Speaker 1: Now, so this delegation was the NAACP Youth [NAACP Youth Council]? Is that who it was? I mean, was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, it was a national delegation of--it wasn't youth, it was a national-- Speaker 1: I mean, the group from Massachusetts that you were with-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --was--were, were you involved in the NAACP Youth or-- Speaker 2: No, these were (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Were the regular-- Speaker 2: These were adults. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: And it, it was a national call for delegations from all over the United States to come to Washington to talk to congressmen to try to get them to support a measure for the lynching law to become federalized. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: So--now that, that, that was ma- I say that to say to show that my involvement in community activities never really--I became politically active, by the way, to help Eddie Brooke [HistoryMaker Edward Brooke] when he first came in. He ran--he ran for state representative, and I became a ward leader or precinct captain to help his campaign. Speaker 1: Now, now is this while you're in high school? Speaker 2: Yeah, in high school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I, I was just saying that this was just an extension of, of the kinds of things that I was doing when I was young. I was always working for the betterment of the community. Story_ID: 646448 Speaker 1: One thing that happened in college that was so exciting is that it was my first introduction to a group of intellectually stimulating blacks. Now that's not to suggest that the people I grew up with [in Washington Park, Boston, Massachusetts] weren't smart or anything, but to have a whole community of guys who were really as bright and as--and as interesting as the blacks at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] at that time was, was really-- Speaker 2: Who, who were some of the people who were there when you were there? Speaker 1: Well, I'll just name a couple: Tom Wilson was sort of one of the leaders of the blacks, and he became--he's dead now--but he, he becames--became the first black A and R man, you know, the A and R man in the--is in the music industry, artists and repertoire? He, he went on to, to discover a, a number of groups that became pretty famous. And his roommate was Fred Brown [Frederick L. Brown] who is now I think--yeah, he's, he's a judge of the appeals court in Massachusetts [Massachusetts Appeals Court]. There are other guys who--well, there's also Max Bond [J. Max Bond, Jr.] who, who, by the way, used to live, when he was in high school, with my aunt in Cambridge [Massachusetts]. I don't know; do you know--do you know Max Bond? He's-- Speaker 2: The late Bond? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Julian's [HistoryMaker Julian Bond] cousin. Speaker 2: Oh, okay, no. Speaker 1: And Max is dead now, but he, he became an architect and dean [sic. chairman] of the school of--college of architecture at Columbia in New York [Division of Architecture; Columbia University Graduate School of Architecture, Planning and Preservation, New York, New York]. He graduated Phi Beta Kappa [Phi Beta Kappa Society]. Max, Max had a more quiet, congenial disposition than I, so. Speaker 2: Okay. That's quite a group. And, and in those-- Speaker 1: Yep. Speaker 2: --I guess we should point out for whoever listens to this, Harvard was an all-male school, right? Speaker 1: Oh yeah, there, there were--there was--there was one black girl I'm thinking of in--at Radcliffe [Radcliffe College, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. And the other people--I'm trying to think of--oh my gosh--anybody else who would be known. But the one guy I'm trying to think of his name was--he was originally from Everett [Massachusetts] and he became ambassador to Nigeria. He was a couple of years ahead of me. Speaker 2: Carrington? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Walter Carrington [HistoryMaker Walter C. Carrington]. Speaker 1: Walter. Speaker 2: Yeah, Walter Carrington. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, you know what? I'm gonna tell you, when I'm, I'm, I'm really very tired and I need to take a vacation. Walter and I are friends, and for me to forget his name like that is--but Walter Carrington was there. There are other people, but I--but I don't think their names jump out at, at-- Speaker 2: That's quite a group, I mean already. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: People you named already are quite-- Speaker 1: Yeah. And, and, and the interesting thing is that there were also white people who hung with us. I mean, it wasn't always just blacks, you know. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And so we used to--we used to hang out; and, and, you know, it was--it, there was thoughtful conversation. Story_ID: 646449 Speaker 1: Now this is 1952. Speaker 2: Fifty-two [1952] through '56 [1956]. Speaker 1: Okay, right. So--yeah, so-- Speaker 2: It was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) who else was there? Speaker 2: Let me see. At the law school [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] is Bill Ellis [William Ellis] who's, who's a lawyer, but he's a Boston [Massachusetts] guy. (Pause) I can, I can, I can think of a couple of classmates who--a guy named Darwin [ph.] who became a doctor. This was a big--this was a big class because--this was a big class for Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]--about ten there. And--oh-- Speaker 1: You mean for, for-- Speaker 2: --let me see-- Speaker 1: --African American students, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, and if you look at the class--another class ahead of me, there was William Wharton who was Cliff Wharton's brother. You know who Cliff Wharton [HistoryMaker Clifton R. Wharton, Jr.] is I assume? Speaker 1: No, te- tell us. Speaker 2: Well, Cliff Wharton, he was--he was in my original H-Block story ['The Original H-Block,' Melvin Miller and Howard Manly]. And he lived in my neighborhood [Washington Park, Boston, Massachusetts]. He's the first black to be president of a white college. He was president of Michigan State [Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan]; the first black to be CEO of a Fortune 100 company, TIAA-CREF [Teachers Insurance and Annuity Association of America - College Retirement Equities Fund, New York, New York]. And his father [Clifton R. Wharton, Sr.], who was a graduate of BU law school [Boston University School of Law, Boston, Massachusetts] and a member of the state department [U.S. Department of State], was the first black ambassador of a European country. This was all in my neighborhood. Speaker 1: Okay. And, and how-- Speaker 2: Let me see--let me think--oh--I'm trying to think of--Cliff, Cliff Alexander [Clifford L. Alexander, Jr.] was a, a year ahead of me. He became secretary of the army. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: You know who Cliff Alexander is? I'm only thinking of people who, who I think have--who were there at the same time who have had careers that would have at- attacked--attracted public attention. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: Cliff and I were never close so I'm not suggesting that these were people I hung out with. I did hang out with Willie--Will- William Wharton. And there were--it was--it was interesting. I mean, this is the first time I saw a peer group of, of brothers. Story_ID: 646450 Speaker 1: Let me go back a little bit and ask you about--we mentioned the H-Block, but we didn't like jump on it when--way back when. But what, what is H-Block and what is the--now that--that's where you grew up. That's your nickname for-- Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) where you grew up at? Speaker 2: I grew up on Harold Street [Boston, Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: Harold, okay. Speaker 2: And what happened is that there is a gang--a bunch of gangbangers that live in the area started calling themselves the H-Block Gang. It's because parallel to Harold Street is Humboldt Avenue, then crossing it is Harrishof Street and Holworthy Street, and next to it there's a Munroe Street and Walnut Avenue--a couple of other streets. And--but it's all--and so what, what I--the reason I did the story ['The Original H-Block,' Melvin Miller and Howard Manly] is that here we have young guys in that same neighborhood out there doing gangbang nonsense. And I wanted to show that sixty years ago here is the people who lived here, and look what they accomplished. And the--and the list is staggering if you--it would be staggering for a white community to, to have so much success in such a small area. I mean-- Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so that's, that's the definition of the H-Block and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, that's how--that's how they got the name H. 'Cause they used, they--I live on Harold Street now, and I've been living on it since I was three years old. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It's my village. Story_ID: 646451 Speaker 1: We're ready to go back to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and--all right. So Harvard--then what was your major in Harvard? Speaker 2: Economics. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, was John Kenneth Galbraith there at that time? Speaker 2: Yeah, oh, sure. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I, I knew--I knew him politically because I was pa- a politically active person. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He's a Canadian too. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Now did you--was there any--how did you do there grade wise? You, you said you didn't well (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I was terrible. It was terrible. And what--one of the things that happened that was disastrous at--in, in my sophomore year. I had--I, I had a teacher in, in one of the courses I--see they have a lot of section men teaching who really are not competent to teach, and so it becomes political. And one of the things that became disastrous is somebody got the idea of, of mark- marking according to a curve. You know, but the problem is a curve can only work under the law of large numbers. You can't get a curve out of four, a five or six. You, you know what I'm saying? It doesn't work. And so--but I--somebody never told these guys apparently. But anyway, I had a section man who was just--he just would brutalize me on what I'd write a--my writing style was not great. But, you know, you have to pick through and you can mark down because of deficiency in writing style, but you also have to consider content. So I said, said to him, "Well, look, don't you think that you ought to put down why you give a grade so that I can learn from it." I, I said, "I get a paper back and it says C, C minus and I have no idea why you did that." So he said, "All right," so the next paper he started marking down my incorrect statements. So I said, "Jesus!" I went to him and I said, "Okay--," I think it was--I forget what, what, what it was--analy- an analysis of, of someone's--let me see--someone's essay. And he had comments marked. And I said, "Well, why do you--where do you support that comment? Here's the book." And he couldn't support it. And I said, "Well, here's how I support that kind of comment: look up page five, line so and so; read what it says." Man, I kicked that guy's butt. His--and then he got a little snappy with me and I had to pimp slap, slap the mother. He was talking to a Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts] guy. You don't come on my--don't come on my collar with your, your academic bullshit; bring it, bring it. And it was a funny thing 'cause all the brothers were talking. They said, "Man, you're gonna get thrown out of here." I ended up--he was in a, in an office chair with wheels like that when I finished with him. He was in this big hall. That chair was going (makes sounds) with him in it. And those are the kind of experiences I had. I had a, had a economics professor who was doing the same thing. And so I would challenge that. So, so I would challenge the exam. I said, "How--what--you know, I don't worry basically about the exam. I worried basically about learning something, but I, I don't understand this. And so--," and I said, "Frankly, I think you're wrong." Oh, he didn't like that; they never like to hear that. And so, so finally, here I was gonna be an economics major. And I took, took the final; I had studied my butt off; and I wrote--I wrote a blue book; and got back and it was C minus. And I looked. There wasn't a mark in the book, so I went to look for him and I couldn't find him. And then I, I saw him next year. And I asked if he'd agree to see me. And I said, "Listen, I'm still so thoroughly confused because I thought I understood a little bit of something about economics, but here is the--here are the questions of the test and here are my answers. And I get a C minus without a mark on the paper." And so he--I said, "Tell me where I went awry." And he read through 'em, chuckled as he's reading. My writing was getting a little better by this time, and I said, "Did I answer every question fully enough?" He said, "Yes, I think you did, um-hm." I said, "Well, were there any incorrect statements?" "No, no there weren't." And I said, "Well, how do you get a C minus off of that?" And he looked at me with his gotcha look and said, "I must have known at the time, but it escapes me right now; but that's the end of that isn't it." I said, "Okay." Yeah, yeah, this is the kind of treatment I got academically from, from middle school on. You understand what I mean? And, and so from that point on, I said listen, let me get my--I'm after getting my union card and getting out of here. Story_ID: 646452 Speaker 1: Okay. This same teacher here again. Speaker 2: Oh, well, I said he, he had indicated to me that, that I'd been abusive. When I did a little bit of investigation, I found out what it--what the major--what the major problems was is probably less--just less absolute racial stuff. It's that they were asking--we had a section of about ten guys, and they were asking to get a curve out of that ten. Four of those guys made Junior Phi Beta [Junior Phi Beta Kappa Society], so you can't get a curve out of that; you can't get a curve. Somebody had to take the fall, and it was--guess what--the one with the least clout, the, the, the one with no backing, the one who's there on his own. He takes the fall. That's what it was about. And, and once I understood that it was just as phony as everything else, I started--I stopped worrying about grades. That's why when I decided later that--to go to law school, I said, "Well, now you're gonna pay the price of slacking off and not really getting serious about your grades." So what I did is I dug in for the LSATs, and I finished at a level where they had to be--they, they had to really worry about how they were gonna get this done. Speaker 1: Now, I've, I've heard that at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] the hardest thing is to get into Harvard, and once you get in, you're gonna graduate pretty much. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: You're gonna graduate one way or the other. They're, they're gonna get you out of there (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, they do. Speaker 1: 'Cause they don't want you to say you went to Harvard and failed. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So are you saying then that once you discovered out--discovered what this game was, you didn't worry about, you know, trying to excel anymore? You just kind of slid. Speaker 2: No, I did--I'll tell you why. It made me so disturbed. You already see that I can't stand injustice, and it--and I had already had a physical con- unfortunate physical, physical conflict with one teacher. And I said, you know, if you allow yourself to become enmeshed in this stuff, you can do something that will forever ruin your life. Because I, I, I must tell you, I had anger issues at that point in my life. So I decided, hey, (makes sounds). Let it go, (makes sounds). And I just, just--I just lost interest, you know; I even lost interest in class. I used to go to the library and just read and read and read and study. I came out knowing more stuff than a lot of guys 'cause I (laughter), you know, I really--I really did some studying. And then--and then by the--the other thing that I spent time in was trying to perfect my writing style. And I must tell you, I developed a pretty darn strong expository writing style by the time I, I got out. It's not--it wasn't a waste of education, it was just different. Speaker 1: Now, now was, was Archie Epps [HistoryMaker Archie C. Epps, III] there when you were at Harvard? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: Okay (laughter). Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes he was. (Imitates Archie Epps) Yes he was. Speaker 1: Yes, he speaks sort of with an English accent. Speaker 2: Well, you know--well, Archie's dead now you know? Speaker 1: Yes, I know. Speaker 2: Yeah, and he was married to [Rae Pace Alexander]--what's the girl from Chicago [Illinois]--I mean from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]? (Pause) Archie was so--Archie was trying to become a pilgrim (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Were, were there any other--now, now he was--he worked for admissions, didn't he, or? Speaker 2: I think he was-- Speaker 1: I don't know what he was doing then (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I don't think he was in admissions as much as he was in the dean's office or something. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 646453 Speaker 1: Were there any other black teachers or administrators at, at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] when you were in school? Speaker 2: (Pause) No, no, you know, see, this is '52 [1952]. There weren't that many teachers. There was--there's a friend--there's a friend of my family who should have been a teacher. He's an economist who invented the whole concept of regional economic development. Most people will look, when they started looking at macro stuff, would look at countries and cities. And he, he did--he did some of the work on regional stuff but--and I--and I really saw a couple of books by him, but he, he, he, he had committed suicide I guess becau- a lot of one of the tough things about that is that people become really aware of the whole world working around them, and they find that unfortunately the place where blacks are is so far behind that it's, it's not easy to pull yourself backward to become involved in that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I mean, you always wanna go, go ahead and be able to perform at, at your top level. Speaker 1: Okay, so is, is there any--is--are, are there any teachers at Harvard or any classes that you really liked that you really-- Speaker 2: Nothing especially, no. Speaker 1: Did, did, did you have John Kenneth Galbraith for a teacher? Speaker 2: Who? Speaker 1: John Kenneth Galbraith, did you have him for a teacher? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Never did? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: There were--I mean--no. I mean, there was--there were some--there were some who--with whom I--you know, outside of class, there were sometimes teachers at meetings. Because I remained political and so sometimes some of the faculty would be involved in some of those political things. I'm, I'm probably as--more involved with the university now than I have been in the past. Story_ID: 646454 Speaker 1: Now this is 1952--? Speaker 2: Through '56 [1956]. Speaker 1: Yeah. Now this is the Dwight D. Eisenhower [President Dwight David "Ike" Eisenhower] administration. Republicans in those days were a lot different than they are today. Can we, we, we can agree with that? Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah-- Speaker 2: Absolutely. Ed Brooke [HistoryMaker Edward Brooke]--I was present when Ed Brooke became a Republican and that, and that was sort of a--an interesting thing to behold. And Republicans were--I could--I, probably I could be a Republican--old school Republican. Speaker 1: Okay. Now back in those days--well, well, had a--you said something interesting there about Ed Brooke. Had he been a Democrat at some point before he became a Republican? Speaker 2: Well, I think he was--had Democratic leanings, but to tell you the truth, I had mentioned earlier that the, the, the Irish had really locked up the Democratic Party and, and--now people would say the, the--that is racial prejudice. It's not racial; it's, it's, it's just--it's provincialism. You know what I mean? Speaker 1: Okay. I-- Speaker 2: The big problem--the big--just like there was a--there was a chap who ran against Louise Day Hicks when she was--you know who she is, right? Who-- Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: She was a city councilwoman. Speaker 2: There was a black--who, who would--who came close to--who gave her quite a fright. And he did so well because he was an outstanding Catholic layman. So--remember--I mean, a lot--a lot of it had to do with being Irish and being Catholic. If you could be halfway there and be Catholic, you got some points for that. Speaker 1: Okay. So, now in those days, did you consider yourself a Democrat or a Republican? Speaker 2: When I was suppo- after Brooke became politically active as a Republican, I became a Republican. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then--and then I became an Independent. And then as a--as the Republicans became exceedingly more cons- after--in 1964, when Goldwater [Barry Goldwater] took his position, that killed the Republicanism for me. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: Except that I could switch locally for Ed Brooke. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You, you might remember, in 1964 Goldwater announced that he would not support the Civil Rights Act [Civil Rights Act of 1964], so that was--and, and if you--if you--interestingly, if you watch the curve of black support, black Republicanism, prior to that and after that, it went down to zero almost, and they've never recovered it. Now they put out a whole big bunch of lies as how the Democrats have you, blah, blah, blah, blah. It just shows black people were smart enough to know that what Goldwater was supporting was not beneficial in the slightest. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's, that's--yeah, he was I guess to be the begin- beginning of the right wing Republicans that-- Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) really. Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: Super right, right, right wing. Speaker 2: And, and, and to tell you the truth, my, my su- support of Democrats was sometimes a little shaky because my, my support for Ed Brooke goes beyond just political support. You know, there's sort of a tradition among black families, particularly middle class oriented families, that when--we sort of know each other or know about one another. And so when Ed Brooke came to Boston [Massachusetts] to go to the Boston University law school [Boston University School of Law], his cousin, [HistoryMaker] Adelaide Cromwell, was already here and was, was a part of the community. And so the people who were educated and, and commun- and active, immediately embraced Brooke. And my [maternal] grandmother just thought he was the best thing since sliced bread, and she was the one who really pushed him hard to run for state rep [state representative]. And, and the funniest thing is I can remember, Ed says, "Well, I can't do that, Mrs. O'Banyoun [Ella Harten O'Banyoun], because I'm from out of town." And she said, "Oh no, that doesn't matter at all." And he didn't believe that was true so she called the girls together, and Ed Brooke was a charmer, and in nothing flat he got their support. Then he called--we called the AMVETs [American Veterans, Inc.], and he's--Ed was very impressive and he had qualities of leadership. And, and my, my grandmother so em- embracing him in that way, made him--made me almost like a, a little brother. You know what I mean? So I, I--and, and he was a member of the church [St. Mark Congregational Church, Boston, Massachusetts]. So I was an avid supporter of his; and that's important in this regard, that it shows my flexibility with party identification (laughter). Story_ID: 646455 Speaker 1: What you were saying about the Boston [Massachusetts] political sit- so, I would guess that, like, most of those city politicians would have been Democrats, in name anyway-- Speaker 2: Yeah, right, right (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) living in Boston-- Speaker 2: And so-- Speaker 1: --like they were in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and Chicago [Illinois] and New York [New York]. Speaker 2: Yeah. The interesting thing is that, that when Brooke [HistoryMaker Edward Brooke] decided to run for the [U.S.] Senate, that's where all of a sudden this whole question--this Yankee idea that you just serve and do your duty, that doesn't hold for the highest office (laughter). And Brooke ran into some trouble, but he won it. And interestingly, there were some Yankee oriented, oriented institutions that never did fully accept him. The Globe [The Boston Globe] nev- never endorsed him, as far as I can remember. Speaker 1: Okay. I know he explained to us that he--that, you know, Boston had a--that it was really the support of those--I guess those Yankees that really helped him-- Speaker 2: The what? Speaker 1: --win. I mean, he explained to us--he said, those--the Republicans in those days were like the--like the old Republicans of the 19th century almost, the ones that he was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, absolutely. Speaker 1: --supporting, yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: And, you know, I'll tell you another thing that would--really helped him. I don't know--you've interviewed him, haven't you? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Yeah, the--another thing that would really help him is that he was fluent in Italian and--I guess you knew that, right. Speaker 1: I might have known it-- Speaker 2: Yeah-- Speaker 1: --but I forgot. Speaker 2: Right. And, and his first wife [Remigia Ferrari-Scacco] was Italian, and the Italians loved him. And that was--that was the second strongest ethnic group. So he had the Yankees--he had a lot of the Yankees and, the--and the Italians supporting him. The support of the blacks was important, but the size of our population was so small then as to be not, not really very significant. Speaker 1: Yeah, so his election then to the Senate was really--transcended racial politics. Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. See, see that's, that's the thing that's hard to understand. Boston, in a funny kind of way, is less absolutely racial than it is tribal. And I remember--I remember when all of this problem with South Boston [Boston, Massachusetts] was going on over the school busing. Speaker 1: Yeah, I don't know if we should jump to it now-- Speaker 2: Oh, okay, good (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This is a big discussion that's coming up-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and we're gonna-- Speaker 2: Yeah, absolutely. Speaker 1: --talk about it. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Story_ID: 646456 Speaker 1: At Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] were you politically active at Har- I mean, or were you--were you still involved in the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]? Speaker 2: Oh abs- yeah, I did. I was--remained--so--and then Harvard developed its own NAACP program. Under the rules of Harvard, no national organization could have a, a base at Harvard, but we, we sort of disguised it by calling it the Harvard Society for Minority Rights [Harvard-Radcliffe Society for Minority Rights]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So that was really the Harvard branch NAACP. But interestingly, as, as I went on, I found that more and more blacks coming to Harvard eschewed involvement with the Harvard Society for Minority Rights because they were absolutely committed to integration. One of the things that I saw that was really, really sad to see, people trying to transform themselves into appropriate upper class white guys to fit the norm. 'Cause, you know, the behavior patterns were different, the, the body movement, the--I remember, I remember once we had a--I had a friend who loved jazz whose parents were--father was on the faculty--his father was on the faculty, and the mother was a special assistant to Frost the poet, Robert Frost. And, and he got married, and I went--we were all invited to the wedding. And it was a terrible snow storm, and--gee, it was--it picked up after we got underway. And so we went to the place where we thought that the wedding and reception was supposed to be, and we saw a lot of cars all covered with snow and it seemed so quiet. I said, geez, I wonder what happened. And so we went in and we didn't hear anything. We finally went into a room, and the newlyweds were celebrating with their friends and family, everybody standing around holding a drink in absolute silence. I said, whoa, this is really wild party. We couldn't believe it. I mean, there was almost no sound at all, no music, no nothing. No excitement. So, you see (laughter)-- Speaker 1: So this is an attempt by your friend to be--to be what he thought was being white or-- Speaker 2: No, no, this, this, this, this is a white guy. Speaker 1: This is--this is--oh, it is a white guy. Speaker 2: He, he--yeah, they were white. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. And, and see, in those days there was--there was so much--there was a lot of mixture of--there was a--there was so much racial mixture. We--it wasn't all black, black, black, black, black stuff. It was a question of cultural values. I mean, to tell you the truth, I know a lot of the Brahmins thought that I was a hot choice for their daughters to add some fire to the dying DNA. So, you know, it--it's not--it's--here's the thing. Brahmins always were--unlike people in the South--their attitudes on race varied all over the field, and they--and it was--they, they were--the--their cult, their group gave them the freedom of making their own decision with respect to those things. So there just wasn't, wasn't any question. I don't know whether you, you saw that film ['Traces of the Trade: A Story from the Deep North'] about this family from Rhode Island that was very much involved in the racial--the race trade--the slave trade? Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Well, the--I'll tell you a funny thing about that story is that, that family is now so racially integrated that it wouldn't be funny. And, and what they have done is, strategically, they leave all those folks home when they're doing the story to make it more impressive as, as to these white people enslaving blacks. Because a whole--a large number of them are now, are, are really multiracial. Story_ID: 646457 Speaker 1: --Graduated from Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] in 1957 or '55 [1955] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I graduated in '56 [1956]. Speaker 1: Fifty-six [1956], '56 [1956], okay. And you had already applied for Columbia Law School [New York, New York] at this point? Speaker 2: No, no. See, a lot of people forget we had the draft back in those days. And I know had to be--had to be--I, I had to be drafted. Now shall I tell the story about my first job? Speaker 1: Well, sure, yeah, if that comes next, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, okay, that's right. Because one thing--you know I--in those days you--you're sort of hesitant about making a decision because you know you're gonna be drafted. And you start something; you get pulled away. But I was contacted shortly after graduating by the Count- the Connecticut discrims- commission against discrimination [Connecticut Commission on Civil Rights; Connecticut Commission on Human Rights and Opportunities]. And they had a (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Wait, wait, wait, wait a minute. There's one thing I think I have to ask you about before I get you away from graduation, and that is--I, I know your father [John Miller] came to graduation, right, and your, your parents? Did, did, did, did they not? Speaker 2: No, I didn't go to my graduation. Speaker 1: You didn't go? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: So what did your father think? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: What, what did your father think, think about (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, he didn't mind. Speaker 1: He didn't mind? Speaker 2: My mother [Louise O'Banyoun Miller] was more upset at--than-- Speaker 1: I know he had worked so hard to-- Speaker 2: Yeah, but the reason--but the--yeah, but--you know, I'm a practical guy. I was gonna get my diploma whether I went there at all. I had a job, and I wasn't gonna take a d- I wasn't gonna lose a day's pay to go to something that's gonna happen anyhow. Speaker 1: All right, let's go to the job then. Let's go to the job. Speaker 2: Okay, but I'll tell you a funny thing. My mother was upset. So when the postman came to deliver my diploma, she was--she took a picture of me getting my diploma handed to me by the postman (laughter). I don't know where that photograph is. I--I've not been to any of my graduations. Story_ID: 646458 Speaker 1: So this job then--tell, tell us about the job. Speaker 2: Well, what had happened is the Aetna insurance company [Aetna Life and Casualty Company; Aetna, Inc., Hartford, Connecticut] had never hired a black to work in anything except maintenance. And there was a fellow who would work there--a black chap who had worked hard for years and years and years. He'd been a, a good family man, sent his son to college, and his son came out and decided he wanted to become an executive trainee at Aetna. And he applied and they said, "Sorry, we don't (makes sounds), we don't do that." And he was sent away. His father and he and the commission [Connecticut Commission on Civil Rights; Connecticut Commission on Human Rights and Opportunities] was absolutely furious. Here is a man whose father had put in so many years, and even as late as 1956, they weren't even gonna consider an executive trainee. So they said it's a vi- number one, it's a violation of the law. So they invited me down--to come down and to bust Aetna. So I said, "Okay, I'm gonna get drafted anyway; I, I know I don't wanna stay there." So I went down and met with them, and they were all cordial and nice and said, "But, of course, we do have this exam," and blah, dah, blah, blah, blah. I said fine. So I took the exam and then they invited me back, and we had interviews. And then they invited me back again. Now I--so I told them--I said, "Look, I've been traveling this road, from Boston [Massachusetts] to Hartford [Connecticut], several times." And I said, "It's almost like I'm apprying- applying for a job of CEO." And I said, "We're just talking about being an executive trainee; is there any information that--additional information that you need?" Well, what usually happens happened in that case; the man turned red, disapproved of my arrogance. And I said, "Well, let's look at it this way; the next time you invite me, I'm gonna show up with my lawyer; so are we ready to move and do something?" They turned and he said, "You'll hear from us." I said, "Fine." When I did hear from them, I was accepted. And, and so I asked after I got there; I asked for the commission to find out what happened. And once again, I told you--the--for some reason, when I was young I could take those tests. I'd score the best grade they ever had on the tests. So they, they were really boxed in. How will they say I wasn't qualified? Do you understand what I mean? When I had already--I'd killed their test. So they wouldn't give me the job I wanted. I wanted to be trained in the bond department. And so they gave me my first job as a computer trainee--nothing that I really wanted to do, but I did that until I got drafted. And I was there only six months, but guess what? Less than fifty years later the president of the company was a black man [Ronald A. Williams]. Isn't that amazing? Isn't that amazing? A lot of people will say--a lot of people wanna look at the mistreatment that I suffered or the chap whose son got rejected. But I looked at the movement in our country, the flexibility, and the--he just left office. He was--I forget his name. He was president for quite a while. The president of Aetna insurance company is a black man--at least he was. Well, I was the first one to be executive category in that company. I, I think--that's why I, I, I think it should be stated correctly on my bio, that I was an executive trainee. I don't wanna make it--see, nowadays, to get an executive job for a black kid out of--with an M.B.A. out of Ivy League schools, no big deal; it was in 1956, to be an executive trainee. They--it was even a different category, you know? Story_ID: 646459 Speaker 1: So you were drafted into the [U.S.] Army? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Is this 1957 then? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. And what happened in the Army--so, so you were--I, I guess you were trained as a--did they send you to off--officers candidate school [Officer Candidate School]. Speaker 2: Let me tell you: when I was in college [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], I was in Air Force officers training--the [U.S.] Air Force officers training program. I stayed in that all the way through college. And I even went to summer camp between my junior and senior year, and I expected to go in the Air Force as an officer. And what they did at the last minute is, after I've served four years, they changed the rules and regulations so that in order to become an officer, you had to either be an engineer or you had to have 20/20 vision so that you could be a pilot. I was neither of those, and I was bumped out of the whole program at the time of--roughly, the time of graduation with everybody else. While this--what this taught me--as they say, well, now listen; it looks like we don't wanna be too trustful of the [U.S.] military; let's do our two years and be gone. And so that's why the ot- the invitation to go to officers training school, I said no thanks because that added another year. I said no, I'll do my tour and I'm gone. Speaker 1: Okay, so where did you serve at and how did you serve? Speaker 2: Well, the, the funniest thing is that--remember I told you earlier that I had bad knees? And the summer I spent at the Air Force summer training program was really disastrous. Because one of the things I have difficulty doing is running and moving too much on sod because you get an uneven foot fall, and that would cause my knee to move in a--an unfortunate direction. Sometimes it would come out of socket, so I had to--I had to keep my knees wrapped in a way so that it, it wasn't obvious to them that I was a physical--was physically flawed. And, and finally, my knee came out and I had to limp. So what I did is I, I had to find duties to do which wouldn't reflect that I was--that I had a physical impediment. And when I went into the Army, I was one step above 4-F because of the difficulty with my knees. And so they made--they made me a medic. Speaker 1: Okay, now did you leave the country at all? Speaker 2: Yes, I did, I did most of my term in Germany. I was stationed in Frankfurt am Main [Germany]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And one of the--my high school German came in good--set me in good stead, because what happened actually was I went, went to the Wolfgang Goethe institute [Johann Wolfgang Goethe Universitat Frankfurt am Main, Frankfurt am Main, Germany] and met some really nice people around my age. But back in those days the Germans didn't speak English like they do today. So, rather than spend my free time partying and hanging out, I studying the German--studied my German until I was fairly fluent. And then one day, I said okay, today once I walk out of the barrack store here, only German. And so I started speaking German; and by the time I got out I was fairly fluent. Story_ID: 646460 Speaker 1: Yeah, I me- I thought it was a good story so we tried to-- Speaker 2: I beg pardon? Speaker 1: I thought this was a good story about your [maternal] grandmother [Ella Harten O'Banyoun] and the German-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --so. Speaker 2: I said when we--when they came back I mentioned to my grandmother that I could speak German--she said, "Well, you know I can speak German too. I can't anymore." And I said, "What do you mean?" She said, "Well, when I was a little girl, when my grandfather would come to the house, he just spoke German all the time, and so in order to talk to him, we would--we would have to learn German. And I was able--you know, that's how we talked." And I said isn't that something. Speaker 1: Okay. All right so-- Speaker 2: And, and--but--oh. Speaker 1: Go, go ahead. Speaker 2: No, this is an aside. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): We're rolling. Speaker 2: We're, we're, we're rolling. Speaker 1: Oh, well any- anyway, I, I, I later came across some--something about the Germans who might--who immigrated to South Carolina. There's a whole group of them who never stopped speaking German. They were just--they just held onto their, their German. And, and I thought that my grandfather [sic. maternal great-grandfather, William Harten] was--that my, my grandfather was German, but he wasn't. He was an American of German ancestry, but his father came as an im- immigrant and they, they never--they all spoke--they continued to speak German among themselves. Speaker 2: Okay, okay, so you were in the [U.S.] military from '57 [1957] to '59 [1959] I guess, right (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 2: And you were in Frankfurt [Frankfurt am Main, Germany], right? Speaker 1: Frankfurt. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. So-- Speaker 1: I'll tell you my German is very, very bad now, after-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --after fifty years (laughter). Story_ID: 646461 Speaker 1: Had you determined that you were gonna go to law school when you--when you got out? Speaker 2: No, no, when I was, when I was in--one of the things that happened when I was at school [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]--you know, I used to--I used to get a little distressed about blacks and what are--how are we going to--how were we gonna improve our status. And I'd come to the conclusion there were--there were three institutions that we needed that we didn't have, and one was a significant black bank. The second was a black law firm that we could rely on. And you might remember that it was during this period of time that Brown versus Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] came down, and it, it was absolutely clear to me that we had to have lawyers who were capable of handling these serious cases that were depriving us of our civil rights. Most of our lawyers would handle wills and real estate transactions and automobile accidents, and so we needed lawyers who could do something about what, what we call just the simple cases. And the third thing I thought that we needed was good, vigorous press that did several things: first of all, we had to respond to the defamations that were continually heap- heaped upon blacks and the insults which we had a--come to accept with equanimity, if sometimes a little sullenness; and second, that we had to have a press that could keep us informed of the opportunities for progress and advancement and would help us to develop both economically and politically; and thirdly, we had to have a press that would able--would be able to organize us as an effective economic market. I had made that, that determination when I was in college. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so was that informed by your economic studies? Speaker 2: Well, yeah--I mean, I was interested in economics; that's why I, I--one of the things that made me major in it. And I said gee, these are about the most boring books you could ever imagine, and I--anybody who's, who's read economics knows that it's boring even if you're--even if you're interested in the subject matter. And I said boy, I have to, I have to--by majoring in it, I have to for- I would force myself to read books, which I'm sure I would not voluntarily read otherwise. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so, so this, this conviction in your mind about these three institutions, you decided to go to law school then, right? Speaker 2: Well, the interesting thing--what happened--I had a friend with whom I went to high school [Boston Latin School, Boston, Massachusetts]. We were in college together and he, he decided he was gonna go to Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts]. And I said, "Okay, I'll go to the--to the law school, and then we'll see when we get out what kind of serious business development we could bring about." Story_ID: 646462 Speaker 1: So you told us pretty much that you aced the test to get into Columbia Law School [New York, New York], right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: Well, I, I--you know, I took the LSATs, and I think somebody told me I finished within the 95th percentile or something like that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Which meant that a very small number of people taking the test finished better than I did. So even though my academic record at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] was discouraging, people were more sophisticated by that time. They, they--you know, people who are in the business knew that certain activists were getting mistreated, so--I mean, sophisticated people knew it wasn't a clear reflection of my competence. Speaker 1: Now did you consider Columbia a progressive school? Is that why you chose Co- Columbia? Speaker 2: No, I, I--well, it was--it was an Ivy League law school, and it was out of Boston [Massachusetts]. And I knew--I said, you know, I, I gotta have a shot here to really be able to focus on my law school work without being too imposed upon by community people to do this, that and the other. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, well, tell us about Columbia Law School. Columbia University is near Harlem [New York, New York], some people say it's in Harlem, you know. Speaker 2: It was right on the edge of Harlem. As a matter of fact, that was very helpful because I had to work, and I got a, I got a job as an insurance company, doing an insurance--being insurance investigator. And the nice thing about it is it was piece work. You know, every time you finish a report and turn it in then you get a certain amount of money. And none of the guys wanted to do the, the--a lot of them were afraid to do them. The white guys were afraid to do them in Harlem, so that meant I had a really choice lot of jobs to do. And I could jump over the fence at Morningside Park [New York, New York], walk through, and I was there. Story_ID: 646463 Speaker 1: One of the things that was interesting at that time--this was, this was before karate was as commonplace as it is now. It was really, very esoteric. And I--for exercise I used to study karate with a man--gee, I wonder how he is--he's--was a fifth degree back- black belt from Korea, taekwondo. And I got pretty prof- proficient, so I felt very comfortable going into Harlem [New York, New York] by myself. Speaker 2: Okay, did you ever have--ever have to use it-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --taekwondo? Speaker 1: Right. So--one--couple of times--one time I had to use it. Most of the times when people, people sometimes know what you have so they just move away from it. And a couple of times--so I never had to use it to knock anybody down, but I certainly got them dispersed, dispersed them. You see, a lot of people like to--I, I found from the time I was young, what they love to do is to play off fear. And if they know you're afr- if, if you're not afraid, that scares the hell out of them. They said, he, he, might--he might be carrying something, or they have another excuse for acting out like a punk. Because they said, "Man, didn't you see that he had a--had a gun there? I don't wanna get shot." Oh, they didn't see that at all. They just knew they're gonna get their ass whooped if they pushed it further. You know what I mean? So they didn't--that's, that's the reason they didn't wanna do it. And so I was--I, I never had to do it, but I tell you I had to do it at a later time in New York [New York], which was a very fascinating experience. Because a neighbor of mine, who was very nice when I was a student there [at Columbia Law School, New York, New York], used to fix dinner for me and the--and the like. So after I got out and I was an assistant U.S. attorney, I had to go to New York, and so I called. I said, "Hey, I'm gonna take you to dinner." She said, "Oh no, I got a dinner invitation, but why don't we go and have drinks, and I can see you afterwards." I said, 'Good, okay." So I lift up--lived on Morningside Drive in New York. So I was sitting on the bench waiting for her, because she had to go to this dinner. I was gonna meet her about maybe--it was gonna be I think nine o'clock or something like that. And a car pulled out, and these two scruffy guys jumped up--jumped out and started pressing toward me. I said, "Uh-oh." So I got up, took the position, and was ready to take 'em out. And they identified themselves as policemen. I said, "Oh." I said, "I wondered what you were up to." And so we were chatting and then a policeman in uniform came up and said, "Walk along, walk along here." I said, "Hey, I'm talking. What are you talking about?" He said, "Just walk up the street." "No," I said, "no, no, no." I said, "You see a disturbance?" I said, "If you don't see a disturbance, and I'm not violating any law; I'm standing on the street, a public street. You don't tell me that I have to move." So the guy got mad, so he put in a call, and he brought in a whole bunch of police officers. So they wanted me to move; and I said, "Guess what? I don't move." Story_ID: 646464 Speaker 1: So they formed a circle around me and pulled out their clubs and decided they were gonna beat me down. I said, "Wait a minute, before you do anything, I want you to know that I submit peacefully to arrest. And if you have a--if I violated a criminal law and you wanna arrest me, I submit peacefully to arrest. You have that? It's a clear statement right now. I'm not resisting arrest. Do you wanna arrest me?" They didn't even answer that. Then they started swinging their clubs, and then I--that's when my karate went into effect. It would--I'll never forget this. Is a--it was a--it was probably the most extensive use--one of the most extensive uses I've ever--I ever had to make of it, and--but I had a strategy. And I said first of all, I'm, I'm not gonna hurt these guys because some fool will pull a gun, and once the gun comes out everything goes wild. So what I did is I just took a stand. And I know how to move and prevent them from striking me, and I might just use my hand to push them off or something. There had to be four to six cops. No, there were more than four. There must have been the six 'cause there, there, there were lots of 'em, and it was amazing. If, if you watch them, it was almost like the keystone ca- police 'cause they were falling all over themselves 'cause I would--I mean, I--you know, to tell you the truth, I was pretty good, you know. And so I started--you know, I moved and they fell all over the place. Now I told them that I was waiting for a friend, and then while this fight was going on she came out. She said, "Oh my god! What's going on here?" And I said to her, "They didn't believe, didn't believe you were coming" (laughter). And so it was funny. These--half of the policemen were on the ground because they took a swing at me inbalance- you know, when you take a swing sometimes at a person you think you're gonna hit, you put too much weight on it and you don't hit; you keep going. Well that--a lot of that happened. And so there were two still standing, and the other policeman--I said--I walked by him and I said, "Why'd you allow something--," I said, "somebody could have really been hurt here." And they looked at me, didn't say anything, and I left. But isn't that awful? But guess what? I had in my breast pocket the federal department of justice [U.S. Department of Justice] identification with my photo and everything. What do you think would have happened if I'd have shown that to the first policeman? He'd have backed up, said, "Sorry, Mr. Miller [HistoryMaker Melvin Miller]." I said--but I identified with my brother too much. I said the man in the street doesn't have these things, and you don't have to show all this identification to be able to walk the streets (unclear). I had a three piece suit on. What did I look like, a thug? Come on. And I, I--you know, I just simply wasn't gonna tolerate it. And so--and if, if necessary I would have hurt them rather than let them hurt me. Speaker 2: Well, some of the stories out of New--New York [New York] are--you know. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: You, you might have been lucky that you didn't get shot, you know, but. Speaker 1: Well, they were lucky because I don't think they could have beaten me. I mean, you, you had to remember, I was a younger man, you know. I was not the old man you're looking at, at that time (laughter). But that just shows the kind of world we live in and, and I was gonna--I was gonna--I was, I was sort of hoping in a sense that I would get arrested all the way down. And then--what, what--if--once I got arrested, I would--they would have had to come up with a charge. Then I'd laid it on 'em. I said, "Okay." I'd call the press. All of a sudden we got a lawsuit. Story_ID: 646465 Speaker 1: Back at Columbia University [New York, New York], now were, were there any special professors or, or mentors at Columbia? Speaker 2: Yeah--well, I'm gonna tell you--and, and I kind of--I'm so bad with names now. I did the best I could, working as hard as I had to work, but I taught my class in contracts, which was sort of an achievement for me because my academic record at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] had been somewhat dismal. I had a very--I, I had a good academic record at Columbia Law School [New York, New York] and, and if I'd had a little bit of--more time I'm sure I would have been able to make law review [Columbia Law Review]. I seemed to be pretty good at that. And one professor who I liked a lot, although I think that he was very skittish about me, was A.A. Berle [Adolf A. Berle]. That name probably doesn't mean anything to you, but he was the last surviving member of President Roosevelt's [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt] kitchen cabinet, his group of advisors. And A.A. Berle invited my class to a formal dinner at his townhouse down in Gramercy Park [New York, New York]. And I didn't have a black tie. I said, but I don't wanna miss this. I said, I have a blue suit, so I went down with a blue suit. I could see he didn't like that because all the other guys had black ties. But they could afford a black tie; I couldn't. And so he used to encourage me and entreat me not to become a revolutionary for some reason because of my--see, he took my independent spirit as being a, a threat to the system. He didn't know the extent to which I really supported the same system he did. I majored in economics and it was very interesting to me. I'd made my decision as to how I thought things should go, and they weren't very much different from his, his philosophy. Speaker 1: That raises a good point in some ways because I know, knew--Columbia and New York City [New York, New York] at that time, during those days and even now, is, is a--the center for a lot of socialistic activity and-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --political thought-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and were you persuaded by any of the--to organizations or, or (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, I--I'm not, I'm not, no. No, you don't--let me just tell you what I really think is that, you know, what blacks do and what we had to stop doing--some would say, "Hey, man, we're gonna play football." So, so what we would do, we'd show up with shin guards and cleats and short pants, thinking we're gonna play soccer. The other guys have helmets and shoulder pads and, and a football. And see, make sure that you're gonna be in the right game. So why do you wanna go into a game that's not the game that's being played and you're gonna lose it. That's on a--only a fool would wanna do that as a strategy. But we do that a whole lot because our leaders love to pontificate, stand up and talk about how the, the system has failed. I said it hadn't failed for Jews. And I'm gonna tell you quite frankly, when I was young, Jewish people in Boston [Massachusetts] were not well regarded and they weren't rich. You understand what I'm saying? Now we can do a whole lot better than what we're doing. And I just--I just have never bought into that. That's a lot of crap. Story_ID: 646466 Speaker 1: I guess Columbia [Columbia Law School, New York, New York] is also a place where a lot of--I'm just guessing that you were exposed to a lot of public speakers and, and politicians coming to campus and, you know, authors and that sort of thing, and Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] I guess too from that--for that matter. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I mean, yeah, that, that's true. I mean, one, one of the positions that was--that's very interesting and it hasn't gotten broadcast as much as it should from A.A. Berle [Adolf A. Berle] is the notion that--he called--his book in a series of--made it--as a result of a series of speeches, is called 'Power Without Property' ['Power Without Property: A New Development in American Political Economy,' Adolf A. Berle]. And he was very much concerned--he, he predicted the kind of economic problems that the country's now encountering. You know, in, in his generation, the corporate leaders and the people who were in, in charge of the major corporations were the founders. And so the founders--when the founders make a certain move that is self serving, that--you can understand that. But his concern was that the next generation of professional managers who come in and want to exercise extraordinary power even though they don't own the property. And to tell you the truth, I think that's a major problem in corporations. I, I don't wanna get into--sidetracked into a, into a discussion on economic strategy, but I think that that's something that has to be considered as a, as a future problem for the nation. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Don't you--I mean, when you stop and think of some of these buyout deals. You know, you have a company, you hire a bunch of people to run it, and all of a sudden they say, "Here is a company, why don't we take it over." And so they come and say, "Hey, you know, this is a good company, and we'll buy it from you. If you don't give us our price, we're gonna leave our mess." Some pla- some of these deals verge very close to extortion in my opinion; not all of them, but some of them do. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that's--that, that was the kind of thing that Berle was concerned about. For--and for him to be worried about me being on the other side of that was sort of humorous when I stop to think about it. Speaker 1: Now did you focus on business law when you were in law school? I know you have to take everything, but, but were you particularly concerned about that? Speaker 2: No, I was interested in it in certain aspects of it, but I, I can't say that I, I focused on, on that very much. I, I did--here, again, I did other crazy things (laughter). I--well, anyway it doesn't matter. Speaker 1: Well, if it's--you sure? You don't wanna-- Speaker 2: Nah, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: I mean, I, I was--I spent time on other things that didn't have to do with law school. Again, I just--you know, it's--other than work and spending some time with interesting people was all I could get in in, in a da- in, in a day. Story_ID: 646467 Speaker 1: So you graduated from Columbia Law School [New York, New York] in--? Speaker 2: Yeah. And I must say my academic record was far superior to my academic record at, at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: Okay. So you came out in 19--what's it? Speaker 2: Sixty-four [1964]. Speaker 1: Sixty-four [1964], okay. Now tell us how you became an assistant attorney general. Now this is--this happens (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well I'm gonna tell you-- Speaker 1: --right? Speaker 2: --it's almost impossible to become--as members become--in the U.S. attorney's office even before you get certified to practice law. But, you know, Ted Kennedy [Edward M. Kennedy] was at Harvard when I was there. I'm not sure whether he was my classmate, but, you know, I've, I've known him--I knew--I knew him for a long time. And his, his cousin was a high school classmate of mine [at Boston Latin School, Boston, Massachusetts], Bobby Fitz [Robert P. Fitzgerald]. And you might remember Ted Kennedy was running for reelection, and he had an airplane crash and he was disabled. So he had a--I, I was sympathetic to that, and he, he, he had an enormous task of demonstrating that he, he was perfectly capable of moving forward. And the way you do that is he had to get an enormous number of people to sign his papers in a hurry. And so I took over part of that job. And I, I think it was the first time that, that a black political organization--political group--had out performed everybody else. Speaker 1: So what was the name of your, your group? What was the name of your group? Speaker 2: It wasn't--just--wasn't any name. I just-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --I just go and recruited family and friends to--I, I--what I did that was important is I, I developed a scheme and a strategy that would put us where crowds were where we, we could get numerous signatures. And the way we did it--wa- the--you know, the way we did it is, you know, you, you see somebody has a clipboard? Well, I would say have three clipboards and you just keep 'em moving at the crowd. And that's what people were doing. It was amazing to see. It looked like they were juggling clipboards. And, and I tell you it was a sort of a proud day when I went down to the office, and I, I had a stack of signature sheets almost a foot high. They, they almost fell out of their seats, primarily, because in past election efforts, guess who falls short, doesn't perform? We won and so I guess that's one of the things in--you know, people recognize. You know, I was--I was a little older than some of the guys, and they recognized that I was an astute dude, so I got a slot in the U.S. attorney's office. Now you have to remember at that time my intention was--you know, I told you there are three things I think that you had to do--the--and, and the--the blacks had to do in order really to move up. And I expected that I would be in the, the, the legal group, you know, the group of lawyers. That's what my plan was, to become a great functioning lawyer and a--and to tell you the truth, I wasn't effect- I was effective in the U.S. attorney's office, and there were some major law firms that wanted me in there because they had never had black partners. You gotta remember when this was, man, (laughter) this--we're talking about 1965. And, and, and they were--they were looking me over for that. But when I went to some of these law firms and I saw these guys, I said, oh my god, this is, this is another situation where I suspect I'm not gonna get along with these people. So, you know, I, I passed by those opportunities. Story_ID: 646468 Speaker 1: But it still wasn't my intention--it was still my intention to stay in the U.S attorney's office for a much longer time than I did. But what happened is that the urban renewal program was going on up in Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts] and the South End [Boston, Massachusetts] at such a pace, and there was insufficient information on it that I decided we got--we had to have a newspaper at this point that could at least do that, keep the people informed. I mean, it was disconcerting--you go to, go to leave to go to work one day, and you come back and then block the--a couple of blocks away the buildings are gone when you get back. So that's how I started the Banner [Bay State Banner]. But here's the problem: it that--the problem was that I, I opposed the war in Vietnam [Vietnam War]. And as you know, President Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] was running into great difficulty at that time, so the U.S. attorney said, "Listen," he showed me the organization, he said, "here's the president of the United States; here's the attorney general, and under the attorney general are these U.S. attorneys all across the country. And under them are assistant U.S. attorneys." He said, "That's not very many places in the organizational chart." He said, "It's inappropriate for you to be pursuing an opinion, a public opinion so contrary to the opinion of the administration." And so he gave me an--he said, "Why don't you take a--," he said, "you can either stop discussing the war, the war, or else take a leave of absence." So I said, "Listen, I can't ever agree that I'm not gonna discuss an issue of great importance to my readers, can't agree to that." And, and I said, "I'll be out of the office by the end of the week." Story_ID: 646469 Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, can you state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Melvin B. Miller [HistoryMaker Melvin Miller], M-I-L-L-E-R, and Melvin is M-E-L-V-I-N. Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: July 22nd, 1934 in Boston, Massachusetts. Speaker 1: And your title and occupation? Speaker 2: My title is the publisher and editor of the Bay State Banner. Speaker 1: And sir, what is today's date? Speaker 2: (Laughter) April 25th, is it? Speaker 1: Twenty-seventh I think. Speaker 2: Twenty-seventh, okay. You see, I'm a few days-- Speaker 1: Is that right, 27th? Yeah, 27th. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: The year? Speaker 2: Oh, 2013. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: Well, we're in the offices of the Bay State Banner in Boston, Massachusetts, at 23 Drydock Avenue. Speaker 1: Okay and today we're attempting to finish an interview we started back on the 24th [April 24, 2013] I think, right? Speaker 2: Okay, yeah. Story_ID: 646470 Speaker 1: Let me ask you about the founding of the Bay State Banner in 1965. At the time you were working as an assistant attorney in the attorney general's office. Speaker 2: Yeah, U.S. attorney. Speaker 1: U.S. attorney's office. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And so, so you told us about some of the philosophy of why you founded the paper, but I think we need to know how, how did you do it. How did you get the money to do it, and how did you staff it? How did you--where did you find--did you find a home for it immediately--an office and that sort of thing? Speaker 2: Well, I, I didn't have much money, and--obviously. And there were two key elements: first of all, my father [John Miller] loaned me some money to do it; and I also went to the bank and got an unsecured loan for the balance of the money that was needed. I, I really can't quite remember precisely how much was involved. It wouldn't, it wouldn't translate into today's money anyway, because five thousand dollars in 1965 is worth fifty thousand dollars today, so. Speaker 1: Okay, so you, you got money from your father and from the bank. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, now did you have a plan for--from what I've, what I've read, your idea was to be the overarching publisher but not to be participating in the day to day-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --operations. Speaker 2: This is--the Banner, I expected the Banner to be an avocation. I had just passed the, the law exam and was a practicing lawyer, and I expected to make my primary livelihood from practicing law and being involved in business situations. And I would support the Banner and manage it as effectively as I could as a part time effort. Speaker 1: Okay, so did you have an editorial policy in mind when you started? Speaker 2: Yes, you know, '65 [1965] was a very, very critical date for African Americans. I think a lot of people have forgotten, but in 1964, the Civil Rights Act [Civil Rights Act of 1964] was passed, and that was the first time the federal government has said that there should be no discrimination in, in education, employment, or places of publicat- public accommodation anywhere in the country. And that was absolutely significant. And then the year after that the Voting Act--Rights Act of 1965 [Voting Rights Act of 1965] set up a system to assure that blacks, particularly--pri- primarily in the South, would be able to have access to the polls. For the first time you could say that at least legally, as far as the laws on the books were concerned, African Americans had freedom. So what we had to do is to develop a strategy to take advantage of this new situation. The strange thing to me was that for some time, and even up to the present, I find it--that a lot of blacks still do not see that the arduous and longstanding civil rights efforts of blacks was over. The battle had been won, and it was time to move on to the next phase. And for some reason people didn't wanna let it go. And really our leadership did not give people strategies of how to move on and take advantage of the situation to develop wealth and educational opportunities and the like. My objective was to--not to be a passive newspaper just giving little stories from the community, but to begin to focus attention to people on those broader issues. Story_ID: 646471 Speaker 1: Give us a little history here. What--was there--about I guess black newspaper publishing in Boston [Massachusetts] prior to Bay--Bay State Banner? Speaker 2: Well, they had always--there, there had never been a publication that survived the life of the founder. I mean, they all seemed to die out. Of course the--there was the Chronicle [Boston Chronicle] and a couple of other papers, but the paper that historically became most significant was the Boston Guardian; that was William Monroe Trotter's paper. And Trut- when Trotter graduated as the first Phi Beta Kappa [Phi Beta Kappa Society] from Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] in 1895, he and--began to see that, I guess to say as, as I did, that there had to be a newspaper in order to focus the attention of the community on issues of importance. He started the, the Guardian I think in 1901 with the aid of Charles Stewart, who was the class of '96 [1896] at Harvard, and was Trotter's brother-in-law. He had married Trotter's sister, Maude [Maude Trotter Stewart], who was a Wellesley grad [Wellesley College, Wellesley, Massachusetts]. Trotter died the same year I was born, or the year before I was born, but his brother-in-law was, was alive. And when I started the Banner, being an old school guy myself, I went and called on Doc Stewart, Charles Stewart was a dentist, by the way, by profession--and asked for his blessing to go forward. And, and I got far more than that. What an interesting man. It was exciting for me to hear the whole story from--about thing--about what had happened at the turn of the century from somebody who had been there. Speaker 1: Okay, that is something. So did, did he give you any specific things to watch out for or any-- Speaker 2: Well, no, no, actually, we talked mostly about historical events and--see, I had just--I had expected I would just make a peremptory visit, and he would say, "Good, carry on," and then that would be the end of it. But it was so interesting that I would go back--I would go back and back and he and I became best friends. And he was deaf, so I used to have to write out everything I wanted to say on a piece of paper. Strangely, that you wouldn't realize he's deaf because his speech was not at all impaired, as is often with people who are--who are--have hearing problems. And it was very important because the Banner was not easy and it was not a financial success, and it was really very discouraging. So I remember one trip to see Dr. Stewart, he started laughing about himself, and he said, "You know when Monroe," they called Trotter Monroe, "and I got out of Harvard, we thought we'd bring back what we learned there and we'd really be able to move the community a lot forward." And then he chuckled. He said, "Doesn't look--doesn't look like they moved a whole lot from the time," (laughter), "that we, we got out of college." And then he said, "You know I'm an old man now. I guess I waste- wasted my life." And then he got somber and he said, he--he said, "I've sometimes wondered what was the Lord keeping me around here for," and he said, "I think now he was letting me wait until you would come along." And he put out his hand on my shoulder and said, "Listen, just go forward, just do the best we can. Nobody knows what the result would be." And the next year he died, and that was the loss of a dear friend. Speaker 1: So he died in--was it about 1966? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, now there-- Speaker 2: He was ninety-seven years old. Story_ID: 646472 Speaker 1: When we were here the other day, you were telling me the story about, that kind of corrected a popular myth about William Monroe Trotter. You know, the myth is that he committed suicide. Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, well, Trotter was a family friend. And, of course, I wasn't around at that time, but my great uncle and Trotter were good friends. And my great uncle loved taking trips out to the Hot Springs in, in Arkansas. So he'd--Trotter had been ill and so he'd made a--reservations for him and Trotter to go on out and take the waters, as my uncle used to say. And I asked him whether he thought Trotter had committed suicide. And he said he just couldn't believe it, given the frame of mind Trotter was in. He was excited about taking another trip with him to, to Arkansas. And my Uncle Tommy [ph.] said he thinks that Trotter, who was feeling faint periodically at the time, might have just felt faint and fallen off the roof, got too close to the edge and next thing you know he was off. Speaker 1: Okay, so there were no, no stories about enemies trying to do away with him? Or, when he (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, he--I asked him--I asked my Uncle Tommy about that, and he said that Trotter, Trotter was certainly a hellion from the perspective of, of white conservatives, but I don't think they thought that he was powerful enough to be dangerous. And he said he, he did--he would be surprised if somebody had decided to assist him to an early death. Speaker 1: Okay. Trotter publicly opposed Booker T. Washington's-- Speaker 2: Yeah, as a matter of fact, in the black community at that time, there were three different philosophies. One was the integrationist approach pushed by Trotter. Trotter, Trotter believed, understandably--I mean, he, he--here is a Phi Beta Kappa [Phi Beta Kappa Society] from Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. You can't expect him to say that the only acceptable a--type of employment for black should be as tradesmen or carpenters, craftsmen. Booker T. Washington seemed to say let's be craftsmen and tradesmen where we are, and forget about moving up the industrial ladder; that was his position. And then there was a third position that a lot of people--that some people pushed and that was Marcus Garvey, the black nationalist approach. That was, that position was supported by a number of people of West Indian herage- heritage, and it was--I mean, I've talked to some people who were of West Indian heritage who hated Trotter and really were enthusiastic about Garvey. Now, interestingly, my father--my [paternal] grandfather [Daniel Miller] was Jamaican, but my father [John Miller] was, was a Trotterite. Story_ID: 646473 Speaker 1: Your focus was Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts], right? Or, or was it--? Speaker 2: Well, well it--yes, it, it, it, it was--it was in a sense Roxbury. Number one is I think that the history of--the black history of Boston [Massachusetts] is so unique that that should be a major focus for blacks all across America to understand what we have done as a people, and what we're capable of. But I don't--I, I don't think that significant press, black press should be too provincial. I mean, I--the issues are fairly universal, and if we wanna get people united to join a cause then we have to make sure that information about the issues is available everywhere. Speaker 1: Okay, so how, how big a staff did, did you have when you started? Who, who, who worked on the paper? Speaker 2: Well, you know, in the beginning we had very little money to pay, pay staff and, and we put out a call for volunteers, people who had certain skills that could be helpful. And one of the things that I've--that was very, very disturbing to me is that we got no volunteers from the black community stepping forward. The--this is a time that the social change movement was great in the academic community. And so there were many people who wanted social change in the bet- and better treatment for blacks who stepped forward. And most--any of the blacks who were there were paid staff. Speaker 1: Okay, so there were whites that volunteer? Speaker 2: Beg your pardon? Speaker 1: Were there, there white people who volunteered for the Guardian [Boston Guardian]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: I mean Banner (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) All, all the volun- all the volunteers were white--mostly women actually. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay, and so what was the first home of the Bay State Banner? Speaker 2: The first what? Speaker 1: Home. Speaker 2: We, we had a, we had a little office on Warren Street, right next to Twelfth Baptist Church [Boston, Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: It was just a, it's just a little space that people would have--like a neighborhood shop. We all squeezed in there somehow and got it done. Story_ID: 646474 Speaker 1: Did you have a, a certain writer you were trying to bring over to the Bay State Banner? Or, or did you--had you targeted anybody--somebody you knew you just had to have? Speaker 2: Yeah, we had a, we had an editor originally who had experience with--at The Boston Globe. And he, he left The Globe because The Globe wasn't militant enough for him. But, interestingly, he wanted to--he, he wanted to be extremely militant at the Banner. And I tried to explain to him that people would not take to a call to arms (laughter). He, he was very insistent. Because at that time, I was a publisher and he was the editor so he insisted that his responsibility and his authority was to set the editorial position of the paper. And I told him that I could not make it successful if we pushed the views that he was suggesting. I said the advertisers would run away in droves, and in fact they did. And when the funds became inadequate to meet our payments, he was the first one out the door, which was a good thing because then I became publisher and editor and I learned never give up that title of editor, so anybody coming in understands who the editor is. Speaker 1: Okay, so you were very clear on the roles after this? Speaker 2: Ab- absolutely, that was absolutely clear after that. And he had a point, because he left, he left a job with the understanding that he would have the major role in, in defining the editorial direction. And, as I told you, I, I had expected to be only part time involved, and I was gonna be building a law practice and looking at other things, so I thought it was not inappropriate that there would be somebody there who was primarily responsible for defining the editorial role. But the problem is, that has never worked for the--for us. And I've had to--I took the editorial responsibilities back then so that anybody coming in now doesn't have an argument. Speaker 1: Okay, now who was the editor that came over from The Boston Globe? Speaker 2: His name escapes me. Story_ID: 646475 Speaker 1: Now what were the issues in 1965? You said we--the Voting Rights Act [Voting Rights Act of 1965] was passed, the Civil Rights Act in '64 [Civil Rights Act of 1964]. What, what were the issues in Boston [Massachusetts] here (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, you know, they're the, the general issues of poverty and education, but there were--there were a couple of issues that were really--that were subtle. And, and I think coming out on the wrong side of those issues was very damaging. Number one is that when he was president, the Kennedy administration [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] wanted to be sure that federal funds going into the cities would find their way into poor neighborhoods to be used effectively. As you know, federal money coming in is usually handled by the governor or the mayor, and to get it from those offices into the streets where you want it to do some good is not so easy. So they passed a rule requiring federal monies--programs, to have maximum--I think the language is: maximum feasible participation of the poor. Now theoretically, when you look at it, you say wow, that's a great idea, but I think that they underestimated the versatility of our political opponents. Because what they did is they would hire a guy off the street who was poor as a church mouse and ill educated to run a program and that, that would be--that would be the end of it. The problem that that was creating is, up until that point there were dozens of people who would volunteer in programs; they'd volunteer their time, but they were in these--but when they turned around and found out that these folks who were totally in- unqualified and incompetent were getting a good paying job running a program, which had been usually run by volunteers, they sort of felt like a fool staying in a situation like that. So the volunteers began to stay home. Now, I don't, I don't think--that wasn't the consequence that the Kennedy people expected, but that was one bad consequence that took time to fix. Story_ID: 646476 Speaker 1: But the worst situation was when--the Moynihan Report ['The Negro Family: The Case for National Action'] came out, the response of the black community was totally inappropriate. Senator Moynihan was then a, a sub secretary of labor, and he did a story on the black family. And part of the study indicated that blacks were eight times--had eight times the rate of children born out of, out of wedlock as whites. And when he published that report, there was a general scream of opposition across the country from bla- black leaders. Now-- Speaker 2: Yeah, the, the readers resented (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They, they said that it was--the, the intention was to humiliate blacks and make us look like we were sexual monsters. Now I had an opportunity--Pat Moynihan [Daniel Patrick Moynihan] was connected to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], and I, I would--had, had an opportunity to meet with him several times to try to find out what was going on. And President Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] was absolutely committed to try to improve the status--economic and welfare status of blacks. And the stra- their strategy was to--the conservative whites in government talked about family values. And he wanted to show that their practices were destroying black families and that they should take steps to prevent that from happening. And I suggested it- it'd be a good idea to have fa- family allowances like was popular in European governments at that time. But blacks' opposition was so vociferous that none of the politicians felt at all comfortable touch- it became a third rail; they didn't even wanna get near it. So nothing of advantage came out of that. And, as a matter of fact, something very damaging came out of it because the policy about assuring that no money went to households where the man was present became even more rigid. And up to that time, the black family was having difficulty because the men were--had periods of unemployment and couldn't meet all the financial responsibilities. But they said, "Okay, we'll help out, but no man can be present." That meant that good--that families had to--the, the fathers had to leave in order to support their, their children. That was in my opinion the craziest idea, given the history of blacks where men through slavery, through war, through all kinds of things had done whatever was necessary in order to make the best effort to support--to put food on the table for their families. And now they're saying you don't have to do that anymore because the government will do, and you--and the best thing you could do is just get the hell out the house. And for blacks--a black leadership to accept that was the--one of the craziest ideas I've ever heard. And I don't think we've, we've--I think if you look at the situation now, we have never recovered from it. That was the--that was the primary issue that began the destruction of the black family. Speaker 2: Okay, now see--now those are policies instituted during the Johnson administration, right? Speaker 1: That's right. And I, and I can tell you that, that, you know, I fought against that and made a lot of enemies because people were convinced that I was wrong. But I'm gonna tell you quite frankly, now you look at these--the, the different attitudes of--the different kind of culture we developed with young kids running around with guns and all that stuff, where did that come from? Where, where did it come from that men are not connected to their children? I think that that bad response to the Moynihan Report had a lot to do with it. So there, there were a lot of issues. I mean, that's not a--that's not a Boston [Massachusetts] issue; that's, that's national. And, and, and those are--were very important matters to, to cope with at that time. Story_ID: 646477 Speaker 1: Just repeat what you were saying during the break about the Moynihan Report ['The Negro Family: The Case for National Action,' Daniel Patrick Moynihan] and its im- and, and its implications and why black leadership, you know, rejected the implications of it. Speaker 2: Well, well, what it--what it did is that Johnson then--President Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] wanted to present strategies that would be benefucia- beneficial to black families. But now the liberals in [U.S.] Congress and, and black congressmen were so angry over the Moynihan Report and so terrified for it, it became the third rail. They didn't wanna get near it at all, and they didn't--they didn't come out--they didn't wanna come out in support of any of the strategies that would have been helpful at that time. Because now, now the thing is that looking forward, that it's really so bad that I don't think our society has ever understood is blacks are sort of like--they--the canary in the mine. When a society is breaking down something's ha- happening. It hits the poorest segment of society first. And so we could see the family--there was a dissolution of the family that hit blacks the most, and everybody was horrified by it and thought that we were becoming sexually dissolute. But, interestingly, now the, the rate of, of out of wedlock births among whites is higher than blacks was in 1965. So you see, if that's something to be avoided, society could have been taking steps to correct it. Seeing how, how dangerous it was for blacks they could have corrected it for everybody at that time. But socie- society chose not to it. They, they want it treated as a pecul- a black peculiarity. And we've done the same thing with drugs. And it's, it's--you know, "I'm all right, Jack. You've got the problem." And I said, "No, you know, this is a social problem and yea- we should fix it." Right now you can see that it's a social problem and whites would just say, "Well, you know, these degent- degenerate blacks are doing it." The next thing you know the--I told somebody right--one--sometime, when the drugs stuffs--situation started, I said, "If we don't correct it now, you'll be sending your grandchild to detox." They got furious with me, but guess what? (Laughter) Yep. Story_ID: 646478 Speaker 1: You mentioned I think urban renewal last time and its effect on the black community in Boston [Massachusetts]. What, what was going on with urban renewal? Speaker 2: Oh, well, urban renewal was a new idea and, and it was expansively done in, in Boston. And the--many areas in Boston were--had deteriorated housing, and so--and, and in--and light industry. And so urban renewal areas were set up, and plans were put in place, and housing that could not be renovated was torn down. And even today, if, if you go into Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts], the black area, and I show people around who are visiting. They say, "Well, when we're gonna get to Roxbury?" I said, "Well, you're in Roxbury." And they say, "Well, where are the slums?" I said, "Well, this--there are no slums. This is no--," and people get re- really surprised because of, of the quality of the housing. And, and I can remember having some debates with people as this was underway who took the position that deteriorating housing was the cause of all the other social ills. And I said, "No, no, it's one of the causes of the social ills, but everything else is not a result of it. You have to take care of those other problems separately." And beca- and now I can see there's some truth to that because the housing is really quite above standard and, and yet we, we have crime and violence nonetheless. I mean, it's sort of strange to see people coming out who were gonna be--who, who might be murderers or--you know, had--gang- gangsters coming out of really quite comfortable looking housing, it seems incongruous. Story_ID: 646479 Speaker 1: Who were some of the I guess political actors in, in, in the black community in Boston [Massachusetts] in those days--both black and white, you know, impacting-- Speaker 2: Well, of course, the, the one who is most important to me is Ed Brooke [HistoryMaker Edward Brooke]. And he, he, he was the one who was a game changer. Even when--as Ed Brooke began his career, the way the local electoral districts was structured it was almost impossible to elect a black to the city council [Boston City Council] during, during my youth because you had to be, you had to be astute enough to know how to bullet vote. Because if there were two or three votes, the opponents would say--whites would say, "Well, give me just one of your votes." So they get one vote from the white community and they'd get another vote from the black community. And it was--we, we--I don't know how we permitted ourselves to be tricked by that time and time again, so Ed Brooke never got elected to state repre- to be state rep [state representative], which was very, very important. So we had other--we had other people who were--who were elected, but to tell you the truth, if you look--it's only recently that the black population has become significant enough for the conventional political approach to be effective. What we used to do--what we used to do that was more significant was to have certain strategies or certain programs to direct public attention that would get the support of others. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so in '65 [1965] was Ed, Ed Brooke in any political office in '65 [1965]? Was he--'cause I know you, you worked on his (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, he, he was running--he, he ran for--he ran for, for state rep and, and then--and then he, he was secretary of state [sic.], and then he ran--then he was the senator. Speaker 1: Okay, secretary of state, state for--I mean-- Speaker 2: For the Commonwealth of Massachusetts (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Commonwealth, okay. All right. Can you give us some years on that? I mean-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay, all right (laughter). Speaker 2: I, I mean, I can't-- Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: I mean--I mean, I can look it up if you want me-- Speaker 1: Okay. No, that's all right (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) to give you-- Speaker 1: That's okay. Speaker 2: --specific years. Story_ID: 646480 Speaker 1: Do you remember [HistoryMaker] Charles Willie? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Charles Willie, Mel King [HistoryMaker Melvin King], Barney Frank, Louise Day Hicks, these are all people-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --that were--there may, may be others. Speaker 2: They--they're--they were very much in- they--they're all invol- they were very much involved in the education crisis. Speaker 1: Okay. So the Guardian [sic. Bay State Banner] started in '65 [1965] and the, the, the busing crisis starts, what in 1971-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --or so? Speaker 2: But, but actually, it started before. What, what hap- what happened is that everybody used to go to the neighborhood schools and that, and that was fine. Nobody had any problem with that. But there was a shift--a population shift so that the local schools--there were two problems: some of the local schools were so old and dilapidated that they were not really quite usable; and the second thing is that the available schools were overcrowded. Now under the rules that we had in Massachusetts, any public school--any seats in a public school could go to whoever showed up once the neighborhood people--neighborhood children had found a place. And it was called, you know, o- an open enrollment system. And we had a situation that is so extraordinary here, where a principal of a school--of a school in a white neighborhood stood at the door to prevent black children from the black neighborhood from enrolling. It reminds you of Faubus [Orval Faubus] down in, in Alabama [sic. Arkansas]. So what happened is that there was a--there was a group called Operation Exodus. And Ellen Jackson [Ellen Swepson Jackson] organized women--now the thing about this is that the school system [Boston Public Schools] would not provide transportation to any of these schools. Because the idea was that everybody had to walk to the school and so they would not provide edu- transportation. So Ellen Jackson set up a system of transportation called Operation Exodus. And residents from the suburbs, primarily women again, would come in with their cars and would take children to these distant districts. This is one of the things that started the battle of schools. Speaker 1: Okay, well, let me just ask, who is Ellen Jackson, first of all? Speaker 2: She was a, she was a resident. Speaker 1: Ellen Jackson. Speaker 2: Ellen. Speaker 1: Ellen Jackson. Okay, I'm listening. And so she was a resident--white woman--black woman? Speaker 2: No, she's black. Speaker 1: Black? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And she--her idea was to take students to what schools for what reason? Speaker 2: To schools in white neighborhoods-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --that had open seats. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because there was a school here in, in, particularly, in the north Dorchester area [Boston, Massachusetts] where there was--the, the population of school aged children increased substantially. Where--children were in a--in the basement of a school at these--in a, in a place that was hardly--you'd hardly wanna see your children there near a furnace room. It was just terrible. Speaker 1: Okay, so the public schools were, were bad in the community (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: They were bad. Was it, was it primarily the facilities or the educational quality was bad too? Speaker 2: Well, let's say both. But at, at the time the, the issue was really the schools were overcrowded. And you had six hundred students in a five hundred seat school. Do you, you see what I mean? Story_ID: 646481 Speaker 1: So when Ellen Jackson [Ellen Swepson Jackson] started doing this, this is like the germ of the idea for school busing for-- Speaker 2: No, no, it--nobody was thinking about school busing-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --at that time. The int- one thing that I think--I find people--that there's a misunderstanding about the school crisis is that it was not about integration in the beginning. It had nothing to do with integration. It had to do with equal disburse- disbursement of educational resources. And there was a--there was a, a, a private u- what we set up is a community school system to--I guess there was gonna be a move to boycott the public schools and set up a community school system. And behind all of these, one of the names that you didn't really--didn't mention then is very interesting, was [HistoryMaker] James Breeden. You have to put his name down there, (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Now who, who is he? Speaker 2: Well, he's a Dartmouth alum [Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire], who was a--an Episcopal priest who lived in Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts]. And he, he was sort of--while all of these battles were being fought, he was primarily the leader. He was the general, Field Marshal Breeden (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And the, the names of other people that you, you mentioned were people who had--they might be commanders of certain elements of the, of the, of the program. Speaker 1: Okay, so, so what did Breeden strategize to do--I mean, what was his strategy? Speaker 2: Well, we ultimately got to the point of talking about a community school system with taking our children out of public schools, creating a crisis in that regard. And it involved the boycotting--demonstrations outside some of the schools where people--that's where Mel King [HistoryMaker Melvin King] really got noted. Because once he, he, he and the police officers had a little confrontation--they tore his shirt off--that created an, an interesting situation. Speaker 1: Okay so, let, let me just slow down here and get this right. So marshal--I mean James Breeden had strategized that--this is like a boycott of the public schools by the black community. Speaker 2: That was a boycott. There were a num- there were a number of things that, that happened that were--that were strategic. Speaker 1: And, and the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I'm not suggesting they all happened simultaneously. The--these things were rolled out. The other--the other element that was important was that the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] through Ruth Batson, the late Ruth Batson--met with--she, she was chairman of the education committee of the NAACP--met with the school committee [Boston School Committee] to try to negotiate a better understanding or better relationship on the school system. Speaker 1: Okay so the--but the issue that James Breeden and the community was concerned about was inequity in terms of resources, right? Speaker 2: That's right. It was Speaker 1: They had poor facilities and-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --in the--in the community. Speaker 2: In fact there was one school--there was one school that was considered to be so dilapidated, and the school sys- cities--the city didn't wanna repair it. So one evening it caught fire, and the question of its repair was completely resolved. It became unusable. So--I mean--so there are lots of things that people did--different, different ways to deal with the problem. Speaker 1: So, you had like one lady, Ellen Jackson-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --who was taking advantage of open enrollment (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right-- Speaker 1: --through Operation Exodus-- Speaker 2: That's what she was doing. Speaker 1: And at the same time got like James Breeden and Mel King, they're boycotting the, the-- Speaker 2: Yeah, and the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) (unclear) public schools, Boston schools [Boston Public Schools]. Speaker 2: --and we had a--we had a--yeah, we had a school--a school system set up. And I'm trying to think 'cause the woman lives in Chicago [Illinois] now. You know, her name is Miller [ph.]. Her last name is Miller. Do you know? Speaker 1: I don't. Speaker 2: Yeah, she, she--she's a--I think she's originally from Chicago, and she went back there. And so she, she was the headmistress of the, of the school--the commu- what we call a community school. So we had office buildings and places like that where we set up classes. Story_ID: 646482 Speaker 1: Now the opposition to this came from the Boston School Committee where the, the primary job of the school committee members seemed to be to oppose whatever the black community did and to receive political attention for, for doing so. And that's, that's how Louise Day Hicks became prominent. Speaker 2: Okay. Now tell us a little bit about her. You had mentioned her before we started. You said that she has--there, there's a popular notion that she was a complete bigot, but you say that's really not necessarily true. Speaker 1: Well, you know, to tell you--de- depends on how you define it. Let me, let me tell you that people who knew her like--she's a lawyer. So there were some blacks in class with her before all of this political stuff developed, so she was gracious and nice enough. And there were people I know--I'm trying to think of who--somebody--I can't remember who it was. But somebody--some people had met with her on the issue of school desegregation to see if she would really take a leading role in bringing about school desegregation. And she was considering it. So my view of, of that is that she wasn't such a--an unbridled bigot that that was not a matter of consideration. It's my opinion that she was really considering what was the best political move to make. Speaker 2: Okay. And she didn't get a lot of support for--now, now what stance did she take? What was her (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, she finally--she finally taught--became the mother of what is called the neighborhood school movement, where everybody goes to school right where you house is. And because most of our neighborhoods were--there was ethnic solidarity in most neighborhoods, then there'd be black kids going to black schools, white kids going to white schools. Now the problem--the problem with that from the black perspective was that Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts] is a--in an old section of the city. We mentioned earlier that we had urban renewal. Part of that ur- part of that urban renewal included the deter- not only deteriorating housing but deter- deteriorating public facilities. So the number of, of usable schools declined in the black community through urban renewal and other programs. So the question, if we have neighborhood schools, and there are no schools in the black neighborhood, then where, where will the black kids--gonna go to school? And that was a--that was really the, the nature of the challenge. The, the idea that never took hold, not generally anyway, was that black students couldn't learn unless they were sitting at a dex- desk next to whites. We found that to be an abhorrent idea; and it was--it never gained much currency here. Story_ID: 646483 Speaker 1: Now the position of the--did the Banner [Bay State Banner] take an official position I guess on this? I, I suppose it did, but what was your (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, well, well, we described--see, you know, the problem is that there wasn't a put--you, you take a--you, you can't think of it as a position. There are a number of things that were occurring simultaneously and so we would support them as it--as they developed. And this--the state at some point passed a law that no school could have more than I think 50 percent racial representation. And so that created a crisis. And out of that came an organization that is still ex- in existence today. We--MET- METCO [Metropolitan Council for Educational Opportunity], the Metropolitan--I forget what the real--what the term--what the--an, an acronym--the letters stand for, but we call it METCO, where wa- where the sub- suburban communities, which are primarily all white--decided it would be advantageous to have some of the black students from the City of Boston [Massachusetts] come into their schools now to, to learn. It would be helpful to them and it also would bring their local students up to date. Because, you know, the world is changing, and everything isn't gonna be all white anymore, so. METCO--the METCO program developed out of that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Now, what happened politically is that the school committee members that were primarily supportive of the old white neighborhoods were absolutely resistant to change. And when it became apparent to them that there was--that their practices were a violation of the antidiscrimination laws, they still remained unsupportive of change; in fact, they were defiant of the federal district court. As a result, of their refusal to cooperate, Arthur Garrity [W. Arthur Garrity, Jr.], who was a judge, had to order busing. That was his last result. There were other things that show how they were adamant on really silly things. For instance, somebody--we have an, an exam school called Latin School--Boston Latin School [Boston, Massachusetts], and there was Girls' Latin School [Boston Latin Academy, Boston, Massachusetts]. They were separate but--separated by gender. The problem was the places available at the girls school were far fewer than the pay- spaces available in the boys school. He said, "You've got to equalize the amount of space available." And so they--the school committee [Boston School Committee] refused to support that. So they said, "Okay, Latin School is now coeducational." And I just--I, I, I mention that because I just wanna show you that the com- the conflict with the school committee was not all racial. It was--this, this had nothing to do with race. This is--this is a gender issue. Speaker 1: Okay, it's about, about fairness and equity-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --across the board (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I mean, you can see if a--if a girl passed the entrance exam with a 90, but because there weren't spaces in the--in the girls school, she didn't get admitted. Where you get--had guys with a score of 80 getting into the boys school. There's something wrong with that. Speaker 1: Yep, that's clearly discrimination against the girl. Speaker 2: Yeah, it's gender, gender discrimination. So we had that going on too. And that's--nobody ever mentions that be- but it just goes to show that there was a--just a crazy attitude on the school committee. An interesting thing is that one thing that I--one thing that I've come out of this situation with is that Mayor Menino [Thomas Menino], and I think correctly, decided to get a--push to get rid of an elected school committee, and I sup- I've supported that. Now blacks said, "We gotta have people on the school committee." Man, it has never worked for us and it won't work for us, and--because all it does is it provides an entry political opportunity for people with ambition to carry forward. So you perform there, and develop your followers and support base as you gird to, to go for higher office. I don't see where that's beneficial to the school system at all. That's, that's how it's always been, and I think that's how it'll always be. Story_ID: 646484 Speaker 1: The school crisis, I mean of the '70s [1970s], kind of--it--it's--it really got in the national news, it was-- Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) I mean, there were angry white parents-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --showing on the CBS News, 'NBC Nightly News.' Speaker 2: And I think, like a lot of things, it was badly reported. One thing that I can remember that was very important to me and gave, gave me great admiration for my community. As you, you probably know that as the buses of black kids were going into South Boston [Boston, Massachusetts], South Boston adults would line up and bombard the buses with bricks and stones to smash the windows. And I remember once I was standing near a school where white kids in black--in Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts], where white kids had been brought in. And we were listening to the radio account of what was happening, and you could hear the windows of the buses crashing and our children screaming in fear. And right behind us on the street, white kids who were at the black school walk into the store to get soda and stuff, and people wouldn't even think of putting their hands on 'em. Then the paper was saying there was violence on both sides. There wasn't violence. We, we, we did not abuse children--never, it didn't happen. Now there were some white kids that might've had a fight in school. You can't prevent that if--but I can tell you, a couple of times I myself stopped to provide protection to some white kids that looked like they might have walked into a little bit of trouble in a farn- in a foreign neighborhood. And I think that among adults in Roxbury, there was an absolute commitment that no child will be hurt, and there was no sense whatsoever of hurting a wil- a white child in retribution for what was being done to blacks. Speaker 1: Now were the children mandated to go to a different school or could they choose, or could they refuse, or what? How did it work? Speaker 2: You know, to tell you the truth, the--to get into--we've had so many appoi- appoint- appointed systems of determining this. But what would happen is that these--the school committee [Boston School Committee] would come up with a, an assignment plan, which the--in, in cooperation, of course, with the professionals in the school department, and then that assignment plan would have to be approved by the judge as being consistent with the--now the judge didn't always do it personally. There were consultants to the court who, who took care of that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Now the thing that really was amazing to me is that white people started--would blame others for the stupid strategies of their leaders. How did--if you put--if you have a leader who's gonna defy, defy a federal district court judge, it doesn't take mat- rocket science to understand what the consequence of that's gonna be. And so I don't know why anybody would wanna blame anybody else when your leaders behave so badly and, and foolishly. That still amazes me and I'll tell you quite frankly, I think that through this whole period there, there were, there were a couple of incidents, but blacks never would attack any children-- Story_ID: 646485 Speaker 1: I can remember one incident that was fresh in my mind. A new school was built. The Trotter School [William Monroe Trotter School, Boston, Massachusetts] was built on Humboldt Avenue. It was supposed to be--it was supposed to be a brand new school. And then people in the neighborhood [Roxbury, Boston, Massachusetts] got notices from the school department, "Your new school is now gonna be taken over by the federal district court and your children are gonna be denied this, that, and the other," and blah, blah, blah. And so I--it was clear to me that what they were trying to do was they were trying to get people excited so that they would behave violently to the integration--racial integration of this school. So on the day that it was supposed to be open, I went up there and wanted to make, make sure that everything went smoothly and to be able to report on what happened. Well, what happened that was extraordinary is that the, the militants showed up looking like they were ready to go into battle, and there were a whole bunch of, of responsible citizens who were up there. And I'd say, "Hey, Joe, what are you up here?" He said, "Oh, it's a great event. We haven't--been a long time since we got a new school." I said, "Why are you really here?" And I asked a number of people that. And he said, "Hey, there's not gonna be any hurting children in my neighborhood." And so this group of people confronted the militants, said, "Hey, if you--if you feel you need to get a--burn off a little energy, let's get it on; but you're not gonna hurt any children, not in my neighborhood." And so the militants went home, and the school opened quietly. Speaker 2: Okay. So what, what was the racial balance in the new Trotter School? Speaker 1: I don't know. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And, and I don't, I don't know what it is now. To tell you the truth, you don't have this--it's impossible to have racial balance in the Boston school system [Boston Public Schools]. Only 15 percent or so of the students are white. Because, you see, Boston has a number of kids in METCO [Metropolitan Council for Educational Opportunity]; then we have charter schools; and we have Catholic schools; and then we have private, independent schools, all serving the same student population. So the number of students that are remaining to go to public schools is much reduced, and the population of whites is substantially reduced--only about 15 percent. And, and I keep arguing now. I said, you can just stop talking about having racial balance in the schools; there's no way to do it. Look--I mean, you--it's im- it's mathematically impossible. I don't--I don't even know why we even give that much of a consideration at all. It would be nice I suppose, but it's--can't be done. Story_ID: 646486 Speaker 1: What were the first five years of the Bay State Banner like; and it--and now did you--the implication of the name is that you have a distribution that goes beyond Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 1: --right into the black community. Speaker 2: Now that's, that's an interesting question, you're very perceptive (laughter). But it--Boston [Massachusetts], the population in Boston is so small, and the population--the black population rather--and the population, it--black population in other towns is so small, I thought that the only way that we could have any kind of impact statewide is if we had some kind of a coherent publication. So when I would go to other towns around to see if we could do this, people treated me as though I as a carpetbagger coming in for some kind of mischief. Now, realizing quickly that I was not a social worker and that I had to have substantial community support if it was gonna be financially viable, I stopped doing it. And I recently, I recently had some extended circulation to Springfield [Massachusetts] and Worcester [Massachusetts], and I, I dr- I dropped Springfield and we still have Worcester. Because to tell you the truth, we just don't have the resources to function in black communities with--where there's not a very sophisticated awareness of the importance of the black press. What has happened in Boston, though, is quite different. Because after forty-seven years of keeping faith and keeping the people informed and serving as a bulwark of the black community against any kind of oppressive conduct, bringing the public light on issues that are of importance, the, the support and I guess the respect for the Banner in the black community in, in the greater Boston area is enormous. And, in fact, we find it--I find it's--there's a whole lot of respect in the white community for it too. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So we, we--let's say that I--our, our name is a little wishful thinking (laughter). Story_ID: 646487 Speaker 1: I know the Bay State Banner has been through a couple of crises. I know one was 2009, but, but back in the early days did you have--did you--what was your biggest crisis? Speaker 2: Well, we've, we've had--we've always had financial crisis. And there was--there was a--one where--this, this recent one was the hardest--was the toughest because I--I'm getting to a point in my life where going in the first line of battle for this kind of thing is a little arduous. But I had another time some years ago where we could not continue financially, so what we did is--there, there was some people in the community, mostly white--young white guys who'd made a--some money who were willing to come forward. And it didn't take a whole lot to get us through the hurdle. We refinanced and sup- continued to publish and, interestingly, all--they--they've all been paid off. Speaker 1: Okay, but you had it to go--you, you had to go out and get that money yourself? Speaker 2: Yeah, I did. And, and I'm gonna tell you quite frankly, I don't think blacks--I don't think blacks understand the importance of the press enough to know why they should make sure that we have a very aggressive, assertive, and informative media. It's--and I, I blame the black leadership partially to this. Because, you know, every--if you look at the nature of black leadership, what have we been talking about all the, all the years? Civil rights, civil rights; we've gotta--so what, what we've done is we've conditioned black people to have an expectation of laying back and so all of a sudden someone's gonna give you something; something's gonna come in. Well, if the--maybe that's--should be what happens. Maybe that's--if you wanna have a totally just system, but that's really--that's not realistic; that's not what's gonna happen. And what we should be doing more of is training blacks and making them understand how competitive America is and what you have to do in order to, to be in the game so that you can succeed. We spend time on how to succeed individually, and, and that's being taken up more. But I'm gonna tell you, if we don't really learn how to succeed more as a group, we're gonna start losing--we're gonna start losing members (laughter). Story_ID: 646488 Speaker 1: When you look back over the history of the Banner, what, what would you consider the--to be the I guess the high--the high points of the Bay State Banner, in terms of story or an issue you helped (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, every now and then there are things that happen that are important. And, you know, during the early '60s [1960s], we--there, there was a battle of--you, you know, this--the, the cities were erupting. And we had what was described in the press as a race riot in Boston [Massachusetts], but it was absolutely not a race riot. What it was was a, a community that was opposed to welfare restrictions--came into Grove Hall [Boston, Massachusetts], which is a section of the black community to, to campaign at a welfare center and caused some concern. And what they did that was really quite frightening for the people working in the welfare office, they locked the doors so they couldn't get out at the end of the day, while they were campaigning for more--for different welfare benefits. So the police came up, but the police was (unclear). Police went after everybody. And I have photographs of people--of a white person and a black person in a phone booth trying to keep the door closed and a policeman with a club trying to club them. So it wasn't--it wasn't racial; it was that the group that they were after was--the group that was doing the demonstration was interracial, and the police just went after everybody. You know, people were coming home from work and getting off the public transportation and being attacked by the police. So my headline at that time was, "Police Riot in Grove Hall, Scores Injured." Now why this was important is that the major--The Boston Globe and the Herald [Boston Herald] took the position that this was a race riot. And so they, they attacked my editorial, and they decided to use their pressure to drive me out. And somehow it didn't work. And finally, the publisher of the Herald, old Hap Kern [Harold G. Kern], asked me down for lunch, and he apologized. That was--which was very interesting. 'Cause here's what happened: is that the people downtown--there was a fellow who--they used to have a, a trade association for all the retailers, retail trade association. And they had a meeting on this issue because they were afraid that the demonstration would come down to--town to the shopping area. And they called in the police commissioner and the comput- the, the--at least the deputy had to explain in some detail precisely what happened. Now these big merchants put my--a friend of mine who is the head of the retail trade association, who was being criticized for ever having helped the Banner. And he was being criticized for doing that. And he--the guy from the police office got up and described what happened. And when he finished, my friend got up and read what the Banner said. He said, "I find no difference between these two descriptions of what happened." And the people listened and the opposition was over. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, about, about what year was this? Speaker 2: Beg pardon? Speaker 1: About what year was it, ru- rough- roughly? Speaker 2: Sixty-eight [1968]--six- oh, I--yeah, it must have been about '68 [1968] because that was before--remember the Kerner Commission report [National Advisory Commission on Civil Disorders] came out in '68 [1968]? Speaker 1: Right, uh-huh, yeah. Speaker 2: It was--it must have been about '66 [1966], '67 [1967]. Story_ID: 646489 Speaker 1: Because coming off of that, I formed an organization, community media organization to get all of the media together to prova- to provide employment for more blacks in the, in the press and to make sure that the coverage was more accurate. And it was interesting 'cause we had the--for the first time we had blacks working--I got cameramen hired for television. It made a, made a big difference. Now that was an important thing. Speaker 2: And the, the name of the organization was? Speaker 1: I--you know, the funniest thing is I've been trying to--the organization doesn't exist anymore, and I've been trying to, to find some reference to it. And Ruth Batson had all the--had all the records, and I didn't think to get it from her family when she, she left; she--she's dead. And the--Tom Winship [Thomas Winship], who used to be the longtime editor of The Boston Globe, was instrumental. And I'm gonna tell you how cla- how--one of--a couple of things that happened that was really--that--man, you know, the people know how to disappoint you, don't they? 'Cause here's--I got all of the media together, and I was trying to open opportunities for blacks in the media. And two things happened that was so disappointing. I remember, we have private clubs in Boston [Massachusetts]. You pro- you have them in New York [New York] too, but--I mean in Chicago [Illinois], but they're very--these are the old British clubs for gentry. You know what I mean? So we had one of the meetings there, and I was going into one of the clubs with a nice source of people, and I waved. Well, you know these rumors are, "Mel Miller [HistoryMaker Melvin Miller], I saw him going into So and So club and he's going in there to sell us out," (makes sounds). "That's what he's going to do, sell us out." Well, I was going in and negotiating with all these people to try to open jobs for blacks. That's what I was doing, and that--that's, that's the kind of reception we got. Now the other thing is that I finally, you know, got one, one of the hired media to hire a black guy. And, and so one of the first things he did was to write a story that was antagonistic and critical of the Banner [Bay State Banner]. I guess he was showing the man, ha- how I can be--, "I know how to beat a black as good as you do." You know, what's wrong with us, man? What's wrong with us? Speaker 2: This is-- Speaker 1: I--that's why--this is why I think that if we don't--if we don't really step up and become a bit more than we are, I think future--I think that we're at the end of the road. There are a whole lot of people who aren't gonna--aren't gonna to- tolerate this anymore. I look at the younger people. They're a--they--they're amazed by this kind of behavior and they say, "I'm not in it." Speaker 2: Well, now African American peop- people can be very suspicious and so that's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, but--and you pay the--you, you, you know, sometimes you're right. I mean, it's not something that's unique to black, as, as I just told you the story. Look at the Irishmen who thought--who, who really didn't come to awareness that they were being sold down the river by the city councilors, who were developing a great big image for themselves, knowingly putting their, their voters into an inferior position on an issue. So it's not--it's nothing exclusive to blacks. That--I don't wanna give that impression. Speaker 2: No-- Speaker 1: But I'm gonna tell you quite frankly, I think it's--it can sometimes get to be class connected. And as you have people who are, who are spending time developing the--their intellectual and education skills, they get a little tired, you get a little tired. I mean--I mean, don't you get tired of people coming up to you? I do. I mean, I remember a guy came up to me--you gotta--you--'cause they think I'm rich or something. "Yeah, you gotta give back to the community; you gotta," (makes sounds). I say, "That's fine." I said, "You gotta give too." "I ain't got nothing to give" (makes sounds). I said, "Are you registered to vote?" "No, I ain't registered to vote 'cause, 'cause what good does that do me?" Here's a guy on, on food stamps, living in Section 8 housing. I mean, how much fool- time are we gonna accept foolishness. You know what I'm saying? See, he, he doesn't even wanna be part of the plan enough to vote or to register to vote, but he wants help. We gotta get--and I'm, I'm, I'm really--I really blame our leadership for not moving beyond that gotta give something attitude that's--that, that civil rights attitude. We gotta make people understand that every man has something to give. Everybody has something to give, and you have to get with the program, and you have to do your work. And you're gonna be rewarded on the basis of what you do, what you accomplish. You're not gonna just sit around and take, take, take and somebody gonna bring it to you--that's not gonna happen. Story_ID: 646490 Speaker 1: Now maybe we'll me- leave the Banner [Bay State Banner] for a minute and go to the bank. Now what, what--you were i- instrumental in the development of Unity Bank [Unity Bank and Trust Company; OneUnited Bank, Boston, Massachusetts]-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --here (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 1: Yeah, tell us--tell us about that. Now this, this is the third leg of what you saw as what, what we needed. We needed the legal-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --black lawyers. We needed the newspaper. We needed a back--a black financial institution, right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: --this is the third leg. Speaker 2: Well, it's--some business guys decided to form a black bank. None of them had any banking experience. Speaker 1: Are these black bus- businessmen? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, they were all black. Speaker 1: I'm asking because sometimes (laughter) strange things happen so. Speaker 2: Oh yeah. No, they were--they were all black. And so they started a bank called Unity Bank. And-- Speaker 1: This is in-- Speaker 2: In, in-- Speaker 1: --the mid-'60s [1960s], right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, it was--yeah, I think it was the late '60s [1960s]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. And it wasn't too long before--as you know the, the bank--banking is the most highly regulated industry in the country. I can't imagine--I don't think there's any other more aggressively regulated--you know, you get a banking examination periodically, regularly. I shouldn't say--periodically makes it sounds like it's--you know, these are annual things. They go over your books. You have, have to follow records and there's a whole lot to it. And these chaps had no experience in banking, so it wasn't long before the bank examination found that the banks were--that the bank was not performing well and would have to be closed. So the bank commissioner then was Freyda Koplow [Freyda Peck Koplow], and she called me and told me that they were gonna close the bank. And I, I think she called me in because she knew it was gonna be a major story. So I pleaded with her, and I said, "Look, I understand, but is there any way that the bank can survive because you don't get too many chances to start a bank; and if we fail in this one, we won't get another chance." So she said, "Well, let me go and have some people look over the records." And so she called me back and she said, "We--I decided that if you--if you'll be the conservating--my conservator, I'll--I, I won't close the bank, but I'll give you a year to get it operating in the black." And so I said, "Well, you know, I don't know much about banking." She said, "Oh, you can do it." And so I did accept it. And in six months we were operating profitably, but we still had a terrible burden. We had bad loans that were in the background that were made before I got in there that weren't gonna--and the--it looks like our capital was gonna erode. Story_ID: 646491 Speaker 1: So I ran it for a while and tried to come up with a plan to rehabilitate the bank. And then Mrs. Koplow [Freyda Peck Koplow], who was the banking commissioner, decided it, it was time for her to, to leave, so she, she was a--she retired. And her, her, her successor, who was--trying to think of the name was--oh, Carol Greenwald [Carol Schwartz Greenwald], Carol Greenwald was her successor--made an arrangement with a major bank that was gonna give us a branch for very little money. When I looked at the marketing, I said that's not a good place for us to, to have a branch. And she insisted that it was a good opportunity. And I said, "Well, it's fine. I've done my analysis so I think it's not something that we should do; what I would--if--I understand you're the boss, if you want me to do it, would you just put your request in writing so that we--there's another--under- an understanding as to what it is that you're requiring me to do," and she refused. And I said, "Well listen, my judgment is that it's not a great idea. Your opinion is that it's a good idea and we should do it. But you want me to take the weight if you're wrong." I said, "I don't do stupid very well; you're gonna have to write it down or else I'm not gonna do it." So she got irate, and I said, "Don't worry," I said, "you find yourself a new conservator; I'm gone." So that's how I left. Speaker 2: So what was--how, how long were you the conservator for the bank? Speaker 1: Oh, I think just a couple of years. I, I think it was--that was the most that I was a conservator for. Speaker 2: Okay, and that--this would--this would be in the-- Speaker 1: In the '70s [1970s]. Speaker 2: In the '70s [1970s], okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. So, so what happened is that they, they formed--by the way, they did do that and as--just as I predicted it failed. The--that branch collapsed, and they formed Boston Bank of Commerce. And the importance of that is that the Boston Bank of Commerce--oh, the, the two, two blacks, a married couple, Kevin Cohee and Teri Williams, invested and gained control of the Boston Bank of Commerce, and now it's become the largest black owned and operated bank in the country, OneUnited Bank [Boston, Massachusetts]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And I--I'd like to say that had I not kept Unity Bank [Unity Bank and Trust Company; OneUnited Bank, Boston, Massachusetts] open and operating, there wouldn't have been the base to--on which to build OneUnited Bank. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So that was--that was an important thing I did, I think, while I was running the, the, the newspaper [Bay State Banner]. Story_ID: 646492 Speaker 1: All right, the bank. Speaker 2: Okay, one of the--one of the important aspects of the bank is that--of having a bank is that you--it gives us a great opportunity to influence financial policies that affect the community. And while I was running Unity Bank [Unity Bank and Trust Company; OneUnited Bank, Boston, Massachusetts], that opportunity came along. The government had decided for the first time they were gonna issue food stamps. There'd been no such food stamps program in the past. And so the banks were supposed to be the mechanism for giving the food stamps to worthy people. Problem is the banks didn't wanna do it because it would fill their bank's working areas on, on welfare day, and if they made a mistake, there was, there was no money in it for--no fees of any substant- of any substance. And if they made a mistake then they had to pay for it. They weren't excited about doing it, but they didn't want to jump out of it and say no because of the bad publicity that that would create. So I was running the black banks so that the, the--they said that they're not gonna do it unless the blank bank--black bank does it. So everybody assumed that that was a slam dunk. But I decided that I wasn't gonna do it unless the welfare commissioner decided to change the way that the money was given to welfare mothers. The 1st and the 15th were called mothers' days, and they would get a check on those days. The problem was that all these petty thieves knew who the welfare mothers were, and they would go and steal the checks. And there was--there were ways that they could go and cash their checks for ten cents on the dollar or something. And it was--it was not a very efficient way, so I made the welfare system--I said, "Listen, let's do it by computers." And I said, "You, you know, you have--you could do it by the names in the alphabet, all the A's get it on the 1st; all the Bs get it on the 2nd." There was a lot of resistance, and when I said no, all of the liberals went after me and the bank and were criticizing this bad behavior. And the fact is, my position was: that look at, we never had welfare ever before, so we're not depriving people of anything that they never had. My position was: let's set up a system to make it efficient so everybody could get their food stamps and the welfare payments. Oh, the, the criticism of me and the bank never stopped, but finally, they de- realized that since I wasn't gonna budge, that they had to use the computer system. And now what they have is a--you get--the welfare people get paid by the last name of the welfare numbers. So, you know, there are ten numbers so that would--that will take two weeks and then you do, do it again. So the, the first--the first two weeks and the second two they get their monies restored, and now they do it all over the country. But a little black bank in Boston [Massachusetts] is the one who started that; and that's, that's one reason why it's important to have a bank. Story_ID: 646493 Speaker 1: The other, the other reason, now our successor bank, OneUnited Bank [Boston, Massachusetts], was there and enabled some blacks in Boston [Massachusetts] to become the only black community in the country to build a, a skyscraper. We have a skyscraper that was built by blacks in Boston, and as far as I know, nobody else has really built a skyscraper. Now that blacks and--have been apartment building--they've built apartment buildings, hotels, and things of that sort. But a skyscraper which is, let's say, a million square feet or more, the only one I know of is the building that is now occupied by State Street Bank [State Street Corporation, Boston, Massachusetts] that was built by blacks, and it came in under budget and on time. Speaker 2: And what, what was it originally (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Wa- I beg your pardon? Speaker 2: The skyscraper, what, what was the skycrape- scraper's--what was it named originally or what was it built--who was it built for originally? Speaker 1: It was built as an office building, and they were gonna get various tenants to, to take up space in the office building. A major tenant was gonna be the State Street Bank building, but when they saw how it turned out, they decided to take the whole building. And it was more, more favorable for them to buy the building than to lease it. And so that's how that happened (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, so it's always been (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But-- Speaker 2: --the State Street Bank Building [Boston, Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: But yeah, but what happened is that-- Speaker 2: I mean, is that, that true? It had--it's always been the State Street Bank Building 'cause I don't know. I'm not from Boston. Is that it? Speaker 1: I think so. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. Speaker 1: Let's say the State Street Bank has always been in that building. Speaker 2: Okay, okay, that's why I was asking 'cause I just wanted to know what the name of the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So I think--I, I, I, I, I cite these two things because when, when the rubber hit the road on that project, if, if it hadn't been a bank come--able to come forward with the finances to back up the black entrepreneurs, they would have lost out. But that's why it's important to have, to have a black bank. People don't understand it because they don't understand finance, but it's--it is absolutely critical. Speaker 2: Okay. Now I have a note here. Now tell me if this makes sense. The--my note says that you were the, the conservator of Unity Bank [Unity Bank and Trust Company; OneUnited Bank, Boston, Massachusetts] in 1973. Is that true? Does that sound right? Speaker 1: Yeah, I think that's about right. Speaker 2: Okay, 'cause you were saying six- '68 [1968] before, so, so (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No that-- Speaker 2: --sev- '73 [1973]-- Speaker 1: No, no. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: That's when they started the bank. I wasn't-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: --a conservator. Speaker 2: Oh-- Speaker 1: You asked me when I--they started the bank-- Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: --and I said--yeah, but they ran it into the ground. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: You see? Speaker 2: So it started in '68 [1968]. Speaker 1: I, I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And you became-- Speaker 1: --think that they started the bank in I think--I think it was the late '60s [1960s], but when I became conservator was around--that's about-- Speaker 2: It's '73 [1973]. Speaker 1: Yeah, I--the conservator isn't--doesn't come in day one. Speaker 2: Right, right, so you were conservator for two years? Speaker 1: Yep, that's about right. Speaker 2: Okay, so until '75 [1975]. Story_ID: 646494 Speaker 1: Now let me go back a little bit more. You, you were talking about, when we came in that you ran for [U.S.] Congress against Louise Day Hicks back in '72 [1972]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Now tell us about that race, 'cause that, that--that's when she was in the thick of controversy. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Well, Louise Day Hicks became the leader of the antibusing brigade, and she--this catapulted her to a seat in Congress. So in 1972, when she was running for reelection, there is--a decision was made to--for [HistoryMaker] Hubie Jones to run as her opponent. The reason for that is that there was a black candidate who ran in '70 [1970] who did very well, but he, he was a, a respected layman in the Catholic church. And he was gonna run again, but he was offered an opportunity to become the first black federal district court judge, and so he, he decided to do that and, and, and he, he, he didn't run. And Hubie Jones had decided to run a campaign. Now Hubie Jones in my opinion ran about the--about the worst political campaign I've seen. First of all, Congress--the [U.S.] Constitution rather, says that in order to run for Congress, a, a candidate only needs to be a citizen of the state. He doesn't have to be a citizen of any specific congressional district. But politically speaking, if you live outside of a congressional district, it's very rare to be able to be elected to represent people in a district where you don't live. So first of all, Hubie Jones was wrong because he didn't live in the district, so that was--that was a disaster. Next thing is that his whole political orient- orientation up to that time was to--as a militant. And running a militant campaign against somebody like Louise Day Hicks was perfect to incite all of the quiet Irish and other immigrant groups to come to join the battle against this black militant. And I said we had to have somebody in the campaign first of all who didn't make us look foolish and who could present a commonsense approach. 'Cause what we had going is that there was a candidate [Joe Moakley] who was--who could win. A white man from South Boston [Boston, Massachusetts] who decided to do something that was very rare and very risky. He decided not to enter the primary but to run as an Independent. And, and the primary was just too doubtful. It, it looked like Louise Day Hicks would win that, but I had to be in the race to make it clear that there wasn't--that she would--shouldn't get too strong a support. Well, it went down just as I expected, and Louise Day Hicks lost. And so we had--we, we were able to be helpful in getting her out of public life. Speaker 1: Okay, so this is the election in 1972? Speaker 2: Seventy-two [1972]. Speaker 1: So, so the fellow that ran as an Independent won, was that what you were--? Speaker 2: Yes, he did. Speaker 1: And what was his name? Do, do, do you remember? Speaker 2: (Makes sounds). Speaker 1: It's all right if you don't, but (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, yeah. Story_ID: 646495 Speaker 1: Now in 1981, you founded the--you were one of the co-founders of Fitch, Miller and Tourse [Fitch, Miller and Tourse; Fitch, Wiley, Richlin and Tourse, Boston, Massachusetts], right? Speaker 2: (Pronunciation) Tourse. Speaker 1: Toice--Te- Tourse? Speaker 2: You pronounce that Tourse, yeah. Speaker 1: Tourse, okay--law firm. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Right, okay. So had, had, had you been practicing law, you know, be- you know-- Speaker 2: Well I was assistant U.S. attorney you know. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --I know, for--briefly, but-- Speaker 2: Yeah, and, and I hadn't been, I hadn't been practicing law--I haven't been practi- I hadn't been practicing law as an aggressive thing. I would--I would help, I would help people. I mean, I had--there was a fellow I used to do legal work for who--he's, he's, he's gone now, but there are people who needed help but didn't have the resources for normal law firm type representation. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so--but the--I--the idea for the law, the law firm, was that your idea or one of the other proponents? Speaker 2: Well, both--all of us thought about, because there had never been a black law firm that dealt with sophisticated issues. Blacks had always been at the service end of the profession. You know, you go in town--all the--, "So and So is a black lawyer. Yeah, if you want a will made, that's where you go." Or, "You, you wanna buy a house? There's a lawyer who does the real estate transaction." Always--or sometimes, "He's not bad if you had an accident, collect insurance," those kinds of things. We said it's time for blacks--for a black law firm to be able to step up and do more sophisticated transactions, that's what we were organizing ourselves to do. Speaker 1: Okay, and by more sophisticated transactions you mean--give, give, give an example. Speaker 2: Well, well, let me tell you how sophisticated we got. We were the bond counsel for the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. That's pretty big I think. We, we were counsel for the development of a major shopping mall, (pause) and we represented some major corporations on special issues. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We're one of the counsels for the--I wanna say the BRA [Boston Redevelopment Authority], for the MTA [Metropolitan Transit Authority; Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority], and we--you know, we were--we did work on major--some major real estate transactions, you know, $100 million real estate transactions. That, that was a, a level that was different from what was normal among black law firms. Story_ID: 646496 Speaker 1: Now meanwhile, did the paper [Bay State Banner] have any competition during the-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --seventies [1970s] and '80s [1980s]. Speaker 2: Yes, from, from time to time competitors would, would come forward. Speaker 1: Did--was there a formidable competitor at any time? Speaker 2: Well (laughter), I remember when we first started, there was a guy who had a, a couple of presses, and he used to put out community newspapers, you know, the local ones. He used to do the print, print for them, and he had some for himself. And he used to put out one, the Mattapan [Boston, Massachusetts] paper, which is part of my turf, another Dorchester [Boston, Massachusetts] paper, a Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts] paper. And so, actually, before I started my paper, I went to see him and I said, "Look, you know, your, your paper has to have broader content or else it's really not serving us." And so he got pretty arrogant, and so I told him, "Well, I can tell you that you're not serving the needs of the people, and if I--if you don't--if you're not gonna do it then we will." And he said, "How are you gonna do that? We have a press, and we have this," and--and I said, "Listen, let me tell you that if I go out and do this, you will not have these papers a year from now." And he was--he got very hostile and excitable, but a year--within a year he'd closed both the papers that were competitive. Story_ID: 646497 Speaker 1: Tell us about your involvement with WHDH. Now you, you were-- Speaker 2: With what? Speaker 1: WHDH-TV [Boston, Massachusetts]? Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, well, as you know, the televisions stations have to comply with FCC [Federal Communications Commission] regulations, and we fought--we--I, I joined a group that had channeled--that had challenged WHDH because it hadn't complied with the community involvement regulations, and it was a very expensive, time consuming challenge. And the, the, the fellow--the family that was directed, the Mugars--Stephen Mugar [Stephen P. Mugar], who was the founder of the Star Markets [Star Market Company], and his son, David [David G. Mugar], were the leaders of the group that I joined. There were two groups. The other group was being led by a group of blacks and whites together; so we had these two groups, and we finally won-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --the license. Story_ID: 646498 Speaker 1: Now one of the things that I--one of the, one of the things that I wanna tell you about too, that was an ongoing thing with the newspaper [Bay State Banner], that was important. And, and that is that when we--when we started the newspaper, employment in--for blacks in Boston [Massachusetts] was dismal. Boston was a place where blacks would come to school and get educated, but there was never a place for them, no worthwhile jobs. And a dear friend of mine, Tom Brown [Thomas J. Brown], who was a graduate of--he's, he's in his eighties now--who was a graduate of Brown University [Providence, Rhode Island], was also--was the first--one of the first blacks in the advertising industry. And he came here and he, he was doing some work for Polaroid, and the, the head of Polaroid took a liking to him. And he, he left his own independent operation and became special representative to the president of Polaroid Corporation. Now he used that position as a catbird seat to put pressure on major companies in the area to hire blacks. And the--this was--this was just an unbelievable and magnificent effort. He, he formed an organization called Jobs Clearing House [Jobs Clearing House, Inc., Boston, Massachusetts], and when he, when he would talk to the companies, because he was--he was the assistant to Ed Land [Edwin H. Land], the president of, of Polaroid, they'd have to take the call and have to pay some attention to it. And so he would comment about the possibility of getting a broader ethnic base at, at, at the employment level. Now they didn't want to be cooperative, so they would say, "Well, you know, we have a job." They knew he had no way of finding people, and he didn't. So he came to me and said, "Look, why don't we work--when we--when I get these people, they--they're setting me up. I know that they should be advertising with you but they don't want to." So I said, "Okay; this is so important to the black community, I'll run those ads." And so he started doing that and we started running ads free for Jobs Clearing House. Over the years of the Jobs Clearing House, I was asking Tom--he says he, he thinks he placed about ten thousand people, using his--using his own resources. Here, again, I was talking about the sort of give me attitude that you find too much in the black community. He said in all tho- the years that he was doing that only two or three blacks ever came forward to make a donation to Jobs Clearing House, even after they got a job from them. And, and I--and now he, he absolutely changed the nature of the employment market for blacks in Boston [Massachusetts]. Story_ID: 646499 Speaker 1: Another aspect that was really important at that time is a telephone company, New England Telephone [New England Telephone and Telegraph Company], which is now Verizon [Verizon New England, Inc.], didn't have any blacks at all in any serious position in the company. There was one guy I know who might have been some kind of engineer in the office, but it was a totally all white organization. But what had happened is that the, the chairman was about to retire, and he was terrified because somebody had filed an antidiscrimination lawsuit against Southern Bell [Southern Bell Telephone and Telegraph Company; AT&T Inc.]. Now, telephone companies have to--telephone companies have to get approval and get licenses from the FCC [Federal Communications Commission], which imposes certain nondiscrimination rules and regulations against them. So he thought that sin- the situation was bad up here that it was just inevitable that somebody would come and bring a campaign. So I took adva- took advantage of this and met with them, and we started running a campaign to, to begin to hire blacks. And the most amazing thing is that when I first did it, I had a delegation of blacks come to my office and tell me that, that it was an abomination that I would run ads [in the Bay State Banner] from the New England telephone company when I should have known they don't hire blacks. And I, I said, "Yeah, but," I said, "we're going to now." He said, "No, what they're doing now is they're just--they're just trying to cover their butts and, and you guys are gonna make some money and make us look foolish. We go down there, they'll turn us out." And I said, "No, they won't, so we'll go down together and, and we'll set up employment offices." So I went down and said, "Look, you gotta set up employment offices in the black community; you guys have created a situation which is very bad," talking to the telephone company. And they understood it and they did it. The only--the only sad thing about it is that the campaign was so effective that it wasn't long before they found it unnecessary to run those big ads (laughter). I guess they found it unnecessary to run those big ads anymore and so we lost that revenue. But to show you how severe the resistance is, the whites' unions who are running the company at the levels that we are trying to get people employed, those white unions went on--they took a strike, rather than agree to the terms of--see, what they had done is they set up an employment ladder where you had to start at this level and then move up to A to B, C, D, and then you move up. We, we, we rejected that and I insisted that the company reject that, because I said you have to take in people who are qualified who had collater- had collateral experience at some other place. They don't have to be at the telephone company. Let's say they came from another telephone company doing the same thing. According to your system, they'd still have to start at this low level. That's crazy. And so that's, that's how we had to break the union to do this, and, and the union took a strike. The interesting thing is that when the Boston [Massachusetts] papers wrote about it, they never understood the nature of the strike. They never got it right. Now, I didn't write about it in the right kind of way because it would have been impolitic. You know what I mean? I would have had to--it, it, it would have--it would have held the telephone company up to a line of criticism, which we were--we had already moved beyond. The executives didn't care about it because it didn't affect them. But once it was really pointed out to them, they were willing to take a strike to stop it, and I wasn't--you, you see what I mean? Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So this--so that was--to me, there was a lot of work like that changing the environment in Boston that, that we were able to do. Story_ID: 646500 Speaker 1: You were at WHDH [WHDH-TV, Boston, Massachusetts] for about eleven years, right? (Mumbles). Speaker 2: Well, that was--that was the length of time--yeah. I mean, it was--if you're counting the time of the challenge and the time that we actually owned the station. That's why I said on my re- resume it sort of doesn't make sense to leave out the fact that I'm a lawyer, because I was general counsel to the TV station. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: What I--as, as general counsel one of the things--those were the days when on air personalities had big contracts, so one of the jobs was to negotiate those contracts and, and work on those contracts--a lot of real estate stuff, a lot of things you wouldn't even think about, like negotiating space on a tower. There were lots of defama- defamation allegations. They'd get that all the time (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That tell--that's just to give you the, the nature of the practice. Story_ID: 646501 Speaker 1: What are the most popular features of the Bay State Banner? Are there--are they--are there features that are more popular than others or peop- people like focus in on? I know jobs--seems like that's a big deal, a lot of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, but the job--the jobs--the jobs market has dried up because all of that is now going on, on the Internet. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So we're, we're gonna try--we're gonna try to bring some of it back, but that's one thing that works really well on the Internet, so that's, that's a, a problem for us now. Speaker 1: And you have a website yourself now, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, we do. Speaker 1: Baystateban- banner.com [baystatebanner.com]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And when did you start? Where--were you early in, in doing that or late, or just about right? Speaker 2: Well, you know, to tell you the truth, you know, what people call a website sometimes is a Raggedy Anne type thing (laughter). I think ours is, is fairly good. Now, now we're trying to make it a little tighter. You know, there's--one of the things that's happening in journalism that's really scary is that there are people who know how to do things technologically to rev up the number of visits that you get, so that they can increase the amount that they charge for the ads. I'm not sure that, you know, they--if they have a mechanism that'll make you click in, which will be recorded as a visit, but you saw this is not what I--and you move out, that hasn't done the advertiser any good. But that's what's happening now. Story_ID: 646502 Speaker 1: Who are some of your popular writers, or your favorite writers for your paper, for the Bay State Banner? Speaker 2: Well, Howard Manly, who is the executive editor, has had extensive journalism experience. He worked at the Globe [The Boston Globe] and the Herald [Boston Herald], the--I think it's Newsweek magazine. So he's been around and he has an important style of writing. Also, one of my former editors, who is now--most of our--the, the way this works now, most of our writers are stringers. And one of the important ones is--used to be Brian O'Connor, who used to be our managing editor, who now is--works for the Kennedys, for Joe Kennedy [Joseph P. Kennedy II]. And so he's so good, you know, we, we can put him on something and he'll get it done. We have a couple of other people who have specialties who we call. We do not have--what we don't have is we don't have many writers who we put on full time. That's, that's a recipe for financial disaster. Story_ID: 646503 Speaker 1: Is your paper [Bay State Banner] associated with the NNPA [National Newspaper Publishers Association]? Speaker 2: I was (laughter)--I wanna tell you, some years ago I went through a whole procedure of joining the NNPA. A long time ago I'd--I, I belonged to it, and I found out then that the--they didn't have the leadership and nothing was happening, so I just sort of let my membership lapse. It didn't, it didn't--nothing was happening, so I decided several years ago, well, looks like they getting it--getting with it, maybe I'll join again. It's a very arduous process to join. I don't know whether you're familiar with that. You have to, you have to get somebody of some substance to recommend you and, and then you have to go through a process of submitting articles to, to demonstrate that you're a black organization. And we went through all of these things, and we had somebody who was supposed to be shepherding the process. And they had a meeting--by the way, you have to be approved at a general meeting of the board. I don't know whether it's an open meeting or just a meeting--and we get approved, and so we never heard anymore. And then come to find out they lost everything. And so I said well, all right. Speaker 1: So you just forgot about it (laughter)? Speaker 2: Forgot about it. Speaker 1: Okay, so-- Speaker 2: Forgot about it. Speaker 1: --so, I take it, it, it--you don't--you don't think it would've make that--made that much difference I guess? Speaker 2: I don't know. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: What--I mean, I know I'm not gonna spend a whole lot of time--I mean, some things I could tell you. I don't wanna mess--I mean, I'm--I don't wanna denigrate a black organization, but I must say, the way this was handled is unbelievable. Speaker 1: So the intake side-- Speaker 2: Beg pardon? Speaker 1: The intake function of NNPA did not work for you very well (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, not at all. Speaker 1: So you got a-- Speaker 2: And, and the organization that's supposed to be--you were supposed to have an agency that gets ads but try to get paid from it after they get an ad, and so it just wasn't worth it. After a while, we said hey, can't go that route. Story_ID: 646504 Speaker 1: Are your writers and staff [at the Bay State Banner] associated with the National Association of Black Journalists [NABJ] at all? Speaker 2: Yes--well, you know, they, they are independently associated. I think Howard's [Howard Manly] a member. Speaker 1: Okay, and what were-- Speaker 2: And I, I, I used to go to, to the annual meeting sometimes. I, I like that organization but, you know, I'm of a--I'm of an age where it's gotta be--sometimes things break my heart too much to go--we're not where we should be in most things. You know what I mean? And, and, and to tell you the truth, I, I just don't unders- I have a hard time understanding us anymore. You know, here we are in a state of, of--we're really in a--we're at war for our existence as prosperous--existence as prosperous people, and we misdirect our energies. I don't understand how hip hop ever became so popular. It's, it's not good poetry or good music. And, and everybody seems to find this acceptable. How is it acceptable for us to--for guys to wear their crazy clothes with their underwear exposed, or these crazy hairdos? I mean--you, you know, I--I'll show you the story about my neighborhood, and then you tell me--I'm sure you could look at the data, and so what with people are doing now, and you tell me whether we're going forward or back. You know what I'm saying? Speaker 1: Okay, so, now what, what about Maynard Institute [Robert C. Maynard Institute for Journalism Education, Oakland, California]. Speaker 2: The what? Speaker 1: The Maynard Institute-- Speaker 2: Yeah, they're pretty good. I, I, I knew--I knew--he and I were friends, you know. Of course, he's dead now. Speaker 1: Robert Maynard [Robert C. Maynard], right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 646505 Speaker 1: So you went digital. You got a website. And is the--is--has, has the digital age hurt the circulation of the paper [Bay State Banner] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, digital age has really been damaging. And, and I think it's gonna be more damaging. First of all, it killed our help wanted ads, which is--which was a, a serious source of, of revenue. And I have to acknowledge that digital ad- help wanted ads is a good idea, but mo- most important of all, I think it's gonna misdirect our young people into believing that a lot of that stuff that you get on the Internet is an acceptable source of information. And it's also what we've--what we do now more than ever, than ever is become absolutely absorbed with entertainment. Which, you know, the Internet leads to games or--and, and I think that the way people are communicating with these--what do you call it when they, they send messages to one another? Speaker 1: Tweets and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah-- Speaker 1: --that sort-- Speaker 2: --it's not-- Speaker 1: Twitter [Twitter Inc.]. Speaker 2: --it's not even well written. You not what--you know, it's, it's gonna lead to the deterioration of the language I, I would suspect. I hope it doesn't. I hope I'm wrong. My gosh, I do hope I'm wrong. But you know, to tell you the truth, when we grew up, we--I don't know why--I don't--I--we, we thought it was important. Even thugs thought, thought it was important to have a, a serious grasp of the English language. I mean, I had a friend of mine--I guess one of the most serious--the guy who grew up with me would be the most serious criminal. If you ever--he's dead now, but if you ever sat down and talked with him, you'd think that he was a Harvard man [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. (Laughter) You know what--you know what I'm--mean. He told me the funniest story. Once he was in the can, and with his manner and the way he spoke, some of the brothers from the street were gonna act a little rough with him--said, "Who do you think you are?" "Oh, you don't sound--," they say, "What are you in for?" He said, "Murder." They said, "Oh, okay" (laughter), and, and knew to stay away from him. But, I mean, his, his demeanor was so polished that it was--we--that was just normal for us. And nowadays you, you talk to people and they--I can't understand them to tell you the truth. I mean, I don't know precisely what they're talking about most of the time because I'm not sure they do. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know, what, what are our--we have no standards anymore. Story_ID: 646506 Speaker 1: Tell me this now, in light of everything you've said so far and what you said about the early black newspapers in Boston [Massachusetts]-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --do you think the Banner [Bay State Banner] will survive you? Speaker 2: Right now I am--I have a plan that--and I'm trying to finance it, and I've, I've done something which is very ex- different. And, and that is: the biggest problem of getting financing for any kind of media is a whole question of, of the risk. And so I had to come up with a financing plan that would greatly reduce the risk, and I've done that. And if--and I'm in the process now. Not everybody understands it easily, but if I'm able to, to finance my plan going forward, here's what a--here's what we will have: we'll have a strong Banner; we will have--we will have a national publication, which will be a little different from black publications. Because I'm more interested that people are thinking along the lines that I'm thinking about, that they are the same color as me. I'm interested in, in having a together- togetherness on that; and a--and a woman's magazine that is different from what's out there now. I'll show you. We've already--I've done some testing for this, and the interesting thing about the woman's magazine is it's for women in a certain demographic of certain mindset without consideration of race. And my--and we've tested it and we've found that for women who are educated and aspiring, they love it. And so this, this marketing also indicates that my--the direction I would take for the--for the national is also--it will also work. But we'll see if--I don't think--I don't think that the Banner can survive on its own bottom. I don't think it's--I don't think the market's big enough. We're only twenty-first in size but, you know, one of the things that's, that's really disappointing is that you had to--if you look at the circulation figures for most black newspapers, partic- in major--in big cities, they're all sold, but they don't sell very many. If you have a market of a million and half people and you're--you have a circulation of ten thousand, you're not reaching very many. So the Banner distributes twenty-seven thousand papers each week. We have the highest penetration of just about any publication I can think of--black publication I can think of. And, and I'm really disappointed that social planners haven't really given thought as to how we use this to change the values and change the thinkings in the black community. Every time you do it--they expect me to do it with my own dime. You don't make any money doing that. And I've re- I've really come to the conclusion that people are not as interested in solving the problems that we face as they profess to be. I think that that's sort of a front. You know why? You know, you--I don't know--you're too young to remember the Alec Guinness film, 'The Man in the White Suit.' The man had devent- invented a new fabric-- Speaker 1: Oh, 'The Gray Flannel Suit'? Speaker 2: No, no, 'The Man in the White Suit.' Speaker 1: White suit? Speaker 2: It was a--it was a--I, I know that--that's a Gregory Peck film you're thinking about-- Speaker 1: Oh (unclear)-- Speaker 2: --'The Man in the Gray Flannel Suit.' Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: 'The Man in the White Suit' was a film of a man who had invented a new fabric that didn't get dirty and kept its--was just wonderful. Well, people in the textile industry went crazy. They said, "Man, you only need one of those things." And that's--you know, it's, it's forever. You see, they didn't want a solution to the problem. And I--and I've really--I've, I've thought for a long time that social workers really don't want a solution to the problem. It is not natural for people to be excited about putting themselves out of a job. And, and I'm gonna tell you quite frankly, I find--I'm very dis- I find this stuff very disturbing because I think that's--a lot of the solutions I, I see are very solvable. Story_ID: 646507 Speaker 1: Before I went to law school [Columbia Law School, New York, New York], I was a teacher for a short time. And, and so in my--I was a junior high school teacher, and there were some kids in the room and they acted up. And I said, "You, you and you after school." So I sat them down, and I gave 'em each a pen and a pencil, and I said, "While you're acting out and creating a fuss in class," I said, "I guess you know what you're doing. I want each of you to write me an essay, why you think it's to your best advantage to act like a fool in school." And they sat there. And I checked on these kids. Two of 'em had records; the other one was from a dysfunctional family. And they couldn't write it, and they started crying. They were junior high school kids. And I said, "Well, I'm not surprised that there's some disorder here," I said, "but here's what--there's a way to make it; you just have to know how." And I said, "I will give each of you a personal map for the future, steps for you to make for you to improve your status in life and to move forward." And so I said, "Come--," this is the end of the day, "come, come to my class tomorrow and we'll start." And, you know, it was amazing. The bell had hardly rung for the last class. My homeroom class wasn't out before these kids were filing in. And so I said, "Okay, we'll work on each one." And I spent some time with each one of 'em. I just showed 'em how, how to do it. And so I was a substitute teacher, and so I think I had to have 'em come back one more time. And then their, their, their class- I got notice that their classroom teacher was coming back. And I said, "Well listen, I haven't finished, but you can--I live not too far from here." Back in those days, you were free--you weren't afraid of doing something like this. I said, "Come to my house and we will finish up." So they came and, and so I had punch and cookies and we talked. And I said, "Okay, guys, listen. If I were around I would help you to go to your--on your route." I said, "But I have my own map." And I said, "I'm going to law school in New York [New York], so I'm not gonna be here to be able to help you; you're on your own, and it's your lives. You have to do it, do it if you want or do it if you don't want but," you know, I--and I said, "I've given you the best advice I can give you, and that's all I have for you. God bless." So I went to law school, came back, was moving around, doing things, and one day--I don't know, I don't know where I was--someplace. And a man came up to me and said, "Hey, Mr. Miller [HistoryMaker Melvin Miller], remember me?" And I said, geez--couldn't, couldn't remember him. He said, "I can--you--I was over your house for punch and cookies once." Then I knew who it was. He said, "I've been doing my map; it works like a charm." He said, "I know you told me not to buy a car and mess money--mess my money around, and I've been saving my money." He said, "But you know, I have a--I'm an accountant now, and I have a job at Johnson and Johnson [Johnson and Johnson Services, Inc.] in New Jersey, so I'm gone drive down there. But I bought a house, a three family house, and my mother and my brothers and sisters have one apartment; we're renting out the other two to pay the mortgage; thanks very much." I said, "Whoa, you're better off than I am." Another one I saw--I was in a restaurant, and a guy came up and he was getting some coffee, and he kept wiping in front of me. He said, "Remember me?" And I said--this is the true story by the way--and I said geez, I couldn't place him. And he said, "I was by your house for punch and cookies." I said, "Oh yeah." He said, "I'm following the map." He said, "I made a little mistake, but I'm taking care of my child so it'll take me a little longer." Two out of three ain't bad. I never found the third one. Man, these things are solvable. We just--we just playing games out here, playing games. Story_ID: 646508 Speaker 1: So do you see the paper [Bay State Banner] as a--as an educational tool? Do you try to use (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, absolutely. Speaker 1: --it as a tool to-- Speaker 2: We--if, if you gave me the financing, I would turn that around in a year's time, in a year's time. I never gave these kids any more instruction than about three times in a class, and they were--they were bad kids. You know--I mean--you know, this is not that hard. I mean, I--another class--I remember I was teaching some kids at the trade school. And so it was a--it was absolutely a zoo in there, and I could see why it wasn't working. 'Cause I would go into the teachers' room, and the white teachers were making fun of the kids. I said how can you ever--to myself--how can you ever teach anybody you don't have the respect--any more respect than that? And so I started teaching the kids. They say they wanna learn some algebra, so I started teaching them some algebra, and one of the kids was so smart. I said, "Well, why, why are you in a trade school?" And he couldn't give me a good answer. I said, "Well, there's nothing wrong with being an auto mechanic; that's a good--that's a good life, but just make sure that that's what you wanna do." I said, "Did you ever think of college or anything more?" And before you know it, I--the guy had taken the exams and gone, gone to college and became a lawyer out of the trade school. Come on. Come on. You know, if you, if you begin to ke- if we keep--be- continue to see ourselves as a problem, as, as incapacitated people, then that's, that's--we're already predetermining the result. Story_ID: 646509 Speaker 1: Let me ask you about your book 'cause your, your book is along the same lines as the educational tool. 'How to Get Rich When You Ain't Got Nothing: The African American Guide to Gaining and Building Wealth' [Melvin Miller], this, this was published in 2002, right? Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: So, well tell us about it. Speaker 2: Well, I'm gonna tell you (laughter), when I started the Banner [Bay State Banner], there was--three kids came in and wanted to sell papers. I used to sell it. So I said okay. They didn't have--usually what I would do is sell the papers to them wholesale. And these kids didn't have any money. I said, "Okay, then I'll front you the money. Here are the papers, when you sell 'em come back and give me what you owe me." So a couple of days later one of the guys came back, and he reached and he said, "Here's what I owe you." I said, "That's good, but where are your friends?" And he said, "I don't know." And I said, "Well, you're here, aren't you?" He says, "Yeah." And that boy was so interesting that I used to--he use- and he used to start following me around. So I used to show him stuff and people used to laugh because they're saying, "There goes Melvin [HistoryMaker Melvin Miller] and Tony," 'cause he was almost like my little son, you know. And, and again, you know, today I wouldn't do it because of all this stuff with people bothering children, which is something I couldn't even conceive of. And he would always--he would ask me questions and I'd answer 'em. Well, Tony Rose has become the largest publisher of black to do books in the country. And he just won the--he just won the NAACP award [NAACP Image Awards] for a book he did ['Obama Talks Back: Global Lessons - A Dialogue with America's Young Leaders,' ed. Gregory J. Reed] republishing letters that kids have written to, written to Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama]. I don't know whether you heard about it. It was one of the--one of the awards. And so I've known him since 1965. He's getting a little long in the tooth now like me (laughter), but he suggested that I should do the book like that for, for his--for his company [Amber Communications Group, Inc., Phoenix, Arizona], to try to get blacks to begin to think--to take the first steps to learn about how the economy works so they can start building their own personal wealth. And I haven't made a dime on the book, didn't expect to; and, and that's why it's there. Story_ID: 646510 Speaker 1: You know, I'm, I'm amazed continually that we're, we're--what we--what we do that is wrong is we spend an inordinate amount of time on people who are almost committed to failure. But if you talk to a lot of people who are my age, you're absolutely--you could--you're absolutely astounded. How the hell did the guy survive? How did he make it through all that? You know what I mean? I, I had a guy who's not that close a friend, but he, he, he was around here for, for a while. I haven't seen him for some time. And he's a--he's a lawyer too, and he has one eye. And it turned out he was from Mississippi, and he got in a fight with these white boys down there. I guess he gave it to them as bad as they did it to him, but they destroyed his--one of his eyes. At any rate, his family made contacts and sent him up to Chicago [Illinois], 'cause his family is supposed to be doing too well--very well up there. So when he got there, they found out they'd exaggerated their success and he had no place to stay, so he was hunt- hanging out in a pool parlor. So the man in the pool parlor let him stay there, and he lived in the poolroom going through high school, finished first in his class, went to college, living in a--living--sleeping on the pool table. Ah, man, I'm, I'm sick of the whiners, whine, whine, whine, can't do this, can't do that because of this. You almost hate to help them because they just--people just put their, their hand out all the time. We've gotta be warriors. We have to be ready to go forward. It ta- it's, it's, it's amazing, and if you talk to people and find out what they've accomplished with such extraordinary, extraordinary impediments, you'd say, "Wow, what a people we are." But we spend all our time worrying about people who, who aren't trying, who aren't breaking their neck. I--we're not willing to step up and, and fight and help when it's necessary. So I guess that's where the Banner [Bay State Banner] runs into trouble because they want me to--they, they always want you to be more sympathetic to people who have fallen on bad times. Story_ID: 646511 Speaker 1: Sir, what are some of--and you've kind of dealt with it on some level already, but what, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today? Speaker 2: Well, the hopes are that African Americans begin to become aware of their true greatness, and they--we can get out of this sense of inferiority, a, a sense that somehow we can't do, we can't accomplish. If you look at the--that's why I don't understand why people aren't more interested in history. Look at what we've already done under great odds. And, and if people would become aware of that they'd say, "Boy I can do that too." But we don't do that. We, we, we have such a negative, laidback attitude. This--I'm not talking about everybody, but we have allowed it to become too prominent in the culture instead of the idea of, "Hey, I'm gonna be as great as Joe down the block. I--you know, I can do that as well." That's not how we think, and we--we've got to change the way we think about things. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I think it's important. I--that's what we--I try to do with the media to try to show people. Look, look what we--look where we've been. Look how much we've accomplished. You--join in. There's--we need you. Story_ID: 646512 Speaker 1: Now when you look back at everything you've done to this point in life, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could go back and change something? Speaker 2: There was a point at which I was really oriented, like most Americans, to being a successful professional or businessman. And there's a point at which I realized that I, I had to choose between that or keeping the Banner [Bay State Banner] alive, because the people weren't ready to understand the significance in--of the press in assisting our progress. And that was a--that was a tough decision because I, I think I could have, at this point, been fairly affluent, very comfortable. I probably would have been retired (laughter) instead of working harder than I've ever done before. Story_ID: 646513 Speaker 1: Now you have a picture of Monroe Trotter [William Monroe Trotter] on your wall. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And we all remember him now. Sir, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: It's quite--it's quite enough to be forgotten. People ask--people keep talking about what's gonna be your legacy, and I said, "Listen, I came and I did my work and I left." People don't necessarily follow what I propose while I'm alive. There's no reason to think that they'll do it when I'm gone; so I'll leave it at that. Story_ID: 646514 Speaker 1: Now do you have children of your--? Speaker 2: I have a daughter. Speaker 1: Biologic- okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: Is it just, just one? Speaker 2: Yeah, just one and she's now pushing--I'm an old dad, so she's, she's only twenty-three, and she's interested in the theater. And I expect that she'll, she'll be a producer. She's not interested in being a performer or an actress. She's interested in putting--producing the play, pulling the elements together and making it happen. I think--and I think she's gonna be good at that. Speaker 1: Okay, now, and your--and your, your current wife [Sandra Casagrand]--I don't know how many times you've been married, but this is your current wife. You wanna tell us about her? Speaker 2: What about it? Speaker 1: Do you wanna tell, tell us about her? Speaker 2: Yeah, well, she--she's in publishing and I--I'm, I'm gonna show you--I don't--have I showed you her magazine? The magazine she's done? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: Well, I'll show you before you leave. Give me--give me time to do that and I'll show you. She's here now, so she's--I think she has a, a real genius for--in that area. And, as I told you, if I'm able to develop the financing that I have in mind, her project--there'll be three projects. See, we have to come up with a new construct. If we have three, three projects and numerous projects working essentially out of the same space, look at--look at what we (unclear). We're saving not having people with a lot of down time because we're using people more efficiently; we're, we're not having three separate offices with conference rooms that aren't being used, and a lot of wasted space, because the space will be used more efficiently. There are lots of--there are lots of different models that ha- that have to be used. For instance, I believe that the journalism model will work. I--a--if you're not trying to be another New York Times [The New York Times] or something that has to do very rough and expensive reportage out there in the world, there's still, there's still other ways to do it to be interesting and stimulating and less expensive. So we're trying to--we're--I'm trying to come up with that model, because if we do, then that will survive my, my demise. If not, I'm not sure the Banner [Bay State Banner]--even the Banner will survive my death. Story_ID: 646515 Speaker 1: Looking back at everything you've done to this point, what, what today would you consider to be your professional legacy? Speaker 2: My professional what? Speaker 1: Legacy. Speaker 2: (Pause) Well, it depends on how you define a legacy. I mean, I think, I think there's no legacy unless you influence what your--those you leave behind think and do, and I, I don't know that I do. I think the, the issues that I'm trying to bring to the, the forefront are just so complex. And, and to tell you the truth, one of the things that blacks are gonna have to do if we're gonna succeed is we have to be less tolerant of, of at least--I hate to say less tolerant of failure, but I think you have to be less tolerant of aberrant behavior that will--that leads to a lack of success...