 Story_ID: 512680 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Ma'am, could you please state your name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: My name is Mary A. Mitchell [HistoryMaker Mary Mitchell], M-A-R-Y, A, M-I-T-C-H-E-L-L. Speaker 1: All right. First of all, what does the A stand for? Speaker 2: You know what? I'm not saying (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: That's one question I won't answer. Speaker 1: Is Mitchell your maiden name? Speaker 2: Mitchell is my married name. Speaker 1: Married name, okay. Speaker 2: And it's also my byline name. Speaker 1: Okay. Can you give us your maiden name? Speaker 2: My maiden name is Duncan, D-U-N-C-A-N. Speaker 1: All right, okay. Now, do you have any nicknames? Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: My date of birth is 5/23/49 [May 23, 1949]. I was born in Clarksdale, Mississippi. Speaker 1: Okay. And ma'am, what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm a journalist. Speaker 1: All right. And what is today's date? Speaker 2: January 21, 2007. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: Chicago Sun-Times editorial boardroom. Story_ID: 512681 Speaker 1: Now, before I ask in-depth questions, there are five People magazine-ish type questions that the management requires me to ask of everyone, and they only require a short answer. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: First one is do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Chicken wings. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Fried. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Green. Speaker 1: A favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Summer. Speaker 1: Okay. A favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Caribbean. Speaker 1: A favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: What does it profit a man to gain the whole world and lose his soul? Story_ID: 512682 Speaker 1: Now, I'm going to ask about your family history. I'll ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side [Joseph Duncan], but we'll start with your mother's side. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: My mother's name is Carrie, C-A-R-R-I-E. Her maiden name is Williams, W-I-L-L-I-A-M-S [Carrie Williams Duncan]. Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Her date of birth is August 25, 1927. Speaker 1: Okay. And where? Speaker 2: She was born in Clarksdale, Mississippi. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, what do you know about your mother's side of the family? First of all, how far back can you trace that side? Speaker 2: I can only trace as far back as my grandmother. And she's been deceased for, I guess she died when I was twelve years old. Her name was Bessie [Bessie Namble Williams], B-E-S-S-I-E. And her name was Williams, W-I-L-L-I-A-M-S. I do not know my grandfather [Ollie Williams], I can't tell you anything about him. I just don't know him. I don't remember him; my mother never talked very much about him. She called him Papa, that's all I know. I know more about my grandmother. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, tell us about your grandmother. Speaker 2: Well, my grandmother was, of course, she grew up in great poverty. She lived on a, she was a sharecropper; her family was a sharecropping family. And so she lived in a little, what we called a shotgun house on a plantation in Clarksdale. I was raised by my grandmother up until the age of about four years old. My mother became pregnant in Chicago [Illinois], and she went back home to give birth to twins. I am an identical twin. And we were there until we were about four years old when my father demanded that we be brought north and that she raise us, my mother. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, my grandmother, you know, she was a hardworking woman. She did a little sewing, she picked cotton. And she had, you know, big hands. That's what I remember most about my grandmother. She had the most giant hands that I can remember, because they were always coming at me. And she was a hardworking woman. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, are there any stories that your grandmother told about times in the past? Any stories passed down about what life was like in Clarksdale, Mississippi? Speaker 2: No, you know, she was a quiet woman. I have just snatches of visions about being there. You know, I know about pecans. I know about, that food arrived in great big giant sacks. You know, they didn't come in boxes. They came in giant sacks that she would put into containers, and then she would use the burlap or the fabric or whatever it was that it came in, and she would make clothing from it. I remember sitting at her feet when she had this old-fashioned pedal sewing machine that would rock back and forth, the bottom of it, and she would be sewing. I remember that she loved to give us shelled pecans and give us pecans to eat. But stories, she never talked to us very much about any of that that I recall. I don't remember her telling us any kind of stories about what it was like there. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Any ghost stories, or any kind of stories like that? Speaker 2: No. The stories, the favorite story that was passed down was, of course, people in the South at that time was very afraid of thunderstorms and lightning and that sort of thing. And what I remember most vividly is that whenever there was a storm, the house would be totally dark, and all the mirrors would be covered up. And I remember asking, "Why are we covering, I mean what's that about, why are we covering up the mirrors?" And she would explain that lightning--mirrors somehow attracted lightning. They believed that and that if you covered up mirrors, then you could avoid being struck by lightning. Story_ID: 512683 Speaker 1: What did your mother [Carrie Williams Duncan] say about growing up in Clarksdale [Mississippi]? Speaker 2: My mother hated the South. She went back only under duress; her mother [Bessie Namble Williams] was ill. And starting about--again, I don't want to say the years, but I know that I was around twelve years old, maybe eleven, when my grandmother became ill with cancer, and my mother was traveling back and forth to the South to take care of her mother before she passed. But my mother hated the South. She hated the cotton-picking. I have a very small-framed mother. She's got to be about 5'3", and never weighed more than a hundred pounds. And the idea that she had to carry those big sacks to pick cotton, I can't imagine how she did it. Well, she remembers it being hot, and she remembers being mistreated there, and ridiculed by other children because she was black. She remembers not doing well in school, and not liking school. She just, she has no pleasant memories of the South. And so, she's never gone back. We have not gone back to this day to see our birthplace, and she's not wanted to go back. She's never asked to go back. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, how far did she go in school? Did she, was she able to finish? Speaker 2: My mother went to third grade. She was basically illiterate when we were born. My father [Joseph Duncan], who probably finished elementary school, taught her how to read and write, that's how she learned. She learned reading from newspapers and grocery store lists, and trying to figure out products on the shelves, and having us read to her. But her husband taught her how to read and how to write. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Did she talk about why she initially moved to Chicago [Illinois], you know, in the first place? Speaker 2: Not really. You know, it's very interesting trying to pry information out of my parents about the South. It's like, you know, it's hard. They don't want to talk about. My father, who passed in 2006, only in the last remaining months of his life did he open up and begin to talk about his experiences. My mother, who will be eighty this year, does not talk about it at all. She still does not talk about what it was like to grow up in the South, and she gives very little information. So, no, they don't share a lot. Story_ID: 512684 Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Joseph [Joseph Duncan], J-O-S-E-P-H, Duncan, D-U-N-C-A-N. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: July 10, 1925. Speaker 1: What do you know about his side of the family? Can you trace them any further back? Speaker 2: No, I can go even--I don't, I can't go as far as I can with my mother [Carrie Williams Duncan], with my father's family. I know my father and his brothers. I did not know my grandmother [Virginia Hawkins Duncan], but I heard a lot about her from my father. He talked about the fact that, you know, who she was, and what her name was, and how we felt about her, and what the relationship was with her. But other than that, I never met her. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And he didn't, he never talked about his father, very little. Speaker 1: Well, was he raised basically in Clarksdale [Mississippi]? Speaker 2: No, he was born in Slidell, Louisiana. Speaker 1: Okay. How do you spell Slidell? Speaker 2: S-L-I-D-E-L-L. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Was he, you know, it probably seems anti-climactic, but I have to ask, you know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's okay. Speaker 1: --but he, was he raised on a farm, too, in a rural kind of setting? Speaker 2: My father was raised in a rural area. He was not raised on a farm, so much as he was raised in poverty. His parents worked in--well, his father from what I'm told worked at a shipyard of some sort, and did manual labor there. My father was not raised by his father; he was raised by his grandfather. And his grandfather's name was Moses, M-O-S-E-S, Duncan [Moses Duncan]. Speaker 1: Okay. Did he, did he talk about what happened to his father? Speaker 2: Well, his father died at a very young age. I think his father had a heart attack and died. He told me, again, he told me just last year that his father, when he was young he found out that his father had gotten ill. He was still a kid when his father died. He lived with his mother with his five, there was five of them. His mother was very, very poor. His grandfather came by one day and said, you know, "You can't take care of all these kids. Who wants to go home with me?" And my father volunteered to go home with his grandfather, and his grandfather raised him. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, that's interesting. Now, you said your father taught your mother how to read? Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous). Story_ID: 512685 Speaker 1: Is there a story as to how they met? Speaker 2: Yes. My father [Joseph Duncan] and mother [Carrie Williams Duncan] met at the old Riverview Amusement Park in Chicago [Illinois]. He had just gotten out of the [U.S.] military, and he was still wearing his [U.S.] Navy uniform. I think he was home on--had just gotten out. And my mother, she had come up here from the South. And they met at the Riverview, and the rest is history. They got married not too long after that. My mother got pregnant, and my father married my mother, had her bring the kids--again, it was the kind of thing at that time where if you got pregnant you went home to your mother, and your mother helped you through the pregnancy and helped you with the babies. My mother came back up north and left us with my [maternal] grandmother [Bessie Namble Williams], but my father said, "No, you've got to bring them, too." So, she went back and she brought us, and that's how we started life in the North. Story_ID: 512686 Speaker 1: Now, your father [Joseph Duncan] went to the [U.S.] Navy, right? Was he-- Speaker 2: He was in World War II [WWII]. Speaker 1: Okay, from Louisiana? Speaker 2: Yes. He was in, he was still living in Louisiana when he volunteered for the Navy. And then he was in, I guess the final leg of World War II. He served on a, he served on a ship. He got out of the Navy and went back to the South and tried to take care of his parents, his mother [Virginia Hawkins Duncan], who was still living at the time, and his younger siblings. So, he would give them money and he would do a little work there, but he did not want to stay in the South. By that time, one of his younger brothers had already come to Chicago [Illinois], and sent word for him that he should come. And so that's how we ended up living--in fact, the funny story he tells me about is that my father was sort of a roughneck at the time, and he liked to have a good time. He liked to party, he liked to drink, you know, and hang out. And he got in a big fight in a bar with some guy who had a lot of brothers. And his brothers, of course, two of his brothers had already come up North. He was down there by himself, and word was out that if this guy found him, he was going to kill him. So, he did the right thing, which was hop on a train and come north. And that's how he ended up in Chicago, and that's how he ended up meeting my mom [Carrie Williams Duncan]. Speaker 1: A lot of people have that kind of story, believe it or not. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah. Speaker 1: I've heard these before. Yeah, that's a good reason to--so, did he, did he know anybody in Chicago when he came here? Speaker 2: Yes, he had a brother here, my Uncle James Duncan. Uncle James was the first one. He was not the oldest one in the family, but he was the first one--actually I think Uncle James is the oldest one, he's older than my dad. He was the first one to come to Chicago. And then my Uncle David [David Duncan], who is now deceased, and then my father. And then my father came and then he brought, made room, made a way for his brother to come, Uncle Norman [Norman Duncan], and then his sister. And that's how they all ended up here. Story_ID: 512687 Speaker 1: What kind of work did your father [Joseph Duncan] find? Speaker 2: Well, when he first came here, he worked in restaurants. He washed dishes and was a busboy at some of the hotels downtown. I think the Blackhawk [Chicago, Illinois] was one of them that he talked about. But he did manual, you know, kitchen work, the hard kind, you know, before they had these big giant dishwashers, where you were just actually washing dishes and bussing tables. And then besides doing that, he was trying to learn to be an electrician. And so, he was studying at night and going to, taking some night school program so that he could be an electrician. Those plans went out the window, of course, when my mom [Carrie Williams Duncan] got pregnant and they got married. And so he had to drop night school. He ended up then getting a job at a paper company where he started off as a janitorial, doing janitorial stuff and handyman stuff. And then he finally moved into the shipping department where he, you know, did shipping work. And then finally he became the manager of that shipping department, the first black manager of the company they'd ever hired for the shipping department. Speaker 1: What company was it? Speaker 2: Max Sterns, S-T-E-R-N-S Sons [Max Sterns Sons Company, Chicago, Illinois]. And it was on South Polk [Street]. I can't remember the exact address, but it was on South Polk in Chicago [Illinois]. Story_ID: 512688 Speaker 1: Now, you've got a twin sister. Speaker 2: Identical twin. Speaker 1: Do you have any other siblings? Speaker 2: Oh yes, I have a large family. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And God, if you're going to make me name all of them, I hope I don't forget anyone. But anyway, my father [Joseph Duncan] and mother's [Carrie Williams Duncan] union, they had ten children. The twins--myself and my sister Marie [Marie Duncan Crossley], are the oldest. And then the next child is Joseph Duncan, Jr. After him, Larry Duncan [ph.]. Perry Duncan is deceased. Nadine [ph.]--well, I'm going to give them all Duncans instead of their married names. Is that okay? Nadine Duncan. After Nadine would be Leroy Duncan [ph.], then Sandra Duncan [ph.], and then Terrence [Terrence Duncan (ph.)] and Clarence [Clarence Duncan (ph.)], they're twins, too, Duncan. Speaker 1: Twins run in the family. Speaker 2: My mother is a twin, too. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: Yes, she has, well, a fraternal twin. Story_ID: 512689 Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: My earliest childhood memory? Oh, my earliest childhood memory would be probably coming north. It had to be really early, because my mother [Carrie Williams Duncan] swears that I could not remember this. But I remember being in a basket, and I was on one end of the basket, and my sister [Marie Duncan Crossley] was on the other end of the basket. And we were on a train, and there was a soldier of some sort who looked down in the basket and thought we were so incredibly beautiful. That's what he said, "These babies are so beautiful." And I remember seeing my mom smile. My mom swears I could not possibly remember that because I was an infant, but I remember it. And she never told me that story, it's just that I told her that story. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that's my earliest childhood memory. Speaker 1: Now, who do you think you take after more? Your mother or your father [Joseph Duncan]? Speaker 2: My father, yeah, I look like my father, a lot like my father. I think I have the disposition and personality like my father, although there are certainly some qualities of my mother. But when people meet me and they know my father, they say, "You're just like Joe." And when my mother used to get mad at me, she'd say, "You're just like your father." Story_ID: 512690 Speaker 1: I realize that people in Chicago [Illinois] moved a lot back in those days, during those migration days. But what neighborhoods did you live in? Speaker 2: Well, the first neighborhood I remember living in was on the West Side, on what would be Roosevelt [Road] and San Francisco [sic.], or Francisco [Avenue], the Richmond area, 1130 South Richmond [Street]. As a matter of fact, I remember the address. It was an old greystone building, huge, that had about three apartments in it. And again, that's where I went to kindergarten. I remember kindergarten there, and second and maybe third--no, kindergarten and maybe first grade. So that's the first neighborhood. From there, we moved to CHA's [Chicago Housing Authority] Dearborn Homes [Chicago, Illinois]. And that was the building at 2961 South Dearborn [Street]. And I was there probably from the second grade to, in the fifth grade. From there, we moved to 3833 South Langley [Avenue], in the Clarence Darrow Homes [Chicago, Illinois], CHA again. And that was over in the--well, it's now torn down, but what used to be a large CHA lakefront development area. I went to Einstein Elementary School [Chicago, Illinois] there. I went to Wendell Phillips Upper Grade Center [Chicago, Illinois] on Pershing Road for seventh and eighth grade. From there I went to Dunbar Vocational High School [Dunbar Vocational Career Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois], where I, you know, finished high school in 1967. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay. Tell us--in all these different places--I guess different places have different memories. But what are some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Wow. Sights: gray, hard brick walls, exposed brick, concrete floors, cold, noise, cold. Most of my childhood memories are tied into the housing projects, and I don't have pleasant memories of those. I remember darkness, dark stairwells, urine, the smell of urine, people urinating in the hallways, noise, fights, conflict. You know, not pleasant. Speaker 1: Some people say, and I've heard them say it--they didn't live in the projects--but they said the projects that were first built were not so bad. And they--I know Ida B. Wells [Ida B. Wells Homes, Chicago, Illinois] is nothing like, say, Darrow Homes. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: But (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, we were among the first families to move into Darrow Homes. But I'm going to just go back to Dearborn Homes. Dearborn Homes have been around a long time, they're low-rise projects. My childhood memories of Dearborn Homes--and my father [Joseph Duncan] used to hate this--is that they were all unpleasant. Why? There were too many violent kids. You were too easily victimized by bullies, rapists, and other people who would take advantage of the weak. There was nothing, there was no fun. I don't remember fun times. I remember crowdedness. I remember noise. I remember dark hallways. I remember being exposed to things I shouldn't have been exposed to. I remember viewing people having sex in the hallways at seven and eight years old, you know. I mean, those are not pleasant memories. So, while people say the projects aren't so bad, they didn't live in the projects, okay. And people say, you know, the high-rise--yes, by the time we moved into Dearborn Homes and I was a teenager, I was better able to fend for myself and to protect myself. Then, it was a different experience. But I would say for children who, small children who are basically defenseless, in an environment that was filled with people who are eager to take advantage of the weak, it was not a pleasant experience. Story_ID: 512691 Speaker 1: Was having a twin [Marie Duncan Crossley] like an advantage in terms of being able to look out for each other? Speaker 2: No, because having a twin meant that you had to, you did have to look out for each other, which meant her problem became my problem. So eventually if she had a conflict with someone, I had that conflict with someone. I didn't have anything to do with it, but you know if I go outside and she's having an argument with someone, then now I've got to defend myself from someone else's anger, because they're mad at my sister. This went on all through elementary school [Einstein Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] and basically high school [Dunbar Vocational High School; Dunbar Vocational Career Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois], because that's just the way it was when you're growing up in a housing project. The other thing is that when you are, when you're twins, then you're odd. You know, you stick out. So, instead of blending in with your environment, you stick out in your environment. You've got green eyes, you're light-skinned, you're skinny, and you're twins. And so, you become a target of people who see that as odd. You know, there weren't many green-eyed, skinny, light-skinned kids that look alike in their environment. So, no, I didn't think it was a plus. Actually I thought that it was, it really turned out to be quite a minus. Story_ID: 512692 Speaker 1: Did you have to be tougher, I mean having a-- Speaker 2: Yeah, you did. But I was not--which is interesting, I was never the tough one. My sister [Marie Duncan Crossley] was the tough one, and I was the bookwormish one. I was the one that, you know, basically just wanted to have my own space. And she was the one that was always in the middle of, you know, he said, she said, they said. And so it was kind of, we grew up quite differently. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, it must have been tough being a bookworm type in the projects? Speaker 2: It was. Speaker 1: How did you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) How did I survive that? Well, books, I learned to read at an early age. I enjoyed reading very much. Reading took me out of my environment, you know. I learned early on that you could, you know, be in a very cold environment and travel, through books. So, the characters and the places was real to me. You know, I knew in fourth grade and fifth grade what it was like to travel to Scotland. I knew about that, because I could go and get a book out of the library. And I always got books that were much more advanced than my reading level, because I enjoyed reading so much. That's how I survived, because I loved to read. And so, I could stay in my room for hours and hours and hours and not have to worry about going outside, because I loved to read. Speaker 1: Okay. Can you remember some of your favorite books? Speaker 2: Well, the one that sticks out to me is 'A Tree Grows in Brooklyn' [Betty Smith]. That was the first one that just impressed me so much, and I don't know why. Well, I did identify with the heroine in the book; the fact that the family was poor, the fact that they had to, you know, their lives were really shaped around surviving poverty and having to hang together as a family to support each other. I can't even remember now what the real storyline was. In fact, I'm going to go back and read the book. But I know that a young age, I was really impressed by that book. I was impressed by Althea Gibson's story, the tennis player, her autobiography ['I Always Wanted to be Somebody,' Althea Gibson]; just the idea that here was a woman that was not, you know, not rich, who had nappy hair, and did all these things. And so, I could relate to, I related to her story. And I related to autobiographies altogether. I mean, those were the books I would look for when I'd go to the libraries is real books about people's lives. Story_ID: 512693 Speaker 1: At least when you were in, I guess, in the Darrow Homes [Clarence Darrow Homes, Chicago, Illinois], there was, the Abraham Lincoln Center [Chicago, Illinois] was around there. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Did you ever go? Speaker 2: Never. If I went, it was probably with some other child. I was not a joiner of things. I had one bad experience at the local YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association]. I think it was the YMCA or YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association], where I did try to join something, and the experience was negative. I think I had to be about maybe thirteen years old. It was a little teen group, and you know they have the teen leader, and you'd go and you'd sit and talk about family and problems. And, you know, you'd go skating and you'd have the little whatever. But we were very precocious. And so, when the leader went about her business--I guess she had to go to the bathroom or something, she left her files open. I never knew that they were taking notes on us, you know, about who we were and what we said and who are family was--just like a thesis. And the idea that I was the subject of someone else's thesis turned me off so much that I never joined again. Because I figured, I felt that this woman was pretending to like us and pretending to be interested in our lives, when really we meant nothing to her but her thesis and her paper, whatever she was writing. And I didn't want to be part of that, so I was not a joiner of things. So I never went to, even though it was located near me, Abraham Lincoln Center. And I think there was another, the Donahue Center [ph.], and they had something there. There were all kinds of centers, but I was not a joiner of those kind of groups. Story_ID: 512694 Speaker 1: --What was Einstein School [Einstein Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] like? Speaker 2: Einstein was a brand new building, just the like housing projects. And we were all--how people came to live in Darrow Homes [Clarence Darrow Homes, Chicago, Illinois] was because they had large families, most of them, and they were really being transferred from a lot of other housing projects. So, most of the kids who went to Einstein, you know, they came from other parts of the city. And so you had this really, really, nice beautiful school with a great environment, but very cold. The cold was reflected in me and on the glass; it was all glass. And so, you had this starkness about it. And what you were seeing through the glass wasn't trees or mountains or water. It was just more buildings upon buildings of concrete. So my, my thoughts or memories of Einstein is long lines of children marching through hallways going into these stark classrooms surrounded by glass. Speaker 1: Okay. That's quite an image there that you paint. Because, you know, Chicago [Illinois]--anybody that's been here, you know, knows how flat it is. It's flat, and there are some times in the winter when it seems that there is no color in Chicago, that it's black and white. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And the school, you know, being stark and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: --the project buildings being stark, and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I always think, I will always think of Chicago as gray. I think that's why my favorite place is the Caribbean, or any place that has color. Because even in the summertime, you know, I still hold that image of the grayness, the starkness, the concrete upon concrete upon concrete, and the sidewalks. And you know, the one tree that's trampled down, and after about a year or two it looks really sparse, surrounded by dirt because the grass has been walked off of it. And so, now you have black dirt. You've got the gray concrete, you've got the concrete of the buildings, and then you have the fence that is gray on each porch. You know, each level has that gray, you know, not wire fence that you look through. And so, my vision of Chicago is just that I hold in my head is gray, unfortunately. Story_ID: 512695 Speaker 1: At Einstein [Einstein Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois], were there any teachers that took an interest in you? Speaker 2: None, none. It was a crowded school. You were a number, and you just got through it. Speaker 1: Okay. I'm thinking about the name, you know, Einstein School. I know that was a Jewish community at one time, but I don't think it was when you were there. Speaker 2: No. It was, it was truly a, it was a housing--it was just housing developments over there. And they had torn down the really squalor, squalid, ghetto-type shanty dwellings across the street on Cottage Grove [Avenue]. So, there was nothing over there at that point. I think when we moved in it may have been one drugstore on the corner, and it lasted about a year. There was an A and P supermarket [The Great Atlantic and Pacific Tea Company] on 39th Street. And then across on 38th [Street] and Cottage Grove, there was a restaurant that we would go in and buy French fries from. But that was it; that was all that was in maybe a two-block area. Speaker 1: Okay. So in terms of your own disposition, would you say that you--I mean did you know how bad this was then, when you were in it? Or did you have any idea? Or was it bad in retrospect (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I think--no, I don't think I knew how bad it was. Well, let me put it this way. I didn't know growing up as a child how--that everyone didn't live like this, okay. I knew that I had relatives that lived in other areas, but they were poor, too, and they lived in worse conditions. You know, they lived in apartment buildings where rats were running around. And I didn't want to spend the night because they had rats, or they had lice in the bed. So, certainly, where I lived was much better than where they were living. In terms of how other black people were living in the city, I had no clue as to where they were living or what their neighborhoods were like, because everyone I knew lived in a housing project. What I did know for sure is that, you know, I didn't like the violence. You know, I didn't like the fact that you had to protect yourself so much, and you had to be tough. And I didn't like the fact that there was so much sexual abuse and things like that, simply because, you know, people were vulnerable. I knew at an early age, I didn't like that. I knew at twelve and thirteen and fourteen, and certainly going into the teen years, that this is something that I would not want to bring my child--an environment that I would not want to bring my child up in. Now, on the other side of that, did my parents [Carrie Williams Duncan and Joseph Duncan] do their best to make sure that we were taken of? They certainly did. You know, we had Christmas and we had holidays, and we had, you know, the nicest things they could buy. We had full meals. We went to the parks, and we went to the lakefront, and we went to Riverview [Riverview Amusement Park, Chicago, Illinois] when it was open. And all of those things and experiences that they could give us, we had. So, we didn't know how bad off we were. I didn't know how bad off we were, and how poor we were, but I knew that we were poor. Story_ID: 512696 Speaker 1: Did a lot of responsibility fall on you and your sister [Marie Duncan Crossley], being the oldest of ten? Speaker 2: Yes. You know, every time there was a new baby born, we knew that we had to go to--there was a laundromat thing, the washing the diapers thing, the folding the diapers thing. We were babysitters; we looked after my younger brothers and sisters. I can still remember being upset, of having to miss school, because my mother [Carrie Williams Duncan] had to take someone to the clinic, or had to do something where someone had to stay home with the younger kids. And that meant we had to take off school. And I don't know why kids don't want to go to school today, but I used to cry because I couldn't go to school. School was very, very important to me, and missing school was just the ultimate, you know, punishment. How can you miss school? So, yes, we had a lot of responsibility. We divided the kids up, my twin sister and I. And she would take half the kids and I would take half the kids, and that's how we took care of them. Story_ID: 512697 Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite subject? Speaker 2: Reading. Reading was always my favorite, not math. I was, you know, I don't know what it was about the math thing. I was always bad in math. I think I was intimidated by math, but reading came naturally. So I loved to read and, you know, reading tests, or speeches, or anything like that was always a natural for me. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Language was a natural. Speaker 1: Okay. We're the same age. When you grew up, I guess it was like the dawn of the rock and roll age and television. Those two things I guess kind of dominated the cultural life. Did you, did your family watch a lot of television or listen to the radio a lot? Speaker 2: We listened to the radio mostly. And, you know, radios back then were those big giant things. And so they looked more like organs and musical instruments than radios. (Laughter) And we would just play, you know, dress up and play around the radio, and listen to the radio and try to sing the songs that were on the radio. It was fun, you know. We just had, we entertained ourselves; we had to entertain ourselves. I remember TV, of course, and running home from school when I was living in the Dearborn Homes [Chicago, Illinois], running home from school to see 'The Mickey Mouse Club' and all of that after-school programming; I loved it. By the time we got to the teen years, my father [Joseph Duncan] was pretty much into baseball and football and sports. And so, we didn't get a chance to see a lot of programs. But looking at TV was a family event. Everybody had a favorite program that your parents watched. And then it was, those programs, kids were also able to watch. It wasn't that thing, PG. It was all family programming. So you could all sit around TV and, you know, watch what was going on in the world, you know. We learned about the Civil Rights Movement through TV. We saw what was going on, you know, with my father sitting in his big chair, and us sitting around TV watching what was going on in the South. Speaker 1: Did having parents from Clarksdale, Mississippi make it more real? I mean, some people who were like watching it were never there, you know. So-- Speaker 2: Well, yes. My father insisted on respect for black people. So, you didn't sit around TV laughing at what was going on with black people. He told you how serious it was, you know, when you saw the hoses and the dogs and the people slipping and sliding. He explained to us why that was serious. When you saw a program like the Amos and Andy show ['Amos 'n' Andy'], and the whole Stepin Fetchit routine, he would tell us why that wasn't really funny, and what was wrong with that. So, yes, them coming from the South and being exposed to blatant racism, at least on my father's end, helped us to understand, you know, what this whole civil rights fight was about. As far as my mother [Carrie Williams Duncan] was concerned, quite frankly, I cannot remember my mother ever having time to watch TV with ten kids. She was always washing, cooking, cleaning, folding, doing something, sweeping. I just don't remember, I have no visions of my mother just sitting around watching TV. Story_ID: 512698 Speaker 1: So, you went to Wendell Phillips Upper Grade Center [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: For middle school? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: What was that like? Were there any teachers there that took an interest in you? I mean, were you a good student in school? Speaker 2: I was a good student, I was a good student. I was probably an underachiever in the sense that I probably could have been a straight A student. I was probably--but I was an E student at the time, excellent, and Gs, you know, I would get that consistently. I was poor in math. Again, I don't know, I really can't tell you why. But it's just that math was not a good subject for me. I was a quiet student. I think that was probably a problem, if you're a good student and you're quiet. I mean, teachers just don't really pay much attention to you. They were busy dealing with kids who, as they are today, with kids who are a problem. So, I can't think of one teacher on the elementary school level that looked at me and said there's some potential there. No, I don't remember that. Story_ID: 512699 Speaker 1: Oh, I know one big event in those days was the assassination of John Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy]. I mean, did that affect your family at all? Speaker 2: Well, yes. They had the same reaction I'm sure as the rest of the country. There was a lot of hope projected on John F. Kennedy. Growing up, I was never sure why. But he seemed to be a huge figure that represented an opportunity, a chance at fairness for African Americans. They loved him, irrationally so, to me. But just the fact that he was on TV and his wife, Jackie [Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis] and his cute little kids. They loved him. So, his assassination was just further evidence that good people could not survive in the climate that we were in at that time. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what about Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]? How did your family feel about what he was doing? Speaker 2: Oh, he was a hero, he was huge. I went to see him when he was here I think in 1963. They bussed people from the housing projects to Soldier Field [Chicago, Illinois]. I didn't have a clue then; I was kind of mindless about the whole Civil Rights Movement. I mean I knew it existed, but I wasn't one of these, you know, people who was involved in any way; I was just going about my life. But they took us to Soldier Field, and we filled up this section. And I heard him speak and I heard Mahalia Jackson sing. It was awesome. I mean, you just felt so much a part of something that was--you couldn't explain it. As a teenager, I couldn't explain it, but it just felt huge. And when we got back home, we just then felt like we were part of this whole civil rights thing. Story_ID: 512700 Speaker 1: In terms of politics in those days, I've heard since I've been in Chicago [Illinois] that the feeling about Mayor Daley [Richard J. Daley] was that he would provide you with a turkey and ten dollars if you voted for him, and there were certain benefits if you knew the right people. But I mean, was that the same impression that you had growing up? Speaker 2: No. My parents, we didn't sit around the table and talk politics. My father [Joseph Duncan] was very hardworking. To support ten kids, he had to work two jobs basically. He would work his very good job, and then on the weekends he would do handy work--cleaning for his boss' family and for other people. He would bartend for private events. Then on Saturday nights, he would go play poker. That was his side hustle, he played poker and all of those things. So, we did not--politics was not something we sat around the table and talked about. And my mother [Carrie Williams Duncan], again, was barely literate, so she didn't know anything about politics. She didn't get involved in politics. Ours was a life of survival. It was getting up in the morning, what were we going to eat? How were we going to, you know, clean clothes, getting everybody to school, making sure they got back safe, making sure they were in the house, day to day. So, I didn't know anything about Mayor Daley. The snatches that I heard about Mayor Daley, I was much older. I was an adult myself, and then I would hear things. My father would say things about Mayor Daley and about black politics, and black people should support black people, and that sort of thing. But growing up, it was not a conversation that we were privy to. Story_ID: 512701 Speaker 1: When you were a teenager, I'm thinking that there was still, like the big--the black professionals in the black community that people knew--people like Dr. Lawless [Theodore K. Lawless] and others, you know, Harold Washington's father [Roy Washington] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They were not part of my existence. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They were, they were as far removed from my existence as I would say today that our contemporary leaders are removed from folks who are on Section 8 and living in poverty and on welfare. But what do they really mean? How is the, what's the connection? There was no connection in my life for these people, I didn't know them. You know, I may have heard about them, but we were living a life of survival. And so, even as a teenager, these were historic figures that we would hear about. But it didn't mean anything to me. Speaker 1: Okay. Did you, were there, did you have any heroes in the black community in those days at all? Speaker 2: None, none that I can--I can't really think of anybody that I said, "Gee, I just want to be like that person," or "I'm impressed with that person." They didn't come to my school to speak; they didn't come to my classroom; they didn't come into my community. Probably the most prominent person that we knew was the Reverend Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson], and that was because of Operation Breadbasket [Rainbow PUSH Coalition, Chicago, Illinois]. And of course Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] when he was assassinated, like everyone else, we were saddened and horrified, and understood the significance of his death. But in terms of growing up--as a role model or as someone who I could look to and say I wanted to be like--no, I just don't remember that. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Because there was, I know in the late '60s [1960s] there was a push in some of the schools to teach black history and that sort of thing. Did they do anything like that at Phillips [Wendell Phillips Upper Grade Center, Chicago, Illinois] or Dunbar [Dunbar Vocational High School; Dunbar Vocational Career Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: No, no, nothing like that. And that's not to say that at Phillips Upper Grade Center there weren't great teachers. You know, I'm pretty sure there were. I still remember a male teacher there, Mr. Nethan [ph.] or something, that was a very, you know, good teacher. But as far as--I think there's a push in contemporary times to have professionals go into high schools and go into elementary schools and show themselves, so people, so kids understand that, you know, I can do this, too. I can be a journalist, or I can be a doctor, or I can be a lawyer, or at least see one or touch one, or hear from one. When I was growing up, and I was growing up during the '60s [1960s], we were preoccupied with a lot of things. There was a Civil Rights Movement, and people were really making a push to give basic rights, to bring basic rights of equality to African Americans. There was also the Vietnam War going on. So, there was a lot of attention given to that. There was very little attention given to what was going on with black kids in classrooms, very little. Story_ID: 512702 Speaker 1: Now, why did you decide to go to Dunbar [Dunbar Vocational High School; Dunbar Vocational Career Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois]? Dunbar is a vocational high school. I know Phillips High School [Wendell Phillips High School; Wendell Phillips Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] was probably your neighborhood school, right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So, why did you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Dunbar was the school, was considered a very good school in 1963 when I graduated from elementary school, a very good school. And when you are trying to enter your career path, you go in and you have these dreams. What do you want to do in life? You talk to your little counselor, and you say, "Oh, I want to be a psychologist," which is what I wanted to be in eighth grade. Because I read all these books and I think, this is a great life. You get to talk to all these people and understand what's going on with them. And yes, I want to be a psychologist. And I must have gotten my hands on some book about psychology. And when you go talk to the counselor, they, say, "Well, that's impossible. You know, you can be a nurse, or you can be a teacher. But you cannot be a psychologist." Because in 1963, little black girls growing up in the housing projects didn't become psychologists. So, what's the school you should go to? You should go to a vocational school. You have good grades, you have a high reading score. You can get into Dunbar Vocational High School and you can get a skill, which is what I did. So, I went to Dunbar, and my twin sister [Marie Duncan Crossley] went to Phillips. Speaker 1: Okay. So, you had high aspirations, but no encouragement to reach them (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There was just no, no, there was no encouragement. And again, my parents [Carrie Williams Duncan and Joseph Duncan], they didn't go to, they didn't get to high school. So, to them, just getting out of elementary school and going to high school was a really big deal. And so they didn't understand, they didn't think about college. It was elementary school; you graduate from high school; you don't get pregnant; you graduate from high school, and now you've arrived. Because for them, getting out of high school was the ticket, you know, to having a good life. You know, now you can go and you can get a job and you can work and take care of yourself. Story_ID: 512703 Speaker 1: How were things at Dunbar [Dunbar Vocational High School; Dunbar Vocational Career Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] when you were there? Speaker 2: Dunbar was a great school back then. I loved it. You had a sense of school spirit and pride. There was, there were teachers there that were very interested, you know, in you being successful. You know, they made sure that you did what you were supposed to do in terms of your studies. They were, they liked kids. I mean, I can truly say that I went to a high school where the teachers seemed to really care about young people, and wanted to see young people succeed. The only problem I felt with Dunbar was, because it was a vocational high school, when you started talking about--again, you go to the counselor and you start talking about what you want to do after high school, and they don't direct you. They just weren't clear in directing you to a good college, or understanding that you had the potential to go to college. They didn't understand that. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Well, were most of your teachers in grade school and middle school and high school black? Speaker 2: Yes. Well, let me think about that. I had several--yeah, I would say yes, several black teachers. I don't remember--I think I had a lot of white teachers in grades first through probably fifth. But then starting with sixth on through high school, the majority of my teachers were black. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Was there any teacher in high school that was like a mentor or took any special interest in you, and that you really were close to? Speaker 2: Well, you know, good teachers, Dunbar had good teachers. Mentoring relationships, no. But are there teachers that I can look back now and still remember their names? Not so. I mean they were teachers, and they were good teachers. I think one teacher gave me--my home room teacher, Miss Lanier [ph.], I remember her because she seemed to know her students. And when I was getting ready to graduate, she gave every student a gift. She gave me the book, 'Hawaii' [James A. Michener]. And it's a really thick book for me to read over the summer. And I read every page of that book. It was a great present. But, teachers who said, "Look, you have the ability to do X,Y,Z. You should go to this college, or you should pursue a career in this and that, or I see something special in you," unfortunately I never got that. You know, not in elementary school and not in high school. Speaker 1: Did you like to write? Speaker 2: I was a good writer, but did I like to write? No. What did my writing consist of? I used to write scripts for my brothers and sisters, to entertain them. And we would write scripts and I would put on puppet shows, because that's what, that kept them out of trouble. So, we would sit down and write a script, and I would give them each their parts. And then we would get the little hand puppets and do plays with that. But I didn't write for the school newspaper, I didn't write for the yearbook. I just did, I did the basics. I went to school, I studied, I got good grades naturally, because I just naturally got good grades. Did I apply a lot of energy into getting good grades? I wasn't one of these kind of people who had to do that. You know, it just came. And did I know that I liked to write? No. I wasn't a poet. I wasn't a person who wanted to write short stories except, again, for my brothers and sisters. I think I operated in survival mode--get up, do this, do that, do the other, and then get up again the next day and do that. I didn't think--I didn't grow up thinking big, thinking there's a possibility to do anything except get out of high school, get a job, take care of yourself. Story_ID: 512704 Speaker 1: I don't know how long the gang thing has been a big deal in Chicago [Illinois]. But I know in that area, in those days there were gangs. Did, what did you have to do to negotiate yourself around--from the gangs? Did you have to join one, or avoid one, or-- Speaker 2: Well, my first experience in moving to Darrow Homes [Clarence Darrow Homes, Chicago, Illinois] was being beaten up by a girl gang after winning a softball game. And actually I wasn't involved in the softball game, but again, it was my sister [Marie Duncan Crossley] who played softball. Their team won, and she was coming home and left her coat, knowing that our parents [Carrie Williams Duncan and Joseph Duncan] would kill her for leaving her coat behind. So, we went back to get the coat, and the gang of girls who--they didn't know they were against a gang--the girls who lost beat us up. They chased us home, beat us up, kicked us, and put us practically in the hospital with baseball bats and the whole nine yards. That was my only experience with girl gangs. During the time that I was living in the housing projects, that was a boy thing. It wasn't a girl thing. It wasn't--you know, you had fights and stuff like that, but it wasn't like gangs coming after you. So we didn't have to, we never felt that we had to negotiate. Or, I never felt that I had to, you know, stay away from gangs. I knew that I went to school and hung around with girls who were very smart, who liked school. And so the pressure, more so than getting in the gang, was the pressure to be in the right peer group, you know, to be with the smart kids and not end up with the kids who weren't doing so well. Story_ID: 512705 Speaker 1: How tough was that? Now here you got like--because girls can really be tough on each other in terms of social status and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, you developed a clique. We had a little club called Exquisite Ladies Club [ph.]. And we would meet on Saturdays and, you know, we had goals. You can't have sex, you know. You couldn't--you just, you couldn't drink; you couldn't, you had to have good grades. And you had to own a certain number of pairs of shoes. That much, I remember, you know. And your shoes had to match your outfits. Every, every game day we would wear our hair in ponytails, and we would all wear the same ribbons and the same colors. That's the clique that I joined, and the clique that I wanted to be in. They were all smart. They all ranked right up there at the top of the class. The one who was the leader, so to speak, was the valedictorian. So, the competition was to be with the top of the class, and not to be out there doing, you know, all these drugs or gangs, or fighting or any of that. And that's how I stayed clear of bad things. Because the people I ran with were very smart people, and so I wanted to be smart, too. I wanted to be in their group as opposed to being with the kids who were getting in trouble. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, did the Exquisite Ladies Club have an advisor? Who came up with those (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, we were all personal. Speaker 1: --with those rules? Speaker 2: We did, those were our rules. We, you know, these were rules we made up for ourselves. And that's how we got through--which was interesting. I mean, that's how we got through high school [Dunbar Vocational High School; Dunbar Vocational Career Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois]. None of the Exquisite Ladies got pregnant, none of the Exquisite Ladies dropped out of school, none of the Exquisite Ladies, you know, had those kind of problems. We wanted to be smart, you know. And popular--back then the people who were popular were the smart kids, you know, not the screw-ups, but the smart kids. And so we set those rules for ourselves, and those are the rules we played by. Speaker 1: Okay. How did most of you do? Speaker 2: We did great, we were good students. I think we only had one who was a little problematic (laughter), but the rest of us, we followed the rules and we graduated on time. And we all graduated near the top of our class. Story_ID: 512706 Speaker 1: Did you study a specific skill at Dunbar [Dunbar Vocational High School; Dunbar Vocational Career Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: Secretarial practice. Shorthand and typing prepared you for a life of carrying coffee and taking dictation. Speaker 1: Well, that changed at a certain point. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: But, so you envisioned yourself immediately getting a job as a secretary after high school? Speaker 2: Right. I envisioned, that was my goal. I didn't--well, I wanted to go to college. But right after high school, my father [Joseph Duncan] became ill. You know, by that time my mother [Carrie Williams Duncan] and father were divorced. And he had remarried, and I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, when did they--when did they-- Speaker 2: My mother and father divorced when I was probably a sophomore in high school. And that meant that under the terms of the divorce agreement, half of the children, the younger children, went to live with my father. And my twin sister [Marie Duncan Crossley] and the oldest boy, the oldest two boys, stayed with my mother. And so, I guess I lost my train of thought. Well, they got divorced. And because they got divorced, I moved in with a stepmother, my father and my stepmother. By that time, I had graduated from high school. I had wanted to go to college, but my father was diagnosed with tuberculosis, so he had to go to a sanitarium for about a year and a half. And I had to help take care of the family by working. So, instead of applying to school, I went straight to work. Story_ID: 512707 Speaker 1: So, you graduated [from Dunbar Vocational High School; Dunbar Vocational Career Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] in 1967. I just want to ask you about--now that neighborhood--you were close to--there was a great big cultural activity over at the Afro-Arts Theater [Chicago, Illinois], which was just maybe a couple (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Was it there? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Wow. Speaker 1: In the old Oakland Theater [Oakland Square Theater, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Well, I didn't know anything about it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I didn't know anything about it. Speaker 1: Yeah, and this is interesting, because there's so many different worlds going on in the same--that people may not know about. Speaker 2: Right. You know, and part of that is because my parents [Carrie Williams Duncan and Joseph Duncan] didn't know. My parents did not know that--again, and I think--again, this is operating in survivor mode, and that the best thing to do with us was to take us to a cultural--someplace where we were either part of a Boys and Girls Club [Boys and Girls Club of America], or part of this, or part of that, to keep us out of the street and to keep us out of trouble. I found my own way of doing it, you know. That's not to say that some of my brothers and sisters did not, you know. They didn't survive as well, because they found it on the street. So, it's what my parents didn't know. They didn't know how to negotiate the organizations and the clubs, and they didn't know how to find the help that they needed to raise their kids. So they tried to do it all on their own, and we were at our devices in terms of how we occupied ourselves. Speaker 1: Okay. It's interesting, because a lot of the people that founded Afro-Arts thought that the community knew what they were doing. And although they--it was founded in kind of an unconventional way. You had like young poets like Haki [HistoryMaker Haki Madhubuti], and Phil Cohran [HistoryMaker Philip Cohran] I think was the person that actually set it up. And you know, they had dance and poetry, and all that kind of stuff going on for at least one summer (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: One or two summers, I think. Speaker 2: Yeah, we had no idea. Story_ID: 512708 Speaker 1: Were you in that same neighborhood when you moved with your father [Joseph Duncan]? Speaker 2: Well, '67 [1967], here's how it happened. I'm thinking my parents must have been divorced in '65 [1965], when I was still in elementary school. All the kids stayed with my mom [Carrie Williams Duncan] for a while, while they went through the divorce. And then by the time I graduated from high school [Dunbar Vocational High School; Dunbar Vocational Career Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois], by the time I graduated from high school my father and mother were divorced. So, they must have gotten divorced in '66 [1966] maybe, or later in '65 [1965]. My father bought a, my father had moved out, he bought a home. He met and married someone else, and the kids, the younger kids, moved in with him. And I moved in when I graduated from high school. And that was the last day that I spent at my mother's house in the housing project, because he had bought a home in the Auburn Gresham [Chicago, Illinois] neighborhood. And I moved over there as the oldest child to help make sure that my younger brothers--their stepmother, his wife, had helped take care of the younger brothers and sisters. And it just so happened that at that time, that's when he was diagnosed with an illness. Story_ID: 512709 Speaker 1: Before we get out of high school [Dunbar Vocational High School; Dunbar Vocational Career Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois], I've got to ask you this. What was your social life like in high school? The eye thing, and all that look thing, I know would make you a highly sought after young lady in high school. So, how did that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I was very not sought after, frankly (laughter). Speaker 1: Really? Speaker 2: I wore thick glasses, because I wear contact lenses now. And of course at that time we couldn't afford--poor kids didn't have contact lenses. And my glasses were like the pop bottle kind of thing. I was extremely skinny from all those neck bones and, you know, hominy grits, and whatever my mother [Carrie Williams Duncan] was fixing to, you know, feed ten kids on my father's [Joseph Duncan] income. So, I was extremely frail. And I was shy, you know, very, very shy. So, no, I was not--I mean I had fun; now don't get me wrong. I learned to have fun in high school, and I learned that, you know, that vanity thing, you know. I don't think I remember half the people in high school, simply because I didn't see them, because I didn't wear my glasses most of the time. But I was not, I didn't date in high school. I didn't go--I did books, you know, I read books; I went to the library. My favorite thing was reading. And so, I was behind. And so when everybody else was talking about boys and sex and all of these kinds of things, when I came in the room they would stop talking, because I didn't have a clue as to what was going on. I mean that's kind of the--that was my high school years. It was not, I didn't date during high school. Speaker 1: You had to really focus on those things to be able not to--I mean when you're in an environment like that, then it must have been tough not to be involved in that sort of thing (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, well, not really, it wasn't that tough. I mean it was--when you're in an environment like that, there are a lot of girls and there are a lot of guys. And you know, there are a lot of beautiful girls and there are a lot of fast girls. So, I didn't have to worry about it. I grew up in a time where if you're not having any--you know, that was the sexual revolution. And so if you're not having any sex, nobody was interested in you anyway. So I didn't have to, it wasn't much of a problem. And it was at a time when girls weren't chasing boys, boys were chasing girls. So, if you weren't being chased, it wasn't a problem. So for me, part of the thing was that I just wouldn't--boys didn't find me attractive. And so, if they didn't find me attractive, you know, I didn't have to worry about it. Speaker 1: Okay, that's interesting. Story_ID: 512710 Speaker 1: When did you apply for a job, and what was your first job? Speaker 2: Well, my first job, let me think about that. What was my--oh, my first job was working for what was called then the Peoples Gas Company [Peoples Gas Light and Coke Company, Chicago, Illinois], or something gas company. I don't want to say Peoples, but it was the precursor to Peoples Gas Company. And I'd gone on several interviews. My father [Joseph Duncan] had even set me up with his boss, who was a Jewish man, had even given my father a tip on where I could go and apply for a job. Now, this was 1967, and even though I could take shorthand at about 120 words a minute and type at least 75 words a minute, there were no black women really working in firms downtown. So, my first interviews I walk into, I remember walking into a law firm that my father's employer had told--had already told him about, and recommended me for the job. And they were shocked that I was black, and so I never got past the reception desk. And then I remember going over to a real estate--and I don't want to name the company--but a real estate company, a top real estate company in the city, and taking the shorthand test and just blowing away the woman who was giving the test. She could not believe that not only did I take shorthand that fast, but that I could transcribe it accurately. And she had to call me to the side and say, "They're just not going to hire a black--," this is '67 [1967], "they're not going to hire a black woman, a black girl for a secretary. I'm sorry." And so finally I ended up going to this gas company and applying for a job in the mailroom. And that's how I started in 1967, delivering mail at the gas company. Speaker 1: That's interesting. So you didn't even get a secretary's job. Speaker 2: No, I took the shorthand test and took the typing test. And I passed all of them and they put me in the mailroom, because there were no black women, girls, being hired to work for the large companies downtown. And sitting in the mailroom, what I would do was practice my shorthand. And the white girls would come in because they couldn't pass the shorthand test. And they had to go to the mailroom because they couldn't pass the test. I would help them learn their shorthand and I would time them on their typing. They would get out of the mailroom, and I was still stuck in the mailroom. So that was my first employment experience. And from there, the next job was I think at the telephone company. And I worked in the secretarial pool, so I did get a little further there by being in a pool where people called down and dictated to you over the telephone, and they didn't have to see you personally. They could dictate over the telephone, and then you would transcribe their stuff and send it back to them. And by the time I had, I was just about to move out of the pool, I decided to go to college [Woodrow Wilson Junior College; Kennedy-King College, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My father was now out of the sanitarium, and he was back at home and back at his job. Story_ID: 512711 Speaker 1: And I decided to go to school, and my first experience with that was with a small community college called Wilson Junior College [Woodrow Wilson Junior College; Kennedy-King College, Chicago, Illinois], I went there. Speaker 2: Okay, and what year is this? Is this like '68 [1968] or '69 [1969]? Speaker 1: This would have been '68 [1968]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, '68 [1968]. Speaker 2: So, you'd been out of school [Dunbar Vocational High School; Dunbar Vocational Career Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] a full year (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 2: One year, okay, Wilson Junior College. Speaker 1: And I think I-- Speaker 2: Which is now Kennedy-King College [Chicago, Illinois]-- Speaker 1: Right. And I think I was taking, I was already at Wilson Junior College at night while I was working that day thing. And when I think about it, I was already at Wilson Junior College taking night courses. And when my father [Joseph Duncan] came out of the hospital, I actually went to what was Chicago Teachers College [Chicago, Illinois]. I think it's Chicago State College [sic. Chicago State University, Chicago, Illinois] now. And I applied there and started school there. Speaker 2: Okay. So, you didn't like go through the whole process at Wilson Junior College and get an associate's degree and all that? Speaker 1: No, none of that. Speaker 2: You just transferred over. Speaker 1: Yeah, I transferred right over. And that would have been '68 [1968] that I transferred over to Chicago State University [sic. Chicago State College; Chicago State University, Chicago, Illinois] and started at the university, you know, taking college courses. Speaker 2: Okay. Well, how did you like Chicago State? Was it different from--you know, how was college for you different from high school? Speaker 1: It was, it was just bigger. There were lots and lots of people, and you were going to school with whites as opposed to going to, being in a school where it's an all-black environment. That would have been in '68 [1968], at the height of the whole Black Power movement where blacks, African Americans, were going on the college campuses and demanding black studies programs and taking over buildings and, you know, making those kind of public demands. That was also going on at Chicago State. You know, it was during the time when we all discovered that black is beautiful. And we all went and cut off, got our hair nappy and started wearing big Afro's and dashikis. And the cool people on the campus then were the people who really were in touch with their African side. Story_ID: 512712 Speaker 1: Who were the student leaders then? Do you remember the names of any of the students that were--? Speaker 2: I think there was one guy named Primus Mootry. I remember him because he was in my, one of my lab classes, and he was also the leader of the student rebellion that took over the campus and shut down everything for about two or three days. That's the one that I remember. Speaker 1: Okay. And so the campus [Chicago State College; Chicago State University, Chicago, Illinois] was actually shut down for three days (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, it was. No exams, no tests, no anything. It was pretty cool, too, because people didn't want to take their tests anyway (laughter). But, you know, and it was wonderful in a way. Because for me it was--we knew what was going on, but we didn't know. There was no leadership. You hear what's going on; you hear about the Vietnam War; you know about what's going on at other college campuses. You have an inkling of what's going on, but you don't really know what that means for the school that you're attending. And so, Primus and his group of agitators were able to pull it--pull all these people together and take over the cafeteria and sit us down and explain to us, "This is what you don't have. This is what you're missing. You don't have black studies, you don't have--you don't know anything about your culture. You don't have, you do not have what you need as, as black students to really come back to your community and teach in your own community." Because this was basically a school for teachers. And so, if you don't know your own history, and you don't know your own culture, how are you going to go back and teach kids, you know, black history or anything like that? So, it was really a good thing that he was able to bring us all together. And we began to see the beauty of being who we were, black students, you know, black--yes, we were poor, many of us, but you know, we had potential. I think that's the first time that I realized that, you know, the Black Power movement was something more than just what was going on in the South. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, did you get involved? I know you were like working and going to school. Did you have time to be involved? Speaker 2: Not really. I mean fringe-wise, I was involved. I mean, I did not really have time to be involved. And then unfortunately during that time, I had my first boyfriend. I met the first guy that I fell in love with and started dating, and immediately got pregnant. So, besides going to school and working, I was pregnant. So I didn't have much time, I was back in survival mode. I mean, I didn't have time to get involved in all these other things. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, did you and the fellow stay together? I mean-- Speaker 2: We did not stay together. He was, he went to Vietnam. He came back from Vietnam a little bit different, a drug addict, basically, and never was able to--he was never himself. And so I was a single mom at nineteen, and had my son, that interrupted college and all of that. Then I was working. Story_ID: 512713 Speaker 1: Now one of the big news stories--and that must have been--that's a lot of things you're doing at one time. That's a lot of things. One of the biggest news story in those days was the murder of Fred Hampton. Do you remember the coverage, the news coverage of the murder of Fred Hampton? Speaker 2: Yes and no. Yes, in that I probably remember it as much as a commuter on the train is reading the paper and keeping up with it. How, did it affect my life? No. I thought it was a terrible thing to happen, but being invested in it, being angry about it, being, you know, involved in it--I wasn't one of the people that were raising questions with the police department. I watched it unfold very much like you would watch a drama. That's how I watched it. Speaker 1: Okay. The reason why I raise it is because at the time it was a big deal all over the country. And the other thing is because the news made a significant contribution to the, I think, public's awareness of what happened, you know. And I think the one news reporter showed the bullet holes all going in the door. And (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right, we saw that. You know, I saw that. But when you're nineteen and you're dealing with--going to be a single mom and, you know, what all that meant--and then realizing that, you know, that you're going down a path that you've not planned for yourself--things like somebody else's, what's happening to someone else doesn't register. Story_ID: 512714 Speaker 1: And you were by yourself then I guess in terms of this pregnancy (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was by myself. Speaker 1: He was still in Vietnam? Speaker 2: Well, no, he was back from Vietnam. But he'd come back from Vietnam, which is how I got pregnant, and then he went away to school. So, he was finishing his education. He was going to a private college. He was a basketball player, and he had a scholarship at a private college in Texas. And he just ran off to his life, you know, and I was left to deal with the child. Speaker 1: Did he ever come back and interact with or--? Speaker 2: Many years later. Well, not many years later, about five years later he came back. Speaker 1: So, he wasn't a part of your life (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, he was not. Speaker 1: --in terms of raising your child? Speaker 2: No, he was not. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. And those were the days before they--well, they say now they try to make the fathers pay child support and that sort of thing. Did he make any-- Speaker 2: Well, I was, I was very independent. My father [Joseph Duncan] was very--you know, I had a great father, a father who took care of his family if he had to work two jobs--if he had to go to work with asthma, whatever he had to do, he took care of his family, and he bred an independent streak in me. So it was a matter of pride, just for me. There's no way I was going to ask him for a dime; I was going to raise my own child. If he didn't want to, if he didn't want to take care of your child and you didn't want to be a part of your child's life, I was just not of the mind of going to court and making you pay anything; I took care of my child. And so, I mean today, I would say that's the wrong attitude to take, but back then that's how I felt about it. So, I never asked him for anything. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I never demanded anything. Story_ID: 512715 Speaker 1: Did you continue to work after your baby was born? Speaker 2: Yes. I started a long career of secretarial work. And I worked for, after going, after having a child and getting back in the workplace, I went to work for Michael Reese Hospital [Michael Reese Hospital and Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois]. I worked there for a while. I worked for law firms. I was the first, probably the first African--I think I was the first African American hired at a major law firm, Seyfarth Shaw [Seyfarth Shaw LLP]. And then from Seyfarth Shaw, I worked at several other law firms; I worked at all the top ones. So, I spent a long career working at law firms as a legal secretary. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what distinguishes a legal secretary, other than the fact that she works for a law firm, from I guess the skill set that's required to be a regular secretary? Speaker 2: Well, you learn, you just, you learn to do a lot of things. I mean, you learn how to file motions. You learn how to write up complaints. You know how to do notices of service. It's a specific niche. And you do a lot of transcription. You know, you transcribe tapes, you transcribe conversations. It's, I think it's more detailed. And so, I spent probably twenty years in that profession. Speaker 1: Okay. Now meanwhile, were you able to finish school? Speaker 2: No. I was going to school at night, taking a class here and there, taking general subjects--an ethics class or a writing class, or a poetry class, or something like that, one a semester. And then there would be periods when I wouldn't be able to take any classes. But no, school was secondary. I lived life, you know. I paid bills, I raised my child, paid rent, had a life. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, what did your life consist of? I mean, what kind of things did you do? Speaker 2: Working (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I was a workaholic, I did a lot of working. I did a lot of--as most single mothers still, probably still do--is that you've got to make ends meet. And so that means if you want your own apartment and you want a car, or you want, you know, those kinds of things, you're working not one job, but two jobs. There were periods when I worked two jobs, and there were periods when I worked seven days a week. I did a lot of overtime, and basically paid the bills and took care of my child, those sorts of things. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Nothing--nothing, you know, fantastic. Story_ID: 512716 Speaker 1: In those years, that was like the golden age of black publications. By 1968, I think there were like forty black publishing companies, all of them new, including the Third World Press [Chicago, Illinois], Drum and Spear Press in Washington, D.C.--all of these black books were coming out. Black magazines, new black magazines were being published. A lot of them didn't last long, but there was a lot of publishing going on. As a reader, did you--I mean did you have any favorite publications, or did you read these things? Speaker 2: No, no. I was probably a big--as I recall, a big newspaper reading. But let's look at the hours in a day. By the time you get your child up and get your child to daycare, get to your job, work ten or twelve hours, get your child back, get your child fed, it's way past time to go to bed. So in terms of things to--you know, reading and pursuing what was going on, and keeping up with what was going on in the arts and black publishing and literature and all that--that just was not part of my life, you know. I wasn't, I was the average everyday single mom. Speaker 1: Okay. I'm still going to ask this. (Laughter) Did you have a favorite columnist in the Chicago [Illinois] papers at all? Speaker 2: Richard Simon--Roger Simon. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Roger Simon, I loved him. He was, he is just like I know him, you know, which is why I know about the relationships that form between reader and columnist. Because I'd get my Chicago Sun-Times and I'd get on the train, and I'd read some story about what's going on in the city, or what was going on with an individual. He was a real champion of ordinary people. I mean, he wrote stories about average people, and I just loved him. And I remember when my brother--I had a brother who was in Stateville [Stateville Correctional Center, Crest Hill, Illinois]. And he was getting a really raw deal, in terms of the money we were sending him to put on his books or whatever. But I remember being so upset about that, because everyone in my family depended on me to straight, fix things. So, I wrote to Roger Simon. "This is my problem. My brother's in jail," blah, blah, blah. And I never heard from him, although, you know, since then we've talked. I mean, he sent me a letter saying, "I know I didn't return your, answer your letter." But he was real to me, and he was my favorite columnist. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, did you read the Defender [Chicago Defender] hardly at all in those days? Speaker 2: Yes, I read the Defender too, but not as much as I read--we were a daily newspaper family, especially my father [Joseph Duncan]. Actually, we read two newspapers. We read the Sun-Times in the morning, or a daily news- a morning newspaper, whatever it was called--and then an afternoon newspaper. So, that's how I became a newspaper reader, because my dad was a newspaper reader. I would read the Defender, only in terms of if you saw it someplace or you picked it up someplace. But that was not the heyday of the Defender. You know, during those years, the late '70s [1970s], the early '80s [1980s], those weren't, that wasn't the heyday. Now, it was probably the heyday for my dad; I'm sure he read the Defender every day. But not for us, not for my, at least not for my generation. Speaker 1: It did decline in popularity-- Story_ID: 512717 Speaker 1: Were you an avid listener of 'Lu's Notebook'? Speaker 2: Yes, I knew who he was. And I also knew who [HistoryMaker] Herb Kent was. Herb Kent came along when, you know, I got my first transistor radio. And my sister [Marie Duncan Crossley] and I had to share it, if you can imagine somebody having to share a transistor radio; there was one between us. And I can remember when Herb Kent came onto the scene. It was like, there's somebody for us. I mean he understood young people and it was just, it was wonderful. So, yes, I remember that. Speaker 1: Those were the golden years of WVON [WVON Radio, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Oh yes, yes. And we would sit out by the lakefront on a stoop in the projects and turn on the transistor radio. And that radio would be going all day and all night. That was before the boom box, mind you. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Let's see. Were there any black columnists in the Tribune [Chicago Tribune]? Well, Lu Palmer [HistoryMaker Lutrelle "Lu" F. Palmer, II] had been in the Daily News [Chicago Daily News] at one time. And I don't know if--we had [HistoryMaker] Vernon Jarrett, you know. Speaker 2: Vernon. Yes, well, Vernon came a lot--for me, I started reading Vernon a lot later, because Vernon was writing for the Tribune, and I was not a Tribune reader. And when he started writing for the Sun-Times [Chicago Sun-Times], it was probably in the '80s [1980s], the late '80s [1980s], and then I read his column. I didn't have any connection to columnists. I mean, I'm not the kind of person, you know, whose life was paying attention to the political structures. I mean, that just wasn't me. I wasn't into the politics of Chicago [Illinois], or what was going on in terms of what was going on on the South Side, or what was Daley [Richard M. Daley] doing? Or what was--the Harold Washington years--all those years, believe it or not, I was a working class mother. That's who I was. I was trying to take care of my family, and dealing with my own personal life. Speaker 1: I didn't ask before. But was church a big part of growing up at all? Speaker 2: For my mom [Carrie Williams Duncan]. My mom was Pentecostal. My dad [Joseph Duncan] was, he didn't go to church at all. (Laughter) And there was always that friction between the Pentecostal upbringing and, you know the Sanctified church, as it was called back then, and us going to the Sanctified church and my dad not being a part of any of that. You know, it was that constant conflict of his lifestyle versus her lifestyle. Story_ID: 512718 Speaker 1: I know that at some point there came a juncture when you stopped being a legal secretary. And there was a traumatic episode, from what I've read. Something happened, what happened (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Well, I had--well, by 1990, I was--well, actually 1989. I was turning--it was my fortieth birthday, and I was beginning to think, you've been doing this forever. I was bored with what I was doing. I was going to school at night, and really beginning to delve into writing--poetry, creative writing, enjoying it very much. And on my job I was a legal secretary, but there was opportunity to become a supervisor. And it was middle management, where you were supervising basically like five secretaries. It was not a big deal but, you know, a step up from where I was. I'd already been at the law firm where I was working for ten years--a very good reputation, you know, well-liked, good reviews, all of that. So I thought it was a cinch for this job--and lots of seniority, like I said, ten years. And so I go to my supervisor and say, "I want to apply for the job," and she gives me, tells me that I have to try out for it, which I didn't understand. I mean, how do you try out for a job that you've been--I've been here ten years, and you know who I am, so why don't you just give me the job? "Well, you've got to try out." So, I ended up trying out. My competition was about a twenty-two year old white female blond, who had just got there. I go to the tryout, and the guy that I was trying out for gives me an interview and tells me he remembers me when I was a lot younger, whatever that was supposed to mean--when we were both were a lot younger--he tells me this. And you know, he'd give me a fair shot at it, and then he proceeded to be gone for a week. So, he never even saw my work. While I'm there I've got to cover his behind for him with clients, and straighten out bad, messed-up appointments, and re-file things. And I knew I had this job, because I just ran rings around my competition. But the day when we were supposed to--when my tryout was over and my supervisor came and told me what happened, she pulled me into a little office and said, "You know, I really hate to tell you this, but you didn't get the job." I was flabbergasted. I was like, "What?" And she said, "And you know why. I can't tell you why, but you know why. And if I were you, you know, then I would just take this as an opportunity to do something else. Because, you know, I know it's not right, but that's all I can say about it." And I was so stunned that she was basically telling me that I was not hired because I was older and I was a black woman, and he wanted a young white woman supervising. So, I went home and I thought about it. By that time I had two children, two biological children, and two children that I had adopted, a relative's children. And I had a mortgage and car note, and all these things going on in my life. And I decided, "Well, you know what? I just can't take it. I'm quitting." So I went back and I told my supervisor that I was going to leave, and that I was going to go back to school. And I quit two weeks later, and I went back to school. I went to Columbia College [Columbia College Chicago] in Chicago [Illinois] where I'd been taking night classes, and I enrolled in a writing program there, a journalism program, as a matter of fact. Speaker 1: Okay. So, this is 1990? Speaker 2: This would have been 1989. No, this would have been--well, I guess I would have quit my job in '89 [1989]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes, '89 [1989]. Story_ID: 512719 Speaker 1: After you did it, were you--did you wish you could take it back (laughter)? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah. Well, after--it was tough. You know, I mean it was tough. I was an older student, the oldest [at Columbia College Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], of course. I had just celebrated my fortieth birthday. So when I show up in the--even though it's a non-traditional school--when you show up in the classroom and you haven't been in a classroom in a serious way for decades--then I had the family responsibility. I had a husband, and my husband was not--you know, he had gone to journalism school, and so he had never achieved his goal of journalism. So it wasn't looking too hopeful that I would find a job. And he was also not the working kind. I mean, he kept a job, but he wasn't like me. He wasn't a workaholic. He wasn't overtime, whatever it takes to meet the bills kind of person. He was pretty laid back. And at that time that I quit, he wasn't even working full-time. So, I had that to deal with, that we would have to take the little bit of money we had and make it stretch so much further. And I had the fact that you deal with the whole thing of being older. You know, you're with these young kids and you're having to compete with them. With all these other things going on in your life, you're having to compete with them for grades, because I depended on scholarships and financial aid. And I knew as a good student, I could earn it, but now I'm competing with much younger people. So it was, you know--yeah, I remember going to the counselor's office and basically--Carolyn Haas [ph.] was her name, and she was the journalism advisor. And I remember it was coming up Christmas, and I didn't know where I was going to get money to buy the gifts for my kids. I hadn't had a perm in months, and I was wearing a hat all the time. I was--day and night, it seems to me, that it was taking me just to get the work done and the papers written and all of that. My marriage was beginning to disintegrate at that point, and I was crying. I mean, I just walked in her office and broke down and cried. I just, it was like, "I can't do this." And she looked at me and said, "Mary [HistoryMaker Mary Mitchell], I can tell you that this career is going to be for you. And once you finish this, you'll never look back." Story_ID: 512720 Speaker 1: So now, a big crisis, tears (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: --and your teacher is giving you some encouragement. Speaker 2: Yes, she gave me some encouragement, and I also found a little scholarship grant that helped me get through Christmas for my kids. And she was right, you know, I never looked back. You know, there were times when I felt funny, like when I'd go to minority scholarship forums and things like that, and everybody thought I was a professor and not the student. I mean, those times were hard. But overall, it was a great experience. I loved Columbia [Columbia College Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], it was a great experience. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Are there any special teachers at Columbia that you can name? Speaker 2: Well, Carolyn Haas [ph.] was a good one. She was my advisor, but she also taught journalism. P.J. Bednarski was the best. He was an editor for, at the Chicago Sun-Times. And he was the person who was the professor in my first journalism class, like Introduction to Journalism. And he looked at my sample work of news stories and said, "You have the potential to be a writer for a newspaper," and advised me to apply for an internship, a minority internship. It was the Sun-Times' first minority internship and scholarship program, and I applied for it. I applied for it on short notice. I think there was about maybe three or four days before the deadline. The deadline for some glitch reason, for some reason fell on a holiday which was Memorial Day, you know, the first big barbeque day of the season. And everybody was planning to go and do the barbeque thing, and I had to come up with an essay about why I wanted to be, you know, an intern, and my goals. And I had to also come up with letters of recommendation, which I went to my former--I went to my former supervisor and asked her for a recommendation. And she gave me a recommendation, even though she was--it's really interesting how things worked out. Because she knew the business side, the big VP's over on the marketing side of the Sun-Times, and she got one of them to write me a recommendation, and he didn't even know me. So, he wrote a recommendation and we put the package together, I got it to the Sun-Times in time. I actually drove down here on that holiday and gave it to the security guard, and it got into the mix. Speaker 1: That's something. Story_ID: 512721 Speaker 1: You took creative writing at first, but it kind of morphed into journalism? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: How did that happen (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, creative writing, I think creative writing was--I had a professor--you know, I was doing so many things that I wasn't really doing the work that was needed to do creative writing. It is easy to tell the truth, to me, than make up stories. Truth is great, it tells itself. And there's incredibly powerful stories that are real. I have a harder time making up stuff, and that's what creative writing called upon you to do, was to go to a place and uncover these characters. And that is much harder to do. So, I did not do as well. And I was in a classroom with--Columbia [Columbia College Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] attracts, even back then, which was in '89 [1989] and '90 [1990], they were attracting some fabulous talent. And so, these people, you would sit in the classroom and listen to them read from their stories and go, "Wow. Mine, it just doesn't sound like that." And I knew right then and there that the one thing I'd have to do is be able at the end of my degree was feed my family and pay my mortgage and continue my lifestyle; I would have to do that. I knew that I was not--I didn't see Toni Morrison potential, you know. I knew that that wasn't going to happen. What I needed to do was find a job, something that would create an income for me. And so that's why I decided on journalism, because I figured, "You know what? I can at least get a job at a newspaper or a magazine or something like that." So I had, I just--it was a business decision. Story_ID: 512722 Speaker 1: Writing with the Sun-Times [Chicago Sun-Times], that started while you were still at Columbia [Columbia College Chicago, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know, let me--to get the chronology right, I got dissed in '89 [1989] from the job. And at the same time--because I think I said something wrong--at the same time I got dissed from the job, I was already going to school part-time. And when I got dissed, I decided to go back full-time. And that's when I met P.J. Bednarski, who gave me the opportunity to do an internship. So, all of that happened in '89 [1989]. And so when I was selected, surprisingly, as the intern for '90 [1990], the summer of 1990, that's when I made a clean break of the law firm and really starting walking in the path of being a journalist. You know, I had never worked for a school newspaper, I had never even thought about being a journalist. The first thing I did was start running around trying to find someone who would let me write something for them for free. And I contacted the Defender [Chicago Defender] and offered myself up as an intern for them for the summer. And they never wrote me back, never contacted me, never returned my phone call. Several other newspapers--you know, I did the Tribune [Chicago Tribune] and I did some community papers. And a little community paper out in Maywood [Illinois], it was called The Maywood Star [ph.] or something like that, did call me back and offered me an opportunity to work for them covering village hall meetings in Melrose Park [Illinois]. They even agreed to pay me. If I would work a couple of days a week, they would pay me something like a hundred dollars a week to cover the board meetings. And the board meetings that I was assigned to cover was in Melrose Park. So, that was my first experience with journalism, real journalism, before I came to the Sun-Times as an intern. Because I just didn't want to panic when I walked in the door because I didn't know anything about, you know, writing a news story. So I covered, I would walk into the Melrose Park village hall meeting where guys were still smoking cigars. And they were all, you know, white males with these big cigars. There were no females in the room, period, because women didn't come to the Melrose Park board meetings at that time. And they would all turn and look at me, because they just couldn't imagine what was I doing at a Melrose Park board meeting. And so that's how I kind of cut my teeth and got involved. And I would work twice, two days a week, at the little community newspaper. And one of those days I had to actually do the real intensive labor of cutting up and pasting up newsprint and all of that--writing headlines and setting things up and proofreading, and the whole nine yards. I was covering stories with the camera around my neck, and taking the pictures and doing all of that at the same time. Story_ID: 512723 Speaker 1: So you learned how to shoot pictures at Columbia [Columbia College Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], too? Speaker 2: Right, over the summer of 1989. Because in 1990 and the fall of--yeah, the summer of '89 [1989] and the next year in 1990, I got the internship; that's when I started the internship. Speaker 1: Okay. I remember Chicago [Illinois] in those days, I guess in terms of current events in Chicago, the black community was deflated after the death of Harold Washington. There was a lot of just-- Speaker 2: The big stories, yeah. When I came on board, the big stories--well, my internship was a great internship, because I actually got to work on real stories. And after getting over the initial shock of being in the newsroom with some of my favorite writers, and getting my voice back--because I literally lost the ability to speak coherently, I was so excited about the opportunity of being in that newsroom. When all of that passed and I actually got on the street writing stories, that's when I realized that what really attracted me the most in this business was the fact that you had the power to tell stories about real people. And in 1990 and 1991, the big stories out there were education stories. I mean that was the time when you had Ted Kimbrough, Superintendent Ted Kimbrough, who was taking over the Chicago public school system. And he was catching a lot of flak about what was going on. It was a time when I think we had the blackout, the ComEd [Commonwealth Edison Company, Chicago, Illinois] blackout at that time over on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois], and that took up a whole--that was a whole big news story. But politics were basically focused around--because Daley [Richard M. Daley] had a firm grip on the city. Politics was basically focused around the school system, and what was going on in the school system. Those were the big stories. Speaker 1: I think it was, I don't know, it wasn't long before, I think--you were covering it when the Daley administration decided to take over the school board, right? Speaker 2: That, too. But that came (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That came later. Speaker 2: --that came a few years later. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But 1990 and 1991, we were still dealing with the school board, dealing with the School Finance Authority [Chicago School Finance Authority], and that there was this other whole body that had the power over the school system's finances. So the school was lobbying two people. They were lobbying the School Finance Authority, which demanded they have a budget, a balanced budget every year. And the process of balancing that budget was always big news. That's, that's kind my entree into the news business. So I covered a lot of that, just as an intern. I covered the, you know, the big stories. The paper [Chicago Sun-Times] allowed me to do that, and I ended up with a lot of headline stories, front page stories; I worked on good stories. They positioned me very well to come into the newspaper as a fresh voice. Story_ID: 512724 Speaker 1: Who were some of the other black reporters when you came on? Speaker 2: Lillian Williams was covering politics for the city. Maudlin [Bill Mauldin], you had (unclear) who's still here, she was here. Carl Rowan, of course, was our star syndicated columnist, and so was [HistoryMaker] Vernon Jarrett, who was on staff at the time. A guy named [HistoryMaker] Leonard Pitts, Leon Pitts I think; yeah, he was here. So, I think that was about it. Those are the ones that I can remember. And those are the ones that kind of schooled me, in terms of just covering basic stories, the day to day stories. I came in as an intern with like six other people, and competed with them in terms of covering stories and getting the best stories. And I really didn't think I had an opportunity to actually be hired, but I had--I think my advantage was the fact that I was a workaholic in the secretarial field, so you know that I was going to be a workaholic when it came to the news cycle. And I was prepared to compete, you know, I worked hard. I probably was the weakest writer of the bunch, because most of them had long dreams of being journalists. So they started off with the school newspaper, the college newspaper, the wire services and all of that, whereas I started off fresh with no experience. So I had to write, and re-write and re-write, which I did. And I had to spend long hours in the newsroom. And again, I had to get here before anyone else got here. I had to re-write so many pieces, but it paid off. Because at the end of my internship, I got an offer to work for the paper [Chicago Sun-Times] full-time when I graduated from college, and that meant completing my junior year and my senior year. They offered me a job at the completion of that, which was 1991. In 1991, I graduated from Columbia [Columbia College Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], with job in hand. Story_ID: 512725 Speaker 1: When you talk about long hours, what kind of hours are we talking about? Speaker 2: Probably I had to be in the newsroom by eleven o'clock, and then I probably left here about nine at night. So, from eleven to nine at night. And then I was getting up and getting here before my eleven o'clock shift, because I wanted to make sure that whatever I sent in, I could get it back and check it one last time before anyone took a look at it. So, I was probably getting here at nine, instead of eleven. I was working sometimes up until two o'clock in the morning, if it was a big story and I had to re-write. Because I tried to re-write when people didn't know I was re-writing. You know, I mean, you didn't want your editors to know that it took you three times as long to write a story as it did anybody else. So, what you had to do was just do it on your own. Speaker 1: Well, being a, having great secretarial skills (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Helped. Speaker 1: --probably helped. Speaker 2: Yes, it did. It helped with the interviewing process, it helped taking notes out in the field. I was a fast typist, so it helped in terms of just getting the story inputted, and just taking all that information and, you know, boiling it down to its essence. I think all of my secretarial skills helped with that. It certainly helped me to be able to--the secretarial skills helped me to be able to tackle different situations and different stories. I wasn't afraid to go into like the courtroom; I wasn't afraid to go into different environments that I think probably would have intimidated a lot of different people. Speaker 1: Okay. Yeah, I thought that would probably be of some help, you know, being a legal secretary and having been exposed to legal documents and-- Story_ID: 512726 Speaker 1: So you started full-time in 1991 [at the Chicago Sun-Times]? Speaker 2: Nineteen ninety-one [1991]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, you were hired to do? Speaker 2: I was hired to cover education (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 2: --along with a woman named Maribeth Vander Weele, she was the primary education reporter. And I was paired with her as a secondary reporter. And what that meant was that she basically covered the board itself--Ted Kimbrough and all the members of the board. And I covered schools--school issues, you know, truant issues, academic issues, the schools themselves; that was my responsibility. And so, I learned. I mean I learned all about the board, I was kind of thrown into the mix. And it was, I got to say, it was difficult, because it was just like taking someone from Mars and then dropping them down on the earth and saying, "Okay, go to work." Because I was not a political person, and I didn't really understand the context, the political environment and how education fit on that; I wasn't paying attention to those kinds of things. I had fresh eyes. Speaker 1: Well, what was the most startling discovery that you made in terms of the schools, the thing that you didn't know, you know, existed? Speaker 2: About schools? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: The politics--that most of the decisions that were being made about the students, or what they read, or what schools they went to, or whether the school stayed open or closed--were political decisions. And you never knew who was right or wrong. It was so hard to determine who's telling the truth here. I mean I think that was the scariest part for me, that, you know, you have the Chicago Teachers Union saying this, and you have the Board of Education [Chicago Board of Education] saying that. And it always came down to you having to decide as the reporter who was telling the truth here? Because reporters don't want to admit this quite often, but it has to filtered through a perspective. Every story has a point of view. And so, if you believe the Board of Education is lying, then you're going to, in your story, seek out the kind of people who're going to prove that. So, you have to know when you go into a story what you want to get out of that story. So, that was the scariest thing to me. The most surprising thing to me is that everything was politics. And quite often, you didn't know who was telling the truth. Was Daley [Richard M. Daley] telling the truth? Was Kimbrough telling the truth? Was Chicago Teachers Union telling the truth? You never knew. And I found that to be the scariest thing of all. So I kind of left that--there was a learning curve that I had to get through. And then you had the competition of two reporters. When you have two reporters on the beat, you are--even though this is your colleague, this colleague is still competing with you. It's a strange kind of dynamic, you know. Instead of teaching you, she's basically competing with you. So I focused my attention on schools--actually going into schools talking to students, and trying to do stories that show the plight of the students themselves. That's where I focused my attention. Story_ID: 512727 Speaker 1: Is there any particular story that stands out now as one that you-- Speaker 2: Well, my most favorite story, and to this day it's still my favorite story, was the five-part series on Cregier Vocational High School [Chicago, Illinois]. And this was a story--I was covering the Board of Education [Chicago Board of Education], and I think in '91 [1991] or '92 [1992]--this is when I first really got hired by the Sun-Times [Chicago Sun-Times]. So it was early in my career, maybe the first year or two, or the second year. They were going to close down a series of schools. And one of the schools they were going to close down was called Cregier Vocational, and it was considered the school of the last resort. A lot of students going there who were either kicked out of the school, who were either teenage moms, poor academics, you name it. It was a West Side school, it had a long history in Chicago [Illinois]. It used to be one of the premier boys schools, and then it became a dumping ground for poor students. And I just was drawn toward that story. And I started stopping at the school on my way into work, and interviewing casually students, and talking to them about, you know, what they thought about the school, what they thought about the, you know, closing the school, and whatever. I proposed the story to my editor, my first line editor, and she thought it was not a good story. "One, because, are you going to say at the end of this story that these kids somehow become very successful? What's the point of the story if you're just going to talk about a school that's got all these problems? We're not interested in that story." But I believed in that story so much that I went over her head and went to another editor who could understand the vision that I had--that we needed to see what these students were dealing with, and why this story was, why the school was important, and why you couldn't just look at numbers to close down a school. Because where are these kids going to go? You're basically going to kick them out and say they don't deserve an education because they're a single mom, or they don't deserve an education because their parents were on drugs and, you know, they had a hard life and they don't get to school; that they're truant problems; that they, we're just going to throw them out. He understood that vision, and he gave me the go-ahead to do a five-part series on that school, and it ended up winning major awards. And one of the awards I was most proud of was my first award from the National Association of Black Journalists. And it was an award, I got the Award of Excellence for that particular piece. And the Board of Education decided to, at the end of that series, decided to revise their policy and did not move right away to close down that school. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: So, it was my taste of what journalism could do, you know, that it could make a difference. It could change people's minds and opinions; it could sway opinions; it could tell stories that influence social policy, all those things that one story taught me. And so, from that point on I knew those were the kinds of stories I wanted to tell. Speaker 1: Yeah, once you kind of touched upon the dichotomy among journalism, I guess in terms of telling the story--is the story to tell a story that gives a person a conclusion, or some kind of concluding, you know, thing to do? Is it an, everything's going to be okay story, or is it a story that gets people interested in the issue? Speaker 2: Right. Well, I wanted people to see, I wanted to strip away all of the politics. Every story has this political side; there are politics, you know, everywhere. Because--and I think that this gets back to the fact that I wasn't brought up in a political environment. We didn't sit around talking about what Daley [Richard J. Daley] was doing, what old man Daley was doing, or even what Harold [Harold Washington] was going to do. That's not--we talked about, if anything, we talked about how things affected us. We talked about getting through life, getting through the job, getting--you know, doing the best that you can; getting through high school, what it took to just survive in a city like Chicago [Illinois]. Those are the conversations me and my friends were having. They weren't political conversations. They were about, well, how do you, you know, when the father's not taking care of the kids, how do you make it? Those are the conversations we were having. So when I came into the newsroom, I wasn't coming in from the perspective of what the political aspect of it. I was coming in looking at life--what does this mean to one person's life? And that one person's life is really symbolic of a group of people, a bunch of people, what they're dealing with every day. And that's how I saw the Cregier--that's how I covered education. Story_ID: 512728 Speaker 1: And when I left education in '93 [1993] I think, I was sent to cover city hall. And again, I was paired up with a woman who is the premier city hall reporter who'd been there, who's been there for decades to cover Mayor Daley and the city council. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. Well, how did you--what was the biggest story during that period? From '93 [1993]--you did that from '93 [1993] until when? Speaker 1: From '93 [1993] and probably '95 [1995]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, '93 [1993] to '95 [1995]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Biggest story was Operation Silver Shovel. And that's when I learned the hard facts of journalism, that you can be scooped on your own story. (Laughter) It was a tough lesson but, you know, you have to learn it. I, again I was paired with someone who was covering the politics of city hall. And I never liked to get on the bus; didn't like covering Daley [Richard M. Daley]; didn't like quoting, having to quote everything the man had to say. I just thought it was just crazy that people would follow him around everywhere, and basically not really looking at--underneath what he was saying; they were just quoting what he was saying. So I never got, I didn't like being on the bus. And that was, that's the way city hall reporters were being treated at the time. They had a van, and every day you found out the mayor's schedule and you got on the van and you followed him from place to place to report what was going on. I hated the van. So, often I tried to find a way not to get on the van. I would stay behind and I would look at stories. And I started looking at, I started looking at committee records, what was going on in the committees. I also started, you know, paying attention to just how people were living in Chicago [Illinois]. And I was driving down Roosevelt Road area and saw in front of me this huge pile, mountain of garbage rising out of nowhere. It just seemed like it, to me at the time it looked like it was seven stories high. And I just couldn't figure out, how did this get here? And I started looking into it, and I ended up talking to aldermen, and reporting on a story about this weird figure, a Christopher [John Christopher] something. I can't remember his name now, who was a mole. He turned out to be a mole for the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation], who was running around setting up aldermen who were allowing him to set up illegal dumps in the area. And I kept reporting on the story, reporting the story, until the city made a commitment to remove the dump. Now where I fell short, and where I learned a lesson of being scooped on your own story, was that I still did not know that the FBI was involved, and this was a mole and this was a set-up. But I was getting closer and closer to that fact. Well, my paper [Chicago Sun-Times] lost interest, and, "Oh, you got to go do this, and you got to go do that." And so the moment I stopped reporting that, two days later Carol Marin broke the story of the mole, the FBI, and the dump. And that's how I learned that you can get scooped on your own story. Story_ID: 512729 Speaker 1: Trying to cover city hall in Chicago [Illinois], and probably in some other cities, is quite a job, because a lot of what they do is almost inscrutable. You can't, you can't tell what they're doing. They pass ordinances by the number in the City Council. And when you go to the City Council, you know what I'm talking about. Speaker 2: Right. The City Council--but see, the action doesn't happen. That's the politics of it, that's the theater. That's what you, you know, they show on TV, and what we quote in newspapers, of the aldermen doing this and that. But that doesn't start there. It starts in the committees. So, if you really want to know what's going on in city hall, you really learn how to go to the very basic grunt; it's grunt work. It's going to the committee meeting and your ear perking up when you see everybody signed up to protest something. You know, the Walmart ordinance, the Big Box Ordinance, for instance, started in a committee someplace. And so, a journalist who covers city hall, they're going to go--a good journalist is going to start off covering the committees. On the other side of that, you also learn the politics. You know, I learned about the grip city hall had on--that Mayor Daley [Richard M. Daley] and city hall had on aldermen, and many--and the aldermen who basically sold out and were in cahoots with Daley, just by watching what was going on at the floor--just by watching when election time came up, who was quiet and who was making noise. You get to see the political--you get a good political view of city hall. You get to see the ministers, and how they line up. The black ministers line up behind Daley. You get to see the aldermen who you think are really, you know, very anti-Daley; how they're really not anti-Daley just by looking at the projects that come into their ward, because nothing moves without Daley's approval. So, you really begin to understand some of the politics just by watching what goes on on the floor. And it was a good training ground for me. The editors decided to send me there because they thought I was too soft. They thought I was too nice in terms of the way I was covering the news; they wanted a harder edge. And so they sent me to city hall, because they figured that once I got to city hall, it's so rough and tumble that I would develop a harder edge, which of course I did. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, one of the hard-edge aspects of city hall that I've seen with my own eyes are city employees, young men and women, assigned to follow reporters around and write what they're talking about. Speaker 2: Well, I don't know if we had that at the time. And I was not at the top of the chain when I was at city hall, I was kind of under the radar screen. You know, you had your pecking order at city hall, you know, the long-term journalists. And at that point it was the Tribune [Chicago Tribune] and the Sun-Times [Chicago Sun-Times]. It was John Kass and it was Fran Spielman. And then you had the radio guys, the three of them, they'd been there forever. And then you had--I was a backup. I think there were two city--I mean the Tribune had a second person, and I was the second person for the Sun-Times. And you know, we were basically backup people. So, you weren't really the ones they were following around. And that was good, because it gave you an opportunity to be, you know, to learn what was going on under the radar screen. Story_ID: 512730 Speaker 1: Did anything surprise you about Silver Shovel [Operation Silver Shovel]? Because several aldermen were (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Black aldermen were allowing-- Speaker 1: Was that a, was that when Tyrone Kenner lost his spot-- Speaker 2: No. That was when Percy Giles, and Virgil Jones, Marino [ph.], all these guys went to jail. I think there had to be seven or eight people who had gone to jail behind Operation Silver Shovel. And two things surprised me about it. Black elected officials were allowing a white contractor [John Christopher] who was, who also turned out to be an FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] mole, to dump garbage illegally in their wards, and they were taking money for that. They were that willing to take a bribe. And they weren't taking a bribe for someone to build a condo or build housing in their areas. They were taking bribes to allow someone to dump garbage, knowing that the African American population, more than any other, their children suffer from asthma and all kinds of respiratory ailments, and these black elected officials would do that. And I think that was the shocking thing for me. Because, you know, up until the time--I would say that at least for me, entering into journalism in an urban city [Chicago, Illinois], you didn't criticize black leadership that much. Everybody got a pass, you know. People were so busy writing about the racism of the white aldermen and no white mayor, and all these white people and what they were doing to black people. Black people were getting a pass, so black leaders didn't have to worry, they had immunity. They had obvious outright immunity, because you weren't going to--black reporters weren't going to report negative things about them. Carl Rowan broke that mold when he wrote about what was going in the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], and he was castigated for that. People thought he was wrong for that. He should have won a Pulitzer Prize. Story_ID: 512731 Speaker 1: So, we're at about 1995, right? Or heading towards it? Speaker 2: We're into (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) City hall. Speaker 2: Yeah, we're into-- Speaker 1: And Silver Shovel [Operation Silver Shovel]. Speaker 2: We're into city hall, Silver Shovel. Great, I enjoyed that series. And the difference that it made is that today, there's no mountain of garbage there. City hall had to dump that mountain, my mountain. Everybody knew that this was Mary's [HistoryMaker Mary Mitchell] mountain, and that they had to do something about it. Because every time I talked to Daley [Richard M. Daley] and his people, I had the microphone in his face about, "What are you going to do about that mountain of garbage?" And they're building a studio, a television studio on that site now. So that showed me, again, that journalism like that can make a difference, and that's the kind of journalism that I was very much interested in doing. Story_ID: 512732 Speaker 1: After '95 [1995], they brought me back for a little while to cover projects. I worked on a race series, and I worked on a violence series; I worked on long-term projects. And then they sent me over to, I think in '95 [1995] they sent me over to the federal courts. So I left city hall and I went over to the federal courts and I covered the Gangster Disciples Larry Hoover trials, and a lot of the federal drug prosecutions. I got to learn about what all that was about. And I was, it was there that they tapped me to become a Sunday columnist [for the Chicago Sun-Times]. Speaker 2: Do you remember the 21st Century VOTE, Larry Hoover's-- Speaker 1: Right. I was covering (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) attempt at politics? Speaker 1: Well, yeah, that started over at city hall, and then that just carried on over to the Larry Hoover trials. Because 21st Century VOTE was the first--well, it was an organization that was trying to get legitimacy, some political legitimacy. And they were being supported by aldermen, you know. Lots of ward aldermen either gave them money, or gave them jobs, or gave them a kind of legitimate platform for their views. So yes, I covered that, and I also--but it was an interesting dynamic. Because on one hand, this was a terrible thing. I mean, here's a gang member trying to get legitimacy. But on the other hand, here are young people who are being now interested in politics, and who have taken an ownership of politics within their own communities. It was, it was just a very interesting dynamic at that time. Speaker 2: Were you there that afternoon when they brought four thousand youths to Daley Plaza [Richard J. Daley Center, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 1: I can't remember that, but I remember-- Speaker 2: They had buses and buses, they shut down city hall. Speaker 1: Yes. Oh, that was Larry Hoover. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: That was for the Larry Hoover trial. I was covering Larry Hoover at the time. And yes, the ability to mobilize that many people, it was an eye-opening experience, you know, for everybody. It was a wakeup call that this was more--this was about more than drugs being sold on the corner in the communities. This was about people who were beginning to organize to the point of taking political control of their communities. And they were offering a real challenge to the established leadership, which would have been, you know, Reverend Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] and Operation PUSH [Rainbow PUSH Coalition, Chicago, Illinois] and the elected officials in those communities. Speaker 2: Do you think they got a fair shot at trying to go legitimate? Speaker 1: A fair shot? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Well, yes. Here's why I say that. At the same time, they had not denounced the violence and the problems they were causing in their own community. I mean, yes, on one hand it was good to see all these young people answering the call and being politically involved. But on the other hand they were still holding the elderly people, black people, hostage in their homes by selling drugs in front of their houses. They were still selling drugs to young black women, many of them pregnant, and causing, you know, the community to have to deal with more kids who were dysfunctional because of their parents' drug use. They were still shooting and killing each other, which was causing more trauma within the community. So, they had not denounced the things that they needed to denounce to have legitimacy. It was great to see them on one hand being politically active. But on the other hand, they hadn't deserved, they hadn't deserved the platform that they were seeking, because they were still a cause of the destruction within the black community. Speaker 2: Yeah, that was, that period of '94 [1994] and '95 [1995] was one of the most violent periods in Chicago [Illinois] history. Stats have shown (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes. And you know, and I came from the perspective of having to raise children who--they couldn't live with their mothers because their mothers were strung out on drugs, or their father was strung out on drugs. I knew that this, this is the cross that the community is bearing from your behavior. So, while you're saying that you know, we want to represent, you don't represent me. You don't represent me, because you cannot seek to destroy me and represent me at the same time. Story_ID: 512733 Speaker 1: After the Larry Hoover trials, where did you go? Speaker 2: Larry Hoover trial, I was there in '95 [1995] and maybe a little part of '96 [1996]. And the Chicago Sun-Times has always been in serious competition, of course, with the Tribune [Chicago Tribune]. And they were trying to re-shape their Sunday paper, because their Sunday paper has always been our most troublesome paper. One, the circulation is not high as the rest of the week, and two, they're always trying to compete with the whole package that the Tribune was offering. So, they're always seeking to revise their product. So, when they came up with the idea of fresh voices, or fresh columnists, and they gave me an opportunity to write for the Sunday paper, write a column for the Sunday paper. And that was the first inkling for me that I actually could become a columnist, when they invited me to do just one column on Sundays every week. And that grew from one column to two columns, to me being called back over to the newsroom and serving on the editorial board. That happened in '96 [1996]. And then from there, three columns; and now three columns and the editorial and the blog. Speaker 1: Okay. I remember I think that first column in the Sun-Times, you know. A lot of us were excited because we thought that--I mean we were just glad to see somebody come along, especially with a natural hair-do (laughter). Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I was wearing, I was wearing natural hair. Because I always wanted to wear it at the law firm, and, you know, I was discouraged from wearing it. And so when I came to the Sun-Times with that long flowing perm, I knew the first opportunity--that I had an inkling that I had a job--that I was going to change my hair and wear it natural. And I've worn it natural since. Speaker 1: I think some would think it's probably insignificant. But I think a lot of us see it as a sign of, at least an aspect of truth, being out here, you know, the idea that the person won't alter their hair. Speaker 2: Right, no, I wouldn't do it. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: I had more problems actually out of black people at city hall with my hair than I did any other readers. They were like, "How could they have her in the paper with her hair like that?" Because they didn't understand the significance of locks (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) A non-conformist. Speaker 2: And you know, it was so non-conventional. Speaker 1: Or non-conformist, you would think. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: I mean-- Story_ID: 512734 Speaker 1: Well, how was your column received when you-- Speaker 2: Oh, I think people were so--they wanted it, they were waiting for it. And it was just--I spent a lot of time early on writing about my personal life, so that my readers could get to know me--know that I was a mother, know my background, that I grew up in a housing project. A lot of people then at the time weren't writing--black people weren't writing about poverty, their own poverty. You know, they could write about somebody else's poverty, but you know, it seemed like everybody who was in the newspaper [Chicago Sun-Times] came from the middle class and not from an impoverished background. It was not something that they talked about, and I talked about mine openly, which was surprising to some. But to other people, they understood why I did that. Because I really wanted to, I wanted people to be clear that, you know, I didn't come from the same place a lot of other people came from--that my voice really was a voice of low-income and working class people. Because that's where I came from, that's my experience. And so that's what I tried to set up, by writing about myself and writing about my family and my own trials, so that people know, you know, that I've got teenagers, too, and this is the kind of things you go through. And so, I think they enjoyed it. I got a lot of criticism too. A lot of people didn't like it. They wanted a much more intellectual voice. They were looking for another Carl Rowan or another [HistoryMaker] Vernon Jarrett, or whatever. But they weren't, they wanted me to bring something to the table that I didn't bring. And so, yeah, so I had to deal with that. I had to deal with the whole look, you know, how I looked and why I wore my hair the way I did. I had to deal with that. Criticism of black males, or any black leadership, they didn't like that either. So I caught a lot of flak about criticizing--black was right, and that's all you could say. And unless you're defending black people against white people, then it had no place; it was airing dirty laundry, and it had no place in a newspaper. And so, I had to deal with that. Story_ID: 512735 Speaker 1: Is there a specific case that really stands out where that was true, where you got criticized for--? Speaker 2: Well, it was always around Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson]. I mean, Reverend Jackson and I had always never seen eye to eye on most things. Most things, we did not see eye to eye on. And one, I was not a PUSH [Rainbow PUSH Coalition, Chicago, Illinois] baby, so I didn't have any kind of, I didn't look at him in awe and say, "Oh, Reverend." He was Reverend Jesse Jackson, but he wasn't my reverend. You know, it wasn't we were in the Baptist church and I had to do what he said do. I didn't see it that way. I saw him as a leader, like any other leader. So, we would clash. I was clear on the things that I stood for, from very early on. Black on black violence, I had no tolerance for. Black on black, you know, this whole drug culture, I had no tolerance for. I have no tolerance for the whole black kind of male dog figure, whereas it's okay to go and do anything you want to the black woman, because after all you're the black man. I have no tolerance for that. So, we clashed. We clashed on his whole Decatur [Illinois] crusade. Speaker 1: Right. That's where a young, two young men were-- Speaker 2: Seven-- Speaker 1: Yeah, seven men (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Seven men were suspended over a mob beating, a mob fight, where they got into a fight and started kicking and beating each other up. Speaker 1: In the stands during a game, right? Speaker 2: Right. So he went down to Decatur. He called it racism and, you know, he confronted the school board and blah, blah, blah. And when it was time, of course, I had to write something about it. And it took me a while to figure out what I thought about it. But it was one thing I couldn't get around was that, yes, the issue was right. Blacks are overwhelmingly disproportionately suspended from schools. Blacks are, you know, kicked out of schools, and they should have alternative education. But what I couldn't get around was the black on black violence. I couldn't get around that. Now for the whole world, you guys are acting like mob thugs in the stand at a football game, and we're supposed to turn around and say that's okay. You got what you had coming. So, if you wanted to really deal with this issue, you needed to find someone who was not guilty; someone who did what he was supposed to do, and got the book thrown at him anyway. That's how we clashed. And it was terrible. I mean the follow-up that I suffered from just addressing that issue and disagreeing with him just was, it stunned me, you know. So I had the target on my back, and I had to take a vacation after that. Because people were just like, oh, they were so upset. Story_ID: 512736 Speaker 1: They didn't like my column about [HistoryMaker] Carol Moseley Braun and her boyfriend [Kgosie Matthews] when I told them she needed to get rid of him. Because she was a U.S. senator, and we were focusing all of our time on what was going on with her and her boyfriend instead of what was going on in government. And basically I was trying to share with a sister that, you know, I been there, done that. You need to get rid of the guy. They didn't like that column either. And they certainly didn't like the column about Reverend Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] and his baby's mama drama. I just called him out and said it just wasn't right, and that it was wrong, and that he set a totally bad image for African American families at this point. And that it was a scandal, and that he was treating the public like, number one, this had just been revealed, when everybody knew this had been going on all along. And number two, that we were supposed to all just wink at it and, you know, act like it was okay. So, they didn't like that either. It's called airing dirty laundry, and people always wondered why would I do that? Why would I put, why would I address these issues? Why didn't I just ignore these issues? And the reason why I do it is that--to not talk about these issues, not address them, it's to render African American leadership invisible. It's to say you don't exist. It's to say what you say doesn't matter, so why say anything about you? It's to say that black people, that black people should accept whatever leadership there is, and prop bad leaders up. It's to say that any man can--any one-eyed man can be king in, you know, the land of the blind--that we are all blind. And so, any guy who rises this little bit above, and can see this little bit, is good enough for us. And I just never accepted that, and I think that primarily that's my background. Because I don't look at figures like Louis Farrakhan [HistoryMaker Minister Louis Farrakhan] in awe. I don't look at figures like, you know--I look at them like leaders that have to be held accountable and responsible. And the reason why they're in leadership is because they've been put there. And so when they fail, when they fail in that mission, you got to say, "Look, you're going down the wrong path." And you enable, I don't understand why black people are supposed to, and black columnists are supposed to enable poor leadership. Story_ID: 512737 Speaker 1: Do you have people that you talk to, I guess, for guidance or advice about how to weigh some of these issues (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure, sure. Speaker 1: These critiques are--you know, Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] has been criticized before. I think a whole book ['Jesse Jackson: the Man, the Movement, the Myth'; 'Jesse Jackson: America's David,' Barbara A. Reynolds] has been written about him by Barbara Reynolds [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Barbara Reynolds] way back in '75 [1975]. Speaker 2: But look at what happened to Barbara Reynolds. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: She was basically run out of town after writing that book, you know. So yeah, there are people that I do talk to, I have sources that I talk to. But I also have friends, people in academia. I have people in the movement, in the Black Power movement, and the nationalist movement that I talk to on a regular basis and touch bases with, and say, "You know, what do you--this is what I'm thinking." And believe me, they criticize me. They say, "I wouldn't do that if I were you," blah, blah, blah. But you know what? They got my back. They understand my heart. They know that I'm not doing it because I'm just trying to beat a black man down, or beat a black woman down, for that matter. They know me, and they know that--they weigh the stories that I write that have caused a great change, a positive change for African Americans--against stories that they don't like. And so, they know that they're not going to like everything that I write. They try to counsel me wisely to say, "You know, you shouldn't do this. You should stay away from this story because--" or, "This is what you don't know." Or, "This is the impact this story's going to have if you write it." And then I have to go back and weigh whether I'm going to risk that. Is it worth writing it, you know? I had to weigh is it worth writing about Jesse Jackson's baby's mama's drama? Well, it was worth it to me because there are a lot of people who was Jesse Jackson's baby's mama--women who are out here who had got involved in these relationships with powerful men, and now who have been dogged. Their kids aren't being provided for. Their kids are never going to have the same standard of living as the legitimate children, because we still in the black community have the legitimate and illegitimate thing; we just hang on to that. And their lives are going to be, they're not going to have the standard of living that they ought to have. So, why do I think that? I think that, because I've been there. I'm writing from the perspective that I've been through. So, why would I want to see other people, other people go through that? And so, when you set up a--when you live a poor example, I think as a black leader, you are given much. You get the front seat at the games--the Bears [Chicago Bears] games, the Bulls [Chicago Bulls] games. You get, everybody adores you. You get the entree into the highest places. That comes with a lot of responsibility. And when you handle it like it's nothing, somebody needs to check you. And that's all I, I think that's what my column [in the Chicago Sun-Times] does in some instances, is to say, "Okay, brother, you need to be checked. Not that I don't love you, but in this instance, you need to be checked." Story_ID: 512738 Speaker 1: Now one thing that you do, as you--we touched upon earlier--you bring a perspective about things that happened in ordinary life to a black woman in Chicago [Illinois] to the news. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And as you said before, hundreds of people, and thousands, probably call you up and tell you their stories. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They do. Speaker 1: --seeking someone who can sympathize with what's happening in their own lives. Speaker 2: Right. I think Chicago is unique in that way. I mean we have aldermen who are supposed to be on the front line, you know, and they're supposed to take the phone calls and try to address the problems. We have both the Nation of Islam, and we have Operation PUSH, the Rainbow PUSH Coalition [Chicago, Illinois] now. And we have the Chicago Urban League [Chicago, Illinois]. These are powerful organizations, and the Chicago Urban League is a heavy hitter, not lightweight in the network of, you know, the Urban League. So we have powerful organizations, plus we have almost a majority on the City Council at this point. We have black women, seven black women--well, at least five black women on the City Council. So you have all of this going for Chicago, and yet when something happens, people don't know who to call. You know, when their son is arrested improperly, and roughed up or beat up and thrown into jail, now they got to dig up money to get a lawyer. And now they got to go through that whole process and they don't have any money to try to get him out of jail. Who answers their phone call? And who tells their story? That's the uniqueness of Chicago. All that we have going for us, we still don't have--the voice of the voiceless, they're still voiceless. Voiceless people in Chicago are still very much voiceless. If you don't have a PR [public relations] staff, if you don't have a prominent name, if you're not an elected official, if you're not a minister, if you're not a celebrity, your stories don't get told. And so that's kind of the void, the niche that I carved out for myself--is that, you know, you can call me. I really want to know. I know for myself personally that people are dealing with a lot of situations that they shouldn't be dealing with, because of bad social policy. You know, it is bad social policy for black males to be hassled and arrested and thrown in jail and, "Okay if they get out, fine. They'll have their day in court." Well, who has the money to get a lawyer to give them their day in court? You know, why should they, why should they have to be off their job, and now they can't go to work? They're going to lose their little income, they're going to sit up jail and maybe get themselves in some more trouble trying to protect themselves in that fierce environment. They're going to have to get a public defender, or their family is going to scrape up and get another loan on their house to get them a good lawyer, just to be released five or six weeks down the road, or months down the road, for a crime they couldn't have possibly committed, just because the police needed to put somebody in jail. And this is, this happens time and time again in Chicago. And you know what? Nobody writes about it. We don't talk about it, we don't write about it; it's like these people don't exist. It's like the people who have kids in the Chicago Public Schools who are failing. We say, as Oprah [Oprah Winfrey] has said lately, that all they're interested in is iPods. Well, why is that? You know, why are they only interested in iPods? And whose fault is it that all these people--now, we have a majority black system with a majority of black teachers, and for a long time a majority of black superintendents. And kids still can't read. These are not the stories that people write about anymore. And so, I write about them. They're not sexy to the newsroom. I mean, the newsroom would rather you write about Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] or write about the Bulls [Chicago Bulls], the Bears [Chicago Bears], or any type of celebrity issue. But I've built a following writing about those very issues, and it's a diverse following, black and white. Speaker 1: Okay. Yeah, you're right. The police issue is something that's felt deeper than anything else. But it's organized around the least. Speaker 2: Right, right. Story_ID: 512739 Speaker 1: Well the personal experience, one column I know I really remember--and it seems kind of frivolous on some level, but it's not. Your experience at your first Cubs [Chicago Cubs] game, this is back in 2001. Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah. That was a very painful column to write. And I wasn't even going to write about it. But happened was I was in the newsroom and I was telling someone. I was telling the editor about it, just talking. And I told him what happened, and he couldn't believe me. Number one, he's from England, and he just had no clue that this--he was like, "What?" And I told him, and he said he didn't believe me. I was like, "You know what? It happened. You can ask my son, because my son was there." And he said, "That's a story," and he asked me to write about it. And that's how I ended up writing about the incident, because I was so--on every level I was humiliated. I mean, it goes to show you. Here you are, you're a major voice in Chicago [Illinois]. You've got a column that runs three times a week [in the Chicago Sun-Times], and you go to a Cubs game and this is what you're called? Speaker 1: What happened? Speaker 2: Aunt Jemina. Speaker 1: Tell us what happened (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They called me--what happened was when we left--a former employer at the law firm that I worked for invited me to share his private space at the Cubs game. And so we left--and I took my oldest son. We left there, and we're walking down the street past the big Wrigley Field [Chicago, Illinois]. And there were some kids, black kids, playing the drums. And you know how they beat on those pails, those white pails? Speaker 1: Yeah, those plastic-- Speaker 2: Those plastic pails. And it caught my attention, because a circle had formed around them. And really, I felt that they were being--you know, when I see kids like that--maybe adults I don't do anything. But when I see kids like that, I reach in my pocket and I go and pay them. Because I know they're performing not for me to gawk, but they're trying to raise money, and it's better than them snatching my purse and running off with it, you know. I give them money. So I went in my pocket, and I got my money. I walked, like a parted crowd, I walked through the crowd to deposit my money in the bucket. And this drunken group of guys started calling me, "Come on down, Aunt Jemina. Here comes Aunt Jemina. Come on down, Aunt Jemina," blah, blah, blah. I was stunned. And then I couldn't believe it. I'm walking back through the crowd, and my son is like, "Did you hear that? Why did they say that?" And I've got to grab him, because he's getting ready to go and confront these guys. And no one, which was an all-white crowd, said stop it, or said anything or did anything. They just stood there like it wasn't happening. And I left there, grabbed a cab, and came home. That was my Cubs experience. And then I wrote about the fact, I wrote about it. And of course, people got mad about that too, because I said I wasn't going back on the North Side [Chicago, Illinois] to any Cub games, and that I didn't have to deal with it, which is true. And you've got to remember, in the context of growing up in an all-black community we could enjoy a great life without ever coming into white folks' neighborhoods. Speaker 1: Yeah, the North Side-- Speaker 2: Didn't ever have to go to the North Side. Everything was on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois]. Anything you wanted to see, we'd go downtown even. But we didn't have to go to the North Side to do anything. And not to mention, we were Sox [Chicago White Sox] fans. I could see the Sox fireworks from my, you know, porch. So I didn't have to go to the North Side. And I felt that to be in Chicago at this time and have white people say that to you, and other white people say nothing, was just, it was just an incredible experience. It showed you the level of racism and intolerance that still exists in the city. Story_ID: 512740 Speaker 1: One of the subjects you've been writing about, that you've been writing about recently, is Tank Johnson and some of the other athletes in the city that continuously get in trouble for gun possession and other problems. Speaker 2: And again it's giving us--we're between--as a black journalist, we're really between a rock and a hard place. On one end, we understand. And it took me years of being in this business to really get a sense of this, and really understand it fully. But on one hand, black people are being beat down all the time in many different arenas. They're being, you know, misunderstood; they're being, you know, stereotyped. In many arenas, black people are just being challenged. And the arena of police enforcement is one of them, you know, where they're stopped for driving while black, or walking while black, or going in a nightclub while black. You know, all of this exists. So I understand that. And so, you don't want to be piling on. You understand why black men are sensitive about being criticized. But on the other side of that, here you have a black athlete who is privileged, he is among the privileged class. It used to be the intellectual blacks who were in the privileged class. But you know what? Today, it's the athletes and it's the celebrities. They're the privileged class. You know, doors open for them. And you are going to get yourself in all this trouble. And then this was the worst for me--when you know you're in all this trouble. You've already been caught with these unregistered weapons. Your childhood friend is found in your home with marijuana. Your house has been busted basically, and you're on a short leash with the Bears [Chicago Bears]. You're in trouble now. And what do you do on a Saturday night? Do you stay home with your wife and your girlfriend and your two kids and say I'm going to chill? No. You go out to a club that is known as a gang hangout and a thug hangout, and your friend ends up dead. Now, I just asked you, what else can you say about that except it was wrong? The man should have been home with his child and his children and his girlfriend. He should have been home. And it paints such a--it plays into all the stereotypes about black athletes--that they're undisciplined when it comes to this sort of thing. It's bad enough that we're talking about the girlfriend and not the wife. You know, it's bad enough that we're talking about unregistered guns. And you're living out in the midst of a predominantly white community with this kind of behavior. And you're in the front--your face is plastered everywhere. So, what is it--what your team gives you is a pass. They give you a pass because they need your brawn. And that's what it is, they need your brawn. They don't give you a pass because they think you're right, but because as long as you got big shoulders and, you know, big thighs and you can block--you know, that same old buck syndrome, then you're okay. And when they use that up, if you get injured they're done with you. That's the kind of story you don't want to write, but you end up writing and you get criticized for. You know, so it kind of goes with the territory. Story_ID: 512741 Speaker 1: In the community it's said many times, and you can hear it on WVON [WVON Radio, Chicago, Illinois] every morning, where someone calls in and says, "Well, you know, the Sun-Times [Chicago Sun-Times] is making [HistoryMaker] Mary Mitchell write this or that column, or making [HistoryMaker] Renee Ferguson say this or that," or making some black columnist say something that they disagree with. I mean, are you ever pressured? Speaker 2: Always. People often, if they don't agree with you, if they don't agree with what you said it comes down two ways--either you're a sell-out, and that you're trying to please and keep your job. You're trying to please the Sun-Times editors, and that's the reason why you wrote that. You don't really believe it, but you're a sell-out. That's basically what they're saying. Or it comes down to, people say, "Well, you know, I know Mary Mitchell, and you know, I don't think she really, I think that her editors made her do this," because they're trying to find an excuse for what you have written. And so on both of those things, how I deal with it is that, you know, I understand why the community has a need to scapegoat, you know. They need to find somebody to blame for the truth. You know, they don't believe it, but it's the truth as I see it. My column reflects the truth as I see it. Is it the end-all, be-all? Is it everybody's truth? No. Does everyone think and see the world as Mary Mitchell sees it? They do not. But to think that I would be forced to write something because my editors told me to write it, is just ludicrous. It does not happen. Number one, editors would not have any use for me if that were the case. They want to know what my perspective is. And they want to know, when it's a black journalist, they want to know, "What is your perspective? How do you see it?" We don't do them any good to be in the paper if we're going to parrot their perspective. Because they have people--the white perspective is in the paper every day. So, I just think that black people are just often looking for someone to blame, when you are holding black leadership accountable. Story_ID: 512742 Speaker 1: Have you ever felt in any way that something that the Sun-Times [Chicago Sun-Times] just didn't like what you wrote? Or did they try to, I mean have they ever tried to change something (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure, yes. First of all, when it comes to your perspective, the most they're going to do--and this happened very early on in my career, and certainly with different editors. And that is, they would read something and they would think it was too harsh. For instance--and I learned something about that, and I think I shared this story with someone. And that's probably why people are running around saying, "Well I heard they just made her do that." It was about, writing about racism. I had an editor who just hated columns about racism--like you're racist, this person is a racist, blah, blah, blah. And he had this theory that if you really want to have a conversation about race and about these issues, then you can't put race in the first couple of paragraphs of a column, it would be buried down in the column. And why was that? Because the person, the white person that you're trying to communicate to--because black people already know this stuff. The white person that you're trying to, to say, "Look," and hold the mirror up to, he's not going to read past the first couple of paragraphs if he sees the word racism. But if it's down in the middle or toward the end of the column, you've already roped him in with a compelling story that makes your point before he really realizes he's gotten the point. And I found that to be an incredible tool. I learned to write about race without ever using the word racism. I learned to write about race by comparing, just by comparing apples and apples. "This is what happened to John, he did this. And then, you know, James, he did this and it was the same thing. And lo and behold, John got free, and James is serving twenty years. Oh, by the way, James happened to be black and John was white." That's how I learned to tell those kinds of stories. Story_ID: 512743 Speaker 1: So yes, I've had to deal with, you know, language. I have a particular way of speaking, and it's really because of how I was brought up--the fact that my parents [Carrie Williams Duncan and Joseph Duncan] are from the South, the fact that I grew up in the housing projects, the fact that I, you know, did not really come from a household that was really particular about the King's English, you know. We did our gonna's, and fixin's and all of that sort of thing, too. And I have to always code, switch back and forth. Well, when you get in the newsroom, you know, language becomes an issue. So some people write about mothers, and other people write about mamas. And so, you have to fight to hold on to the mama. Because in the mainstream, you know, they call everybody mother. You have to fight to hold on to that. And yes, I've had my battles fighting about that. I've had my battles of fighting about, like, things like, I wanted to write a story about--mostly this thing about the paper not allowing you to write, had more to do with advertising than black people. Black people needed to understand that no one sits around a room trying to offend them, or trying to keep their perspective out of the paper. They're more interested in not offending the advertiser. So, my biggest problem comes up when it comes to something, when it comes to an advertiser. You write about a car dealership and you've lost them, you know, a hundred thousand dollar ad, you know. Which means that when you write about a car dealership, you'd better have all your Ts crossed, you know, and your I's dotted. That's the kind of thing that even black journalists have to deal with, but not because--you know, African Americans, what they don't understand is that we are no longer the dominant. In our own minds, we might be the dominant population, but Hispanics have moved a long way into taking that place. And therefore, if you look around newsrooms today, blacks are disappearing in newsrooms. Black voices are disappearing. There are not the number of black columnists that used to be, nor the caliber. There's no, there's no, where's Carl Rowan today? Where's the Carl Rowans of today, or the [HistoryMaker] Vernon Jarretts of today? You don't see them. They've just disappeared. So, newsrooms aren't thinking about the black perspective. We have to fight to get the black perspective in the paper, negative or positive. We have to say this story's important because of X, Y, Z. There used to be a time when they wanted to know what was going on in the hood. They wanted to send somebody down to the housing project to find out what was going on. Now, you don't see them even, those stories don't even surface. Story_ID: 512744 Speaker 1: You have a higher profile now, you're even on television. I've seen you on 'Chicago Tonight' from Dayton [Ohio]. I don't know how they do it. Speaker 2: Really? Speaker 1: Yeah, but I've seen you, sitting in my living room in Dayton. So, with being more recognizable, with more recognition now, is it harder to get--I mean well, you're a columnist now, not a reporter. But do you miss the anonymity? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. You miss it when, you especially miss it when you just want to be, have private time. You know what I mean by private time? Private time is like you go out with your kids or something, my adult children. And somebody doesn't like what you had to say, or even likes what you had to say, and they approach you. And you never mind, because, you know, they're readers and you appreciate that. But you're always on. So, always being on is hard, when you come from somewhere like my background. Because I never expected--as I told my daughter [Kathryn M. Johnson] just the other day, this is accidental success. I never went into the newsroom thinking I was going to be a columnist and was going to be big. All I wanted to do was tell stories about people who ordinarily wouldn't have their stories told. And I never knew that would be huge to the point where people would recognize you and think that they know you, and call you [HistoryMaker] Mary Mitchell, and, "Hi, Mary Mitchell," and want to talk about your kids and want to talk about your experience or want to share their stories with you. I never thought that. So it is definitely--on a small level it's like some kind of celebrity status. But it's on a small level. And even on a small--when you see it on this small of a level, you realize the people who are huge, how terrible that must be, to not be able to go to the health club without somebody recognizing you, or just not to be able to just have your own private space anymore. Whenever you step outside the door, you're on. And somebody's going to recognize you, and somebody's going to think something about what you have to say. That's the hard part. Story_ID: 512745 Speaker 1: When you look back at where you've come from, and where you are now, is there anything major that you would do differently? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Probably so. Well, you know, do you mean professionally, personally? What do you mean? Speaker 1: Anything. This is one of our stock questions, so I always ask--but it could be anything, anything. Speaker 2: Anything that I would do-- Speaker 1: Professionally, personally. I mean any, well, let's say professionally for right now. Speaker 2: Professionally. Well, if I had to do it over, I probably would have gone with a smaller paper first, just so I could learn a little bit more about how the business works. You know, I didn't know how the business worked, and so it was kind of trial by error. You make some mistakes and you move forward. And you know, there were certain mistakes that I didn't have to make, at least in this large of an audience, had I gone to a smaller paper. So, yeah, I think if I had an opportunity, I think I would have started a little bit smaller than the Sun-Times [Chicago Sun-Times]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Personally, is there anything that you would do differently? Speaker 2: Probably a lot of things that I would do differently. Yeah, but none that I want to share (laughter). Speaker 1: I think we all have a lot of them. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 512746 Speaker 1: We've discussed so many things. But what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: I think it's our children. Our children, and in my case my grandchildren. It's a fact that we aren't partnering up, that we're not getting married anymore. And so you have so many people, so many young people who are, you know, their biological clock is ticking, and they're having children without the help of men. And so men, again, black men--and I don't think we understand this--are being deemed unnecessary. If you, if it's not necessary--if you can have children without men to raise them successfully, why would you need, you know, why do you need black fathers? And so fathers are being rendered obsolete in the African American community, and that scares me. It scares me because only men can raise boys. Only men can teach girls how to love men. And if you don't have that, you know, you're missing so much. So I'm scared about that, because I see that as a disintegration of the African American family and the disintegration of the African American community. And what does that mean? It means that we're going to have an even bigger gap between those who are successful. The professionals--you look at them and see how their lives, how they're living their lives, you know. You look at them and see how they're hooked up, you know. They got families, they got traditions, they have values. They're joining together economically to build something, and to build wealth and to have something to pass on. And you see the gap with the people who are on the lower end of the spectrum, whose men are having, you know, five or six babies by five or six different women, and those women are having five and six babies by five and six different men. And you see where they are today. And it scares me because, you know, what does that mean? In the end, what does that mean for the African American community? It's a lack of progress, and it means that it'll be black people viewing other black people as being unworthy and beneath them, because they'll be so far behind. And there will be no way to relate. They'll relate to other races; they'll relate to white people; they'll relate to the Asians and even the Latinos, who are doing well. But they will not relate to this growing population of people who are uneducated, whose children are illiterate, who are creating the violent situations, and who are working in the underground economy just trying to scratch out a living, you know, and survive. The mental illness, the substance abuse, all of those problems will be problems of a lower class people. These are our uncles, our aunts, our relatives, our cousins. We're still related to these people, they're part of us. And for us to move forward and leave them behind I think is a great tragedy, and a failure, frankly, of the Civil Rights Movement, that, you know, we allowed this to happen. Story_ID: 512747 Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point, what today would you consider your legacy to be? I mean, you're still young, you're still-- Speaker 2: Now, no, there will be--some day they will sum that up. What will be her legacy, you know? And I don't know. I mean, I think that I will always be known as the common touch, the common voice in Chicago [Illinois]. I think I'll be known as that, you know, and also as a crusader. I think I've made my mark in fighting for the little guy, you know, the guy who didn't--that people wrote off, you know, the person--I always think of my favorite story. My favorite story is the story of this little baby who had a dysfunctional mother who basically was mentally ill. And that mother gave that little black baby to an agency in Utah, just gave the baby away. And that grandmother wanted her grandchild so much that she was determined to fight and fight and fight for it. And when I started writing about that, and people started taking an interest, they sent--I asked grandmothers to send five dollars, just five dollars in to help her with her legal defense. And they sent that five dollars, enough for this woman to get a lawyer. And in the end, to see that baby come back to that grandmother--yes, you know, the mother is still dysfunctional, but that's what family is all about. Black people can raise their own kids. And to know that I had a role in helping Illinois shape up and sharpen the adoption laws so that this cannot happen so easily again, and that that one story of that one woman's plight did all of that--then that's what I think my legacy will be built around. Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about your family. I think we have some idea of what it consists of. You have two daughters and two sons, right? Speaker 2: I am the mother, biological mother of two. I adopted a nephew and I adopted a niece. So, actually I'm the mother of four. Speaker 1: Okay. And you have some grandchildren now? Speaker 2: I have three grandchildren, a boy six years old, and a girl ten, and a girl nine. Story_ID: 512748 Speaker 1: Is there anything I have not mentioned that you think we need to--oh, I have to ask you about Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] before we stop this. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: What's your opinion of Barack Obama's popularity and Barack-o-mania, and a possible candidacy for president of the United States? Speaker 2: He's a gift, he's a great gift to the African American community and to the white community as well. Because I think that we are at a time where it takes a person who has lived and understood intimately the fears on both sides of the race line to bring us together. You know, it's easy for black people to say white people did this to me and that to me--the legacy of slavery and all of that, and be outraged by it. It's just as easily for white people to be outraged by the crime that they see by the, you know, the kind of behaviors and anti-social behavior that they see in the African American community, and form ideas about us. But when you have a Barack Obama, whose parents and grandparents reflect both sides of the coin, the fears and the hopes, then he is the one, to me, that can bring us together. And I also see an incredible amount of talent. You know, some people, it's just the it factor. You know, they have the intellect, and then they have the charm, and they have the ability to make you feel comfortable, and a magnetic personality. And you see this guy and you say, "He has it. We don't know what it is, but he has it." And so I hope that America gives him a chance to reach for the dream that we're promised, you know. We're promised that--you tell your kid, "One day you can grow up to be president of the United States of America." And to a black man, honestly, until he's given a chance to actually do that, then that remains a myth, you know, like the Easter bunny or Santa Claus. And I think that Barack Obama has a great chance to make it more than just a myth, make it a reality. Story_ID: 512749 Speaker 1: Now is there anything I have not asked you? Speaker 2: No. You've asked me all the pertinent questions. Thank you very much. You did a great job, thank you. Speaker 1: Well we have one last question. Speaker 2: Oh, no. Speaker 1: We always ask this. It's similar to legacy. But, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: How would I like to be remembered? I guess I'd like to be remembered for my compassion for those who, you know, who are left out of the mainstream. So, I think that's how I'd like to be remembered. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, thank you so much. Speaker 2: You're quite welcome, thank you...