 Story_ID: 192265 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Okay. I am B. Herbert Martin, Sr. And it's initial B, H-E-R-B-E-R-T, M-A-R-T-I-N, Sr. Speaker 1: Does the B stand for a name? Speaker 2: Uh-huh, it is. It's a country name. You know, in the South you get a half name, so to speak. And so, my first name is Bobby. Not Robert, you know, but Bobby. So, I am Bobby Herbert. (Laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Oh, yes, I asked if you had any nicknames. Speaker 2: "Hubbie." (Laughter). That's what all my siblings called me, that's what my mother [Cassino Braboy Martin] called me. So you know, in the rural the "e-r" or "h-e-r" never... it was not in the dialect as 'her,' it was 'huh.' You know, E. "Huh'bert" Martin, so you would never come up with "Her." Even with a pronoun for the feminine 'her,' it was 'huh,' it was not 'her.' And so, I come out being "Hubbie" you know, "Huh-bert." (Laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah, a lot of youth in Chicago [Illinois] used to say 'huh.' Speaker 2: Yeah, right. It's 'huh,' right. Speaker 1: With the Mississippi background though, I don't think a lot of them realize it's kind of country. Speaker 2: Right, it's very, it's very rural-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --to come out with that. So, that's the beginning of the Ebonics that, you know, we call it today. But it's a part of the dialect of the South, especially in the rural... I know in the rural Delta area, you know, where I came up, it was 'huh.' And so, I came out to be 'Huh-bert.' Yeah, when I go home now, it's "Huh-bert Martin is home," you know. (Laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: The date of birth is December 28, 1942. And I was born in Mound Bayou, Mississippi. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is your occupation? Speaker 2: Minister or pastor. Speaker 1: All right. And you've also been the board member and the head of-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I've been in a number of secular positions, you know, even worked in secular positions, you know, as a social worker or as a car salesman. You know, whatever you had to do to make it, you know, that's what you did. (Laughter). Because many times many of the local congregations that I pastored were not able to afford a full-time pastor. So, you had to do some moonlighting in order to make up the difference. Speaker 1: I was really talking about you being the director of the Department of Human Relations, right? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. That was kind of a bi-vocational thing. I was the chairman of the Chicago Housing Authority [C.H.A.], you know, under the Harold Washington administration. And then following his death, I was appointed Commissioner, or Director, of the Chicago Commission on Human Relations. Yeah, so these governmental type agencies, I've been matriculating around in them for a while as well. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is December 11, nineteen--I almost said ninety--- (unclear)--2003. And it's unbelievable that I'm sitting here in the year 2003, yeah. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? And you don't have to give your exact address. Speaker 2: You're in my home here on 49th [Street] and Washington Park Court, yeah, Chicago, Illinois. Speaker 1: All right. Story_ID: 192266 Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five People magazine-ish type questions we always ask. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Questions that just require a brief answer. The first question is, sir, what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: My favorite food? Cornbread and greens. (Laughter). That's my favorite, you know. Country cooking is my favorite, as my body can perhaps tell you. (Laughter). Yeah, that's my favorite food. Speaker 1: Now, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue. Blue is my favorite color. Not the light blue, but more of the royal blues. That's a powerful color for me, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And green is my second one. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Yes, I do. The autumn is my favorite time. And then second would be spring, yeah. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Yes, oh my goodness, yes, the West Coast of Africa, to a little place called El-Mina [Ghana]. That's my favorite spot. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: All right. And do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Yes, I do. And that thing is stay strong. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 192267 Speaker 1: All right. I'm gonna ask you about your family history. I'm gonna ask you about your mother's side of the family and your father's side. We'll start with your mother's side. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Okay. My mother's full name is Cassino, C-A-S-S-I-N-O, Braboy, B-R-A-B-O-Y, Martin, M-A-R-T-I-N. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: What is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: January 22, 1922, and she was born in Mound Bayou, Mississippi. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Now, I know that Mound Bayou has a particular significance. But can you tell me how far back you can trace your mother's family? Where did they come from, and what do you know about them? Speaker 2: Well, on the Braboy side, they come out of Vicksburg, Mississippi with traces back to North Carolina. I've traced the name Brayboy. At first I thought it was a European name, but I come to found out that it's Lumbee Indian, and it comes from the origin... the origin is from an Indian by the name of "Brave Boy," B-R-A-V-E, B-O-Y. But the Africans not knowing, not having, you know, the tenacity to pronounce the letter 'v' dropped the letter 'v' and it became "Brave Boy." And they moved down the east, southeast coast, into Mississippi and it became Braboy, B-R-A-B-O-Y. But those who are still in the North Carolina area in Pembroke [North Carolina], in Lumberton, North Carolina spell it B-R-A-Y-B-O-Y. But it's the same name, you know, with the same origin. And so they came into that area and then Page Brayboy, Jr., who was the son of Page Brayboy, Sr., who I discovered back in this past summer, was a Civil War veteran. And I found his grave in the Vicksburg National Cemetery, you know, for... I mean, for the Civil War veterans there, Page Brayboy. Speaker 1: He would be your great-great--? Speaker 2: He would be my great-grandfather. Speaker 1: Great-grandfather. Speaker 2: The one that's buried-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --in Vicksburg. Speaker 1: Page Brayboy? Speaker 2: Right. And then Page Brayboy, Jr. would be the one who married my grandmother, and then became the father of my mother, Cassino. That's, you know, on the Brayboy side. Then my mother's mother was Mary Black Brayboy [ph.]. And the Blacks came from the plantation of Joe [Joseph] Davis, the brother of Jefferson Davis, the president of the Confederacy. Their plantation was called Davis Bend [Mississippi], which is in like the northern section of Louisiana, right on the Mississippi River. And these ex-slaves from that plantation, by ferry boat, found their way into the area called, that was eventually settled and called Mound Bayou. So, the Blacks were part of the early settlers of Mound Bayou, and they met and married with the Brayboys. And so, that's kind of a little bit of the history of that. There's a lot more laying there, but, sort of briefly-- Story_ID: 192268 Speaker 1: Now, in terms of Mound Bayou [Mississippi], do you know much about the history of that town? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Do you want to tell us the significance and the history of Mound Bayou? Speaker 2: Okay. Well, Mound Bayou was founded in 1887 by ex-slaves. And they were under the leadership of two men, Benjamin T. Green and I.T. [Isaiah T.] Montgomery. These were like the founding fathers. They were the organizers of this band of slaves that came off of Davis Bend [Louisiana], in that plantation. Mound Bayou grew as a colony, which could have easily happened during the days of racial segregation and the days of Reconstruction, you know, in the Delta area. And we built our own schools. We organized and built our own hospitals. So, all of our quote "municipal" agencies and governments... we had everything except a jailhouse. We didn't need it those days, because it was a real community of people who reinforced certain moral values and a belief system and so forth. We didn't need a jailhouse, but all the other institutions that go to make up a town, we built it ourselves, you know, as a people. We had our own banks, which means that we had our own, you know, economic base. In those days, of course, it was agriculture which was the economic base. And we owned our own land, and farmed it and traded among ourselves. We built our own cotton gins so that we could, you know, turn the money around, you know, over and over in the town. So, the town grew and grew well. I don't think it ever grew over ten thousand people. And then when the 1960s came, you know, which was really my generation... graduating high school--things were in tremendous transition. And not only in Mississippi, you know, which has always been a problem in terms of race relations and poverty and all of this stuff--but the young people needed something better, and they fled North. And we became a part of this great black pride, black power movement in the northern cities and the northern states in the 1960s. Those of us who did not go directly from high school to college--and even if we went to college, we were still very much a part of that whole black revolution that came to growth in the 1960s. Speaker 1: Okay. There is a proud tradition among Mound Bayou, Mound Bayou-ites, I guess-- Speaker 2: Mound Bayouans, yeah, we call them Mound Bayouans. Speaker 1: --that, you know, that have--that they're from an all-black town. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: When you think about Mississippi-- Speaker 2: I'm going to tell you. You know, I did not realize truly that white people ran America until I left my little hometown. Can you imagine what kind of a culture shock that was? Because you were raised with a sense of ownership, with a sense of self-determination, you know, and a sense of affirmation in terms of who you were as a person. As a matter of fact, our education... We could not graduate high school until we had completed... I mean, completed and tested in Carter G. Woodson's Negro History. We had to take American History. We had to take Mississippi history, and all these other histories. But as significant to our graduation was the completion of Carter G. Woodson's 'Negro History' book [ph.]. So, we left this place with a tremendous sense of history and knowing who we were. And plus, we left with a history of knowing about our town--you know, that African Americans, or black people, ex-slaves--however we want to refer to them--actually built a city, owned and operated a city. Story_ID: 192269 Speaker 1: There's a rumor that Jefferson Davis or his brother [Joseph Davis] like ceded that land to their former slaves? Speaker 2: Yes, sir. And, and, you know, you will find this in the archives there in Mound Bayou. What, what was going to happen was--and it's interesting what has happened to Davis Bend [Mississippi]. Because Jefferson Davis and his brother, Joe Davis, had conceived this kind of utopian idea, you know, about what could happen if this land is deeded to free Africans, and the kind of the community that could have been built out of that. But a tremendous backlash came to that kind of thinking. I mean, I was surprised when I began to read about that, you know, in the early days. And it was to I.T. [Isaiah T.] Montgomery and Benjamin [T.] Green that the land was deeded. So, but over the years this piece of history dropped out of circulation. We didn't know what it was. And I think I.T. Montgomery and Benjamin Green, after this idea couldn't work, then left the plantation and moved north into the Delta area and founded Mound Bayou. Somewhere in the archives, this is true. It was a vision that Jefferson Davis and his brother, Joe Davis, conceived. Now, when I went back looking for Davis Bend--back in the summer of 2003 I went back looking for whatever relics or pieces of history I could find regarding my family lineage. Somehow by some trick of nature, or some design of man, the banks of the Mississippi River overflowed and now that's just one big island, you know, where the plantation was. You cannot access it. The only thing you can do is see where some of the old buildings used to stand, and it's not accessible now. And even by boat, I understand that the descendants of Jefferson Davis and Joe Davis have made it impossible, and will not allow any access to even the island now that's out there. And it's an interesting piece of story. Someone probably needs to do some research on what happened to Davis Bend, and how was it that the Mississippi River claimed all of that land out there, and all of the pieces of antiquity regarding, you know, memorabilia and stuff that would have been available for historians to look at is no longer available, you know, to us? But I discovered that back in the summer of 2003, as I looked at some of the records. Speaker 1: Now, it's sort of curious that since Davis, being the president of the Confederacy, and his brother would conceive of land for free black folks. Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean it's just--(Laughter). Speaker 1: I could believe it if it was someplace else. Speaker 2: Yeah, would've sent them to Liberia or wherever, you know, get them out of the U.S. And these brothers, who, I mean who would have been characterized perhaps as some of the worst separatists and racists, you know, really envisioned a kind of a utopian place for African Americans and whites to live. It's, I mean it was mind-boggling to discover that, it really was. (Laughter). Story_ID: 192270 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, are there any stories passed down by your mother's [Cassino Braboy Martin] side of the family about the family, and what it was doing when Mound Bayou [Mississippi] was founded, and-- Speaker 2: Yeah. My great-grandmother, Minerva [ph.], and the kinds of matriarchs in my household were all the story... they were the storytellers... they kept the stories and they passed them on to the succeeding generations. So, the stories--I was at age seven when my great-grandmother died, when Minerva died. And she died at the age of ninety-five. And she was just a little girl, you know, in the days of, you know, those early days, a young woman. But she would tell us the story that as a young girl clearing the land for what was to become Mound Bayou, she literally burst her blood vessels in her arms, you know, from the rolling of logs and cutting of logs along with the men to help build log cabins. There were stories of wild animals at night trying to, you know, get them and eat them. And all those big stories, you know. I'm sure many of them were embellished, I'm sure. (Laughter). But you know, by the time you are telling a story, you know, you're a great hero fighting the lions and the bears are everything are coming. (Laughter). So, those stories live big in my family. And then of course my grandmother's children would have been Mary Black [Braboy] and Theodore H. Black, Jr. [ph.]. They, by being some of the first generation Mound Bayouans had access to land and to money. So, they became entrepreneurs. Honey Black [ph.] became the guy who ran the local hotel. Some of his reputation is not quite as impeccable as we'd like to have it. (Laughter). Because he ran a little prostitution on the side, and a little gambling, and a little racket on the side. But he had what was called the grocery store, plus a juke joint, all right, plus this little hotel. And a lot of stories are told around him. So, early is this whole entrepreneurial, you know, type life, you know, for our family in that little town. Also, he was a, an auctioneer. Cattle, he would auction cattle and other animals, you know, goats and cows and pigs and so forth. I think one of the pieces of the story that I remember most around my early days with Honey Black and the whole Black clan was when a gentleman by the name of Dr. T.R.M. [Theodore Roosevelt Mason] Howard--these were the days when the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]--this was even before SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] got active. T.R.M. Howard became the president of the NAACP in our area. He was a doctor, he was a gynecologist and a practitioner in the area. T.R.M. Howard was the forerunner of [Reverend] Dr. Martin Luther King [Jr.], organizing and petitioning for equal rights in Mississippi. He became so popular that the White Citizens' Council decided that he needed to die. You know, he needed to be killed because he was a problem, quote "stirring up the natives" and organizing people. T.R.M. Howard, Honey Black, and the business people in Mound Bayou all organized and got together and raised money, because it was clear that the [Ku Klux] Klan was going to come and kill T.R.M. Howard. Ezell Anderson was the local mortician. So, they got with Ezell Anderson and put Dr. Howard in a casket, and put him in the ambulance in this casket and sent him north to Chicago [Illinois]. So these are the kind of stories--I mean powerful stories--that are there. I'm not sure if they're written anywhere, but this is how they took care of each other, you know, protected each other, you know, from the white racism of that period of time. Story_ID: 192271 Speaker 1: And [Dr.] T.R.M. [Theodore Roosevelt Mason] Howard, of course, came to Chicago [Illinois] and became a very successful physician here on the South Side of Chicago. He was a great hunter. He was a guy who showed us our first real live monkey, because he built a zoo in Mound Bayou [Mississippi]; we had a zoo. The first time I saw an alligator, or I saw a rhesus monkey or black monkeys and apes and all these, you know, very beautiful exotic animals--birds and everything--he would literally bring these things back from Africa. Those were the days when they could do. He created this huge reflection pool where all the exotic fish of the world, you know, would live and swim. And we would come and--He built a swimming pool, you know, for us to come and how to learn to swim and do diving and acrobatics in water, and so forth. And he had also established a medical center called the Friendship Clinic [Friendship Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois]. We had two hospitals. The Friendship Clinic was one founded by Dr. Howard. The Taborian Hospital [Mound Bayou, Mississippi] was founded by an organization or fraternity called the [The International Order of the Twelve] Knights and Daughters of Tabor, Mount Tabor. And, and, we built that hospital, and it was literally manned by interns from Meharry Medical School [sic. Meharry Medical College] in Nashville, Tennessee who had come. So, we had these two medical centers right there in the town, both ran by African-American people. All the physicians were black. So, you grew up with this sense of ownership, with the sense of somebody-ness, with a sense of achievement, seeing successful role models, and all of this before you. The first judge I saw was black, Judge Green [ph.], who was the grandson of Benjamin T. Green, the founding father of the town. And he was both judge and lawyer. He was our town lawyer. The first banker I saw was a black, you know, Charles Banks, is black. The first schoolteacher I saw was black. I mean everything, our whole environment was this way. And so, you grew up with a sense of real history and a real story that you can pass on to your own children. And so, there is a sense of great pride on the part of Mound Bayouans. I wish we were more actively involved in the life of the town at this stage. I think those of us who left in the 1960s, at this stage, which is my generation, we need to be returning to that town, which I plan to do after I retire which will be about four years from now. Speaker 2: There's so many Mound Bayouans-- Speaker 1: There's hundreds of us. Speaker 2: --in Chicago. Speaker 1: Yeah, in Chicago and around the country, you know, who have become very successful people, and very knowledgeable people. And so, we need to be back now contributing, you know, to the development of the young people and the future generations of leadership of that city, yeah. So, we're headed there. So, Mound Bayou has a long, rich, wonderful history. Some of it is very exciting and some of it is very thrilling, but at the same time, some of it is very sad. Because we did not escape the reality--even though we have like our own little utopia we grew up in, ultimately white people in the state of Mississippi were in economic control and could determine the economic destiny of that little town, which eventually they did. And, and we--but we have not quit. We're still there, it's still an all-black town. White people haven't chosen to make it their home. And we have one or two residents who occasionally come in, maybe who connected with the medical center there or with the high school [Mound Bayou Consolidated Public School and County Training School, Mound Bayou, Mississippi]. But it's a very temporary kind of arrangement. But it remains a 99-1/2 percent African American village, city, there in the heart of the [Mississippi] Delta. Story_ID: 192272 Speaker 1: Now, let me ask you about your father. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: What was your father's full name? Speaker 2: Now, this is, this is part of the story. My biological father, I have never seen, and would not have known him if he would come in. But I have stories, many, many stories about him. We came to Chicago [Illinois] looking for him, you know, after he had relocated here, never found him. I gave my address at the local place where he always hung out. He came to my home, met my wife, and met my children in those days. And when I got home, they told me my daddy had been there. But then he left Chicago and went to St. Louis [Missouri], where he died. So, I never saw him. But I was blessed in my childhood, early childhood, around age seven, to have a man by the name of Willie Martin, a veteran from World War II [WW II] who met and married my mother [Cassino Braboy Martin], and literally adopted me and my brothers. And we never heard the word "stepfather." I mean, that was like non-existent. He was our father, and we were never stepchildren. You know, we were his children. So, I grew up with that. Now I was born Braboy, because my mother was single, all right, when I was born. And my two other siblings, brothers, we're all Braboys. When I came of age, I decided that this man had taken me as his son and that I should take his name. And I asked him for permission to become Martin, and he told me yes. It made him very proud. He never insisted that we should take his name, you know, or anything like that. And when I asked him if I could take his name as Martin, he said yes. And I took it, and I became Bobby Herbert Braboy Martin, (laughter). But the name B. Herbert Martin is my name. So my stepfather, so to speak, my father--that's the only father I ever knew. And he passed away in 1984 in the month of March. And so, he was a brick mason. And he wanted me to learn brick masonry, to be a brick mason, but that was not my forte. And let me just tell you a little about him, all right. He didn't get out of the second grade. He could barely read and write his own name. We were sharecroppers, which, you know, that sharecropping was another economic slavery in Mississippi. I mean slavery should have ended, you know, in 1863. But it continued in the form of the sharecropping system in the state of Mississippi. So, he brought us from the plantation. He taught himself how to be a brickmason and to read blueprints. He was a genius of a man, yeah. Story_ID: 192273 Speaker 1: We were talking about your stepfather [Willie Martin] and his abilities to build. Speaker 2: Yeah, and I was just saying it's amazing. Here is a man who had no formal education at all, who barely could write his name, who developed--had a native ability to construction and brick masonry--could not only read the blueprints, but he could draw them. And he'd draw the blueprint and he'd lay it out, and he became one of the master home builders in the [Mississippi] Delta area. And, and, and I believe that within him was that DNA from Egypt, you know, Northern Africa--you know, where the geometry, where the mathematics, and the measurements, and the form--you know, the capacity to build things, you know, and to measure things was just such a powerful part of our ancestry that's there. He became a fine entrepreneur, and that's the way he freed us from the cotton fields of Mississippi. And we moved, and then we moved right into the town of Mound Bayou [Mississippi], where I remained until I left in 1963. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, did he have any stories from his people about life there-- Speaker 2: He was born-- Speaker 1: --at the beginning of Mound Bayou? Speaker 2: Yeah. Now, he was born in Belzoni, Mississippi, which is another little area in that Delta area there. And so, his folk all moved into Mound Bayou at a much later date, like in the late or the mid-1940s. So, they were not a part of the early 1800 activity--you know, of founding the town. So he moved into the town along with his mother and father and his siblings, and then met and married, you know, into the Braboy clan-- Story_ID: 192274 Speaker 1: What was your mother [Cassino Braboy Martin] like, and what did she do-- Speaker 2: Yeah, she-- Speaker 1: --for a living? Speaker 2: She was just a tremendous philosopher, homemaker, cook. I mean, she stayed home and she raised the kids. She was a wonderful mother. I think if it was anything, she had a full occupation of being a mother. It was ten of us, and she raised all of us and took good care of us, fed us, clothed us. She was mama. She was, then too, she was the one who carried the stories. And she would tell the stories that her grandmother, which is my great-grandmother [Minerva], would tell. And my grandmother [Mary Black Brayboy], they would all gather around this heater--you know, this coal heater, especially in wintertime when there was no crops to be gotten in or anything like that. We'd gather around the stove, and the thing you would do is tell stories. You'd tell the ghost stories (laughter), you'd tell the stories of your ancestors, you would tell the stories of your relationship with the Cherokee--not the Cherokee--with the Choctaw and the Chickasaw Indians, you know, which we all got kind of mixed up with there. And there was one Choctaw woman who lived with us. And so, she passed on to us a lot of the traditions and the rituals, you know, that happened within her tribe. Story_ID: 192275 Speaker 1: And some of those rituals and traditions still live within my family. Speaker 2: Now for instance, what kind of ritual would she--? Speaker 1: (Laughter). Ah, well, there were rituals around courtship. There were rituals around spirituality, in terms of how Native Americans understand the world and the universe. And some of that spirituality lives in our family. Speaker 2: Now, in terms of courtship, now that's an interesting topic. (Laughter). Speaker 1: Courtship, yeah. (Laughter). Speaker 2: Now, what was--? Speaker 1: The first thing is, you know, the elders have to participate in it. You just didn't go out and get somebody and bring them in. (Laughter). You had to have a reading, of course, as to whether this is the right mate for you. And then this where the elders would all come together. And this is an interesting mix of African traditional spirituality and the Native American tradition of spirituality meeting in the U.S., meeting in this place. And so, you had this tremendous mixture of traditions and culture. So, in Africa, I found it to be the same thing. It's that the courtship becomes a major family activity. You don't just go out and court somebody. You've got to get in touch with the family; you've got to get the approval of the elders, you know, of the clan. You've got to go through this little bartering thing and, you know, be under watch care and so forth and so on, so that you didn't--you know, you didn't come out a fornicator. But, you know, and all the other stuff around it. Miss Lula Nolan [ph.], if you would, was like the griot, you know, for us. And she was a wisdom woman, and so you had this wisdom circle of women and of men. There is--not the coffee, not the tea leaves reading--but coffee grounds. And if the coffee grounds did not make a certain kind of a formation in the cup--you know, there's a ritual around this cup and the coffee grounds and the consuming of the coffee. And your life story laid out in this cup. And they would read it to you and they would tell you what things to avoid, what things to do, who your possible mate would be, and so forth. And so, it's a lot of ritual there. Some people would frown at that. You know, quote, "Christians" would frown at that. But we were all Christians, but we did not leave our traditional spiritual roots. So, Christianity became a way of moving into a new understanding of God and so forth. But there were some basic traditional things that we maintained, especially closeness to the earth--you know, rituals around spring and autumn, as I told you what my favorite times of the year are. You know, summer and the winter, and the elements of wind and water and fire--you see these as the basic elements, you know, related to you as a person, your body. Your relationship to the moon and the stars, your relationship to the sun. So, and all this hooks together to make you who you are. And it's good to understand the universe in light of who you are as a person on the earth. So, this connectedness is there, yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 192276 Speaker 1: So I suppose you all attended church, right? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, we were avid churchgoers. Speaker 1: What was the name of your church? Speaker 2: Well, at the outset it was called the Jerusalem Missionary Baptist Church [Mound Bayou, Mississippi]. The Jerusalem Missionary Baptist Church is where I got baptized when I was nine years old. And it became very clear to me at my point of baptism that I had been called to a special mission, a special work. And it was important to the ancestors that that mission became clear in my life. And so the call to ministry, to preach, so to speak, became the calling on my life. And I was very clear at age nine that I would eventually be a preacher or a pastor, or a spiritual leader-- Story_ID: 192277 Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up, before we get you to that point? Speaker 2: Oh, man, there are many. The earth, first of all. It would rain, and the earth, especially in the summer when the earth was dry, and then we would pray for rain to come, which is part of the Native American influence on us. And then when the showers came and the rain came, the scent of the earth and water, that you know, was so rich and sweet and pure. And in those days also, like in spring the first flowers to blossom were honeysuckles, and their rich fragrance all through the air was there. And you lived with that. The peach trees, the apple blossoms, the--just--and the birds. You know, and the new leaves on trees. And the nighttime, you know, the sounds of night--owls, the wolf or the coyote or whatever night animals were out there--you know, the wildcats and this kind of thing. So, I remember those very, very, very well. I also remember the smell of the whiskey still that made white lightning. You ever heard of white lightning? Well, white lightning, you know, is bootleg, you know, and I knew where all the local bootleggers hung out. And so, you could smell--I mean these smells were there and so forth. The fresh food out of the earth, you know, you could dig up your potato and eat it there. You could pull your vegetables right out of a garden, oh yeah. And the smell of the time to slaughter animals for the winter is a part of my reality. You know, there was these rituals around pork, especially, or beef. Because you--there were some animals raised for lard or fat, to cook with, all right. And so, that was a certain animal, and you raised it a certain way and you fed it a certain diet. There was animals being raised for, you know, consumption of meat. And so, you had to do something with that. And the old men would come early in the morning in the spring of the year and catch the young animal, the young pig, and castrate it, you know. And then there was a ritual about how this, these--what they call mountain oysters were to be prepared, and who could consume them and so forth. The elders, the men, would castrate the pig. The women would clean the mountain oysters and prepare them to cook them, but the women were not allowed to eat them--only the elders. And of course, I was very curious about what this must be like. And so, there was a whole ritual of smells and sounds. And then the actual slaughtering of animals for the winter and the wind to preserve the meat, because there was no refrigeration. And so, salt became the preservative that you learned how to do. Smoking meat, or sugar curing hams, that's a scent I'll never forget that's in the air, for me. Baptizing, being baptized in the bayou that surrounded the town [Mound Bayou, Mississippi]. Catfish, catfish was a big piece, fishing. And dancing, music, plenty of music. The blues, oh yeah, the blues. Story_ID: 192278 Speaker 1: A lot of blues music? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Howlin' Wolf [Chester Arthur Burnett] was in my area [Mound Bayou, Mississippi] in those days, Howlin' Wolf. [HistoryMaker] B.B. King was right out of Indianola [Mississippi] over there. Jimmy [Mathis James] Reed, Sonny Boy Williamson [II, formerly, Aleck Miller], you know, that whole [Mississippi] Delta area produced all these blues giants. I was shocked that they had become so popular in Chicago [Illinois] when I got here. But I saw these guys, you know, I heard them in their formative years. You know, they would come to the little juke joint, Honey Black's Juke Joint [ph.], and they would play. And many times, man, they had made their own instruments. They had made their own instruments--the harmonicas and the guitars, and all this kind of stuff. Then, of course, the spiritual music--you know, the gospel sound that eventually--As the blues became kind of an electronic sound in Chicago, the gospel music that came from the Delta also took on an electronic sound here. And it's interesting enough that I became the pastor of the congregation that founded the first gospel choir [Progressive Gospel Choir] in the nation. And that's where I'm pastoring now. The first gospel choir in the nation was founded at Progressive Community Church [Chicago, Illinois] in 1922, all right. But this music, the sound hadn't come about-- Speaker 1: Was that associated with Thomas Dorsey? Speaker 2: Thomas Dorsey, in a way--in a contemporary--Cora [Winters] Ashton is the woman who founded the choir. Thomas Dorsey was able to pen what that sound... it was a sound called the gospel sound. So, he was able to take it and set it to writing and music. So, he became the father of the gospel sound of the gospel music before he wrote it. But the sound itself, you know, back to your point on sound--it came out of the heart of the Delta Mississippi, transplanted into the South Side of Chicago-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now-- Speaker 2: --or the West Side [Chicago, Illinois]-- Story_ID: 192279 Speaker 1: Was there a difference between the blues as it was played in the country and in the North? Besides just the electronics, was there a difference in the content, or--? Speaker 2: You know, once you move to the city, you become a little, what we call "citified." (Laughter). A little more sophisticated, you know, and this kind of stuff. But when you want to have a good blues experience, you go to the Delta Mississippi, you know, where there's the dust on the table, you know. (Laughter). And it's, it's, it's soul. It's feeling, deep feeling. In the North, the electronic sound became more external. It, you know, it made this--it tried to interpret the soul, you know, in electronic ways. If you ever hear Muddy Waters [McKinley Morganfield] and [HistoryMaker] B.B. King and Howlin' Wolf [Chester Arthur Burnett] and these men play and blow their harmonicas without that stuff, you have to go back to the Delta. It's a different sound, a different feel. Feeling is what it is. You've got to feel this thing called gospel, you have to feel that thing that's called blues, yeah. And I think it's interesting. Go to Memphis, Tennessee and go down on Beale Street, and you got all these white kids trying to play the blues. And now, they've got the rhythm. The rhythm is there, but the feeling is not there. And I tell, I tell people all the time in these cross-cultural gatherings, I say, "It's okay to eat soul food. It's okay to recite black poetry. It's okay to try to play black music and so forth. But if you don't feel where that comes from, it's not authentic." You see, you've gotta have the feeling there. So, we have to invite people to a feeling level of it. I had an old man in the congregation, and he was a blues saxophonist who played with Muddy Waters and Jimmy Reed and Joe Turner and all these boys. One morning he came forth to play. He's no longer on the blues circuit, now he's in the church. Okay, he's playing... now, he wanted to play 'What a Friend We Have in Jesus' on the saxophone. And so, the accompanist, the pianist, was sitting there and said, "Well, what key do you want me to play in?" He turned to him and says, "In the key of feeling." Wow. And that's what it is. It has to be in the key of feeling, and that's a deep place within you, you know, where it comes from. It comes out of experience, you know, not out of training or anything like that. I see B.B. King every now and then on the television trying to teach white kids how to play the guitar and so forth and so on. And that's all you can do. You can share the, I guess, the physics, you know, the technique. You can do that, but it's got to come up out of the soul, the feeling that is there. Yeah, you've got to know why, when this guy says, "Someone asked him why does he sing the blues?" You know, he said, "You sing the blues out of a deep experience, out of a deep place within you." Gospel, or the spiritual music, you know, it comes from deep places. Or, traditional black preaching--see, it comes up out of the soul of the person, out of the--not only a personal experience, but a people's experience. Story_ID: 192280 Speaker 1: Now tell me, what kind of a young man were you growing up? What were you like? What did you like to do? Did you have a lot of friends? Were you outgoing? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I had a bunch of friends. Yeah, boy. We were--I've always been what people term as extroverted. You know, I've been a very open, you know, friendly, you know, kind of a guy. And it was always easy for me to make friends and to attract, you know, friends to me. And so as a small boy, I learned first of all that I was loved and was part of a big family. So, you know, that's why--I think all that early socialization takes place. I was close to nature, had fifteen dogs--had fifteen dogs-- Speaker 1: Fifteen dogs? Speaker 2: Fifteen dogs, and knew every one of them by--they had their own different names. All of them would respond to me when I called their names. And (laughter)-- Speaker 1: Now, where did you keep fifteen dogs? Speaker 2: Well, in the country, you know, you got all kind of space, you know. And-- Speaker 1: So, were you living in town [Mound Bayou, Mississippi] at the time? Or--? Speaker 2: I was living in town, but sort of--not right in the little business area, but you know, kind of removed--you know, where you can have space for fifteen dogs and a hundred cats. (Laughter). Speaker 1: Now, did you have a hundred cats, too? Speaker 2: No, not really. The dogs and the cats would never have gotten along. Speaker 1: Fifteen dogs. Now, were they responsible for some of their own feeding? Speaker 2: They had to hustle for themselves. (Laughter). That's the key to it. The thing up there, you know, you've got to feed all these animals in your house, and all this. They didn't, they were not house dogs. They were dogs who had to hunt along with me because--and there were times when I had to hunt too, for supper. So, we were competing sometimes for that rabbit that they running. (Laughter). Yeah, boy, because the rabbit was coming home for dinner, you know, and they were not to eat it themselves. But I had fifteen dogs. Speaker 1: Well, were they different breeds? Speaker 2: No, they were all mongrels. (Laughter). I'd never heard of anything like a pit bull or--(laughter). A couple of bloodhounds-- Speaker 1: All different kind of looking dogs, huh? Speaker 2: All different kind of looking dogs, you know. And I knew them all by name, and they responded to me. And so they were my--we were great friends. But then, too, every boy my age had dogs. And so we would go hunting. We would chase rabbits, we would--possums, raccoons--whatever was out there in the woods, squirrels. This was before we were able to hold a gun responsibly, so we had to hunt with sticks and these dogs. And we did pretty well. Fishing was also a big piece of my experience. Yeah, going fishing, and I still love to fish today. I'm not much of a hunter of the sort, but fishing has stayed with me. I would say there was about fifteen or sixteen, maybe twenty boys in my group, in my adolescent group. And we would all get together, especially during the holidays like Thanksgiving and Christmas, and we would visit the countryside. We would visit all the homes of all the girls we knew, all the parents we knew, and we'd all gather in these different homes. And we would eat to our heart's content, and we would sing Christmas carols or sing gospel songs, or put on little talent shows and all this kind of stuff, just entertaining ourselves. And most of this done by walking, five or six miles, you know, one way and then back. And we're always together. Story_ID: 192281 Speaker 1: One of the most tragic things, though, that happened, in 1960, I was eighteen, Paul Turner [ph.] who was my best buddy--we were best friends. You know, we were just everywhere together and doing things together. We entered [HistoryMaker Reverend] James Bevel's training session, SNCC [the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee], which was then organizing in the [Mississippi] Delta area, to register people to vote. Paul and I came to take the training so that we could go out on the plantation and register people. One night on our way from the training session from St. Gabriel's Catholic Mission [St. Gabriel Mission, Mound Bayou, Mississippi] where the training was taking place, we had to walk down the township road. And it was a gravel road, into the dark, because you know, lighting was not out there. A truckload of white men out of somewhere just showed up with sticks and clubs, and they beat the daylights out of us. They beat us, they beat us. And Paul, my best buddy, sustained the worse injuries as far as I'm concerned, because we were both hurt bad. They kicked him repeatedly in the groin, and he could not father kids. So, he was my best buddy and my friend. You know, that was a hurtful piece inside of me. I was--my skull was cracked, you know, from the ax handles or whatever they were beating us with. We survived that beating, and that's when I began to understand that we were not in control of our destiny, you know. And that this whole thing that [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was doing around the Southern Christian Leadership Conference pre-dated Operation PUSH [People United to Save Humanity] and some of the newer movements. The NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], of course, was the oldest, and we were all members of the NAACP as boys. And so, it was natural for us to get involved with the movement, the right to vote, you know, which was a basic citizen right. And we were very much involved in that, but we suffered tremendous pain as a result of it. Now, all of my buddies eventually moved away to Detroit [Michigan]. Paul and his family--Paul had twenty-six brothers and sisters. They lived out on the plantation just west of Mound Bayou [Mississippi]. But every year, you'd come out in debt in that sharecropping system, you know. And so, old man Turner finally, you know, got hip and he moved all of his family by night off the plantation. And they headed to Detroit, twenty-six kids plus, you know, they had left there. Left me kind of lonely, you know. And then of course I was moving toward graduation myself from high school [Mound Bayou Consolidated Public School and County Training School, Mound Bayou, Mississippi]. Then I graduated and went off to college. Story_ID: 192282 Speaker 1: You went to grade school in Mound Bayou [Mississippi]? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: And high school. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: What was your school called? Speaker 2: Okay. Grade school was like, you know, like a house where the woman was a schoolteacher and taught kids, you know from primary school up to first grade, like a kindergarten kind of thing. Miss Henrietta Cleggs, I never will forget that woman, a great lady. And always... she was a powerful part of my early beginnings, to teach me how to read. And I was always kind of thick-headed, she said. She said, "Herbert, boy, I don't know what I'm going to do with you. You're thick-headed, you don't want to read. You can't work your arithmetic" and so forth. But she was my beginning, you know, and stuff. Then I come to Mound Bayou Training School [Mound Bayou Consolidated Public School and County Training School, Mound Bayou, Mississippi], that's what it was called. And it ran from first grade through high school; that one big building did. And I went, I was eight years old when I finally got to the first grade. And I was twenty years old when I graduated from high school. Speaker 1: Okay. What were some of the other teachers at Mound Bayou Training School and at the high school that you remember? Speaker 2: Oh, man. The lady who really impacted my life, her name was Estella Hawkins [ph.]. She was my English and general literature teacher. She, she, you know, they come--and they don't believe in you just taking an assignment and taking it home and bringing it back on paper. But you had to demonstrate that you had mastered the material. So, she would require us to commit to memory volumes of literature, poetry, and all kinds of stuff. So, she gave me my real beginnings and foundation for oratory. And I would commit total--I mean ten and twelve stanzas of stuff to memory so that I could recite it. I became real good at that, and that was the way I got my way through college. I was an orator, I was a thespian, you know, I was an actor. I did the major dramas, you know. I did '[Doctor] Faustus' by Christopher Marlowe. I did [William] Shakespeare's 'Hamlet,' 'Othello,' 'Macbeth,' I did all this stuff. It was powerful stuff. And she gave me the background, you know, for all of that, to get my way through college on a dramatic scholarship, and went on through. The church of course, was very, very key, you know, to it. And so, the teacher at school was also a member of the local church, Bethel AME Church, African Methodist [Episcopal] Church [Mound Bayou, Mississippi], where after leaving Jerusalem [Missionary Baptist Church, Mound Bayou, Mississippi] I wound up at Bethel AME which was the kind of status quo place to be in the town. There was the doctors and lawyers and businessmen and schoolteachers and so forth. And so, you're interchanging with all of these mentors and role models, you know, there. So, Estelle Hawkins gave me my underground. Now, in terms of linguistics, it was Sister Bridgeforth. Mrs. Bridgeforth [ph.] was my French teacher. And she taught me the fundamentals of French, and French became a second language for me. And as I moved around the West Coast of Africa, in particular, my heart is always deeply grateful to Mrs. Bridgeforth for teaching me fundamental, you know, introductory conversational French. And I'll always remember that. And then from French off into other dialects and languages, you know, which I'm still rather proficient at. And I pick up on languages real easy. So, those two ladies were very instrumental in me. Charles Thurman [ph.], my history teacher, who believed that you must first grasp an understanding of civics in those days, citizenship. You know, know what your citizenship rights are. Know the Bill of Rights, you know. Know the power of the ballot, and so forth and so on. And so he instilled in all of us, and in me in particular, you know, an appreciation for government, and for understanding the Constitution of the United States of America, you know, and it's articles and its--and all aspects of government. Story_ID: 192283 Speaker 1: And you ran for student council [at Mound Bayou Consolidated Public School and County Training School, Mound Bayou, Mississippi]. And were you the president? Speaker 2: Yeah, I was the president of student council from, during the tenth, eleventh and twelfth grades. I was elected each year by my colleagues to be president of the student council. Somehow or another, there was always this sort of--well, for lack of a better word, anointing, on me for leadership and for counsel, and they looked to me for advice. Even the kids in my age group, they'd always come to me to check things out before they made decisions about doing stuff. So, I was sort of like the griot in my high school. And, and, I had the respect both of my teachers, you know, and my classmates. So, that went through, and I was the organizer, not only of our high school student council, but I went around the state of Mississippi to organize student councils in high schools where there were none. So, and what my dream was, was to create this state-wide organization of student councils. But then I graduated from high school, and that went away. Speaker 1: So, you played football, too? Speaker 2: I played football. Speaker 1: What position did you play? Speaker 2: I played, what is it--the fullback. The fullback, yeah, I've always been stocky and heavy. I played fullback. I got plastered, you know, by the annual Thanksgiving game which we played. The rival high school was in [West] Helena, Arkansas, Elijah Miller High School [West Helena, Arkansas]. Man, listen, those boys were so huge. I mean they looked like the front end of a John Deere tractor. And they ran over us so bad. (Laughter). I left playing football and then became a member of the dramatics club that summer, and the rest of the way through high school. Speaker 1: As I was saying before, it's kind of like Jim Brown. He left football for-- Speaker 2: Yeah, for the stage, you know. And, and, you know, because I found out that, you know, women love more than football heroes. They also love guys who have a pretty smooth line for them, you know. (Laughter). So, anyway, that was sort of high school for me; it was a rich experience. I had the admiration of my classmates as well as the acceptability of my teachers--a great deal of encouragement. And the church and the school, really, you know, were the fundamental--and of course, family life, of course--were the fundamental places of my total existence. Story_ID: 192284 Speaker 1: Five days of school, and the rest of it was spent at the church. And that's where I would meet also many of the schoolteachers that were members of the church. Then the local pastor, you know, of Bethel A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] Church [Mound Bayou, Mississippi]--very nurturing kind of a guy. Speaker 2: What was his name? Speaker 1: His name was Reverend T.C. Johnson [ph.], Reverend Johnson, a very warm, you know, gracious kind of a guy who didn't mind spending time, you know, with the boys and the girls of his church. And he nurtured us, you know, not necessarily to be pastors or preachers, but just nurturing us spiritually, you know, and giving us the fundamentals of how to negotiate life, you know, in the real world. And he was in many ways my image of what a pastor or a spiritual leader or teacher should be, you know, in a local context, in a community. Story_ID: 192285 Speaker 1: Now did you--when you were nine--you said earlier that from the time you were nine, you knew you wanted to be a minister? Speaker 2: Yeah, I had a powerful conversion experience at age nine. Speaker 1: What happened? Speaker 2: The day of my baptism, of course, it was on a Sunday. And you know, you have this experience in the rural South of sitting on the mourner's bench. And, and the mourner's bench is a place where you have to sit and listen to a week of preaching, or several weeks of preaching, if you don't feel anything, all right. And so, I was sitting on the mourner's bench along with my older brother and some other guys who were bored to death, you know, with this whole process. But I was very interested in it. I loved to listen to the preacher teach and expose, you know, expose the scriptures and the meaning of the scriptures and so forth. They were bored to death. And so anything that came to their mind to say that they had a testimony of being touched by the spirit, just to get off the mourner's bench, they went up and did it. I sat there, because it hadn't happened to me, okay. I was waiting for this real experience. And the elders would actually come and spend time with you and pray with you. And a couple of times they would look at me, because I'm back on the mourner's bench every year, all right. And so they had to pray me off the mourner's bench, so to speak. So, by the age nine, after baptism I went into the woods. And the moon was powerful, it was a powerful moon. And the dew, you know, the dewdrops of the moon, this whole experience with nature and what I understood to be the voice of God saying very clearly to me, "This is what I've called you to do. This is who I've called you to be." And it was clear to me, you know, what my mission, my whole role was. And as I've gone into it and as I've walked into this whole way of life, it's been confirmation, affirmation. There have been spiritual guides all along the way to let me know I'm on the right path, and that my journey is still going. As recently as an experience I just had in Africa. There was a group of spiritual leaders all together--traditionalist, you know, religion and so forth, just spiritual people. One of the guys, one of the gentlemen, the elders, came up out of the crowd of this powerful gathering, and he pointed directly in my face. And he says, "You shall live and not die. You shall live to be 120 years old." All right, awesome. And then he fades back into this crowd, all right. So, then I began to say to myself, I said, "Good Lord. God, if this prophesy that this man has spoken into my life... which resonates with me powerfully, all right. If this is the case, that I'm going to be here sixty more years, there's two things I ask for--a sound mind and a healthy body, and the rest I can negotiate. You know, if you keep me in a sound mind and keep me in a healthy body, then whatever else remains of me from this day on, then I want to be able to do that." And some powerful things have happened since then, Brother [Larry] Crowe. Awesome things have transpired over my journey. But it was the church, it was the school, it was the family. These three basic components of my life remain with me to this day. Names, faces, people, you know, of those early days of my formative days are very much with me. Ancestors are still there. Their advice, their wisdom, their encouragement--you know, it's still with me, I'm able to go forward, you know, out of that-- Story_ID: 192286 Speaker 1: So, high school [Mound Bayou Consolidated Public School and County Training School, Mound Bayou, Mississippi] was powerful time for me. Speaker 2: Well, was it that network of support that got you through that trauma of being beaten? Speaker 1: Yeah. Because you know, you can live that kind of trauma, and two or three things can happen. It can leave a tremendous hatred, tremendous hatred and anger, you know, that can be paralyzing so that you're not able to move beyond that. Speaker 2: How did you feel immediately after that? Did you feel angry like that? Speaker 1: I felt scared, I think more scared for my life. I had came--I think I finally came to grips that I was in danger, that danger surrounded me, and that there were some places that my family or my friends could not protect me. And so, fear began to fill up inside of me. Intimidation, I became easily intimidated, you know, by external forces, especially white men. You know, that hatred could be communicated without them even saying a word to you. All they'd do is look at you, the little "hate staring" was there. So, you could easily develop these feelings of intimidation dealing with white men. That became a part of me. Inferiority, I mean all of the demons, you see. Everything that my ancestors had shown me and my parents [Cassino Braboy Martin and Willie Martin] were teaching me, all of a sudden came against the stark reality that you are really powerless. And more than powerless, you are expendable. I mean, you don't mean anything. I mean, your life can be snapped out like that. Earlier in my experience, Emmett Till, you know, had been slaughtered and lynched in our area. Speaker 2: Is that, that was in Money, Mississippi, right? Speaker 1: Yeah, Money, Mississippi. Yeah, that wasn't too far. It's a whole little Delta town, you know. And then Emmett Till's face, grotesque face, after pulling him out of the Tallahatchie River, was put in the newspaper and shown to us. You know, and the message was if you don't stay in your place, or if you dare look at a white woman differently than we want you to, then this is your destiny; you're going to be wiped out. So, you've got all of these forces, you know, feeding in on that. And then the beating itself was very disabling. You know, and it came at an age where you were realizing your manhood, age eighteen, you're ready now to go out into the world to make your way and so forth. One of the things that happened, a lot of psychological damage was done. And sometimes I think about this stuff. Since Emmett Till, the death of Emmett Till, the message around his death was if you dare to touch a white woman, then you would die. So white women, looking at them, became a symbol of death. So, and the word to me was if I want to survive, then white women have to be crossed completely out of my reality. So, I 'X-ed' white women out, man. They did not exist for me, all right. Because to recognize them was for me to die, all right. I didn't realize the damage that had been done to me until I was in grad school at Northwestern University [Evanston, Illinois]. And a white girl who was in my class came to me, and she said, "Why do you treat me as if I don't exist, B. Herbert [HistoryMaker Reverend B. Herbert Martin, Sr.]?" I said, "What?" She said, "Why do you treat me as if I don't exist?" In reality, she did not exist. You know, she was not a part of my reality. She couldn't be. I had to--I had to work through that. I had to work through a lot of pain and wounded-ness, anger, fear, intimidation, inferiority. I worked through it all sufficiently enough to function, you know, in this world. That, that's a part of my story that I don't usually talk about. Story_ID: 192287 Speaker 1: The lynchings, the initiation rites of the Ku Klux Klan [KKK] that I witnessed, you know, watching my playmate--there was a white boy on the plantation, William Peacock [ph.], little William Peacock. We played together, all right. But then I happened to stumble up one day on a Klan rally, a ritual that was taking place in the woods. And little William Peacock, along with the rest of the white boys who were being initiated into the Klan. That was an awesome moment to me. And when I went back to Mississippi as an adult, about five or six years ago, William Peacock was running for the State Senate of the state of Mississippi, yeah. Now, as to whether he kept his connection with the Klan or not, I'm not sure. But I would have liked to have seen him, to say to him, "Man, this is a different day and time." I'd say, "I can see you as a grown man, I'm a grown man. And the things that we went through to get to where we are--you know." And, but I didn't make that connection. But these are the kinds of things, you know, all of that--those formative years--high school and the transition between high school and moving out into the real world were all of these bad, horrible kinds of things-- Story_ID: 192288 Speaker 1: My grandmother [Mary Black Braboy] was effective in teaching me how to negotiate hatred, anger into the dynamic of radical love. Before I made it to theological school [Garrett Theological Seminary, later Garrett-Evangelical Theological Seminary, Evanston, Illinois], the best theologian in my life was my grandma. (Laughter). No education at all, but she, she had done a job on me and on my mind, to give me a sense of worth and value that I could not have gotten from any academic institution. And it is because of what this community, Mound Bayou, was and still is, and you know, put into us, that we've been able to survive out here. I still have memories of the beating, yeah. I don't think that'll ever leave. You know, it's emblazed in my memory. But the pain of it is no longer there. It's been, like, moved into another level of understanding. You know, human nature, evil, you know, and the capacity to hate which is big. But it's like poison inside of you. It will destroy you, so you have to get that out. And there are spiritual rituals and disciplines, you know, that I was taught, by which to pull this up out of me and get it out, so that I could go on with my life. And of course, I couldn't be a spiritual leader and teach hate (laughter). Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: We had too much of that on the other side, you saw it. Story_ID: 192289 Speaker 1: You knew you wanted to go into the ministry. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: And so, when you were a senior, had you chosen a college? Speaker 2: Yeah. You know, of course, you know, I couldn't afford to go. And the superintendent of our high school [Mound Bayou Consolidated Public School and County Training School, Mound Bayou, Mississippi], which was black--we had a black superintendent of schools. He was a graduate of Philander Smith College [Little Rock, Arkansas], and had influence, you know, with the school. So in July of 1963, I put my little trunk, my little footlocker together and got on a Greyhound Bus and went to Little Rock, Arkansas. And I walked from the bus station down to Philander Smith College into the Dean of Students Office and said, "My name is [HistoryMaker Reverend] B. Herbert Martin [Sr.], and I'm here to go to college." Now-- Speaker 1: Now, that's a little gap. Because you graduated in what, 1960? Speaker 2: Sixty-Three. [1963]. Speaker 1: From high school? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Oh, '63 [1963], okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: I was an old guy. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And there's a whole story around that. But, you know, with the sharecropping system and getting to school late, I was always late, always behind. And as a matter of fact, I wound up in a place, in this category called "educable mentally handicapped." Speaker 1: You know, so that was when you were in grade school? Speaker 2: No, this is in high school. Speaker 1: In high school? Speaker 2: Yeah, because I was always behind and couldn't catch up, because I was late getting there. And the teachers didn't have the time to wait on me to catch up. So, they put me with the slow kids, you know. And--so it was, it was sort of a stigma, things like that--you know, working through all that kind of stuff had to be done. And I survived. As I tell some of my friends now, "Hey, man, look, we survived all of this--Oh, this is on tape, isn't it? (Laughter). We survived all of this craziness. (Laughter). We survived all of this craziness, and we're not on Prozac, and we don't have to take anxiety medicine in order to live each day. (Laughter). We survived; we made it, you know, through. And thanks be to God that we did. We could not have done it without this tremendous support and nurturing that came from family, came from church, came from our school. It was all worked together to help make us who we are. Story_ID: 192290 Speaker 1: So immediately after graduation [from Mound Bayou Consolidated Public School and County Training School, Mound Bayou, Mississippi] that July, you went right to Philander Smith [College, Little Rock, Arkansas]? Speaker 2: I went right to Philander Smith, man. Speaker 1: Okay, so what happened? Now, you arrived with your stuff-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I walked in the dean of students' office, and said "My name is [HistoryMaker Reverend] B. Herbert Martin [Sr.], and I'm here to go to college." And he looked up at me and he said, "Okay, B. Herbert Martin." (Laughter). I said, "I'm from Mound Bayou, Mississippi." He said, "Okay, B. Herbert Martin from Mound Bayou, Mississippi. If you want to go to college, you can go to college." And he gave me a job of painting a fence, painting the tennis court fence green. I never will forget that. Philander Smith's colors were green and gold. And so, I had to paint this whole courtyard green with a brush and a bucket of paint. And then he gave me housing on the campus, you know-- summer--it was doing the summertime when school was really out. You know, you've got a few summer students. And I worked my through the summer. And it was the summer of '63 [1963]. And then... because I was a part of SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference], and I knew that the Civil Rights Movement was in its heyday, and that I wanted to be a part of the March on Washington under the leadership of [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.]. And I was a part of the delegation from the [Mississippi] Delta, you know, Fannie Lou Hamer and all those good people. So, I came back in time to get on the Greyhound Bus and head to Washington, D.C., and to sit at the Washington Monument with my feet in the reflection pool listening to Dr. King deliver his famous I Have a Dream speech. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: That was an awesome time, and I was coming back to Mississippi and then getting back in time to get back to Philander Smith to register for the first fall semester. And the freshman class elected me president of the freshman class. (Laughter). And it was just a great time in my life--growing and exploring, you know, becoming a young man, making my mistakes with women, and learning that--Somehow or another I got in my head that I had to have liquor to drink. And White Lightning wasn't my choice of liquor. So, I had to find something, you know. And I was looking for that outlet, so I had my little experience with alcohol, and it didn't work. So, I became a non-drinker, basically. But an interesting thing happened. As I moved into my freshman year, one of the white trustees of the--of Philander was looking for a butler and a gardener. So, I knew I had the skills of a gardener. I didn't know much about being a butler, but I was willing to go and learn. And he hired me and I went to live in the house with them, in a place called Pulaski Heights just outside of Little Rock [Arkansas]. This man was an attorney and a retired Consulate General to India. So, he had all of this wonderful Indian, you know, memorabilia and culture and art, and all of these things. He was an international person. And this maid, the woman who had been with him for many, many years all around the world, was there--very articulate and a very educated woman. So, she kind of-- Speaker 1: Was she black? Speaker 2: She was black. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, she was black, an excellent cook. And I had this flair for cooking, so I'd pick up on her recipes and she'd teach me how to do stuff. And I learned how to cook some of the exotic things that she did. But I think what happened there-- this was a--he had just built this house maybe in the last three years before I got there. It was Frank Lloyd Wright design of stone and glass, and built into the side of this mountain overlooking the Arkansas River. I mean it was an awesome, awesome thing, you know, to see and to be a part of that. And I lived there, and I was a--by the day I was a student at Philander. And evenings I was a butler, you know, welcoming dinner guests and all this kind of stuff. Mainly weekends, I was a gardener, you know. And so, a typical southern life, you know, with servants and, you know, and a white master and his wife, and this kind of thing. So, I got my way--I paid my way through school. But at the same time, I learned tremendous things about the rest of the world, the globe, by watching all of these foreign diplomats and the government leaders of the state of Arkansas, like the Rockefellers and all these folks who came through there. Governor Rockefeller, Winthrop Rockefeller, was there. And so, it was a lot to learn. And I learned a lot, you know, through both school, and then learning how to matriculate and relate to white people at a different level other than just as white racists. So, that began another level of consciousness for me, in the hope that I could make something better of my life, yeah. Story_ID: 192291 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, did you--what did you major in [at Philander Smith College, Little Rock, Arkansas]? Speaker 2: I majored in sociology and psychology. I had this combined curriculum. So, I did social work with a psychology emphasis. So, I wound up with a bachelor of arts in, really in social work. That's what it would come out to be. And my first job after college and getting in to Chicago [Illinois] was a social caseworker working with boys in trouble with the law. That has been my life's destiny. Speaker 1: Now, what neighborhood did you work in? Speaker 2: Okay, well, the first job was on the North Side at North [Avenue] and Clybourne [Avenue] at a place called Isham YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association]. And the agency was called Methodist Youth Services [later, MYSI Corporation]. And this was a sponsorship of a Methodist church to try to rescue young boys from the prisons, the jailhouses. Rather than sending them to jail, put them in this like a halfway house setting with counselors and teachers and role models, and maybe they would transform. So, I worked with them at that level. And that was in 1968. And it was in April of 1968 when I was really doing this work that [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther [King, Jr.] is shot, and all hell breaks loose in Chicago. And riots began, and I get stuck on the North Side of Chicago, not knowing where I was. Because the brothers and sisters had disabled the "L" [elevated train] trains and everything headed back south-- Story_ID: 192292 Speaker 1: Now, had you met [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] before? Speaker 2: Earlier in Mound Bayou [Mississippi]. He would come to Mound Bayou. These were the days of Dr. T.R.M. [Theodore Roosevelt Mason] Howard, these are the early days, in the 1950s. I would sit on the orange crate or wherever I could sit to hear all these great orators. Man, they were powerful. To hear somebody like [HistoryMaker Reverend Fred] Shuttlesworth and to hear Adam Clayton Powell [Jr.], you know, come to our town to speak. And Dr. T.R.M. Howard himself was an awesome orator, you know. And I would just sit and listen. And then they'd introduce Martin Luther King. He was a real young guy; he was very young in those days, probably in his twenties. He had to be-- Speaker 1: He would have been, yes. Speaker 2: Yeah. So yeah, all of those came across my screen, and impacted my life tremendously. And when I saw the leadership was strongly clergy, like Adam Clayton Powell--you know, a clergyman that was on the vanguard of the Civil Rights Movement. There's Martin Luther King, you know, coming along that was a role model, you know, for me. And of course, other preachers. So, the Movement grew in the churches. That's where it came out of. Speaker 1: Now, did you--did you ever work again with SNCC [the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] when they had the voter registration? Speaker 2: I did, but-- Speaker 1: You know, they had that big push in '64 [1964] to register people. Speaker 2: Right, that's right. I was a part of all that. And when the killings took place, you know, over in Philadelphia, Mississippi-- Speaker 1: Viola Liuzzo- Speaker 2: And she was killed, and also-- Speaker 1: [Andrew] Goodman and [Michael] Schwerner-- Speaker 2: And Goodman and-- Speaker 1: And [James] Chaney. Speaker 2: Yeah, and Chaney were all murdered there. You know, all of this, yeah, is part of it. Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay-- Speaker 2: It was a scary time, but it was real, and it didn't stop us from pushing and working for it. Story_ID: 192293 Speaker 1: I think what hurts my heart though, is that the disconnect of history, you know, for our younger generation. They don't know what agony went into, and what death and bloodshed went into getting the 1965 Voting Rights [Act] Bill passed, and to know that it is a bill, it is not law yet. [U.S.] Congress, with the sweep of a pen, can wipe it out if we don't organize around it and insist that the 1965 Voting Rights Bill not only be renewed, but that it become law. You know, we are the only ethnic group in this nation that every twenty-five years have to go back and ask for the right to vote. We are. And, and, and, that's exactly what it is. It's a civil rights act, a civil rights bill. It is not a civil rights law. Now, what is the likelihood of them doing it? I don't know. It all depends on who becomes--who your Congress people are and what conservatism comes to--you know, who comes to be your national leaders. Speaker 2: Well, I think we had the right to vote-- Speaker 1: We have the right to vote-- Speaker 2: --already, but the Voting Rights Act made provisions for correcting those states that were denied. Speaker 1: That's right. And what's going to happen is that those states at a local level could easily re-institute all of those prohibitive things--the literacy tests. I remember them. The literacy tests, the-- Speaker 2: The Constitution. Speaker 1: The poll tax, all of this. I watched my grandfather [Page Braboy, Jr.] vote at age eighty for the first time, you know. It was an awesome experience to see that, because he could not pay the poll tax. Or, if you could pay it, they always found some way--they said you were late paying it. And the questions on the literacy test, man--one question I remember is "How many bubbles are in a bar of soap?" "How high is up?" And you try to answer that. There's no way to answer it. It wasn't intended for you to answer it intelligently. It was intended to disenfranchise you as a voter. So, we lived through all this stuff. And I think the disconnect of our history, we haven't been able to tell these stories. And maybe that's what [The] HistoryMakers is about--is helping tell these stories to succeeding generations, and let them know that this, which has been handed to you, came from someplace. Story_ID: 192294 Speaker 1: --How did you feel? Well, I suppose you felt terrible when [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was assassinated. How did, where you were you when found out (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was devastating. I was at North [Avenue] and Clybourne [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois] working with boys in trouble with the law, that's where I was. And when--I didn't know it had happened. And everybody was running in the streets, coming out of their apartments and running in the streets. And then finally someone said, "King has been killed in Memphis [Tennessee]." And I was in just total disbelief, you couldn't believe it. You'd run to the television and see what you could see. And sure enough, he was killed. And then the aftermath of that, the anger, the unbridled anger within our community was nationwide. It was an unbelievable thing to watch, you know, the burnings and the killing, the riots and all of that. So, that's emotional place for me right now, yeah. Speaker 1: So, did things change in '68 [1968] then, after the killing of Dr. King for you? I mean, did it affect you? Speaker 2: I think those of us who were close to the [Civil Rights] Movement, you know, like [HistoryMaker Reverend] James Bevel. You know, I knew him well. He had a nervous breakdown. And others around him--and there was such a powerful state of depression and hurt and all of that. It was--a numbing. A psychic numbing happened, you know, within the whole nation among African-Americans. It hurt big. But now, you had like people like Stokely Carmichael [later, Kwame Ture] out there. You had a [HistoryMaker Reverend] Jesse [L.] Jackson out there. I subscribed a little closer to Jesse than I did to Stokely. You had the Black Panthers in Chicago [Illinois], you know, all of this. So, you had a place where you could plug in to keep afloat, you know, and to see that you were still a part of this movement. Operation Breadbasket, you know, was what we knew as SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] in Chicago. And then eventually, Jesse organized Operation PUSH [People United to Save Humanity, later Rainbow/PUSH Coalition], you know, based on that. So, that's a whole piece of history-- Story_ID: 192295 Speaker 1: Yeah, and what's uncovered for me at this moment, you know, is a big memory of great pain--the piece where we touched on the William Peacock [ph.] story, my playmate, at age twelve and me watching him in the woods being initiated into the [Ku Klux] Klan, right. And so what that represented then is there's been a shift now in the relationship. We were no longer playmates. I now had to assume my subservient role as a black man, as a black child in society, and he become my master. And that was-- from that point on, the relationship did change. He was in a position of telling me what to do, rather than helping me do it, or work with me. He became my boss. And that's a painful place for me to visit, you know, in telling this story, among other painful places that we've touched on here. But I think this is what the culture has done. You know, the culture in which we live has created this feeling of inferiority, superiority, and how African people have had to think themselves through that so that they can emerge as whole persons. But now, what it also has done is created this false impression that white men or white people are somehow, by virtue of their genetic existence, are superior. See, and so this stuff has got to be worked through, if in fact we're going to move forward as a nation. There's a lot of work that African American men, first of all, within ourselves have to do. But we also have a lot of work to do with our white men. There is not a, there cannot be a genuine relationship until we come to meet and work through this painful history, these painful memories that we have. And unfortunately, this current generation has to own that painful history of which many of them have not benefitted from or participated in. But we've got to bring it and lay it on the table. It's an ugly history, you know. If we don't deal with that, we're not going to be able to be whole people, you know, in this nation. And then today we recognize that there is a proliferation of these groups. You know, they're coming back. Story_ID: 192296 Speaker 1: Okay, 1968, we were talking about the assassination of [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] and some of the aftermath of that. And you're stationed over near Cabrini Green [Homes, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Yeah, I was at the Isham YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] working with boys in trouble with the law. And the riots break out. I'm living on the South Side of Chicago [Illinois] at 62nd Street in Englewood [Chicago, Illinois], 62nd and Throop [Street], and leaving there each morning to go up to Isham YMCA. And that particular day in April when the assassination took place, the riots broke out. And so I had to wind up spending the night over there, you know, with friends, you know, and co-workers and things, and then find my way back home on the next day. And it was amazing, the morning after. You know, the driving... coming back on the 'L' [el, elevated train], you know, you could look west and see that the buildings are burning. There's glass and debris all over the 'L' tracks, you know. And man, I said wow, you know, what is happening? You know, but then in the aftermath of that, you know, organizing took place. And community groups--do you remember something called the Black [People's] Topographical [Research] Center? Speaker 1: Yeah, the Topographical-- Speaker 2: It used to be right there-- Speaker 1: --Research Center. Speaker 2: Right. So, we were all a part of that--the Black Panthers, you know, we were all a part of this movement. And then this is like the spring of '68 [1968]. Story_ID: 192297 Speaker 1: Then we go through the summer, and I had just entered the United Methodist Church here in Chicago [Illinois]. And I was on a track to go into theological school at Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Now, were you ordained at that point? Or-- Speaker 1: No, I was not ordained, but I was licensed to preach, okay. So, but I didn't--I wasn't pastoring. I was serving, you know, in the church in an assistant pastoral role, you know, with the senior ministers. Then-- Speaker 2: This is at which church? Speaker 1: At [Greater] St. John A.M.E. Church [Chicago, Illinois], Greater St. John A.M.E., at 62nd and Throop in those days. And then I went from there to Garrett Theological Seminary [later, Garrett-Evangelical Theological Seminary] at Northwestern in Evanston [Illinois] that September, after 1968. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: That was my first year there. Speaker 2: And that's where [HistoryMaker Reverend] Dr. [Kwame John R.] Porter went to school, too. Speaker 1: Yeah. Dr. Porter was there. He had gone before me, and left an emblazoned pathway at Garrett. And there were three African Americans--myself, Reverend [Dr.] Gessel Berry [Jr.] and then [Bishop] Johnathan [D.] Keaton from Arkansas. The three of us were in this class of white kids of about three hundred. And of course, the graduating African Americans before us had left an agenda for the incoming black seminarians. And that was, you know, to organize church and the black experience at Garrett. You know, and so those were the days of black reparations and, you know, all the things that we were trying to put together-- Speaker 2: Yeah, that was-- Speaker 1: --and asking the administration to empower African Americans, and that kind of thing. Speaker 2: There was a black reparations movement in those days that consisted of--I know one component was delegations of men going to white churches. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: During service-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --and stopping the service-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --and telling them that they owed us. Speaker 1: [Reverend] Albert [B.] Cleage [Jr.] and all these guys out of Detroit [Michigan]. Jim Mack [ph.], you know, here in Chicago. I'm not surprised... I'm sure John Porter--this is part of his generation, a movement, where they were being very disruptive in churches. As a matter of fact, you know, [Reverend] Cecil Williams out on the West Coast, you know, at Glide Memorial United Methodist Church [San Francisco, California] was a part of this, you know, these guys. And they were very radical and were very strong, you know, in doing it. They saw their mission as being the militant watchmen of the cross, you know. And they were upsetting things, you know, in a big way throughout the general church--you know, whether it was Methodist or Presbyterian or whoever they were. And all of them had black caucuses, you know, within them. And I was a part of the black caucus within the United Methodist Church, you know, petitioning for fairness and equity within the structure and so forth. And at Garrett itself, which is the academic center for United Methodism, so to speak, we made our presence known. There were just three of us, but we were powerfully respected. Because we had connected with the Black Student Union at Northwestern in the undergraduate and graduate school at Northwestern. So, we had this pool of force and power between these two powerful institutions. Story_ID: 192298 Speaker 1: They were called the days of rage. And then, you know, that same year was the Democratic National Convention in Chicago [Illinois], and the Students for a Democratic Society [S.D.S.] was present. And there were white students who were pushing for change also in their communities, that things be different. The Vietnam War was one of their major agenda items--to bring an end to it. And so, we were all caught up in that. The flower child movement was very much alive, right alongside the black power movement. And so we complemented each other as generations, you know, growing up together. Then the tragic thing happened of the killing of Mark Clark and Fred Hampton on the West Side of Chicago by Edward V. Hanrahan, the [Cook County] State's Attorney, you know, over there. And so-- Speaker 2: That's the winter of '69 [1969], right? Speaker 1: Yeah, right-- Speaker 2: December-- Speaker 1: Right. We had moved through the fall of '68 [1968]-- Speaker 2: I think it was December 4th of '68 [1968, sic. December 3, 1969]. Speaker 1: Yeah, you're right on it, 1969. And I think the fall of '68 [1968] is when we had the Democratic National Convention in Chicago. And that was my baptism by fire. Speaker 2: It was a turbulent-- Speaker 1: Turbulent time. Speaker 2: The death of, the assassination of Robert [Francis] Kennedy that June. Speaker 1: Robert Kennedy, oh man, it was mean. Speaker 2: So much going on. Speaker 1: Sixty-Eight [1968] was a big, turbulent year. And, and, and Boss Daley [Richard J. Daley], you know, the present Richard [M.] Daley's daddy, had issued the "shoot to kill" order during the Democratic Convention, and the kids were still rioting. I remember the night of the big riot, where Sheriff [Richard] Elrod--I'm not sure if you know that name-- Speaker 2: Right, yes. Speaker 1: --when he got his neck broke. Well, these kids were fleeing-- Speaker 2: He got his neck broke? Speaker 1: He got his neck broke lunging after one of the kids. He was going to capture the kid, and he fell and broke his neck. Yeah, and that's where it happened. So he wound up, of course, paralyzed for life and in a wheelchair as a result of that. But what was happening, he was chasing one of the kids in the riot, trying to catch them and arrest them, and he stumbled and fell and broke his neck. And then--but the kids then were fleeing the city, coming north. Now I'm already on the north end, in Evanston [Illinois]. And I was the pastor of this little black Methodist Church. And I had made friends with the other Methodist pastors there in the city. And these kids came north. And it was cold and frigid. And how they found my house, I don't know. But they were knocking at my door asking me if I could provide them housing, you know, let them sleep in the church overnight. So, I said, well, yeah, I think we should do this. And I talked to the rest of pastors, and we all opened up our church houses and let the kids in. That was like on Friday night, and they stayed with us--it must have been--yeah. Because on Saturday, on Saturday night these kids were there in our building. Hanrahan and his deputies raided our churches... after these kids. They burst out our windows, knocked down our doors with axes, came into the church and took the kids out, and then issued subpoenas to all of us pastors for the grand jury for aiding and abetting criminals from the law. That was my baptism by fire into the politics and political life in Chicago in '68 [1968]. Speaker 2: This--just for the record, Hanrahan was the State's Attorney? Speaker 1: Right, he was the State's Attorney, right. He was the State's Attorney. Speaker 2: Edward Hanrahan, right. Speaker 1: Edward V. Hanrahan, we'll never forget him. And then from there it went on, you know, to chase the Black Panthers and to hunt them down, and eventually murder Mark Clark and Fred Hampton later--about a year or so later. But do you remember a man by the name of [Reverend George Edgar] Ed Riddick who was at Operation PUSH [People United for Saving Humanity, later Rainbow/PUSH Coalition]? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Reverend Edward Riddick, a tremendous statistician, researcher and so forth. When I got in trouble--because my congregation was now ready to put me out of the church (laughter) for, you know, causing all of this ruckus. And so, they were ready to put me out of the church. And of course, the other congregations wanted to expel their pastors, too. But of course, we had stood for justice and we had stood for righteousness, and we did the right thing to bring the kids in from, you know, from the street and provide shelter for them. It was not an attempt to hide them from the law, as we got accused of doing. And, and, so Edward Riddick, I will never forget that man, and may God rest his great spirit. I will never forget him. He came all the way from Chicago to my little church to talk to my officers and church members about the rightness of what I had done. And he saved my life. He, he kept me from being ex-communicated, (laughter) you know, out of the life of the church. And, I'll forever be appreciative for that. But those are the days of rage. And then we went through that, and then 1969 was even heightened with the eventual murder of Fred Hampton and Mark Clark on the West Side. And then, of course, the stuff flew. Story_ID: 192299 Speaker 1: At the same time, other things were going on in the society. This relationship that had existed between blacks and Jews through the civil rights era--you know, all through, you know, the March on Washington and all these wonderful things that had happened--working to help us get civil rights--a division came between blacks and Jews, you know, over this whole issue of affirmative action. And the reverse discrimination cases began to get filed-- Speaker 2: The Allen Bakke [Regents of the University of California v. Bakke, 1978]-- Speaker 1: Allen Bakke, you recall that. All this stuff is a part of my developmental years politically in Chicago [Illinois], in trying to communicate with Jews saying "Look, you know, this is not the way we should be going. Affirmative action really is a flooring, it's not a ceiling." Because Jews had experienced a horrible history of quotas. You know, a certain number of Jews could only go to school, and so forth and so on. So, they were afraid of this quota system, and they were arguing against it, alright. And we were saying the quota is not a ceiling, in terms of numbers, but is a flooring by which African Americans can get some compensatory make-up, you know, and move forward. And these were the days of reparation talks, and so forth and so on. So, we were doing all of that; all of that was going on here in the city of Chicago. One thing led to another, and Jews and blacks could not come together around this issue of affirmative action. And then when the lawsuits of Bakke being the--you know, the benchmark of it--when that flew... I mean the relationship between us... pushed us way apart, unfortunately, all right. And all efforts that we put forth in subsequent years to bring the relationship between blacks and Jews back together, all failed. Then, of course, the war between the Palestinians and the Jews broke out, you know. [Yasser] Arafat was a very significant part of all the stuff that was going on in Palestine and Israel and all--and it became a national piece. And then Bayard Rustin and other significant African Americans in leadership at that time went to Israel and met with--tried to meet with--in a reconciling way--between the Israeli factions and the Palestinian factions. And of course it played out in the news like African Americans had sided with Arafat against the Jews. And whew, it just was a real fiery time in Chicago. By then, I had left the local church and taken on the presidency--no, executive directorship of the NAACP [National Advancement for the Association of Colored People] in Chicago. This is '79 [1979] by now, trying to work with this black/Jewish dialogue, trying to hold things together, you know, and it continually gets worse. Um-- Speaker 2: Now, there was a trip that [HistoryMaker Reverend] Jesse [L.] Jackson-- Speaker 1: Well, Jesse was a part of that early time-- Speaker 2: Oh, that trip with Dr. Anderson Thompson, Jesse Jackson-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --and others. Speaker 1: Yeah, and Bayard Rustin was a part of that, too. Speaker 2: That was that same trip? Speaker 1: Yeah, all of us together, and they were-- Speaker 2: Yeah, '79 [1979]. Speaker 1: You know, it was giving the impression that they were actually embracing Arafat, but really what we were trying to do was understand the truth of what was actually going on between the Israelis and the Palestinians. Speaker 2: Now, did you have knowledge of, at that time, of the group of African American Jews, or Israelites? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh yes. Yes. Speaker 2: There may have been maybe twenty different sects. Speaker 1: Ben Ammi [Ben-Israel, formerly Ben Carter]. Speaker 2: Yeah, Ben Ammi. Speaker 1: Yeah, I'm familiar with him. Speaker 2: Ben Carter. Speaker 1: Yeah, (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Ben Ammi went over and they had a big settlement in Israel at the time. Speaker 1: Yeah, in Dimona [Israel]-- Speaker 2: Dimona. Speaker 1: Dimona, Israel, and it still is, and it's doing well. They're striving--Prince Asiel [Ben Israel], you know, who is the person here in the U.S. is a good friend of mine. Alright, now that's one aspect of it. Then you have traditional black Jews, like Ethiopian-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --Hebrew Ethiopian Jews. I'm friends with many of them. Rabbi Caperson [ph.]-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: He is a dear friend and colleague. And then of course you've got the Muslims. The Black Muslims and [HistoryMaker Minister Louis] Farrakhan and I are friends. And that's another problem with the Jewish piece, is that Jews, you know, could not get along with Farrakhan for a number of very abrasive statements he had made to offend them. And so, you know, and my role has always been like a reconciler--how do I bring two warring factions to the common table to work out our differences? And of course, reconcilers oftentimes get shot in the head, or shot in the back, you know. (Laughter) Because sometimes both groups get mad with you. And that's been a real interesting role for me to play in the City of Chicago-- Story_ID: 192300 Speaker 1: The split of that relationship--it seems to me that, at one time, you know, blacks were moving into previously all-Jewish communities, or the Jewish professionals remained and had the businesses in most early black communities as we made the urban migration, you know. But as middle class blacks moved out to the suburbs, so did the middle class Jews, even before them. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: So, there's no, there's not that neighborhood presence anymore. Speaker 2: No, it's not-- Speaker 1: It's independent-- Speaker 2: We lost, we lost that. And I think Maxwell Street [Chicago, Illinois] is a black/Jewish creation. Do you remember? Well, in the old days we used to call it "Jew Town." You know, that's not politically correct, ever again, you know, to do that. But Maxwell Street and that whole market and that whole economic base that was laid there, was a black/Jewish creation. And, and, and of course, we lost it, we lost it. And once you separate like that, you lose connections and you lose relationships. Relationships break, and you become separated from each other, alienated from each other. And then when the larger society--you know, whatever powers that be--who do not like Jews--you know, the powerful, you know, decision-makers who do not like Jews and who do not like blacks--you know, they take advantage of that separation and they manipulate you against each other even more. So, it's been an interesting journey with just the black/Jewish relations. And hopefully, at some point down the road--maybe another generation or two from now--we can re-connect. But given the nature of things right now with the international issues, the global issues, the political issues, the war, and all the other things that's going on--we're not hearing each other at the feeling level, relational level; it's not happening. Speaker 1: But the--would you say that the black/Jewish split is probably just a part of an overall black community split with the white community that's been around for a long, long time? I mean, a lot of black folks don't know a Jew from a Pole, or-- Speaker 2: You know what? You're the second person that--and I felt that people didn't understand me when I say that. When an African American looks at the white community, they're not looking at white ethnics--you know, how diverse that community is. They're looking at the white skin, and they see that as white people, period. And so Jews get, you know, painted with that broad brush, you know, along with the Polish, along with the Irish, along with Italians and everybody else, whose skin is fair. And if you look like a white man, that's who you are. And as a community, you identify them as being there. And I think the--learning this--you know, the diversity of communities and who could possibly be friends of ours in those communities who are similarly impacted and discriminated against because of their ethnicity--who could we begin to form relations with and merge coalitions with? Harold Washington took full advantage of that for his election. He recognized the Polish community was the next largest ethnic community in the city to African Americans. And you may have heard him say many times in his speeches that he was a twenty-year mayor--he was elected for a period of twenty years. And the reason for that is that he had locked down the relationship between the Polish and the African Americans. And that's why he had the ticket that he said, "This ticket is made in Heaven." And what he was talking about was the coalition now the Polish community in naming--[Aurelia] Pucinksi is the daughter--what's her first name? Speaker 1: Aurelia. Speaker 2: Aurelia Pucinski, she was on his ticket. And, and, that was the genius of it. He had wedged this coalition between the next largest white ethnic group in the city. And he did. If he got a loyalty vote just from those two communities, he was guaranteed to be mayor. So, but the problem with that was that those around him, particularly, you know, his closest political colleagues, did not understand it and could not catch the vision of that because of their own dislike for names like Pucinski. And there's a horrible racial political history around that name. And so, when they could not control-- Speaker 1: Roman Pucinski. Speaker 2: Roman Pucinski, yeah. Speaker 1: His posture in City Council was not necessarily pro-black, was it? Speaker 2: Not at all, not at all. And so, the sins of the father, so to speak, gets cast then upon the children. And Aurelia Pucinski had to carry that historical weight. And, and, when she came out on Harold's ticket, this offended many of those who worked with Harold. They could not catch the vision of what he was talking about. Story_ID: 192301 Speaker 1: Now, in terms of Harold Washington. Now, you're head of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] in '79 [1979]? Speaker 2: Seventy-nine [1979]. Speaker 1: Through what time? Speaker 2: Eighty-two [1982]. Speaker 1: Eighty-two [1982]. Speaker 2: Eighty-four [1984]. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, had you been-- Speaker 2: Eighty-five [1985]. It's been so long. (Laughter). Speaker 1: Had you been an active member of the NAACP? Speaker 2: All my life. I was born into the NAACP as a child, and remain a life member, you know, today. That was the group. You can have your deacons--you know, I went to a meeting with my daddy [Willie Martin], my stepdaddy, who was also a Mason, okay. But what we'd do--in the deacon's meeting--you would call the deacons' meetings together. And then you'd join the deacons' meeting and then convene the NAACP meeting. That was those days when the NAACP was not allowed, you know, in the South. And it was, you know, very suspect by the white community as Communist, and so forth and so on. So, we had to meet undercover. So, I was a little guy, but I was a member of the NAACP all my life coming up to Chicago [Illinois]. So, in Chicago I became the executive director of the NAACP in '79 [1979], shortly after Harold Washington had made his trial run for mayor of the city in '77 [1977], remember? Speaker 1: Right, that's right. Speaker 2: Yeah, in '77 [1977]. Speaker 1: Symbolically, sort of. Speaker 2: Right. So, Harold and I were friends. He was like, I was like his pastor in 1976, alright, when he was a State rep [resentative], and when he was a Senator and so forth. So, in '79 [1979], Jane Byrne of course is mayor of the city, and so forth and so on. I'm the president of the NAACP, the executive director of the NAACP, working with Harold in the General Assembly and putting all the legislative initiatives together and lobbying, you know, the General Assembly for certain kinds of issues. In those days, the NAACP had sued the Chicago Board of Education for racial discrimination. And we had this massive desegregation of the Chicago Public Schools [C.P.S.] going on at the same time. Harold was very effective in articulating a lot of those issues around education here in the City of Chicago. The, this is all very thumbnail, a thumbnail sketch of this. So, Harold eventually becomes Congressman, he runs for Congress. And by then I had been, I had left--not left the NAACP, but became pastor of the Progressive Community Church [Chicago, Illinois] in the 3rd Ward where Harold grew up as a child. He knew the church and knew the congregation as a boy. So, I'm pastor of that church and the executive director of the NAACP at the same time. So, we helped to mobilize his campaign for Congress. So, he's elected to the 1st Congressional District in 1980. While he's in-- Speaker 1: That's sort of a revolution in some sense, because-- Speaker 2: Oh, major. Speaker 1: --you've got Harold Washington, and [HistoryMaker] Gus Savage-- Speaker 2: Gus Savage-- Speaker 1: --comes in at the same time. Speaker 2: And on the West Side was [HistoryMaker] Cardiss Collins. Speaker 1: Cardiss Collins, that's right. Speaker 2: And so, it was a powerful thing. We did a lot of community organizing around the three of them, and created all kinds of community tributes and this kind of stuff, to really have a sense of pride. And coalition building, that's what it was all about--building a coalition with whatever white liberals that we could build it with--whatever ethnic groups we could build it with. And this was also the beginning of my relationship with the Bridgeport [Chicago, Illinois] section, all right, during those days--the Italian community, the labor community, which was represented very heavily in the 11th Ward, alright. So, so that was a developing relationship. And then Harold is now on Capitol Hill fighting feverishly for the restoration of the Voting Rights Bill of 1965. Strom Thurmond is chairman of the Judiciary Committee. And Jesse Helms, you know, and all these clowns are really giving him trouble. And we were, the NAACP had this legislative mobilization on Capitol Hill around this whole issue. So, I was organizing strong in Chicago and in the state of Illinois, you know, along with the folks in Washington, D.C. and also in New York [New York]--connected with the headquarters in New York, and so forth. So, we successfully get the Voting Rights Bill renewed, you know, and so forth. Harold comes back home. Jane Byrne is now ready to run for re-election. And he says to me and to a number of other pastors-- I'll never forget the Sunday morning when he said, "Do you think I should run for the mayor of the city again?" And I said, "Man, yeah, of course you should do it." And the challenge was, you know, "If you all can register 50,000 new voters, I'll run." We came in with 200,000 new voters. He said, "Oh, yeah, let's do it." And then the rest is history. Just tremendous campaign, tremendous campaign developed around his election. Story_ID: 192302 Speaker 1: Now, we were talking before--Harold Washington agreed to run after the plebiscites that the Palmers [HistoryMaker Jorja Palmer and HM Lutrelle "Lu" F.Palmer II] held-- Speaker 2: Yeah, and the testing of that first 50,000 voters. "See, if this is possible, then you guys, if you want me to run--you say I should run, show me by bringing in 50,000 new voters." And from that, was kind of a test case. We did 200,000, and like I said, the rest is history. We went from there to do a great thing. Everybody was involved, I mean, everybody. Street people-- as I tell you, the prostitutes gave up their nights with the johns in order to work for Harold. (Laughter). They said, "No action tonight, brother, we've got to get the vote out." And I mean, it was powerful. Everybody was involved. The elderly, I mean, you were not too young or too old-- Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: --to be a part of that people's movement behind him. Black and white, all of us, you know, working for a common goal in those days. If we could just re-capture that moment, you know, in Chicago [Illinois], when Chicago certainly felt united, you know, around the future, and what possible changes we could make in this city to become a true world-class city. Of course, you had the opponents of that, you know, with the Bernard Eptons and the [Richard J.] Daley, you know, machine-- Speaker 1: [Edward "Ed"] Vrdolyak-- Speaker 2: Vrdolyak. Speaker 1: The [Edward M. "Ed"] Burke clan. Speaker 2: The Burkes... I mean you know the alliances, you know, that were formed, you know, to stop it from happening. And, but it happened. I remember--How much of this can--you know, the colloquialisms of Harold--you know, of course he had the King's English. But he also could go to 47th Street on you real quick. (Laughter). And this is what happened. The morning after the election, we went to have this interfaith gathering, you know, with the Cardinal [Joseph Bernardin] and significant religious leaders down at the [Conrad] Hilton Hotel [later, the Chicago Hilton]. It was a breakfast, a unity breakfast, it was called. You know, Daley was going to be there. And so, it kind of painted the picture that everything was going to be all right. Harold is standing in his apartment window, and I'm standing there with him. And we're looking north towards the Loop. And he looks out the window and says, "Damn, I done got my black ass elected mayor of this city." (Laughter). And I said, "Yeah, man, let's go." And we were out the door and down to the hotel where we did have this unity gathering. And all the media was there, and the Cardinal. In those days, Bernardin, you know, was the Cardinal in those days, who I think was a very sensible and righteous man, for the right things. So, we did that. And then from there, we were getting ready for the inaugural address. And Harold made this great inaugural speech and he challenged, you know, the powers that be--mainly the Daley machine operators--you know, for transformation and change. And on the day of the first [Chicago City] Council meeting in May--I'm forgetting the date in May--he had asked me, "Pastor, will you come and do the invocation?" I said, "Oh, man, will I." You know, so I had this great invocation. You know, I met Harold in his office, you know, the fifth floor, which was alien territory for us. And so we come down this elevator in, you know, on the way to the chambers. We go into the chambers. We do the roll call. I do the invocation, praying for peace and unity and harmony and all this stuff in the city. And Harold slams the gavel down, and adjourns the Council. And Burke and Vrdolyak, and all them clowns in that day, leaped and jumped up out of their seats and chairs to take control of the seat. But Harold vacated and went on back up to the--Going back up on the elevator, I said "Man, what are you doing?" He said, "Just pray, Pastor." (Laughter). And we went back to the office, because all hell had broken loose. The media was everywhere. And that's when this thing happened called "Council wars" between Ed Burke, Vrdolyak and his crowd, and Harold Washington and the black aldermen, you know, and the few white liberals who had joined his side. There were some stormy, stormy times. All of 1987, no, '80 [1980]--I'm looking at '83 [1983]. All of '83 [1983], '84 [1984], I mean it continued. Story_ID: 192303 Speaker 1: Then when it came down for re-election in 1987, I repeated the ritual with him [Mayor Harold Washington], and this is a--the day before the election in 1983, April 1983, he came to the altar of the church. He kneeled at the altar--there's a picture of him on the wall with him kneeling at the altar. And I have my hand on his head, anointing him for victory to win. He went and he won. He comes back to the church four years later in February during the primary. He gets ready to kneel at the altar, and I noticed this time he doesn't kneel on both knees. I said, "What's wrong? Why aren't you kneeling right?" I said, "You act like you're in pain." He looks up at me and says, "Oh, no, I'm healthy as an ox." (Laughter). But I knew he was not able to bend that other knee to get down on the altar. I went through the ritual, anointed him, and then of course he wins a second term. But it was clear to me that his body has changed. And the stress and the strain of the prior four years had really taken its toll on him. You know, he had become an old man. He was not--he still had the spirit, a vital spirit, but I could see the deterioration in him. Story_ID: 192304 Speaker 1: Now, out of--when Harold Washington ran for mayor, he made speeches at almost every black church in the city [Chicago, Illinois]. If he just stayed there three minutes, he was in about every one. Speaker 2: Every one of them, brother--storefronts and cathedrals, it didn't matter. Nothing, you know-- Speaker 1: And the white churches, too, right? Speaker 2: Right, everywhere. Speaker 1: Almost everywhere. But, but of all the pastors--and probably a lot of black pastors wanted to be--you know, known as Harold Washington's minister. And I--he wasn't really a churchgoer anyway, from what I understand. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: But from the very beginning, it seems he let everybody know that you were his pastor. Speaker 2: He wouldn't have no one else. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: He (laughter)--when did this happen? I think--because I'd been related to him all along. And I was always a social activist so to speak, politically active, you know. He respected that, all right. And in 1981, I called him at his Congressional Office and said "Hey, listen, I'm getting to leave the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], and I'm going back to the church." And I said, "You know what? You need a pastor, and you need a church home." And his response was, "Well, you'll be the only one that will be my pastor." And I said, "Okay." And then next I was being invested in the office at a church at 48th [Street] and Wabash [Avenue] which was, you know, in the 3rd Ward, which he was very familiar with. He came to my investiture service. Jane Byrne came. Jane Byrne was there, oh, was she there. And [HistoryMaker Lutrelle] Lu [F.] Palmer [II]-- I mean all the enemies and the friends and everybody--because I was friends with everybody. You know, they all knew me, you know. And all these friends and enemies came under one roof. I thought the roof was going to fall in, because all of those folks were gathered under there. You know, you had Lu Palmer in church, you know, and that kind of thing. So, [HistoryMaker] Conrad [Walter] Worrill was there. (Laughter). So, all this was going on, and they all kind of surrounded me for this event. Jane Byrne showed up to do the mayoral greetings, and this stuff. While she's up there, man--'cause you know, she was passing out money to black preachers to buy the vote. She stood there and she said, "Well, Rev. Martin, the winter has been hard." This is April of '82 [1982]--no, '80 [1980], yeah, somewhere back in there, a bad winter. "I want to donate five thousand dollars to you for this wonderful work that you're doing." And my poor members, man, bless their heart. They went up, I mean they, "Oh, what a wonderful thing. Oh Jane, Mayor Jane Byrne." (Laughter). Harold was sitting right down from me, man. And I lean over and I say, "Hey, man, what you going to do?" He looks back and says, "You know, I ain't got no five thousand dollars." (Laughter). I said, "Man, I'm not asking for five thousand dollars, but we've got to do something." I said, "We got to check this." So what he does, when it comes time for him to make his remarks, he gets up and he says "I don't have five thousand dollars to give. But Pastor [HistoryMaker Reverend B. Herbert] Martin [Sr.], I can give my membership to this church." And it was that moment at my investiture I get up, give him the vows of membership, "Do you vow to uphold the church with your time, your talent, and your money?" And he says, "Yeah, I do." (Laughter). And the house goes up again, you know. And so, we checked this ploy of Byrne, you know, to compromise me and my work before my people and all of my friends like Lu Palmer and all the other stuff. But what she does, she goes back to her office and writes a check out in my name anyway and sends it to me, yeah. What I did with the money, I took it-- Speaker 1: In your name instead of the name of the church? Speaker 2: Right. And put it directly in my name, B. Herbert. I took the money, because Harold had this thing, "Take the money, man, but do the right thing with it." I organized the Leon C. Scott Memorial Scholarship Fund in memory of a man in our congregation who loved children and wanted them all to get a good education. And that fund has grown to a place where we are now giving as high as sixty-thousand dollars to students, deserving kids, and get them on through their college work. So, that became a beneficial thing. But those are the kinds of things that were going on around this. And so, we left that place with the powerful desire to elect Harold Washington. That was April of 1982, that's when it was, April of '82 [1982]. The campaign now is in full bloom, organizing all over the place, raising money, campaigning--you know, getting everybody registered to vote, the whole piece. Eventually in April of '83 [1983], April of '83 [1983], with the anointing for victory, he goes out and he wins. And he repeats that in '87 [1987]. Then the eve of Thanksgiving [November 25, 1987], Thanksgiving Eve, he dies. And I'm sitting in my office at the church, and Delores Woods called and said "They just took Harold out of here to Northwestern [Memorial Hospital, Chicago, Illinois], and he looks real sick." So, I make it to the emergency room there. And because I'm clergy, they allowed me in. And there he was, laying on this table. I will never forget that. He was stripped down with these pipes running everywhere, even to his groin. And everybody standing there looking at him. But he was clearly dead. So, I did the last rites over him and walked out. Story_ID: 192305 Speaker 1: Did he [Mayor Harold Washington] ever consult with you about difficulties of the job? And what kinds of things would he-- Speaker 2: Yeah. We prayed together every morning, you know, by telephone. And I knew the issues, I knew what he was dealing with. Not only with the, you know, [Edward "Ed"] Vrdolyaks of the world and the Ed [Edward M.] Burkes of the world, but with his own group--you know, his own team, who didn't understand, you know. And they gave him more unnecessary headaches, you see. Because you couldn't tell Harold how to think. He knew-- he was a powerful thinker, you know, and he knew politics. He was--but he was above politics. He was a statesman. He knew how to do, you know, a deal. He was a Chicago [Illinois] dealer. He knew how to deal in Chicago, and those around him did not know that. They didn't understand his vision. If they subscribed to it, it was in words only, and not in terms of heart commitment. And when he died it manifested itself in division, fights, infighting. People that had worked together for twenty or thirty years, man, turned against each other. So, we watched all of it go down the tube. So my role mainly as a reconciler--healer so to speak. Even the preachers, man, everybody got to talking about who was going to preach his funeral, and as to whether a pastor from 48th [Street] and Wabash [Avenue] had the intelligence to do it. Could he handle this kind of high echelon gathering, you know? But I thank God for people like Ramone [B. Price], his brother, and Dolores Woods, who said "[HistoryMaker Reverend] B. Herbert Martin [Sr.] is his pastor, the only pastor he's ever had. When he was un-churched and everything else, none of you jokers even tried to relate to him. And now all of a sudden you want to reach and grab for the spotlight because he's dead. No, B. Herbert Martin is preaching his funeral." And I will never forget when I arrived at Christ Universal Temple [Chicago, Illinois]--and bless [HistoryMaker Reverend] Dr. [Johnnie] Coleman's heart, because she opened her doors, you know, when it was her policy not to do it, you know, for funerals. She did it because of the spirit of things. Speaker 1: And that was the largest facility in the city. Speaker 2: The largest one in the city. Speaker 1: In the black community. Speaker 2: So, you know, it was there. And I'll never forget when I arrived at her office. And I was met by the presiding pastor, you know, who told me "B. Herbert, you have twelve minutes to deliver your eulogy." And I just simply said, "Thank you, okay." (Laughter). But I knew I was going to have to have more than twelve minutes to talk about that. And I preached. I wrote his eulogy on the back of a brochure that was published on his youth agenda, yeah. So my role--if you listen to the eulogy, there were a number of things I said in there where I was trying to be instructive to the way that we should conduct ourselves--you know, this horrible time of grief and pain, and talking about king-making, and people who felt they had a right to heirship, you know, to his legacy. You know, all of this was going on. And I said "You can't do that now. You can't do that. We've got to band together and move the agenda forward, for which Harold lived and died." They didn't hear that. They didn't hear it. And it went from there to these [Chicago City] Council meetings, you know, where [HistoryMaker Eugene] Gene Sawyer had been named--and the anger and the bitterness which flew--the disrespect, the infighting that took place in the aftermath of that between Gene and Tim [Timothy C. Evans]. It was a very hurtful time for us. I didn't go to the Council sessions. I just sat and watched it on TV. And I watched it, and I watched everything that we had worked for--not just for that four years--but for the last twenty years, man, or more, to go down the tube. Story_ID: 192306 Speaker 1: So I said, I know what I've got to do. That is go back to the hood, go back to the community, start all over again, see--developing leadership, mentoring people, young people. But there was such an anger among us that we couldn't work together. And the children picked the anger up. And shortly after then [the death of Harold Washington], I mean gang activity increased, black-on-black violence, and crime just doubled--I mean double digits, homicides galore. I mean, it was just--it turned--this hatred turned inside, you know, and happened to us at every level. And that has gone on now since 1987. And only within the recent years as we celebrated now the sixteenth anniversary of his death are we beginning to feel some sense of belonging again, you know, that we can talk to each other politely again. But it will take another five or six years perhaps, another whole twenty year period before we can begin to build and coalesce. But it's going to look very different for us politically in Chicago [Illinois]. You know, now with the Hispanic community being what it is, things have changed drastically, you know, for us. Will we ever elect another African American? Possibly, but I believe we will elect a Hispanic before we do that. So, here we are, and past the turn of the century with all of its prophecy and projections about what it's going to look like for us, you know, in this city--reorganizing, reacquainting ourselves with each other, once again trying to develop new leadership--organizations like [The] HistoryMakers becoming a very significant part of how to record what went down, you know, and get the stories of what happened and the memories of what happened, so that we can build on that, you know, and try to teach and train and develop another generation, you know, for us, for leadership in this city. Yeah, the decade of the '80s [1980s], you know, was a powerful decade. It was a very hurtful, painful place. And I don't think I cried about anything--I didn't even cry during--but the memory is painful, man. Speaker 2: You actually are more emotional now than you were... than you appeared to be at the time. You seemed to be very cool at the time. Speaker 1: I had work to do, yeah. And that's the place you have to go in order to provide leadership to people in their time of crisis. You have to go there. Only in the aftermath--in looking back at what happened to us, and the way in which it happened to us, is a very painful thing, you know. And then of course, you go back to the local community and you try to--whatever remnants is left, you know, of the movement--try to piece it back together. Story_ID: 192307 Speaker 1: And this is how I get caught up sometimes, you know, in controversial issues between black community and the white community. And I know in the Bridgeport [Chicago, Illinois] situation, you know, I've got caught up in this controversy with Lenard Clark and-- Speaker 2: He's the young man that was, he was run over in the Bridgeport area on his bicycle? Speaker 1: Yeah, he and Clevon Nicholson, who was a member of my congregation. Clevon was, his family. And they ride over and they get beat--you know, similar to the beating I sustained. It was almost--I mean the recall was there. You know, with my best friend [Paul Turner] I got beat by a white mob, and that kind of thing. Speaker 2: Now, this is not new in Chicago [Illinois]. I know, since I've been here since '77 [1977] it's been-- Speaker 1: No. The racial history of race riots between Bronzeville [Chicago, Illinois] and Bridgeport--See, let me just tell you this. In 1918 [sic., 1919], when these communities were really against each other, and racial segregation was what it was in this city, there was a place on the beach at 31st Street Beach, were black were not allowed to swim. On this particular day in 1918, a young man, not knowing the imaginary boundary, swims into the white Irish boundary, and is stoned to death in the water. A race riot breaks out between these two communities and people are killed and maimed. The communities divide--the 11th Ward from the 2nd Ward--the 3rd Ward I mean--Then eventually comes the Dan Ryan [Expressway], which further alienates and separates the two communities, so there's no real connection, all right. Well, it's not until the racial beating of Lenard Clark did all this memory--psychic memory, corporate memory, comes back to the fore. And all the other racial incidents that's happened since then come back. So I say, look, somebody's got to take some responsibility to manage this anger. The African American community was mad as it could be, and had every right to be mad about it. The folks in Bridgeport were in a turmoil and confusion, you know. And a number of things were going into play. Story_ID: 192308 Speaker 1: See, this is what I'm saying. We don't always understand the diversity of the white community. I did not know the strong relationship--I mean the strong resistance--between Irish and Italians. I didn't have the handles on that thing. But they were there in that same neighborhood, all of them in the 11th Ward [Chicago, Illinois]--all of them white and all of them Irish, okay. And you know, so what happens is, I'm in touch with one of the families whose son is involved in the beating [of Lenard Clark and Clevon Nicholson], all right. And we don't have all the records on how all this stuff happened, man. But I knew one thing. The racial beating had turned into a "get even" between the Irish and the Italians on that side of the bridge that dated back to stuff around Al Capone and all kinds of stuff. Bad stuff, okay. Speaker 2: Now, what--I don't understand what you're saying. You're saying that-- Speaker 1: Okay, there, there is a history--gang history, mob history--bad relations between the Irish and the Italians, all right. Something had gone down in that neighborhood between these two old families. This boy, who was involved in the beating, is seen by the Irish community as an opportunity for payback. So, the police records get all muddled and confused in terms of reporting about who then actually did the beating. And they hang it on the [Frank] Caruso [Jr.] boy, all right. So, this is all stuff that's going on at a local police level investigation and everything. So, you know one thing, you've got this--you're no longer concerned now about justice for Lenard Clark. What you're doing now is getting even for another political issue between the two communities. It was no longer a question of justice for Lenard. Now, that's the confusion over there, all right. Over here it is outright, downright anger at a racial beating of this kid. So, the black community is organizing to march across the bridge to make it known--the dissatisfaction of this kind of activity. Okay, the Caruso family called me and said, "Pastor, something is bad. Something is really wrong with all of this. Can you call us together for prayer?" I said, "Well, I'll try. I can't promise you the outcome of this. Because over here, we all are angry at what this community has done against us." Now, mind you, we're not looking at any kind of stuff between the Irish and the Italians. We don't know about that; we're angry about Lenard getting beat. So, I intervened. I said, "Look, let's not march into Bridgeport [Chicago, Illinois], let's not do that." Because what was happening, they were arming... it was going to be a repeat of 1918 [sic., 1919], really, a race riot. So, intervening--I convinced them not to do the marching and the fighting. Rather, let's take a more reconciling activity. Let's call a prayer meeting between the two communities, and let's have a conversation together. And that's what we worked on doing, yeah. Story_ID: 192309 Speaker 1: Eventually, what we had was an interfaith service, a number of them, to bring these two communities back together and to begin some conversation around healing and forgiveness, and working out the paradigm by which that was to take place, you see. So, we did some good work around that. And eventually what happens is that the families reconcile. Mrs. [Wanda] McMurray, who was Lenard's [Clark] mother, meets with the Caruso family. The Caruso boy [Frank Caruso, Jr.], of course, gets sentenced to eight years for this beating that took place. And everyone who really knows the history and the record of the case, knows that he was scapegoated, you know, by some other dynamics and issues, alright. And the real beaters have not been brought to justice, you see, those who did the beating, all right. So that's how-- But at the end of this service one night--we had packed this place, you know, with people from both communities. At the end of the service, there was a little white-haired woman from Bridgeport [Chicago, Illinois] who looked to be about eighty-five, maybe ninety years old, standing at the altar at the end after everybody cleared out of the sanctuary. And I asked her if she was okay. She says, "Yeah, I'm just remembering." I said, "What is it?" She says, "I'm remembering the last time I was over on this side of the bridge." I said "Well, when was it?" And she says, "1919, that's..." And I said 1918 earlier, but I meant 1919, the year of the race riots. She said, "I went back home with my parents, and I have never been back across here." And she was there for that service. So, that lets me know that some healing did take place, some things did happen good. And eventually Lenard and the Caruso boy, Frank, Jr., meet at the prison house [Sheridan Correctional Center, Sheridan, Illinois], at the penitentiary, and they have an opportunity to meet and talk and reconcile their differences. Mr. [Frank] Caruso [Sr.], the father of the boy who's serving time in jail, literally adopts Lenard as his son, almost--sees him through school and did some other wonderful kinds of things for him. So in terms of the healing piece, at that level, heart-to-heart kind of stuff, it happened. But the danger of all this is that the community feels that because the Caruso boy was sentenced to jail--convicted, tried, convicted and sentenced to jail--that justice had been done. That is not the case. Perhaps in this one instance, it's done. Still, the hatred and the mean-spirited, ill-will between these two communities still exists. Speaker 2: As of-- Speaker 1: It is laying dormant for the same thing to repeat itself later. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: There's a lot of anger in the black community over this whole incident. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And you probably had to bear the brunt of a lot of it yourself from--I remember the radio discussions around this incident. Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. Speaker 2: Now, now, Lenard Clark is still not--I think he's still damaged. He's still damaged from this beating. Speaker 1: Yeah, I don't think he'll ever be-- Speaker 2: He has trouble thinking and-- Speaker 1: Yeah, right. Speaker 2: --form--talking and other things. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: He was beaten in the head. Speaker 1: Right. And believe me, I know what that's like, yeah. Speaker 2: So, it was a terrible thing for him. And in terms of the Carusos--now, there was--I mean, when did you first come into contact with them in the first place? Because people wondered-- Speaker 1: Oh-- Speaker 2: See, the rumor being, as you well know, people said "Well, these are some Mafia people. And they've bought off, you know, the [HistoryMaker] Reverend [B. Herbert Martin, Sr.]; they bought off the courts, they bought--you know, they threatened people--you know, that's how they got over." But there was the two other guys. There was supposed to be three youths out of all of this, right? Speaker 1: Yeah. The [Victor] Jasas boy and [Michael] Kwidzinski, I think, some name like that. Speaker 2: And one of them disappeared I think, and they couldn't find him or something. He's-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --you know-- Speaker 1: Well, you see, what I'm saying is that there are so many unanswered questions about who the actual beaters of the boy was--you know, of Lenard. And you know, there was a horrible time, you know, just of trying to provide leadership during that period. It was very difficult. Story_ID: 192310 Speaker 1: But I understood the source of it, you know. And when you're angry, anger always covers another problem, another wound deep underneath. And African Americans are angry people. And that anger covers another deeper wound, you know. And we will never really be successful at anything if we don't deal with that which lies underneath the anger, you know, which is a deep communal wound. And spiritual leadership tries to address that. But the anger is like the scab on the sore. And if you ever try to work--break through the anger, then you'll get all of the other demons, you know, coming. And bad memories and so forth comes out. And to show you what this is symptomatic of--if [Frank] Caruso [Jr.] had been black and beat Lenard [Clark], as we've seen hundreds and hundreds of times in our own community where blacks kill each other ruthlessly and nothing is said about it--but if it's a white person beating an African American, then immediately it is that piece which is the wounded-ness underneath us. You know, we, we, we respond to that. We cannot respond to our own killing our own, whether it's raping and murdering and slaughtering us--you know, ourselves. But if it's a white person doing it, then we get angry. Speaker 2: Well, I think we get angry in a different kind of way, maybe. Speaker 1: Yes, terribly angry. Speaker 2: But people do march against violence. And they do, they get upset. Speaker 1: Right now, you know--this is the kind of anger it is. Do you remember this car accident that killed a black girl--some black men two or three summers ago? And they lost control of their car over here on Lake Park [Avenue] and they killed a woman, I think it was. And the brothers on the street came and dragged these brothers out of the car and beat them to death? Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: That kind of anger. We hate ourselves. You know, and we've got to get at that self-hatred that lies underneath our anger. You know, because the anger--the anger that we exhibit is only symptomatic of what really ails us underneath. And individuals such as I, you know, who work in this spiritual dimension in trying to provide spiritual leadership--you know, we're constantly picking at that scab. And the people don't want it picked at, because at some point the truth has got be revealed, and we've got to face ourselves as we are, and that we are a deeply wounded people. And we've got to heal, we must heal. Because we pass this wounded-ness on to each succeeding generation. And at some point, it's got to stop. So, that's--it comes out of that Lenard and the Caruso family, they forged some kind of a wholesome relationship where there is a sense of restoration, you know, restorative--that if the father [Frank Caruso, Sr.] actually felt that his boy did this, then the father feels obligated to restore to Lenard's family and to Lenard some restitution. Restorative justice has to take place. We cannot rely on the criminal courts or the State of Illinois to give us justice. They will never do it. Story_ID: 192311 Speaker 1: In terms of the other two kids [Victor Jasas and Michael Kwidzinski] that were involved in this, what's your analysis of why they haven't been convicted of anything? Speaker 2: Because their family lineage is not connected. (Laughter). Speaker 1: And so, they're not Italian? Speaker 2: [Nodding head, no.]. Or even if they were Italian, they were not connected to the family that the fight was between. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Over control of certain things, you know, in this area [Bridgeport, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: But weren't they all students at De La Salle [Institute, Chicago, Illinois], I think? Speaker 2: College students, yeah. I mean, they were all in there together. So, there are dimensions of Chicago's [Illinois] political and racial and ethnic life, you know, that--you know, it's mind-boggling when you get behind it. And sometimes it's not about race at all; it's about money, it's about power. And in this instance it was about retribution, yeah, and who it is that's in control to punish. And at this point, the Irish are in control of the [Chicago] Police Department. Speaker 1: And the [Cook County State's Attorney's] Prosecutor's Office. Speaker 2: Yeah, you name it. There it is. Story_ID: 192312 Speaker 1: So, we've got many things to unearth and to work on. And I'm not sure as to whether we have other men and women interested in this whole area. My interest is different, you know, from a [HistoryMaker Lutrelle] Lu [F.] Palmer [II] or from a [HistoryMaker] Conrad [Walter] Worrill. So, my focus is, how do we heal ourselves as a people, you know, and get underneath the anger? What's making us angry, and how can we use the anger? And I think we should be angry, but how do we use the anger in more creative ways so that we can actually move to a place of real power? Yeah. Speaker 2: Do you think accomplishing political objectives or political victories would do a lot to solve the anger? There's a saying in basketball that a guy on the court who's mad at himself, all he needs is to make his next shot, you know-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --and he's better off, you know. But is that, is that-- do you think that's--? Speaker 1: Nothing is sweeter than victory. (Laughter). And I think one of the problems among us is that we have not been able to celebrate enough victories. We have not been--And Harold Washington indeed was a victory. You know, it was a surprise. You know, I mean it was almost--it was a corporate prize and pride that we had there. And then all of a sudden, once it's removed from us. Then the only thing that we could go to was anger. Because once again, you know, that which we strived to achieve was taken away from us by quote, "powers that be." You know, whether it was a divine intervention from Heaven or wherever, an act of God; or maybe it was the scheming of clever people to--germ warfare, a biological warfare. There are a number of conspiracy theories around it. Speaker 2: Have you ever thought about what that might--you know, that it might not have been just a kind of-- Speaker 1: Uh-huh, right. I didn't see Harold as a potential heart-- cardiac patient. But maybe he was. But it's just that it has never registered right for me. And I cannot make the picture of the man that I knew--I can't reconcile that with the way in which it happened. Story_ID: 192313 Speaker 1: Now, that leads me to an interesting question. I don't think I've ever asked anyone in ministry. But how do black people--how do you as a pastor deal with black folks' paranoia, in a sense? And it's a paranoia based in real fear of consequences that often do occur. So, how do you deal with it? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. We--I think there is an old saying among African Americans which is, "Not to be paranoid in America is abnormal." (Laughter). And that paranoia among us is not an abnormality insomuch as it is understanding our context. It's that we are always on guard to be done in, you know, by the larger community, or to be exploited by it. And so, this paranoia has become almost a way of life and existence, you know, for us. Sometimes it works to our disadvantage, because sometimes it is not about race--it's not about race, but it is about power, class and other kinds of issues. So, I have what I call is a healthy paranoia. (Laughter). And so I, too, am a victim of it, you see, by virtue of my journey and my experience. But what I've learned to do is just trust the integrity of my experience, which may include being paranoid at certain times. And, but it is a--but I think it is a defense mechanism inside of us that lets us know when danger is near. I had to 'x' white women out of my reality, all right, because of some of that. And so when I'm in the presence of white women, I feel the, I feel it--that I just might get killed for being here. It's there, it's in our culture. It's just, it's in our television, it's in our media; it's everywhere there. So, to think that someone is out to get you, it's, I think it's a healthy thing to have in this culture, yeah. And if it's anybody out to get you, you know, it's whitey, so to speak. (Laughter). But Big Mama used to tell me, she said--because I didn't know about Democrats and Republicans, you know. And I said, "Big Mama, what's the difference between a Republican and a Democrat?" Her response was--which took me years to figure it out--her response was "It just takes one a little longer to lynch you." I said, "What are you talking about?" But what she meant that, white power is white power whether it is Republican or whether it is Democrat. You have to understand that, and don't get hung up on party labels. Because when the chips go down, it's going to be white men in charge, yeah. So, I don't get caught up with being party loyal, and that kind of thing. I'm more of a progressive political thinker. Story_ID: 192314 Speaker 1: Tell us about CHA [Chicago Housing Authority, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Okay. During the [Mayor] Harold Washington years, of course, Harold inherited the problems of Chicago Housing Authority. Speaker 1: Which were tremendous. Speaker 2: Tremendous problems, man. Speaker 1: And Charles [R.] Swibel had been the head of the CHA board. Speaker 2: Swibel, then followed by a number of other political hacks, you know, who were in there. And then finally we get [HistoryMaker] Renault Robinson, who tried to make some powerful changes. Earl Smith [ph.], who tried to change things. But it was a bureaucracy that was entrenched to take care of itself, all right. And the elevator system, you know, and the contracts with it, mainly flowed out of the community into the Irish dominated unions and so forth. Speaker 1: Yeah, and that was always the charge--that the huge maintenance contracts-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: --the CHA budget being huge-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --with enough money supposedly to fix everything-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh-- Speaker 1: --but never-- Speaker 2: Never could get it fixed. Speaker 1: --never could get anything fixed. Speaker 2: Because when they went up to fix it, they fixed it just good enough to last a few days, and then the same problem was back, see. They never repaired anything, they never fixed anything. They just put maybe a little screw there that would eventually come loose itself, and then they'd go back to do it again. So you kept the contracts going and you kept the money flowing. Outside of, of course, the community, Harold came in with an agenda to transform CHA by empowering the tenants to--you know, to become laborers and craftsmen and workers and this kind of thing. That was very intimidating to those people who had been benefactors of those contracts. So-- Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: That was a big problem, they had a major problem. So, I didn't want none of that to happen. So, when I came as chairman of the Housing Authority, the deferred maintenance was estimated at $1 billion. The deferred--now these are items that don't even get touched, $1 billion. So, I mean the place was in total decay, all right. Then it was a political football, you know. Because there were 244,000 people or more, you know, who had been used historically by the [Richard J.] Daley machine to be loyalists to the Democratic Party, all right. So, you had all of this mixed in together. But the services for the tenants was not being delivered. The big battle between HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development] and the CHA continued. And when Harold came in, he issued the mandate that we work out a relationship with HUD in Washington, D.C. so that we could begin the transformation of the Chicago Housing Authority--repair it and do what we needed to do with it: Close down those units that could not be repaired, start a program for replacement housing, and this kind--all of this good stuff--scattered sites and so forth. Story_ID: 192315 Speaker 1: I was appointed and became chairman [of the Chicago Housing Authority, CHA], but I am a people's advocate. I am not a executive CEO [chief executive officer] of something. That is not my role. So, and Harold [Washington] knew this--and that I would change things in favor of the tenants, and not in favor of the administration. Neither would I put up with HUD's [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development] paper war with CHA [Chicago Housing Authority], and that's what was going on. Got a paper war between the regional office and the Chicago Housing Authority--they spent their time shooting paper, you know, from one side of the town to the other one. So, I said, well this is crazy. So, what I did--and this is shortly after Harold was dead. We had these commissioners who were just there in name only, you know, with the exception of Artensa Randolph, the sister in the wheelchair, boy. And we were gallant soldiers and fighters. So what I did, I told her. I said, "Listen, I know I'm supposed to be the chairman of this board. And I know that's a highly visible office." I said, "But you know what? This takes another action." So I went to HUD at 5:00 a.m. in January, one January morning, and tied myself with a log chain to that door, to make them shake loose $32 million in organizational funds so that we could begin--we could stop the tenants, and Ida B. Wells [Homes, Chicago, Illinois] at this time, from wading around in water ankle deep in January, man, and they're playing paper games--shooting paper, memorandums from HUD over to CHA So, okay, direct action is needed. I go and tie myself to the front door of the office building at 300 South Wacker [Drive], wherever that is over there. And, and when daylight comes, here I am with this log chain. And the tenants have placards saying, "HUD, the name of HUD is mud," whatever it was. And then all hell breaks loose in the city. The media is there to capture this stuff. It goes all over the country immediately. Sam [Samuel] Pierce, who is the HUD--who was the head of HUD in Washington [D.C.], calls Gertrude Jordan who was in the regional office where I had tied myself, and said "What in the hell is going on?" She said, "This crazy preacher has tied himself to the front door of the building." And of course, I was trespassing, all right? Because I went--I was barring the public way, so the police will arrest me. And they issued this thing. But if I had got arrested, then all the 224,000 tenants that I'm out there protesting for--you know, to get the money to repair their buildings--would have showed up down there. So, they negotiated with me and they sent the $32 million. But I had done something that was completely non-traditional. I had done something that was appropriate publicly, you know, as a public person, and stepped outside of the role of chairman of the board. And so then my time was limited, I was a problem child. The [Chicago] Tribune called me crazy and out of my mind, and all kinds of stuff. All kind of bad editorials were written. But I had achieved what I was after, and that was to at least get enough money to stop those families from wading in water ankle deep in their apartments. Then I was moved. I left the CHA, of course in those days. Speaker 2: Well, now who was mayor [of Chicago, Illinois] when you left the CHA? Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker Eugene] Gene Sawyer-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --under great pressure from, of course, you know, his sponsors. Story_ID: 192316 Speaker 1: And then I landed then--[HistoryMaker Eugene] Gene [Sawyer] didn't know what to do with me, how to handle it. And I landed from there, and he said, "Look, I need help over here with the [City of Chicago] Commission on Human Relations." But I was going to be a problem for the [City of Chicago] administration wherever I went. Because then they made me chairman of the Human Relations Commission. Then I said "Well, okay, I'm not going to sit here and just get paid to be a ceremonial head of this organization. Let's organize these ethnic groups in the city [Chicago, Illinois] so we can have some relationships going." That became a political threat to [Richard J.] Daley, because he could not have me organizing all these ethnic neighborhoods. What am I going to do with that kind of power? That's the issue. It wasn't my intent to run for mayor; that was the furthest thing from my mind. I just wanted to organize this thing so that we could break down some of this racial hatred, you know, and misunderstanding, you know, and create some integral harmony--you know, have a great city of brotherly love and sisterly affection, see. But that became a problem. And the initiatives that I sent, you know, to him, he rejected them. And I sent him my resignation, yeah, and I left. And I've been back in the hood since '89 [1989], 1989-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --organizing. Story_ID: 192317 Speaker 1: Now, one of your initiatives is One Church One Child. Speaker 2: One Church One Child. Yeah, One Church One Child. Well, we try to be sure--we're working with foster care to try to get these 30,000 children, African Americans mainly--you know, homes, you know, where they can grow up and become productive and help their children as citizens. So, that has worked somewhat. We've got more African Americans involved in adopting, you know, foster--bringing in the children in both foster care as well as adoptive parents. So, that's been going good. Another thing that I'm really working on is this whole recidivism problem and incarceration of young black males and women out of our community into all of these new state-of-the-art prisons that they've built across Southern Illinois to become the economic base of these dying white neighborhoods, see. And that's what's going on. And now these kids go and they stay five years, ten years, or what have you. And then they come back to the neighborhood without any kind of skill, any kind of connection to family, all right. So, I've been working to put in place in our neighborhood--and hopefully it'll be a model for the other neighborhoods as well--how do we help these ex-offenders to re-enter the community in such a way we can find them the basic subsistent kind of thing so that they won't repeat the problem that sent them there in the first place? So, criminal justice is a major issue, you know, for us, and how we correct that problem. Housing is a major problem, as CHA [Chicago Housing Authority, Chicago, Illinois] is being demolished. Where is the replacement housing for people who are looking for homes? Mothers with children--So we've done some replacement housing. We've built some housing, kept them affordable, you know, so that they can be rented out at affordable rates. Then we do the emergency kinds of things like Feed the Hungry [ph.]. We've got five hundred families on our list that we feed. You know, and it's not changing. Welfare reform said that we would move people from welfare to work. It has not happened. People are in worse poverty after the welfare reform than they were when they were on welfare. And they're showing up at the churches' doors. They don't have nowhere else to go. So we have to feed them, clothe them, and find temporary housing and do all of this, you know, for them. Then I can go on down the list with what I call the raw data of human need--you know, that through the church we try to address every day. So, that's what I'm doing, man--let alone education, employment, joblessness. And then you got the regular human stuff--people die, you got new funerals, you got to counsel the grieving. You've got to be available for young folks who fall in love and want to get married. (Laughter). So, it's just all of it is there. And I got young children who got run over by a car last night. A little six-year old girl walked out into the street. Her twelve year old brother saw her and pushed out of the path of the car, and the car ran over him. And so, both of them are at Wyler Hospital at the University of Chicago [Hospital, later the University of Chicago Medicine Comer Children's Hospital, Chicago, Illinois]. And then I got people, you know, just hurting everywhere. And I'm still interested to see how we can be politically active and politically astute; train people to become citizens, you know, rather than just moving from day to day purposefully trying to do a nine to five job; investing their lives in a way that they can impact the lives of other people, yeah. Speaker 1: So, this community [Bronzeville, Chicago, Illinois] here, too, has experienced an economic resurgence with higher income people moving in and rehabbing homes. And I mean this beat over here, I noticed just a few years ago there are many highly intelligent, highly trained people in the community as it changes, you know, from--you know-- Speaker 2: It's a hopeful sign, it's a good sign. You know, because the community is being restored, you know, and so forth. I think what has happened is that we did not solve the problem of poverty, we only displaced it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We displaced it. Story_ID: 192318 Speaker 1: What is your philosophy of religion? What's your theology? Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: I mean, I guess-- Speaker 2: Well, coming out of the background, you know, that I came out of, where denominationalism was not an issue, you know--for us, if you were a Christian, then, whether you were a Methodist or Baptist or what have you, was irrelevant, all right. Now, what that also did, since we were a part of an area where the Native Americans impacted our culture, we picked up on some of the Native American spirituality. You know, as I alluded to earlier, there were some of those rituals and things that were practiced within our community [Mound Bayou, Mississippi] and within our family. So, you sort of come away from that not as a purist, you know, in terms of being what pure Protestantism talks about. That's not what we ascribe to. So you come up with this Universal--it's almost like the Universal Unitarian--Universalist-- Speaker 1: Unitarians. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, okay, but not quite that, but certainly holding to the truth that denominationalism is insignificant, you know, so long as you believe in a certain body of truth, all right, about God the Creator, and so forth. So, over the years I sort of crafted a kind of theology that is patterned after Jesus, the man, the person Jesus, more so than get hung up with the trappings of traditional Christianity with all of its luggage and baggage--you know, of racism and the patriarchal nature of the church and all this, where some people are included and other people are excluded and that kind of the thing, that history. So, I found that holding to Jesus as a model for my pattern of work, my life--following his teachings and his example--out of that, I have sort of created this theological view of the world, you know, that God is creator of it, you know, and that everybody on it as far as the truth is concerned are connected in his family, the human family, all right. One thing that God did not do was to create a religion. That is something we human beings did. We created that. And in creating that, we also created -isms around it. And we created all kinds of distortions around it--exclusivism and all kinds of philosophies and views about who were truly God's children and who were not. So, I don't ascribe to any of those traditional forms to the point that they determine my world view, all right. Looking through the eyes of Jesus helps me to form my theology--my Christology and my theology through which I operate. So, I come up then with the paradigm of love, l-o-v-e, universal love. That's my approach, unconditional love, that's my approach. It doesn't matter to me whether you're male, female, you're black or white, rich or poor, educated or uneducated. You're my brother or you're my sister. And it is my task and my honor to work with you and to serve you, and so forth. I believe that love is God's one item agenda. And both the Old and New Testament demonstrates, above all things, God's love, and that Jesus Christ is the best expression of the love of God to us, and that he comes to reveal, above all things, God's love for humanity and to restore us back into a good relationship with God. So the one item then becomes love, l-o-v-e, and learning how to love, the capacity of loving. So, out of that basic foundation is fundamental to everything I do, that is foundational. And everything is based and grounded in that, and I don't compromise it, even if there are times when I'm having difficulty in dealing with somebody, you know, who I'm supposed to be in a loving relationship--not mean--necessarily an intimate loving relationship--but social relationships, and so forth and so on. Like white racists, you know, I don't agree with their views, all right? But at the same time, I'm compelled to love that person because he is a part of the human race. He may be operating at another level of consciousness, you know, another level of awareness--maybe operating out of ignorance, you know, or what have you. But still I'm obligated to try to redeem that person, you know, from that vantage point--from that view, world view. And that's not easy, it's difficult. Jesus said, "Love your enemies. Do good to them that persecute you." So, it's always the whole principle and strategy of love. How do you turn your enemy into a friend? Or how do you take away, you know, the defense so that people can actually relate one to another on a mind-to-mind, heart-to-heart basis? So, that's sort of how I approach all of it. Story_ID: 192319 Speaker 1: It was hard learning to love, still is. It's hard to love unconditionally. Yeah, that's not an easy task. But that is the reason why we are manifested in this reality in this physical world--is to learn how to love, yeah. Love is the main agenda item. And if we can love one another the way God loved us, to create us and bring us into this world, then we'll get rid of poverty; we'll get rid of powerless; we'll get rid of disease and all the other enemies, you know, to humankind. We could get rid of it. Selfishness and greed will leave, you see. And we can create a world where there's not an unfair disproportionate sharing of wealth, you see. It would be--there would be no such thing of America's war on Iraq if the principle of love ruled, all right. But in reality, that is not the case. So, we have to get to our government leaders. We have to teach transformation, you know, so that our leaders will move into levels of power like that. They will learn that the way of the future has to be a way of peace, and not war and violence and death and destruction. And our technology, our science, can then be used to make life--the quality of life-better for the globe, and not just for a few. So, that's sort of where I'm coming from. And that's the way I teach, teach around that. Anyone who comes into the life of the local congregation [Progressive Community Church, Chicago, Illinois] where I am, one of the first things we tell them, you know, you've got to drop your defenses. You know, because here we're creating a community where everybody is on the same level. You can have a Ph.D. [degree], you can have-- you can be a medical doctor, lawyer, or whatever you are. But when you walk through the doors of this family, this spiritual household, you are a brother or a sister. There's no big "Is" and little "yous" and all of that. So, we have quite a cross-section of people as a result of that. And I think believing the way I believe--that's my motive, that's what drives me--I'll always be sort of out there pushing in the community for people to be unified, you know, to come together. Let's promote harmony. Let's create a community where we can all share, you know, the good of this community beyond race, beyond gender, beyond lifestyle. Because now we've got a big battle many times in the community and in the church over lesbians and gay people. And some folks look at gay people as some strange oddity. And I think all of us through our homophobic reactions have done this to people. So, the church, then has to become a place where everybody's welcome. Nobody's denied, it's not an exclusive club. Story_ID: 192320 Speaker 1: In the black community today, we have a lot of religious expressions that we did not have before. You mentioned before that you have good relationships with the Hebrew Israelites, and with the Muslims. Speaker 2: Uh-huh, uh-huh. Speaker 1: Do you, do you think then that--I mean, I know in the old days Christians used to always say you have to--the only way to salvation is-- Speaker 2: --through Jesus. Speaker 1: --through Jesus Christ. And if you don't do that, you're not-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --you're really wrong. Speaker 2: Yeah. And I think it's that kind of exclusive language, you know, that is offensive to--you know, when you want to have a multicultural or interfaith dialogue. It's that, well, yes, it's okay if that's my--if that's my doctrine, if that's my dogma, if that's what I'm coming out of. It's fine, for me, you know, to be a Christian. However, if I'm talking to you, a Muslim, then that is not the case. I have to find you and dialogue with you where you are in your tradition. And so, rather than fighting whether I'm right, or you're right or wrong, what we do is find room where we can share the value of each other's faith. There are strong points in Christianity, there are strong points in Islam, and there are strong points in Judaism. So, how do we take these strong points and build on them, and build a community that can respect Judaism that can respect Islam that can respect Christianity? And we're not there yet. We're on our way, I hope, to create that kind of community. For me to say Jesus is the way, is the only way--as for Christians, yes, it is. But not so for a Muslim, not so for a Jew, you see. And I think that's where we have to learn to find a place or space where we can grow together. Now, and then these three religions that we're talking about--Judaism, Christianity and Islam--we all share common faith ancestors, see. Christians and Jews and Muslims go all the way back to Prophet Abraham. That's our, that's at the faith--our founding father of the faith. We all share that. So, we have to emphasize those things that we do share in common. Speaker 1: Now, is it tougher when you have to deal with African-American Buddhists or African-American (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, and-- Speaker 1: You've got the Temple of the African Community in Chicago [Chicago, Illinois]-- Speaker 2: Yeah, right. Speaker 1: --and other formations that are-- Speaker 2: There are any number of diversity of expressions of faith. And I'm a Christian, unapologetically a Christian, or a follower of Jesus. And I like that better. See, I am a follower of Jesus. I follow his life, I follow his teachings. But that does not say I cannot understand and appreciate the value of teachings of Buddha, or Krishna, you know, in Hindu, and certainly Muhammad, and in Judaism, teachings of the Torah. I can find all kinds of wonderful places of agreement. So, I think it's where we choose to disagree. And I think those are the lines where we don't have to create another war, a religious war, around the areas of our difference. But those things that we hold in common, let's build on those without trying to say I'm right, you're wrong; I'm the only one... my group is going to heaven and you're going to hell. That's not our judgment, that's God's place. See, God not did create Islam, he did not create Buddhism--he didn't create none of these "isms." He simply said that the word is "love." He created us to be on this earth together, to share and experience it and to give God the glory for it, you see. But we create all these areas of divisiveness and separation, and magnify the differences among ourselves rather than finding ways in which we can work together and live together. And that's my, that's the nature of my work. That's what I do seven days a week, twenty-five hours a day, (laughter) every day of the week of my life. Story_ID: 192321 Speaker 1: We always ask this question of ministers. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: It's one of our favorites. What do you think of the mega-churches? Speaker 2: (Laughter). The mega-churches. (Laughter). What, what, are they? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The huge congregations, with the television audience-- Speaker 2: (Laughter)Certainly. I know--yeah, that's right. Speaker 1: --you know. Speaker 2: I can, I can assure you of this. I have no desire (laughter) to pastor one. But you're right. I think with the advance of technology, with the advance of radio and television and so forth, people have been able to market, you know, their particular stances--religious stances, spiritual stances and so forth, and market it to people in such a way that the marketing schemes--and if you market something good in the U.S., you know, you always can find some consumers for it. And that's what's been happening. I am not a mega-church type person. Speaker 1: You wouldn't want to have a congregation of-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --a hundred thousand people? Speaker 2: How are you going to keep up with them? Shoot, I have twenty-two hundred and I can't keep up with them. You know, I'm the kind of pastor who likes to be in touch with his people. I don't want ten layers of management between me and my members, you know. (Laughter). I've got to be able to know people by name. I have to know about their children, you know, the family situation and so forth. I need to know them. I need to know their heart, and they need to know my heart. And you cannot do that if you've got thousands and thousands of people and the best way that you can communicate with them is through video and other means of technology. Whereby, I'm glad that that technology is there for us to communicate, there is nothing better than face to face, hands-on, you know, human touch in the lives of people right now that's needed. I think more than anything in the world is that people need to feel that they're cared for, you know, they need to know that they're loved. And the pastor represents that, you know, of all things. We still are given the privilege of being viewed as the priest who stands before the congregation and God. And through us, you know, it comes. And not to be able to touch that in a real way, to share it, it's unfortunate. And I think that's one thing the mega-church takes away. It takes away the human touch, you know, between the clergy and the laity and that human involvement. Yeah, it makes the clergy a CEO [chief executive officer] of a corporation--I mean a major CEO, he's running a corporation. And everything is about selling tapes and books and videos and all that, you know. It's not about, you know, me coming and saying, "Brother [Larry] Crowe, how are you doing? Tell me how you're feeling, what's happening? Do you need me to help with something?" And there's no way for that to happen with the mega-church movement. Now, I know that they're organized in such a way where, you know, certain ministers take responsibility for certain key areas of ministry for the church. But that's not like what African Americans are accustomed to. African Americans are accustomed to being with their pastor--you know, being a part of the life of the family, of the school, the community and so forth. Then, too, some of the youngsters are happy with that. The mega-church leadership is now like major celebrities. They are like, you know, the Michael Jordans in the sports. Or they're like Babyface [Kenneth Brian Edmonds], you know, in the entertainment industry, or Michael Jackson. They're celebrities, and they're treated with celebrity status, you know, wherever they go. So I mean they're removed of the reality, the daily reality of their people that they're supposed to be taking care of--the souls of the people, they're removed from it. And it's become a big business. The mega-church is a big business. It's millions and millions of dollars. And if I'm pastoring a hundred thousand member church, then that puts me in this echelon where I can just demand--if you invite me to come to your conference, then I want you to pay me fifty grand [$50,000] up front before I stand before your people and speak to you. And I think that's, that is not what the Gospel of Jesus is about. It is not about money. It's not about prestige. It's not about power. It's not about being a celebrity. It's about being a servant, and how you serve people and take care of their needs, yeah. Story_ID: 192322 Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, the mega-church movement for me is not a good movement. I think it's a trend right now that is going on in our culture, and a trend that will end and that the local church context will have to pick up. Like my little congregation, we're going to have to pick up the casualties that's left in the aftermath of the church, mega-church movement, yeah. People are going to be disillusioned, mislead. I tell the members of my church who go to these mega-church conferences and conventions. I mean, man, they pay air fare-- let's say they're going to have something in Atlanta [Georgia]--the air fare plus hotel, plus a week of lodging and food and all this just to go and have a few minutes of emotional catharsis--buy tapes, buy books, and then come back to me. And if they get sick, I'm the one who's going to take care of them. If they die, I'm the one who's got to take care of the bereavement of them. See, they can't call [HistoryMaker Bishop] T.D. Jakes. They can't call Creflo Dollar. They've got to call [HistoryMaker Reverend] B. Herbert [Martin, Sr.]. But yet, the thousands of dollars that they had to spend to go to the conference was taken from the local context, where we could use it to buy food and to fill and stock the pantry, this kind of thing. So, you get some strange kinds of things going on. I can go to any of members' homes, and I find books and tapes and videos and all this stuff from all of these conferences they attended. But they haven't done anything to help transform a person's life, nothing. Because that personal touch is not there. What you can hear on a video or a tape is removed from the real situation. They've got to call me, "Pastor, I'm feeling bad, can we talk?" "Yeah." Two o'clock in the morning, can they call T.D. Jakes? No, no. (Laughter). They can't do that. So, I think the mega-church movement is something. And not just T.D--I love T.D. Jakes and I love Creflo Dollar. I love all these men, I think they've done a great work. But in terms of them taking care of the needs of the people that is not happening. Story_ID: 192323 Speaker 1: Church today, black church especially, is becoming increasingly African in its superficial ways and in spiritual ways too, in terms of black history is more a part of the church now than it ever was, you know, especially in the large denominations like the Church of God in Christ, United Methodist, Episcopal Church, and the Catholic churches. They celebrate Kwanzaa in church and they do special rites of passage ceremonies in church, and things that were never done, you know, twenty or thirty years ago. Preachers, most preachers today have a Kente mantel on, even in the storefront churches. You know, now you have in recent years been going to Africa. West Africa is one of your favorite places to visit. What is that connection now? And how is that transforming the church and how we view ourselves as a people? Speaker 2: You know, I think one of the things that has happened--even though in the earlier years in the founding of the African American church--that it did get trapped in this paradigm that the Eurocentric view of Christianity was the correct view, and it stayed trapped in that for many, many years. However, along with that, we never lost our African-ness. You know, it may have been underneath all this Eurocentric doctrine and structure and so forth. But let me give an example. We learn to sing Eurocentric music, the great anthems for instance. Let's just take one, let's take [George Frideric] Handel's 'Hallelujah' Chorus. You know, it's a great achievement if you learn to do that, and do it well. However, if you wanted to move me, though, you've got to sing some Thomas Dorsey, you see. So, we, we--that meant that the African heart and soul and feeling is expressed at a whole 'nuther level in the church. Do the anthem, do it well. But that's a performance, you know. But after you do the anthem and do it well, then do "Precious Lord, take my hand. Lead me on and let me stand." And that's where you meet me in my soul. That's when I can respond to my real true spirit, spirituality. So, these dual kind of examples have existed in the black church all along. So there's always been that ethos of African-ness in them, it's always been there. However, it's subdued, it's been subdued. And I think in the last twenty years I would say, there's been this recovery of an African consciousness, especially since the 1960s--so, this recovery of African consciousness. And those of us who could afford the journey back to the continent to begin to study and to recover some of the African traditional spirituality, we've done it. And we have brought back, hopefully, the best of that, you know, to our local context in America. So, as Africans in the Diaspora, we are beginning to connect back to the indigenous people on the continent. So, that's going to enrich, you know, what we do here. We will share with them the uniqueness of the African American experience, and they will share with us the African traditional experience. So, this cross-fertilization will strengthen both the spiritual communities on the continent as well as those in the diaspora. Story_ID: 192324 Speaker 1: There is one danger in it. This is spiritual work, and there are spiritual forces that are not positive. As you know, in America there are spiritual forces in this country that are not positive. There are Satan worshippers here, you know, and they follow a certain pattern. As a matter of fact, the Nazi party, the Ku Klux Klan and others are close to that kind of a demonic thought. And they actually can kill people, thinking they're right. There are ritual killings, and they're thinking they're right. And some of them do it in the name of the Lord, you know. But we know that that is not of God, it is not of God. Also on the continent, there are those pockets of spirituality, you know, that are destructive. And if you don't know the difference in that--if you don't have the teaching and the wisdom of how to move into these different places and what kinds of spirits that you're dealing with, you can easily wind up bringing back into your home, into your church, you know, very negative forces--energies--spiritual energies. And that takes wisdom; that takes foresight; that takes a level of conscious and understanding of how to work that through. Idolatry, for instance is a major area. But everything cannot be dropped under this title. It's idolatry. Let's take libation, a form of libation. For instance, who do you pour the libation to? See, are you pouring the libation to a demon, or are you pouring the libation to the Creator, you see? And, and, and there are those forces. There are--in one section of Ghana, it is very clear that the people practice, you know, demon worship. That's where they are with it, and you can tell the difference. Let me tell you where I went recently. I got a picture of it. I went to the Temple of Python in Benin [Ghana]. Benin remains 99 percent voodoo, all right? And you can walk into that place, and you can tell the difference instantly between light and darkness that's there. When you worship a snake, you see, that's--that would--you are not to worship a creative thing. You are to worship the Creator, you know. But the python snake is what they worship and what they adore, you see. And that's the focus of the full attention of their energy. So, it's a strange, strange power there that you don't want to bring back here, you know, and teach that to your people. And then you can go on and extrapolate other instances, you know, for it. But I have connected with the spiritual community, you know, there in El-Mina [Ghana]. They were not necessarily Christians, you see. But they weren't demon worshippers either. They had a strong spiritual tradition. Story_ID: 192325 Speaker 1: --There are spiritual forces, you know, that you consider operating in darkness, through the powers of darkness. They're there, or evil or demonic, those forces. And they're-- Speaker 2: I know we have this language thing, as was pointed out in the sixties where everything that is bad, is dark. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: You know-- Speaker 1: Well, what the thing is, that's not what I'm talking about. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: It has nothing to do with skin color. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: Because we know that evil is manifest in some very light-skinned people, (laughter) and it has nothing to do with gender. It has nothing to do with ethnicity or skin color. It's human nature, you know, that this operates through. And, and I think what has happened, is when we talk about good and evil--and the most recent example to me is our president, you know, Mr. [President George Walker] Bush, you know, who has actually labeled some other countries as the "axis of evil." And that his mission--he sees his mission is to get rid of evil, and to track down the evil-doers. You know, what I'm saying is to kill them, you know, and so forth--to track them down at the OK Corral and so forth. (Laughter). The--and I think the problem with this is that he does not understand how capricious evil is, and how subtle it is. I can decide that you're evil, and I'm going to--because I'm good--I'm the guy with the white hat, so to speak--I'm coming after you to do you in. I can get rid of you because you're an evil guy. The force of evil--because it's a spiritual force, it can convince me that I'm right to the point where I want to destroy you. What happens is that I become the evil that I'm trying to destroy. Speaker 2: Because I'm trying to destroy--because you're trying to destroy some other being? Speaker 1: Right, that's right. It is not my place to kill or to murder and destroy. It is my place to try to find a way in which we can share at a level where we can create peace between us. But for me to go the extra step to wipe you out because I have more money and I have a bigger gun, you see... What happens is that evil, since it is a spiritual force, decides to enter me. And I see you as the enemy now that I've got to wipe out. So, I have become really the evil that I deplore, that I see in you. So, and I think this is what has happened with our leadership at that level--it's that we do not see our own evil because it's in us. We're looking out there someplace. It is within us. And therefore, we can go on these missions to destroy other people that we label, who are different, label as evil. And I think this is a large part of Mr. Bush's thinking. It's that he has really become the evil that he is trying to destroy, and he doesn't recognize it. Therefore, he can bomb whole nations after [Osama] Bin Laden, one guy--can bomb and wipe out Iraq, looking for Saddam Hussein, you see, and then put at risk thousands of lives of innocent young Americans, see, doing the same thing. And feel that he's right in doing so because he is stamping out evil. He's on a mission to stamp out evil. He's after weapons of mass destruction. And the biggest seller and manufacturer of weapons of mass destruction is America; we're the ones doing that. And the only commodities--and just think of this. We are the only nation that exports human flesh and human bodies, you see, in terms of the world economy. We police the world. So, we send our military, we send our guns there to protect our interests. We do little of exporting goods and food and other things to other nations. What we export is war. So, we've become a nation who claims to be a godly nation, or a Christian nation. But in reality, we've become the fear of all the world. We are a super power with power to destroy anybody. So, I'm thinking of what we--a theological view here... and what is happening to us now, is that the church, which should be a prophetic voice helping our government leaders to focus right, we're silent, too silent. And our voice is anemic, and we're not doing much good for the nation, for the mind of our--for the spirit of our country. We're too silent. At this point, Mr. Bush is like the Roman emperor, the Roman Empire. And we've seen it. And in history, when you become the world's super power, as Rome was, as Greece was, as Great Britain was at one time--the world's super power--you are on the verge then of total collapse. Because you become arrogant, you become prideful, and you cannot see. And the word says, "Pride goes before a great fall." And when Mr. Bush stood before the United Nations and told them, "I don't need you. I can do this myself," because we have the biggest gun, the more fire power and the money to do it with. Story_ID: 192326 Speaker 1: Let me ask you. Now, we were talking about African religions and African traditions being reclaimed. Tell me about your trip to El-Mina [Ghana]. Or your trips to El-Mina, 'cause you've been there more than once. Speaker 2: Several times, yeah. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: The journey was two or three levels for me. Number one was to intentionally reconnect with the mother continent, and to begin to build relationships with real people there. You know, I wanted to get names, addresses, villages. I wanted to, you know, put a face on the mother continent for me. I had done enough research to find out that my ancestors came from the West Coast, between Ghana and Nigeria. That's a big section. So, since I could not locate it directly, I went to El-Mina, you know, to the slave castles of El-Mina. Speaker 1: That's Ghana, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, in Ghana. And there a family in El-Mina adopted me; they welcomed me. They adopted me, and they gave me my family name. My name is Kojo Oyeadizie, which means a man of peace, one who resolves conflicts, and creates order. (Laughter). And when they gave me this name-- Speaker 1: Now, you're going to have to spell that for us, too. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Okay, I'll spell it for you. Speaker 1: Kojo, I think is Kojo Speaker 2: Kojo Oyeadizie. Speaker 1: How do you spell that? Speaker 2: O-Y-E-A-D-Z-E-Y-I-E. Speaker 1: I-E, okay, all right. Speaker 2: Y-Z-A--man of action, man of peace, one who creates order. See, for them, naming is very important. And after going through my rites of passage, I came down for my naming ceremony. And this is the name that they gave me after they looked up my birth date. My birth date is December 28, 1942, but I didn't know the day on which I was born. They found out, and then so my name is Kojo, which means "Monday born." And then they added this other piece to it based on the heavens, you know, their reading of the stars and so forth. And so my mission, my purpose on this earth then is to be a man of peace, one who creates order and settles disputes. And when I said, "Well, hey, this is what I've been doing all my life." When they gave me my name I said, "I've been doing this all my life." And they said, "Yes, the only problem, you didn't know who you were." (Laughter). "You know why you're doing it, now you know." And then the instruction is, "Now that you know your purpose, you have no excuse not to live it out," yeah. And so I became a part of that family. I'm a member of the Asona clan, and a part of the tribe that's there. It's a fantastic experience I had with them, that whole rites of passage--I mean receiving the marking, the tribal marking-- Speaker 1: Now, are they associated with the Ashanti or Afanti [Fante], or-- Speaker 2: Yeah, the Fante. Speaker 1: Fante, okay. Speaker 2: The Fante is the tribe, and Ashanti is the clan. And the Fante and the Ashanti work--I mean, are right within the geographical area. And the Fante live on the coast, right near where Cape Coast [Ghana] is. And the Ashanti live back in the, you know, up into the hinter part. You know, there are stories told about the Ashanti, they were not swimming people. Water is something they don't like. And the Fante and the--and there was another tribe called Dogon. Speaker 1: Dogon. Speaker 2: Right on the, right in a--you know, right in the ocean. So, they were not a fighting people, and they were not warriors. Like, the Ashanti were strong warriors. And so the Ashanti would come down to fight with the Dogon and the Dogon would swim out into the ocean, (laughter) because the Ashanti were afraid of the water and they wouldn't come after them. (Laughter). And it was amazing story that they would tell about wars and fighting, and their participation in slave trade. And this is a piece that's big for the indigenous brothers. They are terribly repentant of any participation in the sale of their brothers and sisters into slavery. Some of them sold their slaves thinking that they were selling the same way they would do among themselves--you know, not stripping them from their language and families and this kind of thing, but let them work out whatever debt is owed, you know, to the family or to the village. When they sold them to Europeans, they did not know that the Europeans were going to do what they did. And so, they have this great grief in their hearts about the whole Middle Passage thing. And we're trying to work on rituals where we can heal that rupture of the Middle Passage. Story_ID: 192327 Speaker 1: What about the El-Mina Castle [El-Mina, Ghana]? Did you go in there? Speaker 2: Man, if you get an opportunity to go, do it. It is an awesome, I mean, riveting, you know, experience to walk through there. In El-Mina [Ghana], they will tell you, the guide, at least the one that was with me. He said, "You don't have to pull off your shoes." He says, "But I want to tell you, walk with respect. Because the pavement on which you're walking really is the flesh of your ancestors. Because so many of them died in that castle, and their bodies were trampled because they put hundreds and hundreds of them, and there was no way for them to get out. And so, the women who were pregnant delivered their babies, and they trampled them right into the pavement, and the dead bodies were just left there to rot. And it's a horrible witness to go through there. And, and when I finally made it through and went to this big gate, this big warehouse gate, it looks like it's open. So the ocean--and then above it is written "The door of no return." And that was, that's a disabling experience for me. But when I turned and walked back in, the brothers and sisters that were coming back, they had written above the door, "The door of return." So, we were coming back, you know, and we were reconnecting and we were developing, and so forth. But it's an awesome moment that--I mean emotionally it wipes you out, just to walk through there and see the horror of that, of what it must have been like. Speaker 1: These are the castles built by the Portuguese, I guess? Speaker 2: The Portuguese and the British-- Speaker 1: And the British. Speaker 2: --also built it, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, built them, and they're still standing. And to walk through those castles, you can almost hear, you know, the agony of people. You could almost hear the chains rattling, and people crying and begging to die, you know. And the energy, the spiritual energy, is in that place. You can feel it, yeah. So, I went through that whole rites of passage with them. I reconnected culturally, so there were three or four things I wanted to do. I wanted to reconnect with the mother continent and build a relationship with the people, get identified with a family that I could relate to--you know, always have a home to go to when I go. The other thing I wanted to do was to re-discover the cultural richness of the indigenous people, you know, and see how much of their culture we actually brought with us, and how much of it still lives in the diaspora. And a lot of it does. You know, it's amazing how much is really alive here, you know, just in our DNA. The other thing was the spirituality. I wanted to connect spiritually, you know, with the African traditional spirituality before Christianity came-- Story_ID: 192328 Speaker 1: In that regard, just one more theological kind of question. Speaker 2: Uh-huh? Speaker 1: Is there--I've done a lot of speculation about, whether--well, you know, people used to say when I was a kid that we were lucky we came over here and was Christianized because there was no moral content in African religion. Is, did you-- Speaker 2: What a myth. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: That's a lie. I'm going to tell you what it is, a lie. You can see the richness. You know, once you get there, you can see the sense of community, or the moral, or the values of family, and especially family. That is big, you know, on the continent. Family, spirituality, great culture, richness is there. A sense of organization, industry, genius--I mean, talent, work ethic, whatever you want to call it. All our people have ever needed, you know, were the resources. And all they need right now is the technology with which to develop their countries. And what's happening is that the strong Western nations still control the economies of these small developing countries, and they're not able to get out of debt. You know, we had a big campaign going to erase the world debt, you know, the debt that these poor nations owe to America, owe to Britain. If they would just cancel that debt and let these countries begin to use their resources, inner resources, to develop their--to develop themselves. Because they have the natural resources with which to do it, all they need is the technology. They have the gold, they have the bauxite, they have the oil. They have uranium, they have all kinds of things to work with, but they don't have the technology with which to do it. But as they become independent countries, and as they begin to elect credible leadership that is not corrupt and is going to rob them like the Europeans have done, then those countries are stable. The most stable ones now are Ghana, Kenya and South Africa, of course--yeah, that's a unique place. Ghana is the most stable along the West Coastal countries. Kenya is the most stable of the East Coast. And--but they're developing slowly, and they're finding ways to mutually aid each other. So, no, that's a lie, you know. Believe me, Brother [Larry] Crowe, it was not a blessing to be brought away in chattel slavery to the U.S. Story_ID: 192329 Speaker 1: I don't care how they interpret that. (Laughter). But no, God has a way of turning any evil deed and bringing out of the chaos of all this, good. And so, we've become the second largest concentration of African people in the Northern Hemisphere. We're here. But now what we've got to do is to see how we can work through this whole issue of identity and begin to relate back to the mother continent as the Irish relates back to Ireland, the Italians back to Italy, the Polish back to Poland and so forth. We've been denied that opportunity, you know, to really take our skills, to take our intellect and our talent back to the continent [of Africa], you know, to help develop it. And I think there's a method in that madness, you know, to keep us from doing that. But eventually it will happen. Speaker 2: Okay. So you're looking forward to a heightened level of Pan Africanism? Speaker 1: Uh-huh, yeah. I believe it's going to happen. And the African-American church, as it comes to a greater consciousness, is why I think your question is so good. It's that as we come to a greater consciousness of our Afro-centricity and our African heritage, then we indeed will begin to go back to the continent. Some of us will even move back, you know, there and help develop those countries. But I think right now what we can do is to assist in sending resources, you know, to those brothers and sisters who are trying to establish businesses, who are trying to get their education. You know, the more educated they become, the more enlightened they become in technology and industry and developing their economy, and so forth. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, I think that's gonna happen eventually. It takes time. (Laughter). Story_ID: 192330 Speaker 1: --This is a symbol of return. This is the water fowl. And the symbol is in two kind of Adinkra--Adinkra expressions. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: There's another symbol for this called Sankofa. But this is really the water fowl reaching back, you know, with the egg in its mouth. And, and, of course, the egg is symbolic of the future, the future generations. And so, you wanna always go back and re-invest your time and energy in the young people in order that the future generations be blessed. So, this is Sankofa. It's okay to go back and fetch it, that's what it's saying--it's okay to go back and get it. And so, this is kind of a symbol of my journey, and it's been a rich journey thus far. It's been a long journey, but one well worth the travel. Story_ID: 192331 Speaker 1: Now, we always ask this question. And that is, sir, what are your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: One is that--and I have to begin here, because it is fundamental, I think, to everything else. We must firmly lay a spiritual foundation for our people in this nation and in this country. Because African people are basically a spiritual people. You know, that's clear. All over the continent, everywhere you go, it is a spirituality of the people that you immediately see. Once we lay a spiritual foundation--whether we're Muslims or Christians, you know, that's the thing. It doesn't matter to me. But if you're a Muslim, be a darned good Muslim, you see. Be a good Jew, you know, be a faithful Christian and so forth. But it's a spiritual foundation, you know, that we must lay for our people. Then from there I go on to say that, you know, if we build a spiritual foundation, then the economy that we want to build--the education, you know, of the mind and the cognitive thing... the technologies we want to build--all this is very possible, you know, because we have the right foundation. The problem in the past is that we tried to build economic foundations only to have them crumble, because that's not a good foundation to be on. You have to build on foundations that are durable, and that won't perish. And our spirituality is one that doesn't perish. The economy has changed, educational systems change, but our spirituality remains safe; it's the foundation. So, I am hoping now that we can train our young people away from violence and find ways to give them values, respect for life, to send them through rites of passage of womanhood and manhood, help mentor them. I believe that that's going to happen more, you know, as we begin to teach the history, you know, to our younger generation. I am hopeful that we are able to develop leadership--not just a leader, you know--that we look now--rather than have one charismatic leader lead us, we keep look for the Messiah--and that we create a community of leaders, you know, wisdom--men and women of great wisdom who are able to help chart the future. You know, and of course, we're always looking for that charismatic leader. And if one emerges, fine. But if that one is assassinated and shot, it won't put us in a kind of a disarray that we've been in throughout our existence in this country. So, our spirituality is number one for me. Education, industry, economy, you know, are a couple of places that we must focus in on. Learning to buy and trade with each other, you know. Knowing that the white man's sugar ain't sweet just because it's white, you know. (Laughter). His ice is no colder than the black man's ice, you see what I'm saying. The white doctor's medicine is just as healing as a black doctor's medicine--you know, to trust and believe in ourselves. Love ourselves and trust ourselves, build for the future. And I guess finally, you know, put institutions, build institutions that are strong. And your work, The HistoryMakers is, for me, the beginning of a lot of that. We have not had a systematic way to tell our story. As the story gets told, it's usually told by those who are charismatic leaders who always get the media, and then the media gives us their take on it. But this way, you get the story from the grassroots, from those of us who lived the movement, were a part of it. And that's why I want to encourage you guys to continue doing what you're doing and build this thing for the generations yet unborn-- Speaker 1: Now-- Speaker 2: --yeah, tell our story. Story_ID: 192332 Speaker 1: At this juncture when you look back on what you've done--and you're still fairly young--well, what would you consider as your legacy? Speaker 2: (Laughter). I haven't even given any thought to that. I would say a life of servant leadership, because I certainly don't have any wealth to leave. And I would say a record of service, you know, that how I invested my time on earth. And the last thirty-seven years in particular has been invested in the African American community trying to advance the cause of justice and liberation a little bit along the way. So, I think when I step off the stage, that's what I'm going to leave--a record of servant leadership, hoping that I have mentored some people to swallow the basketball (laughter) and step in and continue that leadership. So, I think above all, that's what I would leave, a record of service. Speaker 1: Okay. Now-- Speaker 2: Sometimes good and sometimes not too good, but nevertheless faithful. Story_ID: 192333 Speaker 1: Now, when you look back on what you've done, is there anything that you would do differently that you see? Speaker 2: Not a thing. Because all of it has been molding and shaping me to be the man or the person, you know, that I am now. And I think if I take away any of it, that I would not have arrived at this level of maturity and spiritual consciousness, you know, where I am. So I count all of it--the good, the bad and the indifferent, you know, as beneficial to me, yeah. And sometimes I think about all of this. Even that racial beating I sustained at age eighteen--I wouldn't change it, because it helped to fortify my spirit to do something about hatred, you know, and anger. You know, whether it's coming from a black face or from a white face, hatred is destructive, yeah. Story_ID: 192334 Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Wow, (laughter) one word: reconciler. Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I think that would be--that's been my role, that's been my function, it's to try to bring people together and to work on our differences, you know, yeah. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Reconciler (laughter). Speaker 1: All right, well thank you very much, sir. Speaker 2: Yes, you're welcome. Story_ID: 192335 Speaker 1: Standing to the left to [HistoryMaker Reverend] Jesse [L. Jackson], Jesse Jackson's left--beginning at the left there, the short guy, his name is Chivatamoto Musoni. He's Zimbabwean. Speaker 2: You'll have to spell that for us. Speaker 1: Okay, that's C-H-I-V-A-T-A-M-O-T-O, Chivatamoto Musoni, M-U-S-O-N-I. He is a Ph.D. in clinical psychology. He is a lawyer and he holds a master of divinity degree. And he's one of my assistant ministers at the church [Progressive Community Church, Chicago, Illinois]. But what he's done is organized what is called the World Crisis Intervention Network [ph.]. He trains crisis interveners to go into major crisis situations around the globe. He works with the United Nations a great deal. So, he's standing right next to our friend and brother, Reverend Jesse Lewis Jackson, president and CEO of Operation PUSH [People United to Save Humanity, later Rainbow/PUSH Coalition] in those days. I think [James T.] Meeks is now the president. But in those days, Jesse was. And then the guy in the blue is [HistoryMaker Reverend] B. Herbert Martin [Sr.], yeah. Speaker 2: Okay, and the next one? Speaker 1: This is the dedication and the consecration of twenty-four units of affordable housing for families who were being displaced by the demolition of Robert Taylor [Homes, Chicago, Illinois]. And the big bowl in my hand is a lavabo bowl, and I'm pouring libation in recognition of the ancestors and the Creator to bless this place and to make it a safe haven for families. Yeah, that was a great day of celebration. Speaker 2: About what year was that? Speaker 1: That was 2002. Speaker 2: Okay. This is the same? Speaker 1: Yeah, these are some of the elders of the congregation and some of the Chicago housing Authority officials. Miss [HistoryMaker] Sharon Gist Gilliam and others were part of that. And of course, the youth and the children of the church were part of it as well, and some of the tenants who had already been approved to enter. Speaker 2: Okay. Here's the next one. Speaker 1: This is a family shot of me and my--and four of my children. The oldest child is missing. June Elizabeth [ph.] is missing. But that's Herbie, Jr. [ph.] and Zernona Ruth [ph.], Jennifer Cassino [ph.], named after my mom [Cassino Braboy Martin], and Malika Rosebud [ph.], and myself. And that was my father-in-law and he's holding the grandchildren, Nia [ph.] and Devon [ph.]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Imani [ph.] is not there, so I'm missing one of my grandchildren as well. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Oh, boy, that's 1983 or '84 [1984] shortly after Harold [Washington] was elected. And that's the Chief of Staff, Brother William Ware. And this was the occasion of the annual NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] tea. In those days, it was the old [United] Packing House [Workers Union] Hall [later, the Charles Hayes Family Investment Center, Chicago, Illinois], you know, the workers' hall. That was Harold's campaign headquarters in the 3rd Ward. It's the Charles A. Hayes Center now, and that's where that event was being held. And I'm welcoming Bill to come and make his remarks on behalf of the mayor. Speaker 2: Next. Speaker 1: Reverend Jesse Lewis Jackson, who on this particular Sunday morning decided to surprise me and walk into the middle of my worship service and ask if I would come and go with him down to Tallahassee, Florida where there were one hundred students from Chicago [Illinois] and others. And there was a bomber, someone who had been bombing the buildings where the students were living, and he wanted to intervene in that situation. And since I had a daughter there, it wasn't hard for him to convince me to come and go, even though it's right in the middle of my worship service. (Laughter). So, that being Jesse Jackson, the congregation understood. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: This is a picture of me. This is Kojo Oyeadizie [HistoryMaker Reverend B. Herbert Martin, Sr.], fresh from my naming ceremony in El-Mina, Ghana, West Africa. And standing over my shoulders are my two African princesses, Zernona [ph.] and Malika [ph.]. Yeah, that was a powerful celebration. Speaker 2: Do you know what year it was? Speaker 1: This was 2001. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: This was 2001, June, 2001. Speaker 2: Okay, next. Speaker 1: And this is a picture from some of the proceedings in the service. The staff that I'm holding, you see on the staff--you can't see the writing on the staff--but this staff has all the symbols describing my Sankofa journey. And on the top of the staff is a crow. And that crow is a symbol for the Asona clan. Speaker 2: (Unclear) Crowe. My grandfather has that, he actually-- Speaker 1: All right, uh-huh. Well, this was at some social function with all of the potentates and sages of the political arena. I'm standing there. I'm forgetting the Asian brother's name right now. But in the center is Chief Justice [HistoryMaker] Charles Freeman, who gave Harold his oath of office on his first election. Yeah, Judge Freeman, B. Herbert, and then one of the Asian brothers who was attending at that function, yeah. Speaker 2: Okay, next. Speaker 1: Now, I remember the function. This was a function given by President [HistoryMaker] John [H.] Stroger [Jr.], the [Cook County] Board of Commissioners, the Cook County Board of Commissioners. So it was a gala event. And there I am with my friend and my brother, John Stroger, whose sister taught me in high school, sister--his sister, yeah. You know, Arkansas is only separated by the Mississippi River. And she grew up in Helena, Arkansas. So his family, some of his family came to Mound Bayou [Mississippi] and they taught at Mound Bayou High School [Mound Bayou Consolidated Public School and County Training School, Mound Bayou, Mississippi]. And his older sister was-- Speaker 2: Next. Speaker 1: Oh, carrying on the great tradition. And the only difference is it's Lake Michigan, and not the Mississippi Bayou. (Laughter). Catching salmon rather than catfish. Oh, yeah, that was a great outing along with some of the men who were responsible for assisting me to build that twenty-four units of housing, affordable housing, in the neighborhood, connected through Harris Bank. And we were out fishing that day catching... Speaker 2: Okay, next. Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, this was the catch of the day. (Laughter). And I'm proud to say that I did--I caught most of the fish. Yeah, most--and those guys, you know what it was? It was like a floating smorgasbord eating. But the fishing was really great. And that's the end of the day, with us being very proud fishermen. And we didn't go to the market to buy it, we actually caught it. (Laughter). Speaker 2: Oh, one of the great moments of ministry. And Progressive [Community Church, Chicago, Illinois] is always there to share moments with the elders in our congregation. And this is Mother Robert Lee Davis [ph.], who was one of the founding members of Progressive Community Church founded in 1922. On this day, she had reached 100 years old. Yeah, it was the 100th birthday, yeah, and we were there to help her celebrate it. That's what I'm saying--[HistoryMaker Bishop] T.D. Jakes and the mega-church people won't be able to celebrate moments like that with people. So, it's good to be a local church pastor. Story_ID: 192336 Speaker 1: Oh, my goodness. That's me and my head deacon of many, many years, Brother Edward Johnson [ph.] from Shreveport, Louisiana, a football coach and sports--great sportsman. But he was chairman of our board of deacons for about ten, fifteen years. A great spirit. Speaker 2: Okay, next. Speaker 1: Oh, one of those great moments of celebration, when I do have a chance to be among my colleagues from around the nation. There I am in the white robe with the doctor's bars looking as if I'm all scholarly and intelligent and all that stuff, you know, kind of a good moment. I was being inducted into the Morehouse [College] Board of Preachers in Atlanta, Georgia. And of course, you see all the "muckety-mucks" there on the front row. (Laughter). Speaker 2: In this picture, you know where you are. You're-- Speaker 1: There I am right in the center, man, I got center stage. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Yeah, there you've got some of the country's most powerful preachers and pastors. You've got [HistoryMaker Reverend] Gardner Taylor, there's [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr.] Jeremiah [A.] Wright [Jr.], [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr.] Otis Moss [Jr.]. You've got-- Speaker 2: Where is Gardner Taylor? Because we interviewed him. Speaker 1: I think that's Gardner right there, isn't it, toward the end in the suit? Speaker 2: Yeah, I think that's him. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's Gardner. And there is the guy out of Ohio, what's his name? Oh, I can't think of his name right now. But anyway we got [HistoryMaker] Lawrence Carter, who is the Dean of the [Martin Luther King Jr. International] Chapel [Atlanta, Georgia], you know, there at Morehouse. Oh, what's that boy's name? I can't think of his name. That's one of the things you do have when you hit sixty. Speaker 2: Now, not Gilmore? Speaker 1: No, not Gilmore. Speaker 2: Not Marshall Gilmore? Speaker 1: Uh-uh. He's in, he's in, he's in Cleveland [Ohio], and is name is-- Speaker 2: Okay, next. Speaker 1: That's my mom [Cassino Braboy Martin]. You know, we always called her by her nickname, Nean, N-E-A-N. All of us called her that, and that name meant "mother," Nean. And what she explained to me--I asked her, "How did we come to call you Nean?" She said, because when you were little boys, my brothers called me "Seen," and you guys, by being little, couldn't say 'S,' it just came out Nean." And so we heard-- Speaker 2: Short for Cassino? Speaker 1: Yeah, for Cassino, uh-huh. And so we always called her Nean. She was a young woman in those--which was 1954, which meant I was about twelve years old, somewhere along in there, twelve or thirteen years old. Speaker 2: Did she ever tell you how she got that name? Speaker 1: Cassino? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: My grandfather [Page Brayboy, Jr.] gave it to her. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, he named her, yeah. Speaker 2: Okay, and this? Speaker 1: Well, this is some of the religious leaders and community and civic people who had gathered with me to bring unity between... and healing between Bridgeport [Chicago, Illinois] and Bronzeville [Chicago, Illinois] in the aftermath of the beating of Lenard Clark. So, this was one of the efforts, and these are some of the pictures from that, from some of those major inter-faith services that we held. Speaker 2: And this took place, for the caption, in what year? Speaker 1: This would have been nineteen-- Speaker 2: Ninety-nine, [1999], I think. Speaker 1: Ninety-Eight [1998] or '99 [1999] somewhere along in there. Speaker 2: Yeah, on the photo, there's--this is--we should identify-- Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, that's Cardinal [Francis] George, Archbishop of the city of Chicago [Illinois], Kublah, you know, Kublah-- Speaker 2: Kublah Konteret [ph.]-- Speaker 1: Yeah, Konteret, with Ikan-- Speaker 2: Amir Ikan [ph.]. Speaker 1: Amir Ikan, yeah, right, that group, and then some of the other religious leaders and civic people from Bridgeport. Speaker 2: Okay. This is-- Speaker 1: Oh, yeah-- Speaker 2: --different. Speaker 1: Yeah, this is slightly different. Cardinal George, and as you can see, the young lady down front there in those days was a very dear, dear sweetheart of mine. But just behind her is Alderman Fred Roti, a very significant personage in the Bridgeport area and in Little Italy. Speaker 2: He was alderman of the 1st Ward. Speaker 1: Alderman of the 1st Ward, and I think by then he was retired. And in the background, there are some of the parents of the children of the boys [Frank Caruso, Jr., Victor Jasas, and Michael Kwidzinski] who had been accused of doing the beating. And then of course, myself. Speaker 2: Okay. Were the Carusos there? Speaker 1: The Carusos are back there. Yeah, I see them. The Jasases are there and some of the others, yeah. Speaker 2: Okay, next. Speaker 1: These are some of the other religious leaders and participants in that interfaith service. We were representing, you know, all three branches of faith, Islam, Judaism, and Christianity. And also, there are some of the civic leaders like Mr. Paul Vallas who was CEO [chief executive officer] of the Chicago Public Schools [Chicago, Illinois] in those days, yeah. Speaker 2: Okay, next. Speaker 1: What's Calvin's [ph.] last name? Calvin's last name won't come to me. But this another--some of the business people who stood with us and worked with us in bringing healing to the hearts of Bronzeville and Bridgeport, yeah. Speaker 2: Okay, next. Speaker 1: This was a great day, April, 1983, the Sunday--it was Palm Sunday as a matter of fact. And it was the Sunday before the general elections were to take place, with Harold [Washington] running for mayor. I was anointing him for victory to go forth and win. And he did. He won that election, yeah. It was a great moment, a great, great moment. Speaker 2: Okay, next. Speaker 1: After the election, of course, I went to the Mayor's office so many times, a place that had been denied access to. And Harold had a policy of open government, and he wanted the world to know that I was his pastor. And this picture kind of demonstrates that. Every time he had an opportunity to invite me to do anything on the spiritual or on the faith level, he invited me there. I was his pastor, yeah. Speaker 2: Okay, next. Speaker 1: One of the things that Harold did was to initiate tenant-run businesses to take care of the maintenance and repair work in the buildings in Robert Taylor; this was Robert Taylor here. And this taskforce, this group of workers there, were called Project Hope or something like that. But they were... Project Hope--they were tenants who had become employed by CHA [Chicago Housing Authority, Chicago, Illinois] to take care of the deferred maintenance items on those buildings. This was a gathering of those people. And I was then chairman of the Chicago Housing Authority, and I'm giving him an update on what had happened just before he spoke to the group. In the background here, back there in the corner, that's Joe [Joseph] Gardner. Remember Joe Gardner? Speaker 2: Joe Gardner, right, of the [Metropolitan] Water Reclamation [District, Chicago, Illinois]-- Speaker 1: Yeah, Water Reclamation, and then he ran for City Clerk [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: He ran for Mayor [of Chicago], too-- Speaker 1: Did he? Speaker 2: Yeah in-- Speaker 1: Whenever that last run-- Speaker 2: Ninety-Four, [1994, sic. 1995]. Speaker 1: Yeah, well, then that's Joe Gardner. God rest his great spirit. Speaker 2: Okay, next. Speaker 1: This was the night of him winning for the second time, isn't it? This is 1987 when he won again. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, and in the background... yeah, on the far left is [HistoryMaker] Reverend Jesse L. Jackson, and then some of the other faces. There are family members of Harold. You can't see her face, but right in back of Harold is Mary Ella Smith. I recognize her head and the side of her face, Mary Ella Smith. Speaker 2: (pointing) She must be here, right? Speaker 1: Right, with the earring, right in the back of him there. Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. And then the tall head just above Harold is Roy Washington [Jr.], his oldest brother, yeah. And then of course right behind me--that looks like [HistroryMaker] Vernon Jarrett's head. It looks like Vernon Jarrett's head back there, the columnist for the Chicago Sun-Times in those days, yeah, right, Vernon Jarrett. Then of course, Harold's pastor, [HistoryMaker Reverend] B. Herbert Martin [Jr.], all smiles. And then there are those brothers and sisters--there is the City [of Chicago] Treasurer in those days, Cecil [A.] Partee and his wife [Paris Partee], yeah. "Here's Harold. You want Harold, here's Harold," (laughter). Speaker 2: (Unclear) (simultaneous)...