 Story_ID: 10766 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Observing is Quincy Rose. Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Wilbur, W-I-L-B-U-R, Jun, J-U-N, Mhoon, M-H-O-O-N, as in Nancy. I'm known as Jun Mhoon. Speaker 1: Now, I often ask people about their names when they seem a little strange or, or a little different, not strange, but different. But, you know, the middle name, Jun, J-U-N, does that stand for junior or does it have--does it stand for anything or is it just Jun? Speaker 2: Yes, it does. It stands--because I'm a junior, and because I wasn't particular about being called Wilbur. Whenever one (unclear) sun--whenever anyone said Wilbur, I always thought of my father. And I was also born June the 10th, so I took off the "e" from the month I was born in to make it a masculine, and therefore, it's spell "N", J-U-N, Jun. Speaker 1: Okay, and your last name Mhoon, most--we've seen the name Mhoon before, but usually it's not spelled with a "h". Is there--do you have any information about the origin of your name, last name? Speaker 2: As far as we can back, M-H-O-O-N was a deviation of many different spellings. It was M-A-H-O-O-N. It was Mahoon, M-A-H-O-N. We have some family members that has--have traced it back to a General Napoleon in the late 1700s, General, General Mhoon who was in General Napoleon's army. He had a spelling of M-H-O-N, I believe. And we brought it up to Wales, out of the country of Wales--actually, I went there. And we've traced it to Wales, a spelling of M-A-H-O-O-N and then up to present day, down in Mhoon Valley, Mississippi. There's a town with the spelling M-H-O-O-N, and there's a plantation there called the M-H-O-O-N plantation, which we kind of trace our lineage from slavery. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: June 10th, 1954, Chicago, Illinois. Speaker 1: And--. Speaker 2: Cook County. Speaker 1: What is your occupation? Speaker 2: I, I'm a en--a digital content provider. Speaker 1: All right, and you have been a musician? Speaker 2: I'm a--. Speaker 1: --and a record producer? Speaker 2: Yes, I've been a musician. That's what I--I think I was born to be a musician. I'm a drummer, and I studied the music in school. And my degree is in music performance. I later became a music producer. I've produced over forty albums. Then I went into the advertising business and became a television production producer for advertising agencies and then I went back into the music business. And I got into the new digital era where, of digital downloading. I started studying music and how it was being downloaded on the internet at that time, mostly, illegal. And I decided that this was gonna be a business from the legal end. It was gonna grow and prosper, and I became digital content provider, which essentially is a music producer and music distributor digitally over the internet. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is July 17, 2004--or July 18, 2004. Speaker 1: Nineteenth. Speaker 2: July 19th, 2004 (laughter). Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're now in "I AM Musical Lines" offices located at 2147 South Lumber, Chicago, Illinois. Story_ID: 10767 Speaker 1: Sir, what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: Fried corn. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue, dark blue. Speaker 1: A favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Summer. Speaker 1: Vacation destination? Speaker 2: Sea Island, Georgia. Speaker 1: And lastly, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: A minute. So I reference everything to, 'in a minute' or 'look here'. Story_ID: 10768 Speaker 1: And can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Justina, maiden name is Williamson, J-U-S-T-I-N-A, W-I-L-L-I-A-M-S-O-N, Poole--. Speaker 1: Is that--? Speaker 2: Poole, P-O-O-L-E. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Jesus, her place of birth was Augusta, Georgia. The date of birth was the year nineteen twenty--around 1928. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that was in October, October, I believe the nineteenth. Speaker 1: Okay, now, she--just before we go any further, I just want, Poole, P-O-O-L-E is a name in Georgia that's associated now with the family of Elijah Muhammad. Are you any related, any relation to him? Speaker 2: Not to my, not to my knowledge. Speaker 1: Yeah, cause they're from Sanderville, Georgia, I think. Speaker 2: My grandmother, my mother's mother remarried. And her maiden name--well, her last marriage was to Charlie Poole. And actually, he looks like Elijah Muhammad (laughter), now that I think about it. He's deceased now, but he did--like, yeah, Papa Charlie did look like, a lot like Elijah. So I, not that I know of though. Speaker 1: This is an interesting thing. We, who knows, you know, sometimes, but, you know--. Speaker 2: Six degrees of separation. Speaker 1: Yeah, they were from Sandersville, Georgia. That's where Elijah Muhammad was raised. I don't know how close that is to Augusta, but--. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But, well, what do you know about your mother's side of the family? How far back can you trace them? Speaker 2: Not too far back. My, my mother, my grandmother, who's still living, Geneva Poole. She's around ninety seven years old. She lives in Gary, Indiana now. And she had a very interesting life. She actually, I believe, abandoned my mother, and not too long after birth gave my mother up for adoption. And so my mother spent a lot of years of her young life really being raised by different people. There were none that stuck in my--in her mind, nor that stick in mine, except for one lady who seemed to have kind of like nurtured her, nurtured her through her years of puberty. And then my mother reconnected with my grandmother. And so then this whole new life with my grandmother started, I guess, when my mother was around sixteen. She reconnected back with my grandmother, and they started a new relationship that was, it was and still is, was up until her, my mother's death, a very good relationship. But so far as the history--. Speaker 1: Did they reconnect in Georgia or in Gary? Speaker 2: They reconnected in Gary. They reconnected in Gary. At that same time, they reconnected, my mother and my father also reconnected. They had known each other from the South. My father's from Memphis, Tennessee, but he met with my mother when they were teenagers. They didn't get married then, but they reconnected also in, in Indiana. Story_ID: 10769 Speaker 1: Well, since we're talking about your father, can you give us his full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Wilbur, W-I-L-B-U-R, Leon, L-E-O-N, Mhoon, M-H-O-O-N, Sr. Speaker 1: Okay, so do you have Leon as a middle name too? Speaker 2: I used to. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Dropped that (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now, what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: His date is, he was born in November 1919. That always stuck in my mind for some, for some reason. He was born in Memphis, Tennessee. Speaker 1: Okay, in Memphis. Now, in terms of your mother's side of the family, can you trace that side very far--I mean back past your grandmother? Speaker 2: No, not too far back, no. Just recently my grandmother told me about Williamson who she was with when she had my mother, why, why my mother's name, last name is Williamson. And that was about it. Again, being ninety-seven, she can't go too far back. So--. Speaker 1: Did she ever, does she ever talk about her mother? Speaker 2: No, no, never have--. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --never has. I think my grandmother actually had a--I know she had a very interesting life, but she too, I think, as might have happened a lot back then, didn't have a stable life with my great grandmother or great grandfather. I think she kind of got passed around a little bit too. Story_ID: 10770 Speaker 1: Now, in terms of your mother's [Justina Poole Mhoon] upbringing, you say she was passed around from, you know--. Speaker 2: Family to family. Speaker 1: From family to family. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And did she have a chance to get much education or anything? Speaker 2: No, she didn't. She actually only went to I believe the sixth grade. She only had a sixth grade education. I know that because my father actually graduated from high school. So there was a difference in their background, educational background. Speaker 1: Now, did she, did she move to Gary [Indiana] when she was sixteen? Is that how she reconnected with her mother? Did she--. Speaker 2: Yeah, she moved--my, she hooked up with my father, and somehow or another they got back to Gary, Indiana, and then disconnected with my father. He was married a couple of times in between my mother and came back and reconnected with my mother. Speaker 1: Okay, that's interesting. Now, how did they meet. How did your mother and father meet? Is there a story about that? Speaker 2: Not one that I know of. No, not one that I know of, how they got together. And unfortunately, it's, kind of, probably too late to find out now because they're both deceased and most of their siblings are deceased. So I don't really know. Speaker 1: Okay, now, what was your father like and what did he do for a living? Speaker 2: My father [Wilbur Mhoon] was a entrepreneur. Actually, my grandfather was an entrepreneur and so was my great grandfather an entrepreneur. And as far back as I can remember he always did what you call odd jobs. His father was a, what you would call a subcontractor and handyman. And my father and his brother, two of his brothers, one, one even as I was a child, but they always worked in construction. And they would build, they would build houses. They would repair anything. Then later on as I got older--we were very poor. We, we grew up on the West side, 1443 South Hohman. And my father's brother, my Uncle Ernest actually owned the building that we lived, lived in. But that area that we lived in got condemned and they tore down those houses. But unfortunately, we were again very poor, and we were still in the house when they were tearing, tearing down the, the house next door and in front of us. And so I remember as a kid, a lot of times my recreational fun was watching that ball swing and hit the front part of the building and going boom, you know. And but like, as I said, we were very poor, but we did move out of there, and we moved from there to Gary. And my father, while, my father--we didn't know what he was doing then, but he was getting together, you know, doing odd jobs and getting together money so that we could move as Weezie would say and George, and "we moved on up" into the projects. So we migrated from the, from the West into the--we were actually one of the first families in Rockwell Gardens. But my father--. Speaker 1: Now, that's something, that's a point to stop at in a sense because, and dwell on for a minute because now-a-days there's a lot of stigma attached to the projects. But in those days, that was a step up, was it not? Speaker 2: Ah, it was great. Ah, it was equivalent now to, to living on, you know, gold, the Gold Coast. We lived on the twelfth floor. They were new buildings then. They had just built them. And we had a playground, and we had, you know, had all this beautiful view from the twelfth floor. We, I could see--back then, the tallest building downtown was the Playboy Towers, and I used to look out of my father's bedroom and I could see that beam, the airplane beam from the Playboy Tower building. And no, we were, we were rich from, we had, we had, we had made it, and--until they started shooting from project to project a couple of years later. Then my father, again, he was, he was a good man. He worked real, real hard. Back then, I think they played hard, him and my mother and, and my aunties and uncles. They enjoyed themselves. But he worked real hard doing construction, and again, we, we really moved up then because in fourth grade, at that time, we moved--I was just going into fourth grade, we moved from the projects to the South side. So we were really, you know, big willie then. And, but my father always made sure that, somehow or another we had a little food on the table. And he went from--the construction industry had gotten real bad then, and he went from there into the hotel business. He became a professional bellhop and at very interesting type of hotels. And so as a little kid I didn't know. All I knew was my father went to work every night at 11 o'clock at night. And I used to wake up with him to eat dinner, his late, his late dinner before he went to work. And he would go off to work, and we didn't know what was happening. We just knew he was going off to work, but he worked at hotels. I don't know what you would call them legitimately, but they were legitimate hotels. But he provided services for the men who came in who might have wanted, you know, might have wanted to have some extra, extracurricular activity. Well, he was the bellhop that made sure that happened, and, and he did actually very, very well. All I remember is my father used to have a lot of money. And again, this was from, coming from poor kids who, we used to have to look under the rugs for pennies, but my father was, did--we did very well, so much as that he brought a house. Speaker 1: Were these hotels on the South side or--? Speaker 2: No, no, no, this was downtown. No, he worked at legitimate hotels downtown. You know, like I said, I don't know if there's a, a real term for that service that bellhops provide. They still do on the side, I guess, but he, he was able to buy us a house. And we moved to, even further South. We moved from, we moved from the projects to 59th and King Drive, and we lived there for a couple of years. And then we moved from 59th and King Drive [Chicago, Illinois] to 91st and Dauphin, right off of Cottage Grove [Avenue]. Then we moved from there, and we--that's when we brought the house. After that we moved to a 105th and Forest. And I, I guess I was in sixth grade when we--yeah, seventh grade when we moved from there. And, but, but he was a hard worker. He worked very, very hard. He inspired me. I didn't understand exactly all that he did. I know that I very rarely saw my parents fight, if ever. I, I think if--one time I did when I was a little boy. My mother was throwing plates at my father, but I never saw him hit or physically abuse my mother. All I know is that we went--we spent a lot of time--they socialized with my grandmother a lot and, and my mother's siblings got together at my grandmother's house almost every, every holiday, and almost, maybe every other weekend we spent at my grandmother's house in Gary. And they partied. They had a, they had a good time and enjoyed themselves, and they were together up until, you know, my mother's death. She died first, and then later, my father. But he was a hard worker. I never--and when he passed, I always regretted that I really didn't know what he wanted to be. I didn't know what he wanted to do. But he actually did help me do what I wanted to do and ushered my--he didn't, he didn't discourage me from being a musician at all. Actually, he brought he, my grand--his father brought me my first drums, and my father brought me my second two sets, one of--that I still have. It's forty years old now. Speaker 1: Okay, now, you said your grand--your father graduated from high school in Memphis [Tennessee] ? Speaker 2: Yes. Doug--it's, it's called Douglas--it was called that. I guess it would be equivalent to a suburb now. It was called Douglas, Tennessee. And he went to Douglas High in Memphis, Tennessee. Story_ID: 10771 Speaker 1: And you knew your great grandfather too or did you--? Speaker 2: No, I knew my grandfather. Speaker 1: Okay, but you, you--but they all did the same kind of work--? Speaker 2: Yeah--. Speaker 1: --in construction? Speaker 2: They were all, yeah, and my, and my grandfather's father did--he was an entrepreneur, did construction, building and maintenance. Speaker 1: Okay, now, did they have any stories from that side of the family about life in the South? Speaker 2: Stories? Speaker 1: Yeah, from way, way back? Speaker 2: Ah, Jesus (laughter). Yeah, I had a, I had a, Uncle Luke, who was actually my cousin Luke, and I didn't know. We just knew him as Uncle Luke, and he and my father seemed to be running buddies as they were growing up. (Unclear) He had tons of stories. My father, that was--my delight as an adult and as an adult, as an adult to listen to my father tell these stories, but as a young person to hear Uncle Luke, when they, whenever they'd get together and have a few drinks, they would--they'd first tell all these stories. And then they'd fight. That was their routine, tell all the stories, drink and fight, okay. And so, but nah, but the stories, I remember those stories are many. The, the--one of the most memorable ones was they were hitchhiking from Memphis to Chicago, my father and my Uncle Luke. And again, my father, for, well, all my father's siblings had, they even, some went to college, but all of them had education. And, but my Uncle Luke, who was actually not my uncle, a cousin, he didn't. He's illiterate. And so my father and my Uncle Luke were hitchhiking from Memphis to Chicago. And, but my father for some reason, as he said, some strange reason, was listening to my Uncle Luke about how to get here. And so they got a train, hoboed, got a train and road for, as my father said, days, you know, to get to Chicago. And I mean Memphis is not that far away from Chicago. So about, about after a week, my father, you know, they were hoboing, jumping on and off of the train, and, and having a good time. So after about a week or so, my father said, he started to kind of get suspicious, okay (laughter). Having an education, he decided to start reading all the signs and to see, you know, where they were going. And they ended up like way in, Minnesota some place. They had, you know, (laughter) they--my uncle couldn't, my Uncle Luke couldn't read so, you know, he had no idea where he was going. So they eventually made it back to Chicago. That's a funny one. Then my--I had a cousin, I had an Uncle Zek, Ezekiel Mhoon. And he was, he went into the Navy, but he used to always--he was, all my uncles were very animated and very funny and clowns. And they just, they just would always cut up, drink, tell stories and, and fight. So, but my Uncle Zeke had also a very--he was in the Navy. And he used to always have stories about how he would set the kitchens on fire so that they could have (laughter) an extended leave, you know. I guess he was cooking or something, he was a cook or something on the, on the ships. And he'd always set places afire, I mean, just, you know. I don't think he was a pyromaniac. He just like, wanted a couple of days off or wanted to pull into port some place (chuckle). So had stories like that. And my uncle, my Uncle Ernest, who was--he was the, the, he was the oldest. And he'll let you--he would let you know it. And if he was sitting here, he'd make sure that I let you know. He had a number--before he died, he had MHOON 1 on his license plates and he had to make sure he was the oldest and everyone knew it. And I don't think he thought about that he would die first, which he didn't. He died next to last, but he was a dude, so he had great stories about how he, how he was making money doing this and making money doing that. And, and he always drove fancy cars, and they were very--all these people, all my relatives on my father's side, which I knew the most because they lived here, were, were great people, very funny men. I can't think of one of them being disrespectful to a, a woman because as young men coming up, that was our criteria. We like, you know, the kids, we'd--I liked at least pretty women so I respe--I learned to respect women from watching these men and how they, they dealt with, they dealt with their wives. All of 'em were married and have kids--had kids. Then I had a, my uncle, my Uncle Ernest--I'm sorry. That was Uncle Ernest. Uncle Ernest, he had two children, Barbara and Sonny, we used to call him back then. Now, we call him Ernie. He changed his name too. But Dr. Ernest Mhoon, and he was--when I was little, he used to scare me. I was little, and to this day, when I hire a fire truck or a siren, I'll cover my ears because it scares me cause he used to always tell me--I don't remember what he was telling me, but he would, he would run around the house chasing me. Remember, they owned the building, so he was a, he was older than I, a little older than I am. But he would run around screaming and siren, with the siren sound and, and scaring me. And then my uncle or his wife would always give him a whooping or tell Sonny, don't do that. And this guy one day convinced me to--my cousins, Ernest, Dr. Mhoon, convinced me to jump off the first floor landing of this building. He told me that I could--I, I liked Superman. So he convinced me that I could fly. And so I wrapped a towel around my neck, and I think he probably helped me tighten it to it almost chocked me, and, and convinced me that if I, you know, with this cap, I could fly. So I jumped off the first floor landing. I think I hurt myself a little bit. So, again, my uncle and my auntie, my Aunt Ollie, Ollie--I think he probably got a whooping for that, but he did pretty good after that. He's a, a very well respected doctor in, in the country. But, yeah, my uncles were always very colorful. Then I had a uncle, I had a real colorful--my great uncle, if I can go that far, my Uncle Tyler, Uncle Clarence Tyler, cause my, my grandmother--my father's mother was Hattie Lou Tyler, and--or Hattie Tyler, and her brother was my Uncle Clarence Tyler. This guy was really a--he was, he had living stories. Speaker 1: Now, these Tyler's, are they related to John Tyler, the president? Speaker 2: President John Tyler, yeah, we traced it back to John Tyler. Matter of fact, I have a old, old picture that my cousin, Evelyn Rhodes, who lives in Michigan now, she brought me last, a old--one of these old pictures of, of John Tyler. And I guess her or my great, great, great, great grandfather. And, but this Clarence Tyler comes from--he's, he's one of the Tyler's. And this guy was really a character. He was--he lived in a, when we moved to 59th and [Martin Luther] King Drive, he lived down on 56th and King Drive. And he owned a building down there. And his wife was Lucy Tyler. And I was in fourth grade. Matter of fact, when we moved from the projects to the south, to the South side, to 59th and King Drive, I still--my sister was in eighth grade. So my parents didn't want us to transfer out of--she went to Crane High School. They didn't want to take us out of school. So we literally took the bus every day back and forth from the West side to the South side so my sister could finish up and graduate. And I was in, again, in fourth grade. But we would go down to--I would go down to my Uncle Clarence's house every weekend, and to make money, I would clean up his staircase case. I would polish the wood in the staircase. And, but they always had beautiful furniture. They always had lots of furniture, and they always had the furniture covered up with white cloths, you know, white, not cloth, but white bed linen. You know, I just figured that, well, you know, they cleaned a lot and maybe they didn't want to get it dirty. I didn't know, but it was, you know, they always had--and then I noticed they always had different rugs, beautiful rugs. I found later they were Persian rugs. And they'd always change the rugs. I thought they had like that. I figure, oh, you know, my Uncle Clarence got a little money, so he can do this. And he always had a dog. He always had a French poodle named Chico. And, and my Aunt Lucy had lots of furs. She had like all kinds of coats, I mean closets full of fur coats. I just figured they had it that way. Well, my Aunt Lucy was a fence, and my Uncle Clarence was a--he worked for the Jones boys. He was a, he handled the, he did the counting for the policy makers, the black policy makers, the Jones brothers. Speaker 1: Yeah, the Jones boys are famous black policy--. Speaker 2: Yeah, gangsters. Speaker 1: There's a book about them now. Speaker 2: Yes, "Kings". Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Yes, "Kings". And my father's, my--I'm sorry, my Uncle Clarence's partner was Charlie Cole who's also in the book. And so my Uncle Clarence was like, and he would cut cards. He would, he was, he was the head of--he didn't head, but he was their man who made the cards. They used a loaded deck, so he was--he would make the loaded decks. And so--. Speaker 1: How did they do--do you know how they did it? Speaker 2: I have no idea, and thank God I didn't learn as I might not be here today (laughter) talking with you. Nah, I never learned that part. He taught me how to shoot a gun though. And the story, I'm getting around to another one of my father's stories. My Uncle Clarence actually killed twelve people in one (sitting?) (unclear). And that's not--it's not funny, and it's not a thing to be proud of it, but it, it's a story. He was gambling, and he was dealing with a loaded deck, in one of the, one of the Jones boys' places. And they, they used speakeasies and, and houses and stuff, you know, to do these card games. And so somebody caught my Uncle Clarence cheating. And everybody was carrying, everybody--you know, these, these type of people, they all carried, most of black people probably carried guns back then. And, so someone drew on him, and he was just the faster draw, and he literally shot and killed twelve people in, at one card game, and didn't go to prison or anything cause he had it like that. He was one of the boys. Story_ID: 10772 Speaker 1: And we were talking about your uncle and the twelve--? Speaker 2: Yeah, my Uncle Clarence. Speaker 1: Uncle Clarence shooting twelve people--. Speaker 2: One sitting. Speaker 1: In a sitting, and he never was prosecuted for that. Speaker 2: Never was prosecuted. He, because of his connection with the policy people, you know, they paid off everybody, and he, I don't think he ever probably spent a day in jail. And probably killed more people than that, always in self defense, at least they say. And, but he used to have these dogs. He had French poodles, him and my Aunt Lucy. And remember, she's a fence, so you know, that's where all this furniture came from and all these fur coats. People would drop off the stuff, cause they always had gates up at the, up at the door. I mean on the front of the building, and at the door. And back in those days--we're talking about like the early '60s [1960s], you know, that wasn't a common thing. It wasn't, you know, people didn't have gates and bars all over the place. Speaker 1: Now, just for the record, everybody--. Speaker 2: Everybody. Speaker 1: --who lives in an apartment on the South side, if you're not in a high rise with a doorman or something, you got a gate. Speaker 2: You got a gate, and you've got bars. Back then they always had bars, but I cleaned the bars on the Saturday just like I cleaned everything else and didn't know what was going on, but that was because they would get raided every now and then to--you know, I'm sure for the district people to keep their stuff cool, they had to raid my uncle just for, you know, for paperwork. And, but they, they lived very well, and they always had French poodles. And I would always know every time I'd go over, maybe once a month, Chico would have a new hair style, okay, the, the French poodle. And what it was, is that my uncle actually would get drunk or, and get mad and the dog wouldn't shut up, and so he'd, he'd kill the dog (laughter). He'd, he'd shoot the dogs and replace 'em, you know. Speaker 1: They called them all Chico (laughter). Speaker 2: All of them were Chicos, all of them were Chicos. But he taught me how to clean a gun. He taught me how to shoot. I remember we used to go in the backyard. He'd taught me how to clean it real fast and load 'em and shoot 'em. It's a amazing that I'm not in jail some place (laughter), you know, a criminal. But, nah, I could shoot, and I could draw. He taught me how to, to draw a gun real fast. And I guess, I guess he figured if I took up the family, some of the family trait, I'd need to do that. But, yeah, those were some colorful--and, and I remember those stories, not good--it's not a good thing to kill people. But those stories as a kid, just like now in this day and age, kids are very impressionable. And it's nothing new. When I sometimes put down activities that are going in our community, I think, wow, you know, I was, I was in this activity as a kid. It was just different back then. But that was my Uncle Clarence. Story_ID: 10773 Speaker 1: And then I had a Uncle Wash. My Uncle Val Wash [Washington], which was actually my grandmother's sister's husband. So he actually really wasn't blood. He was married to my, my great aunt. And he was a politician, way back then he was a big politician and lawyer in Illinois. He worked for one of the, one of the governors here. He later became a underwriter for [President Dwight D.] Eisenhower and write--he would write Eisenhower's speeches. And he lived in D.C. up until his death. And even though as a little kid I knew who he was and would talk to him on the phone, I didn't understand as a child who he was or what he did. But he was a very, very popular and very powerful, black politician in D.C. He actually introduced John [H.] Johnson and a lot of the notable blacks in Chicago. He was the person who took them to the White House and, and introduced them to Eisenhower. And he later became, was elected or appointed Ambassador to the Virgin Islands. And his Val Washington, and so he was another model or image that I looked up, and later, actually, maybe--I was a, a record executive, and, and when I started traveling a lot, I would always go to Washington, D.C. and visit him. And he would have great stories about politicians and, and how governments got tumbled and overthrown. And when I see a lot of stuff. And when I see a lot of stuff today on the news, I actually reference my Uncle Wash to, you know, figure out, well, what would he had looked at this as or what would he--be his take on what's going on now in our government? And it's, it's--a lot of stuff that's coming out with our current president and, and all these different tribunals, and different things that are happening where they're trying to figure out what Bush has done and what he did, I have a reference, my, my Uncle Wash. Speaker 2: Now, did he has a--now, there's a famous government takeover that the United States was involved in, in the '60s [1960s], where they turned over their governor, Congo. Did he have any, any wisdom to share about that cause he would have been in the Eisenhower administration during the time that the, the stage was set for it. And the trap was sprung during the Kennedy administration, but--. Speaker 1: He, he mentioned some things about that. I have to think politically correct. Now, he, now, he would mention a lot of things about that. Again, it--even as an adult--we're only going back, he's only been dead maybe ten years. But even as an adult, they were stories that at that juncture in my life, I would listen to them as stories more than I would--now, I try to reference them back. But I remember him talking about the Congo. He used to trav--travel there all the time. So I'm sure that he knew what was going on. I'm very sure that he did that. I mean he'd--the purchase of the Virgin Islands, he was involved in that. That's how he became the ambassador. Story_ID: 10774 Speaker 1: I want to go back to your early childhood. I'm gonna ask you about--what were, now, you, you lived on the West side, and then you lived on the South side too. But what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: On the West Side, you know what, crazy enough, fresh air, fresh air. I remember--I was a interesting little lad. I, I used to hang out with older men. My father--because of my father being a, a kind of like, notable in the neighborhood, and my uncle, the Mhoons were known, I used to hung out--hang out in the backyard with the mechanics and the junkyard men, the junk men, who, even back then, they had a different status than when you see people now carrying junk. Back then, it was like, it was, it wasn't a bad thing. These people did this as a living, as they do now, but it was looked upon differently. And, so I hung in the garage with Mr. Manfield--Ms.--Mr. Mansfield. He had a garage back in the back. And I don't know why my parents let me hang out back there, but I hung out there all the time with these older men. And as they smoked their cigars and drank their liquor, and I used to always look up at the girlie calendars. They, you know, they had the calendars with the, you know, pretty girls, half naked on 'em. That, that's all I really wanted to see was--every month when they changed it, what the new lady looked like. But I, I remember that. I remember the smell of grease, even though I can't stand it now. Maybe that's why. And fresh air. I remember summer days, spring days. Back then, it seems like we had spring. And my mother's--even though we were in an apartment building, it was a six-flat, they would still--we lived on the third floor, but they had the clothes lines that went from the building to a pole and usually--I think probably the light pole. And you could hang the clothes on there and draw 'em in. So the, the clothes drying in the air, my mother's cooking. My mother and my father were great cooks. And so food was always a, a constant, even when we were poor, very poor when I was born, we ate--my uncle and auntie downstairs, Dr. Mhoon's parents, Uncle Ernest and Aunt Ollie. We would actually get their leftover Chinese--whenever they had Chinese food, they would bring us some leftovers or maybe they were buying enough for us in the first place. So to this day, besides fried corn, my next favorite food would be Chinese food. So the smell of Chinese food, when I smell that MSG and that, that, that, you know, stuff that's killing people, me particularly, that's, that's a very pronounced and a memorable smell. It's Chinese food, fresh air, grease and--mechanics grease, and that would be about it. Speaker 1: Okay, now, what kind of a little boy were you? I mean what was--how would typify yourself? Speaker 2: (Laughter) I'm laughing. I have, I, I have a one year old, he'll be one-year old tomorrow, a little boy. And I look at him, and now I can remember things. It's like, oh, it's all coming back, when he runs and climbs up on top of, on top of something and throws something over. I remember now. I had a vivid imagination, never had a lot of friends, didn't like--and still don't have a lot of friends to this day. I played by myself a lot. I would always create things, imaginary people that I would play with, especially ladies. I would always, I'd always put on records--we had a little record player. They only had 45s back then. I'd play music and imagine myself dancing with this beautiful lady, while I listened to the music. I always imagined that the girl down the street really, really liked me. You know, and she probably didn't know my name. One time I--and the girls who did like me, I didn't want to know their names, okay. And one day I remember this girl named Charlene, lived down the street. And I don't know why or why they might even do it today, but I, I must have--I don't know where I got it from. I threw a rock threw her window. I know this is what they used to do that then. I don't know why, but I--maybe to get the attention from her. And I got it. I, I, I broke her mother's picture window. And I got in a lot of trouble for that. I must have been, what, maybe not in the first grade, and, but I was in love with Charlene. So for whatever reason, I threw this rock in her window, broke the window. My father probably beat the hell out of me. And I remember I had to--he said I was gonna have to pay him back (laughter) for that window one day. Speaker 1: Now, this is kind of--it's unusual in some way. It may not be as unusual as I think it is, but, but not a lot of little boys I think are in love at age six or, or--. Speaker 2: Oh, I, I've always been in love. I've always liked women and the thought about women. I've always imagined myself being with beautiful women, and I'd see women walking down the street as a little boy and follow them. And the very funny thing is that my little one-year son, he's the same exact way. I mean he has this--I mean, not just a little baby. He'll see a woman going, and he'll just like look, and, you know, women come and play with him, and then he'll look back at me, like, yeah, I got this (laughter), you know. Story_ID: 10775 Speaker 1: But the other thing I would do is that--oh, when the first day at school--this is a good story. I went to a school called [George] Howland [Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois]--not Harlan, later I went to Harlan High, but I went to a school called Howland, [sic] H-O-W-L-I-N. And, oh, a lot of things happened at that school, I mean a very young age. But the first day at school, I, I remember my mother telling me that when the second bell rung--when the first bell rung, it was time to go in school. And when the second bell rings, then, you know, that means school's over. It's time to come home. Speaker 2: Now, this is on the West Side? Speaker 1: This is on the West Side. This is 1443 South Homan. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And I think Howland was on [1616 S.] Spaulding, I think. It was on Spaulding. And we'd--I'd walked, my mother walked me to school that day. I remember that. And got into the kindergarten classroom--looked around and kind of rested my little sweater or whatever I had on. And they, they gave us the little cots. Back then, the kids would have to take naps. I don't know if they do it now or not. And you had the, you had a little cot in, in school. So sit down, I remember just sitting there waiting. And I went, and when--and I had gone in on the first bell. And so the second bell rung about, I guess, two minutes later. So I came home. Obviously, what I didn't realize was she meant the second bell when it was time to go home, and maybe she didn't realize that there were two bells that rung, one bell to come into the school, and the other bell that rings once you're in school that, you know, it's the second bell. It's time to be in the classroom. But I, I walked back home. I was real happy. I spent my first five minutes in school, and I was happy, excited, and came back home. I think my mother gave me a spanking and took me back to school. But I remember, I remember vividly in my mind doing that. And then I used to, I used to--the, the assistant principal of that school, Howland, was Manfred Byrd, who later became the superintendent of, of Chicago Public Schools. He was my assistant principal, and I remember in first grade, I, I had a speech impediment. And I used to have to take speech therapy. And I remember coming back into my class from speech therapy, speech therapy lesson--maybe once a week I took it or twice a week. And I wasn't a frail kid, but I, I wasn't a big kid. I was like, you know, regular sized little kid. And, but I remember tripping this little boy. Why, I have no idea. But I tripped the little kid, and this little kid fell and hit his head on the corner and busted his--had to go to the hospital. And I remember Dr. Byrd, actually leading me out to that--back then the legend that all schools had whooping machines. And remember that, yeah, they had whooping--. Speaker 2: Yeah, this is something I've heard before and people are afraid of that--kids would be afraid of this. Speaker 1: They had whooping machines. And what I think they told us the whooping machine was, was actually the, the--what do you call those copy machines where they used to run--? Speaker 2: Yeah, the mimeograph machines. Speaker 1: The mimeograph machines. I think we thought that was it because the things would whoop out. But anyway, so I was supposed to go to a whooping machine. And I remember sitting out on the bench, and, first grade, but I had to write--I was supposed to write an apology--I guess I could spell back then, apology letter to this little boy and to my parents. And so they sent me home, and I was supposed to have my parents sign this note. I remember my parents to this--to their death never knew anything about this event. I don't know who I got or whether I thought I was forging their signature or what. But they never found out about that. That was my first cover operation. Then I remember down the street--same, same neighborhood. The neighborhood might have had a bad influence on me. There were--they used to have--instead of--rails now are aluminum or they're made out of steel. Back then, they had concrete railings. Handrails were made out of solid concrete. And down the steps--it'd be concrete steps and the handrails were concrete. And we used to slide down them. But one day, one of them was weak. Part of it had broken off. It was weak or something. And I don't know what I was--I was playing on it, I'm sure with this, a fellow who lived in this building. And I accidentally loosened enough of that brick, playing with it, and fell on it and broke this guy's foot. And again, I had to--I was supposed to like, you know, apologize. And I don't know who took me, back then a village was--we, we really did have kind of villages where, and your next-door neighbor would beat the crap out of you if you did something wrong, or, you know, everybody kind of looked out for everybody else's kid. So I was supposed to go home, tell my mother what I did, and, you know, get them to come back and, you know, check on him. And I don't know, I think might have went and got my cousin or somebody to pretend like they were my big brother, and to, you know, get me through this episode. I'd always get into stuff. I got into things a lot, to answer your question (laughter). I'd get into--ah, my mother [Justina Poole Mhoon], before she passed, would have, would have told you that I was very busy, and I always got into--I got into stuff. I also worked a lot. I worked--I remember back before I started school, I would go play--I got in trouble one time because I came--I had a sweet tooth. And again, we weren't, we, we didn't have much money at all. So if I wanted some candy or something from the little penny, penny-candy store, I'd have to go out somewhere and find something to do so somebody would pay me money to, to work, and--so I could buy penny candy. And so I went, so I would go sweep up stores, little corner stores or I'd go wash somebody's dishes. Oh, and actually, this is before my Uncle Clarence. Back then policy was real big in the black community. And Ms. Viola, I'll never forget her, I would always take the bag of policy numbers. Somebody in my parents' building, maybe my mother, would collect the policy slips, put 'em in a paper bag. And then I'd have to take 'em across the alley to Ms. Viola. And I guess she would take 'em to the Jones boys or whoever was handling them in that territory. And I'd get like a, you know, two or three pennies. And I'd go buy candy. But I, one day I, I came home with a snowball cupcake, don't eat them to this day because of this, hate 'em. And I got a whooping because my mother thought I stole it or something. And I'd, actually had worked all day sweeping up this man's store to get this like, twelve cent cupcake that my mother took away from me. And "One Stop", it was called the "Stop Light", "Stop Light" grocery store over on--one block behind Homan. And I brought home this cupcake, "see, mommy, see what I got", and I done worked all day sweeping the store, and she thought I'd taken it and stole it, and so she whooped me and [I] didn't get the cupcake. But I was busy, I always worked, I always could make money. I was very adventurous. I, when we lived, when we moved to the projects, I would look out of the twelfth floor window and I would try to look as far as I could look. And back then, they had a lot of water towers because they stored the water for buildings in these towers that were on top of the buildings. And so I would see the building, and I would say, I'm a run away, and I'm a go to that tower, find that tower and climb up the tower. So I would tell my mother, I would warn her, "mama, I'm a run away today". So she'd pack me a lunch, a little (laughter) peanut butter and jelly, jelly sandwich, and still, I'd say, "See you later." And I'd never eat the lunch she packed me. I'd always look at the direction--I have an extremely good sense of direction to this day, around the country. I can go to a foreign country, and after one trip some place, I'll know my way back. But I'd always go to where, I'd try to get to where I was going. And on the long--along the way, I'd make enough--back then you could buy a hot dog and French fries for a quarter. So I'd go somewhere along way, I'd get hungry, didn't want the peanut butter and jelly sandwich, find a store or find some pop bottles or something along the way to cash 'em in so I could buy a hot dog, and probably wasn't even two hours away from home. And then I'd come back home. So I was real adventurous, worked hard. Speaker 2: You'd go by yourself to do these kind of things? Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, I'd always run away by myself. I would, I had no more than--when I was in, a little bitty boy, I had a neighbor downstairs who was mixed. And I think he was half Hispanic, half black, named Eddie, Jr., Eddie, Jr., who lived on the second floor in the back. And he was my friend. I, it seems as though I only had maybe one, two friends at a time. I had lots of cousins who would always seem to--whatever I had, when they came over they would either take it from me and steal it or, or break it. So I wasn't crazy about them. We joke about that to this day. They remember that they used to take the stuff too. And they're grown now. And even when, then when I, when I went to school, I would have maybe one male friend at a time. And all the way up, grammar school I'd have one--I used to always--I would always make sure I was, I wasn't a rough kid at all. So I always made sure I got in with the bad boys. When, when we were doing okay, when we moved to the South Side, I'd always make sure that I brought the bad boys home for lunch (chuckle) or either I'd buy them lunch or hang out with them and whatever to make sure I was in their good graces. So I didn't, I hard ever, I don't, I don't--I never--one time in the projects I got beat up. There were two little bullies in boy--in the Cub Scouts. And they didn't know I was a Mhoon, and they didn't know about the Mhoon temper. So one day they beat me up for the last time. And they were twins I think. And I beat the hell out of both of 'em and they never messed with me again. So I would, but I didn't, I didn't--if you made me mad, I'd get real, real mad. But I never really showed my temper that much. You'd have to really piss me off really bad. Story_ID: 10776 Speaker 1: And I also had an older brother who I really, I loved my older brother. Unfortunately, he was into drugs at that time, and he spent a lot of time in jail, in and out of jail. But whatever he'd steal, he'd always bring it and give it to me and my sister. He would--we had these bikes he stole. We had a whole set of encyclopedias, but I really--and until this day, he's still in and out of prison. He's a older, old man now, and--. Speaker 2: How many siblings do you have? Speaker 1: I have an older sister, sister, Patricia Mhoon. I have a--and then there was like a eight-year span between my sister and brother. So I have a younger sister named Jeanetta (ph.). Then I have a younger brother named Anthony, Tony Mhoon. And again, they came along--we were maybe seven years old. I was seven. My oldest sister is two years older than I am, when they came along. So there was a little span between the, the different sets of kids. Speaker 2: Okay, let's see if we can get through school--. Speaker 1: And then the older, older--I'm sorry. The oldest brother is Charles. He's, Charles Mhoon. He's, he's older. He's maybe eight years older than me and my sister. Story_ID: 10777 Speaker 1: Now, did you start at Howlin? That's where you started school. Speaker 2: Howlin was a grammar school, yes. Speaker 1: Okay, and then--that was on the West Side. And then--so you were there until you were about--? Speaker 2: I was there until maybe third grade. Speaker 1: Okay, so you're about eight years old then? Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right. Moved to the projects. In the projects I ended up third grade and went into fourth grade. That was, that changed--that was a life-changing grade cause I started playing drums then. Speaker 1: Okay, now, how did you get introduced to drums? Speaker 2: The Beatles, Ringo Starr. I used to--they had just made their invasion of America, and we had a black and white TV, and I remember them getting off that plane, and I remember all those girls screaming and hollering for Ringo Starr. So I, I watched Ringo Starr. I said, I want to be like him. Speaker 1: So you're about nine years old at that point, I guess. Speaker 2: No, no, actually, you know what, actually--. Speaker 1: Fourth grade, that's '64 [1964], I guess '63 [1963], '64 [1964]? Speaker 2: It's third, actually, the third grade cause we were still in third grade when we moved from Homan. I was in third grade so I was seven, seven. Speaker 1: Okay, you'd have been a year ahead. Most third graders are eight. Speaker 2: Back then they started earlier. Speaker 1: Did they? Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, back then they started at--you could get in kindergarten at five and a half, I think. They just moved this new age thing up recently where you got to be, I think six or seven. Speaker 1: You were born in '54 [1954]. Speaker 2: Fifty four [1954] so--. Speaker 1: So '64 [1964]--. Speaker 2: Nah, sixty--so '62 [1962]--let's see--. Speaker 1: Yeah, the Beatles came out in sixty--that's, they came over here in '64 [1964]. Speaker 2: I thought it was '62 [1962]. Was it '64 [1964]? Speaker 1: No it was '64 [1964], yeah. They were on the Ed Sullivan Show and all that. Speaker 2: So I was ten. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay, so--well, I was already, I was already playing before then. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I was playing before then. But the Ringo Starr. I used to--actually, I was playing before then because I used to get in trouble. I would take--back then they had the big Folgers coffee cans. And I'd take my mother's coffee, and I'd pour it out, and I put the plastic cap back on the coffee can. And that was my drum. Ringo just legitimized it. I realized, well, to do this right, you got to have something to hit this plastic with, not your hand. He wasn't a bongo player. He was a drummer. So then I took clothes hanger, hangers, and I'd take the wire off the clothes hanger. And I'd take two--I was, I'd get in trouble case--like I said, we were poor. So I'm jacking up the coffee, and I'm messing with the clothes hangers. And--. Speaker 1: So you'd take those cardboard things off the clothes hanger--? Speaker 2: Yeah, and these were my drumsticks. But at--when we moved from--into the project, I was in third grade, going into fourth grade, they had a, I guess my father kind of knew, you know, I had a little inkling for it--and probably just wanted to keep me busy. And so he let me join the drum and bugle corps at Grant, Ulysses S. Grant grammar school, which was on Jackson, like 1100 West on Jackson [Street, Chicago, Illinois], still there. Speaker 1: Okay, so you were a student at Grant then when you moved. Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I was actually too young to--you had to be in fourth grade to be in the drum corps, and I was just so--I started in third grade taking lessons. And when I originally got there, there was a nun from, from the Merilac (ph.) House which was down the street on the West Side. That was like the social center, the Catholics had this social center to, for the young kids in the hood. And, so I took lessons from her, and--Sister Mary. And then the next grade, at fourth grade, I started--I could play in the drum corp. And then we had this fellow who I still know today named Charles Walton, who took over the--Sister, the nun left, and then Charles Walton came in, and he took over the drum corp. And he's actually the long--he's known me longer than anybody else outside of my family. He's--I kind of, I, I--and I still know him today, talk to him today. And I was short, plus back then, they had big drums. They had the big marching drums. And I was too small, and they didn't have anymore. So my father got my grandfather to buy me a little snare drum. They didn't know, they just brought a little snare drum. And my father hooked it up around me so that I could march with it. So I kind of stood out. I was this little short kid in this marching band, and I was the only kid that had a little snare drum when everybody else had the big core drums. And, but that was my first day view on television. We, that--we marched in the Christmas parade. It was actually--the Thanksgiving, which actually was the Thanksgiving Day parade. And-- Speaker 1: The big one they used to have in downtown Chicago. Speaker 2: Downtown on State Street, right. And marched in that, so I was a, I was, I was hooked then. And somewhere along the line, like I said, I saw Ringo and saw where all these girls will really holler at me if I get this stuff down pat. And I convinced my grandfather to get me a drum set. He brought me the rest of the parts to the drum. They were all ala carte. They were call mitch matched [mismatched]. But I had this little drum set, and I remember he didn't buy me a seat--they didn't know. You know, they didn't know. They just brought little cheap stuff. So in order to sit down and play my set, I had to take the television off the television stand. They had those little carts that ran around--you know, you pushed around, and sit, I used to sit on it. I got in trouble for that all, all the time cause then I used to sit, you know, ride it saddle. And then I'd play my drum sets while sitting on the television stand. But I would--I followed Ringo. Ringo was my inspiration, and started playing drums. And I was hooked, got my little drum set, and that was it. That was the turn--literally, the turning of my life. Story_ID: 10778 Speaker 1: I actually started playing, I was on the West Side. I was in the projects when I started playing--. Speaker 2: Okay, right. Speaker 1: --on the West Side--. Speaker 2: Okay, at Grant--. Speaker 1: Parkway Gardens, Grant High School. Speaker 2: That's right at Grant School. Speaker 1: Grant, [Ulysses S.] Grant Elementary School [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Yeah, and so Ringo Starr is your idol, and--. Speaker 1: He was, yeah. He was my inspiration then. Speaker 2: (Laughter) At that point, cause he was a famous drummer, right? Speaker 1: He's famous, and, you know, there wasn't nobody black playing drums on TV. Speaker 2: Well, you did know--you see the thing about it is, now, you can maybe speak to this on some level. We don't want to digress too much, but the musicians say, that played behind the Motown sound, you didn't know their names, right? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: They never told us who they were. Speaker 1: No, no. If I hadn't of been a musician, I would still--I knew them. I knew James Jamison and them from back then only because, you know, these were cats who we really--you know, when we found out the, you know, when we got into the, the Motown thing. But, you're right, the Motown thing was actually a bigger thing, it was actually a bigger thing non-black than it was black at first, because the music, even though we pushed it over, when it got over, you know, it got--started being pop music, it spread like wildfire. So it was fueled--it spreaded on the pop market before everybody black knew about it. So I was a late comer to all that because from Ringo Starr and from--and I went from Ringo Starr and them to the Monkee's, to the, you know, Rolling Stones. So I was really gonna be a rock drummer. Speaker 2: Now, what kind of radio did you listen to growing up? I mean I know [W]'VON [radio station] started about the same time that the Beatles were, I mean a little, well, maybe a little bit before. Speaker 1: Nah, that's, that's another kind of, I think, maybe, not misnomer, but I think a lot of blacks my age back then listened to WLS before they, we knew about 'VON, okay. And then I think a little later in the '60s [1960s], later '60s [1960s], when 'VON really started blowing up, then (excuse me), we kind of went to 'VON. Speaker 2: So the top forty dominated the listening of, of--. Speaker 1: Yes, the top forty, yeah--. Speaker 2: --of young black people? Speaker 1: Yes, it does, as it does now, still. The top forty just now happens to be black and urban music. But I didn't listen to much radio at all. When I did--because I was a musician. Most--I can't say most. A lot of musicians--I mean I was really a serious musician. So I spent my time listening to what records I was gonna mimic and practicing and practicing for groups. So by the time I finished, it was time to go to bed. So I didn't listen to much radio at all. Story_ID: 10779 Speaker 1: Now, in terms of the record, record--the record, record distribution or record sales in those days was a little bit different than they are today. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: Can you talk about, like 45s, you could get 'em in your neighborhood, right? Speaker 2: Ah, yeah, back then you could about--45s, the, the dominant record store which later became a chain was called Metro Music. And it's a funny story. I actually, I don't know what Eddie Carter's doing today, but back when I was a little boy, we used to go--he liked my sister, this man named Eddie Carter, who owned Metro Music. And he started off with a little store on 91st and--89th and Cottage Grove [Chicago, Illinois]. And he liked my oldest sister, Pat, and he used to let me come in the record store and stand on a crate and, and spin records and sell records. I was always selling something or working, as I said. But, yeah, and actually, he was, he was a maverick. He, he had all kinds of vision. And he was doing video back then, taping groups live and everything and showing them in the stores, before anyone was doing that. But, yeah, back then you could buy a 45 for a quarter, you know, a single. And, you know, we didn't buy many albums. That was a real luxury. I don't remember how much they cost, but as I said, probably no more than three or four dollars, you could buy the album, full album. But distribution, even though I wasn't in it, as a little boy, back then I do know a lot of the history. There were few, if not any, black distributors. And one of the biggest ones in the country was also right here in Chicago, which was Leaner's, Ernie Learner and his brother, Billy Leaner. It was "Ernie's One Stop". And they were like the biggest--there's a, there's a video called "Music Row" about Chicago's music scene that chronicles all that. And, but the biggest--Chicago was actually the hub. People don't know, the Beatles actually, their American releases were first released from a company right down the street on Michigan called Vee-Jay Records. Capital wouldn't even put 'em out in the states, in the United States. They were through Vee-Jay which was a black-owned company here in, right here in Chicago. So, and, and right next to it was Ernie Leaner's, "Ernie's One Stop", which was the distributor for Vee-Jay Records. So, and they became a very powerful force in the record industry back then. But Chicago was the hub. I didn't know it--and again, at that age, I didn't know what was going on, on the business end, which I later got into. But it was real different. But we would go to, we'd listen to a lot of the records at the record store as opposed to on the radio. The record stores were like our, what you got the, the club dee jays now were--we went to the record stores back then to see what was out. Speaker 1: I, I remember in those days, you could go into a booth or something and there'd be some speakers, and you'd put your head between the speakers-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah--. Speaker 1: --and you'd listen to the record. Speaker 2: Yep, yep, yep. Speaker 1: Okay, and did you listen to--just out of curiosity, there was a big wattage station out of Galleton, Tennessee--. Speaker 2: Yeah, what's his name--. Speaker 1: WLAC. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: With the ball, [DJ Bill Allen] 'Hossman'. Speaker 2: Yeah, Hossman, yeah. I got to meet him because later when I got into the music business, yeah, I, I used to go down to see Hossman yep, used to--late at night, yep. Speaker 1: Yeah, all over the Midwest, black families would listen to the Hossman . Speaker 2: Yep, it was a clear channel station, that come straight in here, yeah, I remember that. Speaker 1: That's where you'd hear the blues and they'd have a, they'd have a gospel package, a blues package and all that. Speaker 2: Yeah (laughs). Speaker 1: You'd send away so much money, you'd get the whole package, and, you know. Speaker 2: I got most of my records from my, from my cousin, Dr. Mhoon, who lived downstairs and his sister, Barbara. And I didn't, I, I--I guess I couldn't read as a little guy, guy, but I remember the labels. I, I remember whether it was, if it was something that I liked, I remembered whether it had a dog on the label, which was RCA, you know, I didn't know it was RCA. Or there was a Red Dog label back then, so I remember, I would remember the labeling, you know, to show you how important packaging was and still is. That's how I basically could identify what I wanted to listen to (siren sound). Speaker 1: Just let him go by. Yeah, I remember listening to Roy Hamilton in Epic just to watch the little checks go by on the, on the side of the label, you know. Speaker 2: (Laughs), Right (laughs). Speaker 1: That was fascinating when I was about three or four or something. I'd look and say-- Story_ID: 10780 Speaker 1: But, yeah, I followed all the, I, I followed, I was a rock and roller, I followed, and because of the Beatles. The Beatles, you know, brought in this whole surge of rock and roll. So I, I was a Mick Jagger, the Doors and, and which I later, as a drummer later on, I got to, I got to tour with them. Speaker 2: With the Doors? Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, we used to travel with the Doors all the time. Speaker 2: Jim Morrison, right. Speaker 1: Jim Morrison, I was there all the time--every time Jim Morrison got arrested, I was there. The Staples, who I played with, we actually were managed by this man named Robert Stigwood, and which later became RSO, which is still a big, big, big label. But he was a big, powerful English manager. And he managed all these people. And most of them were signed to his record label. So he also managed [Roebuck] "Pop Staples and the Staple Singers". So I used to tour with all those people. Story_ID: 10781 Speaker 1: Let me go back a little bit. Now, you became--from what I've read, you became sort of a child prodigy drummer--. Speaker 2: Beating on the coffee cans (laughs). Speaker 1: By the time you were twelve, you were supposed to be good--you were good. Speaker 2: Yeah, by the time I was twelve, I was on the road touring. I was with the Staples. Speaker 1: Now, how did you first tour come about? I mean how did your first professional drumming gigs come about? Speaker 2: Well, that's a little story. First professional, let's say semi-professional. There was a lady--when I lived on 91st Street, there was a lady on 91st and Indiana who was legendary. Her name was Satch, Satch and Merrill (ph.). Her husband was Merrill. Her name was--her legal name was Mrs. Finch, and we called her Satch. And she managed young groups. One group was called the "Specials" and consisted of her son and some local teenagers. She also had a group called the "Casadons". And so they were like the local, local group legends. And because the "Five Stair Steps" were--they lived right down the street, and they also went to the high, same high school that I was later to go to which was Harlan. And all these people came out of Harlan. Back then Harlan High was, was like this big music maida (ph.). Speaker 1: And Harlan, Harlan, let's just stop for a--Harlan High School is, in those days, must have been a fascinating place to be. There's so many that, lawyers, judges, doctors and other people came out of Harlan High School--. Speaker 2: Entertainers, yeah. Speaker 1: And that's out at ninety--. Speaker 2: Ninety-fifth and--96th and Michigan, South Michigan. But even in grammar school, we still, we aspired to not only go there, but we knew all these people that did go there. They were, you know, then the "Five Stair Steps" hadn't actually blown up yet, but they were still famous in our neighborhoods and around Chicago. But Mrs. Finch or Satch, she had kind of like a incubator, which she helped groom young artists. And I used to go over there and watch rehearsals, and I would just be sitting there. And, I don't know how--don't remember how I got in, but I'd just sit and wait for the drummer to fall out or, or get drunk or something so I could get up there and play. And she let me come in. So she was my first real nurturer. And, and unfortunately, the drummer got, was killed. He got shot. Matter of fact, it, it's six degrees of separation. Later his family was a famous gospel family, and I didn't know this till later. And I actually signed his family to my, to my label. His family were called the "Barrett Sisters". His mother was Delores Barrett-Campbell. And his name was Frank Campbell, Frank Campbell, Jr. And he got killed. And so I--that opened the door, and I became the drummer for Finch and the "Specials" and the "Casadons". I was like this little house drummer for this little, you know, entertainment group. And--. Speaker 1: So, now, how old were you then? Speaker 2: I was eighth grade, going into, getting ready to go into high school. Speaker 1: Okay, so you're like twelve, thirteen? Speaker 2: I was like twelve or--I was like twelve. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I was like twelve. So again, they were, you know, they, they kind of ushered me into my high school entre into Harlan. Story_ID: 10782 Speaker 1: Prior to that though, I met Purvis Staples at--I was in sixth grade. So I was what, you're good at math. Speaker 2: Sixth grade, you would have been ten then, I guess--. Speaker 1: Yeah, ten. Speaker 2: If you started school early. Speaker 1: Yeah, I was about ten, this--ten or eleven. And we lived over on 91st and Dolphin, one block East of Cottage Grove. And again, I was attracted to pretty women, even--it never, never went away. And I used to see this beautiful lady get out of this beautiful big car. It was a duce and quarter [Buick ], Electra 225. And then the extra plus was this real good-looking guy who would get out the car and, you know, but the lady was beautiful, still is beautiful to this day. I saw her at Pop's funeral. And it was Charlene Staples, Purvis Staples wife, and the good-looking guy who always dressed immaculately was Purvis Staples. I didn't have a clue who these people were. I just knew I needed to know who this guy was. He was, he would become my, my mentor, world-class mentor. And so I introduced myself--one day he had a load of clothes. I offered to help take his clothes up for a dollar. So I helped him take his cleaning up out of his car, got up there, the trash was full. I said, well, for fifty cents more, I'll, I'll dump your garbage for you. So that was my entre to the Staples Family. I became Purvis Staples, like, you know, little valet. I would always go get--then I had to take his clothes to the cleaners, anything to get into his house where I could see his beautiful wife. I'd do anything, you know, mop the floor, whatever. And right about that point I'd started to sing a little bit. I thought I could sing. I was still playing drums, but I wanted to sing. I think, I, I remember, what's that fellow, the, the drummer who died, the rock drummer, Buddy Miles. Buddy Miles was singing. So I said, I can do this too. Okay, I'll really get all the women now, sing and play drums. And so I started singing, and Purvis first found out that I was, could sing, cause I told him. And back then the Regal Theater was on 47th Street, this is the original Regal Theater. And they had talent shows every week. So we convinced Purvis to get us on this talent show at the Regal Theater, which was really the funniest thing--I could see him laughing at us. And I was Smokey, I was--Smokey Robinson was on the show headlining. And I was on there in the talent show singing like, "Ooh, Baby, Baby", okay, couldn't sing a lick, okay, had the--but had these real cool velvet shirts that Purvis helped us buy. And we had, you know, we had a ball, didn't win anything. But Purvis realized, I think at that time that, you know, this kid's career is like, he ain't gonna be a singer. So he found out that I was a better drummer than I was a singer. And so, again, he became like my mentor, my big brother. And he took me--and again, I really didn't know who they were. I knew he was famous and had a lot of money. But I didn't really know who this, these people were. So he intro--took me to rehearsal with him one day, and because he decided he was gonna--he was gonna play bass with the Staple Singers, you know. And Pops [Staples] already played guitar. And so he took me down to rehearsals so that I, I could plays drums so they'd have a, a full little trio. So even though they used world-class musicians all the time when they recorded or what have you, I became actually the first drummer to ever tour with the Staple Singers. Now, this was simultaneous while I was--I'd do, I'd go on weekends because I was in school. I was just getting ready to go into high school. And so back, in those days, even though this man, Stigwood, managed the Staple Singers, they weren't really--they weren't who they are now. And they hadn't even made the big hits yet. Story_ID: 10783 Speaker 1: They were basically a gospel group--. Speaker 2: They were, actually, they were known as a soul folk group in the big rock and roll era. They, they were really gospel, but we would, we would get in Pop's Fleetwood [Cadillac]and we would drive to Dayton [Ohio], to--all over the country, way down South for--Friday evening, to be there for Saturday to do whatever concert. And again I, I'm not really getting who they are yet, still. But we would go--I remember playing in the Auditorium Theater and Dick Biondi or somebody, one of these old rock cats was MC. And I was a, I was short. I kind of didn't grow until I was maybe nineteen, get taller. And I was always kind of like a highlight. And we were in the Auditorium Theater--I didn't know where--I'd probably never been downtown 'til--I know I'd never been in the Auditorium Theater. But I used to always feel so sorry for us because we played these big arenas all over the country and--see, from, on stage, with all the lighting, you can't see in the audience. It all looks black. So I just assumed nobody was out there, you know. You know, I knew nobody would come see us cause I didn't know who we were, and we weren't the Beatles, and, you know, I didn't know who Jim Morrison was, and I didn't know who Donovon was, and I didn't know who--. Speaker 1: And they were on the shows with you? Speaker 2: They were the headliners. We were opening up for these people, okay. And this a funny story. It wasn't until--I did this for like years. On the weekends I would travel with Pops, and it would be nothing but--Purvis [Staples] kind of gave up the bass, and so I'd be just--it'd be just Pops playing guitar and me playing drums. And later on we picked up a bass player who--that's a real interesting story, but a young fellow named Hasaan Khan who was Chaka Khan's husband. But when we used to--Chaka, we used to all hang around, but traveled with Pops and them. We would, like the Bee Gee's, we toured with the Bee Gee's and, all over the country. One interesting thing was the Bee Gee--and every time Jim Morrison of the Doors, you know, there would always be a raucous on stage, and all I know is men in black suits would rush on stage and pull 'em off, you know. And I'm a little kid. I don't know what's going on. I don't even know who these long-haired smelly people are, okay. I just realized that can't nobody be out in the audience because nobody knows who are the Doors are and nobody knows who the Staple Singers are, so it can't be anyone out there. So we did a concert with "Ina Gadda Davida" Boys, the 'Iron Butterfly' [band]. And I knew that song, so I knew they had to be somebody 'cause I had their record. They were selling their records in the black record stores. We were in Dayton, Ohio at that arena. And, you know, we spent time in, and we still--we were the opening act. And we were like, you know, it was novelty to have a black act on with these, you know, the conscious-minded, hippy people would like that. And--. Speaker 1: And it kind of reflects back to the roots of the music that they were playing. Speaker 2: Yes, exactly, exactly. They were, they were--they admitted that this is what it came from, the music came from. So I remember, one day I wandered from the back room out to the front to get some popcorn. And this was at the arena, and it was still light for whatever reason. And I looked around and the place was like packed. They must have had--I don't know how many--that whole place holds tens of thousands of people, right. It was packed, and I looked--that was my first dealing with stage fright, and I wasn't even on stage. I'm like, holly cow, all these--what, what are these people here for, you know. So that was the first inkling that I realized that, wow--and we had been doing this for like a year or so, at these places that, you know, we'd been playing for all these people. The Bee Gee's, I remember Maurice [Gibb] and his brothers. I, again, I--they wouldn't let me play my drum set because--and I had a little rinky dink drum set. And they had this elaborate stage setup. And, but I'd, we'd always put it in--we, they, they had private planes flying them around. And we drove around in a Fleetwood wherever we went. And I remember, I really wanted to play my set one night, and I remember the Bee Gee's taking my drums and putting it on their plane. I didn't, I didn't know that it was a private plane, but they would, they started flying my little set around on their jet, and everywhere I went, when I got there--of course, they had stage crews, my, my drums would be set up. And I thought like it was Pops or Purvis who would set up my drums up--I didn't know, you know. So, I had, but, but the guys were always good. Jim Morrison, and all, I knew all these fellows. You know, I, I, I really--because also I was a rock and roll drummer, but I didn't know who these people were. But I always--that's a feeling in my life when I think about a lot of these--I knew all these guys. I knew him personally, and they liked me and befriended as a, you know, little black kid that they thought was cute. But, yeah, Bee Gee's, "Iron Butterflies", the Doors, Donovon. We were supposed to do the Beatles, but anybody who was associated with Robert Stigwood, Elvis Presley, we, we interacted with, and sometimes toured with. So, as a drummer, I did from the Staples as a little bitty boy to, when I got in high school, they stopped letting me travel cause they wanted me to stay in high school, and, you know, get good grades. So they kind of fired me. Story_ID: 10784 Speaker 1: And I started playing with Finch and the "Specials". And from there at Harlan High, there were so many musicians. One fellow who went there was--I didn't think--we, we had people who we didn't even know, didn't go to that school. That was a place for musicians and artists and whoever was, whoever to hang, to hang out. But one fellow was a fellow named Freddie White. And he was part of the White family, which was 'Earth, Wind and Fire'. It's Maurice, Maurice White's brother. But at that time, he wasn't playing with 'Earth, Wind and Fire'. They, they were just starting. He was Donnie Hathaway's drummer. And so there was a band called the 'Tea Box Band', which had one hit out. But they backed up, they backed up like Gene Chandler. They backed up a lot of famous people. And Freddie White was their drummer. Freddie White left them to go with the 'Tea Box', to go with Donnie Hathaway. And when Freddie White left them, I got a shot to audition for this band. And I became the youngest drummer to ever tour with the Tea Box Band. And I, with them, I backed up Gene Chandler, Johnny Taylor sometimes, a fellow from here named Garland Green. If we were ever down South and Tyrone Davis' band, or his drummer wasn't there, I would back him and play behind him. So with the Tea Box Band, I was, I know I was like fifteen, and I was on the road with them, traveling mostly down South, but every weekend almost. We'd leave Friday. I'd always--I missed so many days in high school on my report card every term, they would put the days that I was there, as opposed to the days that I was absent, 'cause I missed so much. Speaker 2: So now we're in the like, late '60s [1960s] or? Speaker 1: Yeah, we're in the late '60s [1960s], going into the '70s [1970s]--. Speaker 2: Okay, whereas--. Speaker 1: --because I graduated from [John Marshall] Harlan [High School, Chicago, Illinois] in '72 [1972], came out in '72 [1972]. So I traveled around with the Tea Box band for about four years as a drummer. And every--with them, I played with all these other R&B artists. Story_ID: 10785 Speaker 1: And then at a--when I graduated at nineteen, I got married. I grad--graduated at eighteen, but the next year--I'd been dating a young lady named Joan Crawford. It was--yeah, that was kind of funny. She was a good girl. She was a good Catholic school girl, and I was, I dated her for five years in high school, and then got married--graduated at eighteen. And I think it was in my eighteenth, my eighteenth year that Pop's younger daughter, who wasn't with us, Cynthia, she actually died. And the girls and Purvis and Pops asked me to come out--I'd become over the years with them, their surrogate son, Pop's son. It's kind of like I moved from--well, well, I didn't move from, Purvis always was my big brother. And I moved to Pop's son. And I didn't know it, but this cat, he would always look out for me. You know, I was a little kid, and he knew, I think more about what might have been going on in my household than--he knew we were broke, poor. And he, I think he, I think he saw within me a, a chance to like, you know, help this kid make it. And, and it was. Actually, I, I owe so much to him, not to take anything away from my parents, but what I do now, what I've learned and what I know about business and what I know about the entertainment industry, and what I know about being a gentleman, and what I know about exposure to the world, cause we traveled all over the world, I got from Pop Staples and Purvis Staples. Not to put my hands in my pockets when I had on a suit jacket, because as a little kid, I didn't have a suit jacket. I would all--would always have to wear one Purvis' extra suit jackets. And he didn't want me to mess it up, so I could never put my hands in my suit pockets. He'd knock me in the arm. But when Cynthia died, I went back out, not as a drummer, but as their, as Pop's valet. And that's when I really started cause now, you're in the era where they're, they're number one on the charts. They're one of the biggest R&B groups out there. They got "Respect Yourself" and all these hits, so they're doing--they're headlining tours now around the country, around the world. And so I went back out as Pops' valet just to be close and just, you know, they knew he needed somebody close to him. And that was real interesting. When he first took me out--Pops was an interesting character. He'd make a nickel holler. He could squeeze a penny until it screamed. And so, but I learned my lessons. I was always hustling and always making money. So he gave me these humongous opportunities that he didn't realize even, I don't think, how they would impact me. He took me out on the road as his valet. And first he started paying me. He was paying me maybe three or four hundred dollars a week, which was a lot of money for a kid. But he knew I was getting married--. Speaker 2: Three or four--? Speaker 1: Yeah, three or four hundred bucks. Speaker 2: --hundred dollars a week? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, now, that--in those days, to put in perspective, a man working in a factory, you know, made just slightly over that a week. Speaker 1: I, I was rolling. I was rolling, I was rolling, but he knew I was getting ready to get married. And I, and my job was to help him with his clothes and, you know, get all the stuff in the hotel rooms and backstage and bring the clothes from the hotel backstage. And during the show, what he said, he said, here, you can make a little, you know, you know, you could sell some pictures, you know, sell the black and white pictures of the Staple Singers out front. So I said, cool. So I started selling pictures, and I must have did maybe a thousand dollars a night selling pictures. And this, it went to Pops. So he's like, oh, this is a pretty good deal. So he said, well, you know what? Why don't you do this. Why don't you sell these pictures, and I'll give you--I'll pay your expenses for traveling, but I ain't, I'm not gonna pay you any more. You make your money off the pictures, and I'll give you--I don't remember, maybe twenty percent of what you sold on the pictures. So I figured out in my little head even back then, that okay. My, my income here is going down, okay. So I got to sell more pictures. So I started selling color pictures for more, and then I started selling like cassettes. Back then the cassettes were real big, just, just coming in. So I, I'd order some cassettes from the factory via Pops, and I started selling cassettes. So by the time I was finished, I was doing like a thousand dollars a night myself, selling the stuff, okay. So Pops, being the guy he was, said, wait a minute. This cat's making too much money (laughter). So he took me off of that and put me back on salary, I think at about, and maybe I was doing a grand a week then, and put me back on salary. Story_ID: 10786 Speaker 1: And he was always very slick though, and sometimes it, it haunts me today with the girls. He always would tell me, never tell them, never tell the other kids what, you know, the, his children, what our deals, okay. But I was making a lot of money, man. I was like, wow. I'd, I'd send money back home to my ex--then, then he put me back on salary and then I had to pay my own traveling cause we flew everywhere right--back then. We flew first class every place. So he'd make me pay my own expenses, but he was a businessman, you know. And he taught me so many lessons. He taught me how to look a man in the eye as a warning eyes. If they couldn't look you in the eyes, don't do any business with them. He taught me things like integrity, how the--cause I, as we've talked about earlier, I was a real creative young kid, had a real vivid imagination. And I was a, what my mother would call a big little liar, okay. So I'd make up, I'd make up anything. I'd just create something, just out of nowhere (laughs), that this happened. And he kind of helped wean me from that because he told me how, that if you can't trust somebody else, that means you can't trust yourself. And it's you probably that you can't trust, more than the other person. So he taught me how to like--he helped wean me out of that lying to--because the, okay, if I, if I'm dealing with these people, and especially, he did all this because it was his, it was in his name, he knew I would have to do business, you know. And so he really taught me a lot of business lessons. He taught me how to never back down, how to always ask for more, and don't settle for too much less. He taught me how to save money. He taught me how to--Purvis taught me how to dress and how to live, you know. And I didn't like the way Purvis dealt with, dealt with women. Pops on the other hand was a, from another school. He was from a older school. So he dealt with women differently, and I kind of liked--and Pops, he actually had more people--he was a married man and did--I'd never see him--I'd never seen him cheat on Moms. But I, he sure did have more women coming through that back door than Purvis had, you know, at that, at that stage door, looking for Pops. They loved Pops. So he taught me a lot of life lessons, a lot of, a lot of business lessons. It got to the point where I'd, I'd--we used to play a lot of union houses. And so I couldn't sell. I'd have to, I'd have to turn over my stuff to the, the concession company at that place and let them sell. So one day we're in North--North or South Carolina. And Pops would teach me, we'd do a count. And sometimes I could sell, but the union people had to count first cause they had to take a piece of--the house had to get a piece of what they sold. So Pops would teach me how to hold back, how to, you know, give them a different number, have the, how to have two sets of books. Story_ID: 10787 Speaker 1: Okay, well tell us about this incident where this guy grabbed you, now. You're-- Speaker 2: Yeah, we're in South Carolina. And again, we're still in the early '70s [1970s], and mid-'70s [1970s]. So anyway, it's still a little tension going on between the races. And, and, you know, and Pops and them were known for, you know, they were, they were with [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] all during the service. So somebody, this fellow grabbed me and took me back into some office and somebody, understandably, went and ran and told [Roebuck] Pops [Staples]. And again, on the road, everybody just knew me as Pops' son. They didn't know I wasn't blood. They just, that was, that was how we went. And, and they were headlining. It was the Staples Singers, the Stylistics, the Dramatics, a whole bunch of--Heat Wave. This was a tour, big tour, man. Somebody ran back there and told Pops somebody had, this man had grabbed his son and took him back in the office. So, whoa, what did they do that for? Not only did he come and get me out that office, he cursed a whole bunch of people out. But he commenced to go to the promoter, told the promoter that, there's probably gonna be a riot here tonight because I ain't going on that stage, okay. They done grabbed my boy, and, you know, who do you think you are? They done grabbed my son and taken him in a room some place. This ain't, you know, this ain't, this ain't, you know, slavery. What are you--. So he raised all kinds of hell, ah, man. And, and they had to go on stage and announce that the show was, might be postponed. And, of course, obviously, all these black people sitting in the audience literally had a--you could hear rumbling, you know, I could hear the rumbling from being backstage. And little did I know, you know, I know he cares about me, and I know he would have cursed the man out and raised hell, but in the midst of all this, Pops kind of used this as a business opportunity (laughter). So whatever his fee was that concert, it probably doubled, okay (laughter). And he did go on, you know, he did go on, but he made, I mean, I, I think he even gave me a tip that night, okay, cause he, he--you know, because of this incident, he, he did well. But that's, that's the kind of cat he was. He was a good cat, and, and I love him. I love him very much. But we--I had a lot of, that was my, that, that experience with that cat, if it wasn't for him, I might, I might be, I might be in trouble. I might have been taking another turn. I had a lot of opportunities, and my, with my family and with just people I hung around to, to go down another road. But he kind of--and I think, as I said earlier, I, I think he knew that because of the neighborhoods that we lived in. And he kind of plucked me out of that neighborhood and, and took me over here and showed me this whole world, that even when we were--when he was on 89th Street, and I lived on 91st Street, like I said, they wasn't even big record--they were known as gospel. But, you know, I don't even know he--I don't he knew what was coming. But I toured with him as his valet and later his road manager, you know. I kind of evolved from the, selling the pictures because so many houses were union houses. We just said, ah, let them sell it, and especially after the, the incident in South Carolina. And then I became kind of like--I was, he put me in charge of the band. And I'm like all of nineteen years old, and the band members are like in their twenties. So, you know, you can imagine how much charge I had over these grown men. And they kind of, you know, put me through it, and, and I used to always go back and tell Pops, well, they won't, they won't do what I say. And he would tell me, say, well, you know what, I'm paying you to be the, you know, road manager. So, and that's your job. So you got to get them some kind of a way to mind you or else I'm gonna fire you. So I--again, he taught me a bus--business ethic. He taught me or taught me a work ethic and how to, actually, to get people to do what you want, one way or the other. And so I, I was like the band manager and that's when we went to the--we did thirty days in Vegas at the Sands Hotel, opening up for Sammy Davis, Jr. And I was meeting like all these great, you know, famous people and got to hang out with Sammy Davis and his band manager. Then I got into like the technical aspect because part of my job at the Sands for Pops was to be his lighting man, okay. Now, I don't know about lighting. We were at the Sands Hotel, and I'm up in the, in the, in the box with all this equipment and with the lighting people. And I'm supposed to tell them--so every day, I had to give, I gave them different directions because (laughs) I didn't know. And they got real pissed at me, and, and (laughs) I remember Sammy Davis, Jr. sending his lighting man in there, and kicking me out and then writing up schematics for the lights for the show, and you know, making it easier for me. But then I, after that I got off the road--I'm married now. I'm nineteen, I'm married and starting to settle down. Story_ID: 10788 Speaker 1: Did your wife travel with you? Speaker 2: No, no she was actually in grad school. She was in grad school. And I hadn't finished, I had--I started at, I did two years at Kennedy King in junior college and off and on. That two years probably took me three years just to finish Kennedy King. And Pops kind of, you know, figured it was time for me to settle down with my wife, and so he did a remarkable thing. I went to--one summer I took a class at, a engineering class at some school, Universal Studios, downtown on the near North side and learned how to be an engineer. And I studied that, and, it was, you know, it was one of these seminar, maybe eight weeks or something, classes. And I, you know, learned a little bit about engineering. But I could, I knew I could figure out the rest. And this cat built, built a recording studio on the South side on a hundred and third street, the first black-owned recording studio, professional studio, on the South side of Chicago. I don't think we knew that back then. But I helped order all the equipment. He took me to the bank--he got a loan; took me to meet with the chairman of the board of South Shore Bank and to this, (unclear) Milton Davis, and, you know, again, I'm only nineteen, maybe twenty now. And I'm, he's giving me all these entrees to these people who later on, not knowing me, unbeknownst to me, I had to deal with them later on in life. But I got to Milton Davis, the chairman of South Shore [Bank]. And I convinced Milton Davis to give Pops this loan. I mean I'm sure he was gonna give him the loan anyway, but I gave him the business argument, business principles of how I was gonna run this studio and make money. And I did. I made a lot of money over at the studio. I used to do sessions all night long. I'd go from 9:00 o'clock in the morning till 9:00 o'clock the next morning, recording people. And I think I generated over--yeah, I generated, I was generating six figures one year for that studio. And Purvis [Staples] at the same time had kind of come out of the group and Yvonne, the oldest sis--one of the other sisters had taken over, taken Purvis' place. And Purvis had, [Roebuck] Pops [Staples] built, brought a place on the South side called, later named "Purve's House". It was, it used to be called the Colonial House on East 79th Street. And Purvis ran that. And I ran the studio. And then I started meeting a lot of Pops'--and Pops was with Warner Brothers then. They were still real big and gold records all over the place. I'd meet--I met people like Richard Pryor, his manager, I got to know David Franklin very well. Again, I'm twenty-one years old, and I, I'm meeting all these people. I get--meet Robert Stigwood. I get to meet all these big, music industry people that would come by there all the time. I was back in the back recording, but Pops had his offices there also. So I get to meet all these people. And the studio kind of got tiring, different type, grade of people started coming. We started to get into rap and stuff like that. Speaker 1: Now, about what year, where are we now? Speaker 2: This is, we're--. Speaker 1: This the mid-'70s [1970s] at least cause Purve's House is '74 [1974] or '75 [1975]. Speaker 2: Yeah, we're mid seven--we're mid-'70s [1970s] now. And disco hasn't come yet. But actually, Sugar Hill and them are in, the Sugar Hill Gang and them, the Sugar Hill Gang's coming in. And so we kind of, I, I'm--actually, my wife is pregnant, and I got to get a real job now with benefits, okay. So I get insurance, not knowing what was going on. So Purvis kind of took over the recording studio. And one day I took Pops to the airport and he was going off on a tour. And he'd always let me drive his Mercedes, and I just happened to see a for want, for--a want-ad, a help-wanted ad for a place in Bensenville. And the place was called 'WEA', W-E-A. I had no idea what it was, what or not, didn't know what it was. Story_ID: 10789 Speaker 1: Wea, I didn't know what it was. It turned out to be a warehouse where they shipped records from, and it happened to be owned by Warner Brothers, which was the label Pops was on. So, all coincidental, I mean. So I walk in there, and I tell the people, of course, you know, who I am. And, and, of course, they hire me (laughter), okay. So I get a job working in a warehouse. And I worked there--but all my lunch hours, I would go, and all my breaks, I'd go up and I would finagle with, mingle the front office people, which was the marketing people for Warner Brothers, Elektra, Solar Records, and Atlantic Records. So I got to, and they--again, they knew who I was, so they were, would befriend me. And I got to be real good friends with them until one day a fellow in the--the people in the warehouse would kind of--I was the only black in the warehouse. And they got kind of, I guess, a little envious, a little jealous and a little racist, and one day one of the guys tried to kill me. He dropped a, a--what do you call those things, the conveyor belt, the belts that trucks would pick up, a lift truck. He had, dropped a lift, a plat of records, like tried to drop it on top of me. I just barely escaped with my life, literally. And so, that caused a little raucous in the warehouse (laughter). People came out there wanting to cut him and, you know, people from the front office, these executives, you know, the black executives, all the record men, promotion people, you know, they're ready to start a riot in the warehouse, okay. So this fellow named Al, Al--I forget his name. He was the branch manager. He basically told me to take a couple of days off. They fired the fellow who was a warehouse manager, who tried to do this to me. They fired him. I went home, took about a week off, and at the same time, I got a phone call from a man named Jesse Dixon who was a big gospel singer, who told me that Andre Crouch was looking for a drummer. And he had to do this tour, and his drummer couldn't do the tour. And, and Jesse knew, I'd played with him off and on, and knew that I was a good drummer. So I said, great. So I went out to California, and I played and toured with Andre Crouch--it was Andre Crouch and the Disciples back then. And, well, back up. When I left, right before I left, the people at Wea asked me what happened to me, how come I didn't come back to work. I said, ah, I don't know, my head hurt. I got to, you know, take some more time off. So they said, okay. I said, "By the way, I'm thinking about moving to California." Can you get me--and which I really did want to. I said, "Can you, maybe I can work out there in your offices." The fellow said, no problem. We'll transfer me, you know, they're looking at lawsuits and, and they don't want--and then the Staples Singers is a big biller for Warner Brothers Records, so they don't want to mess with me. So they said, sure, we'll transfer you out there, and no problem. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But I never showed up to work. I was touring with Andre Crouch. I was playing drums. I was happy, I was, you know, my wife was getting ready to drop this baby, and my first child. And I kind of like was--the world was my oyster. I kind of like forgot about everything. And, of course, after about a month, the tour was over, had to come back home and never showed up to work at WEA, in, in Burbank, never showed up to Warner Brothers. So I got back, and my wife, well, "The man from WEA has been calling you, and so I called them back. They said, what the hell's going on? You never showed up to work up there (laughter), you know, what do you want to do? What are you gonna do?" So I still needed those benefits. Oophs, forgot, wife still pregnant. And so he said, well, we're gonna make you an offer you can't refuse. So they made me what you call a merchandiser back then. Now, it's called a field marketing rep for Warner Brothers Records. So I went back to them, and they trained me to put up the posters and displays in record stores. If you go by record stores, even now, you got displays in the windows. Well, back in the day, I was one of the people for that company that put up these displays. And I loved it. It was great. I got a--it was basically, my own hours. I made decent money, got immediate benefits. My wife had our--my first child, my ex-wife had my first child and did real good with that; got a promotion, got hired directly to Warner Brothers Records as a local promotion person. I did that, got gold records and platinum records. We promoted the Doobie Brothers and matter of fact, while I was WEA, to show you how six degrees, one of the biggest acts at Atlantic Records was the Bee Gee's who I knew all these guys. Another big group that we had on--. Speaker 2: Yeah, they just had a--. Speaker 1: Saturday night. Speaker 2: Yeah, they had a resurgence because they were, they were kind of--they became obscure for a while. Speaker 1: Yep, yep. But "Saturday Night Fever" thing brought 'em back. So like I knew all these guys. And matter of fact, the Doors, all those guys came back in with a--Jim Morrison, after his death, had a, they had a resurgence. So I, I literally knew all these guys. And so that kind of helped me propel in my career. And, but I, I still was in the R& B departments in the different companies. So I went from Warner Brothers as a local promotion man to Solar Record. On Solar Records, they had Lakeside and the--which I knew all those guys, Lakeside, the Whispers, Shalimar, a group called Destiny, but I got to be friends with Leon Silvers who was producing all these people, for Dick Griffey, who owned the company. And he became like my mentor. I kind of--Pops and them were still doing their thing, but I kind of got into a new area now. And, and I got actually in it really to help Pops with a lot of his business stuff because now I was on the inside. And I knew how things worked. And so I did that and went to Solar, worked there as a--the independent person, getting--my job was to get the records played in Chicago and in the Midwest. So I did that. Story_ID: 10790 Speaker 1: Then I worked independ--independently, I worked for--I, I worked the "Thriller" record [Michael Jackson's "Thriller" album]. I worked "Rainy Night in Georgia" by Gladys Knight. I worked a lot of big hit records. Again, my job as an independent person was to get the record played no matter how or no matter what. So if I had to pay somebody off or whatever, that's what we did back in those days. Speaker 2: Don't say that. Speaker 1: Ah,--. Speaker 2: You all had to (laughter). No--. Speaker 1: That's my Uncle Clarence, my Uncle Clarence coming through (laughs). Speaker 2: Yeah, but that, that's what was going on then. Speaker 1: That's what was going on, still goes on now. Speaker 2: Your urban--. Speaker 1: That's how urban people got their records played. Speaker 2: Yeah, urban top soul stations or urban stations in the area (unclear) (simultaneously)--. Speaker 1: Yep, right, right, that was the side line. Speaker 2: The FM stations in Dayton had WDAO, and here you had like a few of 'em, 'GCI [WGCI] and all--. Speaker 1: Yep, yep, 'DO, what was his name? Long--? Speaker 2: Long John Silver, yeah. Speaker 1: That's my man, okay, he was a program director. And then, so I did that for--independently, and at the same time, while I was doing the independent, I started my own label, I AM Records. And, because I had my connections through the Staples, I knew everybody in gospel music through Jesse Dixon and Andre Crouch, I knew everybody in gospel music. So--. Speaker 2: Just a word on that. This is a question. Now, did you, your family--did you spend a lot of time at church when you were coming up at all? Speaker 1: No, never. Speaker 2: I know you didn't mention it. And--. Speaker 1: Nope, wasn't nothing to mention. I think I went in church--my mother sent me some place probably because of my little lying and scheming, but she sent me to a sanctified church, big mistake. And they had church like all day long. That was the first and last time that I, at that--as a young person, would step inside of a church door. I wasn't about to sit in no hot church all day long. So, nope, never did. My, my church was on the road with the Staples Singers--. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and other gospel groups. But I get a call one day--I got to back up. I got a call one day, and this is how "I AM" Records came about. I was doing independent promotion, and, under Dick Griffey, who was the owner of Solar Records, very well. He got to like me and became another one of my mentors. I was lucky as a young adult to have a plethora of black men who I looked up to, that, that I admired and that, from all I could see, were--they could do no wrong. Speaker 2: Yeah, Griffey's very important in terms of that, that late '70s [1970s] or early '80s [1980s]. Speaker 1: Ah, ah, he was, he was the maverick. I mean, he, he made deals that to this day haven't been made like that any more. He commanded the market place and these companies, these big, mega record companies. He, he, he ruled them. And coming from a Pop Staples frame of mind, where the, you know, you ask for the world and don't expect too much less, Dick Griffey was probably the next suitor in line from, from Pops. And so one day I got a call, and unbeknown to most people, Dick Griffey used to be Jesse Jackson's manager. So when Jesse Jackson first ran for president, Dick Griffey was his manager. So Dick Griffey called me and said, the Reverend [Jesse Jackson Sr.] wants to talk to you. He actually has this crazy notion about starting a record company, a gospel record label. So I didn't know Reverend Jackson that well at all. I knew who he was, obviously, and admired him. He was like Mr. God, as far as I concerned--was concerned. So they set up a meeting, and I went over to his house. And the Reverend told me what he wanted to do. And he, he also obviously had connections with everybody and their mama. But he was also running for president of the United States. So he didn't have any time to do anything. Speaker 2: Now, this is at '84 [1984] when he was running for president. Speaker 1: This is the first time, yes. Speaker 2: Yeah, '84 [1984]. Speaker 1: This is, we're up to '84 [1984]. It's the first time he's running. And so I went around, and because of my connections in the record industry, I set up all the deals. Because of my connections with the artists, I literally had letter of intent from all these artists, ready to roll. They were all gonna be on--and I named the company because "I am somebody" was the original reason why I named it "I AM Records", okay. I am somebody. But Reverend Jackson was running for president (laughter) of the United States of America. So he kind of like didn't have a lot of time to really do this. But it was kind of too late cause I had done it or done everything that he told me to do. And I was ready to rock and roll. And one day, my secretary said--I had done the paper--I had, I had even done a press release that was sent out. And the press release said, you know, I put--I made Reverend Jackson the chairman of the company. And I was the president. So one day I came in my office, and my secretary said, Jun, Reverend Jackson's been looking for you, and everybody else has been looking for you for Reverend Jackson, okay. So I finally called Reverend Jackson. And he was a little disturbed because I had made myself president, and made him chairman, and he hadn't got a chance to kind of like do that, you know, set up, set up the hierarchy of the company. And he told me he had plans, that he had planned on making somebody else president and I could be vice president. And I told him, well, I don't think it's gonna be like that (laughs). So , so, we actually kind of parted ways. And he had--we had a distribution deal with MCA pending. And I never knew what happened to that, but I kind of like, from Pops Staples had taught me not to bend, so I wasn't--I'd done all this work. I wasn't about to be vice president of nothing. As far I was concerned, this was my company. So I changed the name to "I AM", and made a acronym, Inspirational Artists and Music Marketing. And so I AM Records was born. Reverend Jackson and I didn't speak that well--didn't that much for a little while. He would always acknowledge me whenever I saw him some place, and to this day, I never--I, I never knew whether or not he was angry at me or whether he just, this was just a passing fling or, or--I think, some people had told me that act--he actually admired me for what I did, despite him dropping out of it and go ahead on and doing it. But we're friends now. We still talk. We're still, actually working on a, a business project together for the digital downloads. Story_ID: 10791 Speaker 1: But I started "I AM". I went and got a friend of mine who went to [John Marshall] Harlan [high School] , one of my schoolmates--I knew she worked for an advertising business. So I, I assumed she had a little money saved, and she would always come to me for counsel about different projects that she wanted to do on the side. So she wanted to, she had a great idea. This was like in about eight--we're '86 [1986] now, '86 [1986] or '87 [1987]. She had a great idea. She wants, wanted to open up--she used to travel a lot because she was a big executive at Burrell [Burrell Advertising]. She wanted to open up a Krispy Cremes franchise in Chicago. They were only in the South. We knew that, and I talked her out of it (laughs). Yeah, I talked--that was Donna Beasley, I talked her out of it. She was--I talked her out of it, and not only did I, did I talk--was I such a good schmoozer, I talked her out of it, talked her into going and getting another one of her partners at Burrell and bringing both of them in and making them executives with me and investing their Krispy Crme money (laughs) into my company (laughs). Yeah, boom, I want to slap my face because--I actually get mad at her cause she should have been a better talker. She should have talked me into, you know--now, we know what that is. Krispy Crme is like, you know, everywhere. But that was what, that was--those were my first two partners, Donna Beasley and Freda Curry. And so we were rolling. I had, we had some money. We started the record label. I didn't all the big artists that I had with, when I was, when I was gonna be with Reverend Jackson, but I got, I got some of them. And we, we actually be--actually became the, one of the largest black-owned gospel companies in the world. We had tons of product. We had the Barrett Sisters, [Roebuck] Pops Staples did a solo album with me. He later got a Grammy for his first--for his second solo album. But he did his first one with me. Jesse Dixon, Walt Whitman and the Soul Children Choir, Dorothy Norwood. We had all the who's who of gospel, were on I AM Records. And we had good distribution. I later got--because of my old days at RC--at--I, I jumped ahead. When I--after I left Solar, I went RCA Records as a executive, and I became a regional director, the first black regional director for RCA Records in the Midwest. And there, I met, again a lot of, a plethora of gospel stars and people, and met a man named Pete Jones, who happened to be a salesman out, I think, the New York office. But later Pete became the president of BMG, which was, BMG--RCA is what BMG is now. BMG brought RCA and made it BMG, a German company. But Pete Jones became the president of BMG distribution. And I got a distribution deal later for "I AM" with Pete Jones at BMG, which actually, we were the first--we were first and smallest company, black-owned company, that BMG distributed. So there were a lot of first. Just to back up a little bit, also with RCA--after I left RCA I went to A&M Records. And at A&M Records, I was, started off as a regional director, but later, I became a, the national director of gospel music for A&M. The president of A&M, Gil Friesen, I met him in a washroom one day--I knew him. But I, we just happened to be in the washroom together. And I convinced him that, to let me start a black gospel division for A&M Records. And he did. And that was the first black-run gospel division for a major record label. But there I also controlled the Word Records catalogue, and simultaneously, I had "I AM". And so A&M Records kind of forced "Word" to pick up "I AM" also and put us through their Christian book stores. So A and M distributed us in the secular marketplace. And they distributed "Word Records" in the secular marketplace, but Word Records controlled the Christian marketplace. So they made Word put us in the Christian bookstores as well. So we had a pretty, pretty nice lucrative company, company. We went from like '86 [1986], '87 [1987] all the way up to '91 [1991]. Story_ID: 10792 Speaker 1: And, actually, in '92 [1992], I'm sorry, '92 [1992] and business got bad. There were a number of depression factors that, that factored in. We were selling records, but the cost of making those records that we sold and the cost of doing business just was astronomical. Speaker 2: Now, at that point, were you still making records as such or were you making CDs or--? Speaker 1: No, CD's hadn't become big then. When we first started off, we had records and cassettes, vinyl and cassettes. But what we didn't factor in and what we didn't--I knew, but being a, switching from a executive to an entrepreneur mindset, paradigm happened. And I didn't factor in--the biggest problem in the record industry at that time up until now was returns, meaning people could return records. And records broke and people in record stores broke records and shipped them back. And record stores had a hundred percent return policy. So and not just the consumer could return, the record store could return what they didn't sell. So we would, back in those days, they'd say, you ship gold and return platinum. So you may ship a hundred thousand units and you return two hundred thousand units because of all kinds of discounts. They would give records away as, as incentives, incentives for big chains to buy. You know, you buy one, I give you one free, for every one you buy. So, but when they returned them, they returned the ones we gave them free. So we were actually living on empty. We were, you know, in the hole and didn't even know we were in the hole all those--cause, you know, you wouldn't get the returns back for six months. So, you know, we'd make a million dollars and then we'd end up owing a million and a half dollars. So, I decided that it was time to get out of this business. Story_ID: 10793 Speaker 1: I got out of the business and because of my relationship with advertising people, I kind of got into the advertising business. And I knew Tom Burrell, but I knew more Donna Freda, both of those, both of those ladies were executives, and I got into, another lady named Anna Morris, who was the vice president of creative for Burrell. I convinced her and Tom to kind of let me do--and another lady, who was president of Burrell named, Jesus--Sarah Boroughs, Sarah Boroughs, who was a good friend of mine; convinced them to let me come in and do entertainment production, television production. So that was the birth of "Burrell Four", which later became B-4, which later became "Steppin at Club Seven". We created a television show, a stepping dance show called "Steppin at Club Seven, which at that time ran on ABC, Channel 7 in Chicago. It ran at 2:00 o'clock in the morning, and even at 2:00 o'clock in the morning, we burst--we beat all the ratings. We would, we'd be getting like twelve, African American share and three or four three point five to four point general market share. And we were--it was really a very, very popular show. Speaker 2: Yeah, I know it's been written that black people watch television later than white people at night, you know--. Speaker 1: And more of--. Speaker 2: --(unclear) a black show, yes. Speaker 1: Yes, yes. So we did that. The show became--it was a rough start. The show became very popular. By the time it got real popular though, we were broke. We had spent all this money, cause we had to pay Channel 7 to run it. So we'd spent all this money in marketing, and a little money in marketing, but a lot of money in compensation to the station. And we hadn't made any money, you know. We had some advertisers from Burrell, but collecting money from these national people or--it takes a long time. So went out of, we went out of business. We defunct that company, and I decided to go back into the music business. Story_ID: 10794 Speaker 1: Simultaneously, I got a part-time job teaching at Columbia College [Chicago, Illinois], which I actually graduated. We didn't--we missed that part-- Speaker 2: Yeah, we missed that part, Now when did you go, what years did you go to Columbia? (simultaneously). Speaker 1: Yeah, you missed me going to college. Speaker 2: What years did you go to Columbia? Speaker 1: I went to Columbia for a long time. I went to Columbia for about six years, because while I was going to Columbia, I was working for RCA, and RCA was paying for me to go there. They had a executive program, and so I, you know, I couldn't go full time. So it took me about four years to get out of Columbia. I graduated Columbia, I think in about '86 [1986]. But even at Columbia, they started this program at Columbia--the reason I went there--to college, was because a fellow named Fred Fine taught there. Another fellow named Irwin Steinberg taught there, and another fellow named Chuck Suber--and they started this new program, Arts, Entertainment (tape stops). Story_ID: 10795 Speaker 1: So Fred Fine, who had a company called Triangle Productions, which later became--he sold that to Arnie and Jerry--Jam now, and, but his whole motto was what Clear Channel has now for like, you know, massive concert venue promotion. Another fellow, Irwin Steinberg, who started this program with Fred Fine, was the founder of Mercury Records. And I knew him from when I was a little kid--when I had the Staple Studios, I used to do a lot of my own productions, you know, produce groups myself. And I used to--Mercury at that time was here in Chicago [Illinois], downtown, right off, right off the river, right behind the circles, Marina Towers. Speaker 2: Yeah, Carl--. Speaker 1: Carl Davis? Speaker 2: Carl Davis, yeah, worked for them, right. Speaker 1: Right. And so I used to go there and shop my music and try to get deals. I was still, like I said, a teenager. I was probably the youngest guy walking in there, but again, I had balls. And so they never, they never, they never turned me away, always, you know, listened to my stuff, which I'm sure at that time, didn't sound that marketable, but they always listened to my stuff, always befriended me. And I think again, because they knew my relationship to Pops Staples. But that was a good experience. But I went to Columbia because I knew these gentlemen. And Chuck Suber was the founding editor of "Downbeat Magazine", and I knew who these guys were. So I figured, well, I'm already entrenched in the record industry. But I'm gonna go back just to get a, some sheepskin. I want to go some place and learn from people that I can really learn from. And that was, that's what led me to Columbia. And they had just started a graduate and an undergrad program of AEMMT, which is Arts, Entertainment and Media Management. So I finished up degree at Columbia. I had already--I'd done a little stint at Northern, a little bit at Roosevelt, just whenever I had time and a little bit at Kennedy King. I mentioned that earlier, and so I finished up, did the last year at Columbia. That year too me about five years to finish up, got RCA to pay for it. Speaker 2: Is it Bill Latin at Kennedy--did you know him? Speaker 1: Nah, Bill--at Kennedy King? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: At Kennedy King, I lived in the jazz and the music department. Bill Abernathy was the band director. And he was also another mentor of mine. Bill Abernathy introduced me to jazz music. Through Bill Abernathy as a musician, even though while all this music business stuff was happening, I still would sneak back and play drums whenever I got a chance. And, but it was Bill Abernathy and Kennedy King, the Kennedy King Band--back then it was a jazz band. And it was, it was smoking. It was like, it was the crown jewel of Kennedy King College, one of the crown jewels. And through Bill Abernathy, I met a man named Morris Ellis who had the Society Band in Chicago. He still does. And he had, he had this big seventeen-piece orchestra. And sometimes he would just break it down to a trio or quartet. But I became their drummer, and I played with Morris Ellis actually for about ten years. And we played all the society gigs whenever the, black society would have an affair, the Links or NAACP [National Association for the Adancement of Colored People] or whatever, they were the band. And this is a weekend gig. You know, I just--I played it for fun mostly. But I played with him for ten years. Story_ID: 10796 Speaker 1: And through me playing with Morris Ellis and having gone to Kennedy King [College], I found out from the, the--what do they call the principals of junior college? Speaker 2: Presidents. Speaker 1: Yeah, president, actually, he was something else back then. It wasn't a president, but the president of Kennedy King's secretary was a friend of mine. And they were having, the teacher's union, the teacher's union was a, affair in Chicago at the Hilton, and she just knew that I was a drummer, knew I was a good jazz drummer. And at that juncture, I was playing jazz when I played because of Morris Ellis and Bill Abernathy. And she told me Count Basie was in town. And this man, you know, I, I idolized Count Basie and all of his drummers all my life. And so I snuck into this event. And sure enough Count Basie was the, the guest artist playing for this private affair. And I met the band leader who was a man named Lockjaw Davis--Eddie "Lockjaw" Davis. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Yeah, he was actually Count Basie's band leader at that time, for most--for a long time. And the drummer at that time was a man named Harold Jones. And I didn't know that much about Harold Jones, but I knew Lockjaw Davis. And so I proceeded to like, you know, beg this man to let me--you know, could I sit in on a tune. I didn't know any better. I didn't know in the history of the Count Basie band, no drummer had ever sat in. It didn't work like that. But Lockjaw Davis told me that, well, you know, maybe we can do something else later because Harold is gonna leave the band again. So we're gonna need a drummer, but you-- you know, we don't, we don't do sat in's. So I went and introduced myself to Harold Jones, just trying to make connections and make sure that somebody would remember me. And Harold hipped me that Lockjaw drank a certain type of vodka. And he said, well, why don't you just, you know, take care of Lockjaw and, you know, keep loading him up at the bar, and let's see what happens. So I did, and Lockjaw got sufficiently drunk enough, and told me, okay, now, we gonna--this is the last set. Now, at the last set, what you do is you go up there and sneak under the bandstand and stand next to Harold or squat down next to Harold. And I'll tell Harold to let you sit in and play a couple of numbers, okay. And sure enough, I did, and it made history. I was the first drummer to ever, first and probably last drummer--and I was a young kid. Again, I was like maybe twenty, twenty-one. And I had a big natural still from the old days. And I have a picture here, which you're probably gonna cite of me, of me playing with Count Basie. And I could, but--I, I--then I played. I have a picture though that somebody just took and, and let me have it cause they even knew that something was different here, you know, this little kid on the drums. But the picture has the Count looking up at me like, you know, what the hell is--who is this--what happened? You know, it was, it was a real surprised look on his face. But he's still playing. But I did a very good job, and they called for me to go to Europe and tour with them. Story_ID: 10797 Speaker 1: And so that was, that was, you know, I wanted, when I think college and doing things, those were the two big things that I did. It wasn't getting the degrees. I, I later went to grad school at Columbia [College, Chicago, Illinois]. I didn't get my degree. I, again I was, I was in business at the same time that I was, all during my college career. And, but now, they asked me to come and teach. I've been teaching as an adjunct professor for about six years now, five or six years. And I teach Applied Marketing for the Music Business. And a year ago, I proposed to them that I create a class called the New Anatomy of the Music Business because what I've been doing for the last five or six years is studying technology in the music industry, from the synthesizers--I knew when the electronic, electronic computers came and started replacing--the drum machines were the first culprit that started replacing drummers. I, I became involved and concerned then because I knew this was gonna be the end to drummers, good drummers. But anyway, so I started following technology to the extent, as it applied to musical equipment. I wasn't a techie, and I didn't want to be. I just wanted to see how fast they were gonna eliminate musicians, which they kind of did, especially black musicians. Real musicians are almost a thing of the past. So that led me up until, up to about five years ago again. And I started, I was a Apple person. With my company, I always had Apple computers because I'm not a techie, don't want to know about a PC. I want the real simple thing. So I started watching Apple Computer, and seeing how Steve Jobs was developing the technology, seeing where--how he was making everything real easy, easily accessible to musicians and artists, artsy types. And so I just watched. And that, a year ago he comes up with this thing called a iPod, which is a little hand-held music thing that, where you can download music. A little bit after that he announces that he's going to build a digital music store called iTunes. So I'm, you know, I'd just finished with the television show, just teaching, kind of like floating, not doing too much. I decide that well, I, I want a piece of this. You know, this is a good chance for me to-- and now, I'm in my forties now, can't really go back and make a big splash as a musician, thinking I'm too old. The record music business has changed, everything, synthesizers, don't really like rap music that much, never have, don't want to do hip hop. But this something that I can--I think I can learn about and excel in. So I sent proposals to Steve Jobs--the hardest person in the world to get in touch with; had my lawyers trying to figure out how I can get in touch with this person to let me in the door. Well, not that I--I didn't know at that time, they weren't letting any independent companies in the door. And because I had acquired all these masters over the years, these gospel masters and, and albums, CDs that I had produced when I had my company, I had some--what you call inventory, a catalogue product. So I proposed to them to let me bring gospel music into this iTunes music store. But I couldn't get in touch with anybody. I literally got in touch with them through the acquisitions department, meaning that I went to propose, with my proposal, just like you would go to them to try to get them to buy staples. I went through the same department, okay. And those people even told me, well, Mr. Mhoon, she--they said that we've got about 200,000 people who've also approached us the same way you have to try to get music in the store. So to make a long story short, you know, I waited and waited and never hear--didn't hear anything back. And one day in late April, I got a e-mail, just out of the clear blue sky inviting me to this meeting in Cupertino, California to talk about independent music. But it was a generic e-mail. It wasn't really, you know, it wasn't personalized to me. So I figured it was gonna be a cattle call. I knew that they had already contacted over 20,000 people cause the staples department told me that. And I just figured, well, you know what. What can I lose? I can't--and as Pops Staples said, "shoot for the sky" and settle for stars. And so I went to the meeting, only black there. They paired me up in this meeting--there were about a hundred and fifty labels there, represented. They paired me up with this guy from Korea. And he introduced his self, I introduced myself. And I said, I'm Jun Mhoon, and this fellow said, no, you no, Jun Mhoon. Jun Mhoon Korean, Jun Mhoon's Korean. So I said, ah, no, Jun Mhoon's a brother from Chicago, how you doing? So I kind started putting two to two, two and two together and realized that, you know, my name, you know. The, you--we talked about the name orgin-origins a little earlier, but the in-spelling of M-H-O-O-N and Jun, J-U-N, is Korean. That's a Korean name, okay. And so somebody, I think, thought I was Korean. But, only black at the meeting, got the deal, talked to some of the executives there, and kind of--they kind of implied that, yeah--I, I asked. I said, you know, are there any other black companies that you have? And they kind of looked around and said, we're not sure; got to get back to you on that, but you know, probably so, okay. So I kind of like touted that for a long time until I realized, okay, it ain't got nothing to do with being black or white. It's providing them with content. And then providing all these other stores. Then all these other companies coming out the woodworks with these digital music stores. And so I got in contact with them. Because I had the deal with Apple, it was real easy for me to get deals with them. I never once played any music for anybody though. That was always interesting to me, and then we talked before about the black, Jewish connection. And even though I wasn't Jewish, I think just the relationships that, how they conjugate their relationships and build them on other relationships. So if you know Mr. Steinberg, dah, dah, dah, well, I knew Mr. Jobs and I knew Mr.--the people from Liquid Audio. So because I'd gotten those deals, I, my entre to these other companies was real easy. No one ever asked, literally, what type of music I did until later on. But now, we're literally going into a hundred fifty stores on line. We started with two. Apple wasn't the first. We actually did a deal with a company called Liquid Audio, and then came Apple; then came a company called Napster, which is legal Napster now. They were the big illegal company back in the day. Now, they're legal; went into Music Mile (unclear) match after that, Music Mile, MSN--we just finished a deal with MSN, Sony Connect, which is Sony Music, they have a store on line. All these companies are, are going on line. We just did a deal, we're doing a deal right now with a company called, "Loud Eye and OD Two". And OD Two is a English company that supplies Asia and the rest of the world with the digital download mu-music. So we're gonna be supplying them with independent black music. We're gonna supply all these stores on line. So we're like a--we are a wholesale store. We're a digital music store. Story_ID: 10798 Speaker 1: How much--well, I don't know if you can say, but how much are all these contracts worth? I mean what does that make you (simultaneously)--? Speaker 2: Ah, they're--what they're worth? Oh, millions. That's not what we're getting right now because all this is new. But these, this is, this is like manna from heaven. Distribution, as I talked about earlier, I, I've, I've had a lot of experience with distribution because of my background in the music industry. But what that taught me more than anything is, distribution is everything. If you have a billion dollars and don't have a distribution channel, you got nothing, okay. And with the internet now becoming--there are over a hundred fifty million people on the internet every day, every minute, and so distri-distribution allows us a vehicle to potentially reach that hundred and fifty million or a portion of that hundred and fifty million people with our music and video. We're not only just doing music now. We're doing video. We just did the deal for ring tones, what they call rich music tones, cause people are--now can not only download ring tones, but they can literally download whole songs to their headsets and to their telephones. So we went from the iPod which was Apple's invention as a means, a hard drive to carry and listen to music to now, you don't even need that. You got cell phones where you can put the music on the cell phones. You can put the video, you can download full-length films now to your cell phone. So we're--it, it's priceless. It's sometimes scary because there's no lineage. You know, when I look back for help, I got to look at--I don't have to, I, I look to the Dick Griffey's, I look to the Barry Gordy's , but they're not really there. They're not there for me cause they're not there. They're not doing it anymore, and if they were, you know, they couldn't really maybe help me with where we are now because of technology. So what I try to do is, I have no special dispensation. I'm not even a techie, but there're just very few African Americans in this country that are doing things like this, I mean very few. I'm the only black that we know that's doing digital music delivered directly with all these major stores. We were just in Silicon Valley last week, and they always tell us when they've, see us and see that me and my partners are black, they always say, you guys are the only guys doing this stuff, you know, meaning that you're the only blacks doing this stuff and supplying them. And that's not a good thing. I mean I know there're definitely black technical people that have way more experience than I do. I, I've met those people and black tech businessmen. I've even met 'em on this trip in San Francisco [California]. But now, it's just a challenge now trying to get more content from black-owned and black-owned labels from content creators, and from--. Speaker 1: Are you still concentrated on gospel--? Speaker 2: No, no, no. We, absolutely not. We do, we do everything. We, gospel got us in the door. But we do jazz, do gospel, we do R & B. We do old school R&B, we do spoken word, Nikki Giovanni is one of our biggest artists. We have her catalogue that we distribute on line. And kids music, kids books on tape, books on tape, anything that we convert to a digital signal, we'll put up wherever we can and offer it for downloads for sale. Story_ID: 10799 Speaker 1: Now, of all the things that you've done in music, and you've had a rich life in music and all aspects of it, it seems, what do you--can, is there any one thing that's more rewarding than another? Speaker 2: Yeah, playing my drums (laughs). My lovely wife recently, Taj Mahal Mhoon, just gave me a fiftieth birthday party. And I thank God and I thank Tajma Mhoon, okay, my wife, Tajma. And, and my, my birthday party was actually a set at this club over on Randolph [Street] well, where she rented out the club, and I played. I was able to play, and, and all my friends came and, and jammed with me. And Miles play--Miles Davis' piano player came, and, you know, cats came from all around just to play and celebrate, celebrate my birthday with me. But it was a chance that I could play and have fun and other drummers were sit in, but I ended up playing the whole set. And it was, it was a blast. It was probably the most memorable time of--one of the most memorable times of my life. It was fun. So, nah, drums. I all--always it comes back to the music. I just finished a--I'm finishing up Nikki Giovanni's first children's CD. So she came in last month, and we recorded maybe about twenty different kids' poems and stories that she had written. And I put music, I produced music, with other musicians. Speaker 1: Did you produce the original "Ego Tripping" album? Speaker 2: No, no, no, back then, I was a little guy. But it, it's funny. She was my idol. I was, you know, I had my Afro. I was, you know, a nationalist. I was, you know, I was a teenager, but I loved Nikki Giovanni. And my wife, again, knew that I loved Nikki Giovanni, and literally found a contact for her and hooked me up with Nikki Giovanni. And Nikki Gi--made, Nikki made this deal with me sight unseen. She hadn't even met me and did a five-year deal with--a three-year deal with me, and came in later, and we met and hit it off. She's a Gemini, I'm a Gemini. And she, she came in with her business partner, and I--she came back in, and we did the album and had a good time. And she's still one of my, my idols. I love that lady. Story_ID: 10800 Speaker 1: Where is the industry headed next--is there a next thing that you see coming in the industry? Speaker 2: Yeah, it kind of is, it kind of has happened. The next thing is fire all your people, and BMG and Sony just fired 2,000 more people this year. Sony alone, last year fired about a couple of thousand and BMG laid off a couple thousand. They've closed most of their labels. And I'm not directing just to these two, but the whole industry is consolidating. And consolidating and, and raising that bottom line. The record industry has operated in a deficit for many years and operated very foolishly. And now that most of these companies are publicly-held companies and they got to dime, and they got to turn a profit. So they got to cut expenses, and the first, you know, expense to go is, are, are the people. And digital distribution allows you to get rid of your manufacturers. So EMI closed most of their manufacturing plants a couple months ago--I think all of them. And Warner Brothers was sold to private investors. Universal was selling--Vivendi is a French company that owns Universal music. They had their music company up on the block, and supposedly, rumor has it they couldn't sell it cause it wasn't worth anything. So it's about consolidation now, embracing finally this technology--cause they fought it for so long. That, that's one of the reasons Napster flourished illegal because, you know, Napster was a way that people had a choice. You know, people got tired of paying sixteen, twenty dollars for a CD, and then they only liked two cuts on the CD. So now with these services you can ala carte, pick ala carte music, download what you want. It's cheaper, it's ninety-nine cents. Forty years ago, remember we only paid twenty-five to forty-five cents for a single. Now, for ninety-nine cents you can get a single. So they're kind of converting back to the old school. But record companies are on board now. All the major record companies are distributed through the same channels that my little company is distributed to--distributed through. And they're letting go of the--cutting back, cutting back. I think they're gonna consolidate even more. A lot of the labels have folded. The big con--conglomerates have folded much, many of their small labels into other bigger labels, and just as a matter of consolidation now and embracing technology and supplying these people with music. Speaker 1: Wow, so do you think that the future of actual record stores, and I mean--. Speaker 2: Very dim. Speaker 1: --of music stores is--. Speaker 2: Last year over two thousand of the big stores closing, closed, the big chains closed 2,000 stores. And they're closing more every day. You can go to Best Buy on line and download music. You can Wal-Mart on line and download music for ninety-nine cents. Wal-Mart's I think eighty-nine cents, okay. So the record stores who specialize in music have always had big problems because they couldn't compete with these discount stores like Best Buy. They couldn't compete with the brick and mortar. But now that these people are on line, then the record stores are really in trouble. Plus, they can't keep the inventory. You can go on line to iTunes or Music Match, any, any of these stores, and, and me and you can find old school music. We can find music that we can't find in record stores because record stores can't keep that type of catalog or quantity of music in the stores. So it only makes sense that this has to happen. It's a natural, natural maturation of business, period, and distribution. The, the, the template was already set up with the internet. So everything's going there. And now, you got computers now in your telephones, where literally, a gentleman was in my office earlier, downloading a song onto his telephone right in front me. So you don't even need a computer any more to do it. So the record companies are--they're gonna be okay. They're gonna make because they got the money, and they gonna keep the money. So they're gonna downsize, downsize--they're dropping, I think, twenty percent of the major artists last year were dropped from the rosters, twenty percent. They let 'em go. They don't need 'em any more. Speaker 1: Now, on the other side of this, does this present opportunity for independent artists to get their own hook-up? Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely. Besides the cost of me and the masters that I own, having produced many of them, a long, long, long time ago, entry into this field cost me almost nothing, you know. And my overhead, my, my cost of doing business is minimal because it's technology. And once you get the technology, you got it. So inde--the entry of independent and small companies and small artists is, the opportunity is greater than it's ever been in my studying of the whole record industry. It's never been this--(unclear) (simultaneously). Speaker 1: How many people do you employ to--? Speaker 2: We've employed, we employ four people now that work with us. And we don't need all four of them (laughter). We really don't, really don't. So the whole market is--the opportunity for, for artists though, content producers, people creating now, is that they can literally walk in this door and make a deal with us, and we can put that content on line, and make it available a hundred and fifty million people. Now, marketing, they have to--you still got to market your product, but still, they could not walk in a door at Sony. They couldn't walk in a door at BMG or any of these companies and get a deal. I don't care how much money they had, the chances of them getting a deal--and even if they got one, the chances of them making it to the marketplace are like, slim to none. It just doesn't work that way. It doesn't work that way. It's a very privileged and private club. But with this stuff, anybody can play. It's a even playing field. Story_ID: 10801 Speaker 1: Now, is there anything about the music business at this point that you think that we need to know that most people wouldn't know? Speaker 2: Yeah, it's a business (laughter). Yeah, most people don't look at it--everybody, not everyone, but most people who want to come in or who are in, think it's about the music and think it's about the art, think it's about the film, and the creative end. And it, it's not. That's the product, that's the 'widget'. And, of course, it's gonna fuel this machine, but this machine, if it's brick and mortar and, or if it's digital machine, it's a machine that has to be fed and it operates on business principles. So it's no different--I could be selling washing powder on line, the same principles apply. You know, you got to manufacture a product. It's got to be marketed. When you're creating the product, you've got to have your market in mind at that time, even if it's subliminal. You got to kind of understand who you're going after, and how you're gonna get to them. And most people today, young and old, they think about the music and they kind of get caught up in the music and, good or bad, I mean you can listen to the radio now, and there's a whole lot of garbage on there because it sells because it's not really about the music, as much as it is about a machine behind the music that's gonna work. And they can sell garbage. Story_ID: 10802 Speaker 1: Sir, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today? Speaker 2: Oh, boy. I think it's probably the same thing maybe that was ushered years and years, years ago, ago, knowledge. I think that knowledge is the key. With what I'm doing right now and, and I made an entre into a new, what I think is a revolutionary industry and it's revolutionary--revolutionizes our world. The digital industry is gonna control, if it doesn't already, how we live. And I had no special dispensation, no--I'm not a techie. I just read, and I don't like to read. I'm not a reader at all. But I just went to Google and I looked up digital technology and music and, and, and just kept on registering at different, for different e-mail blast and Google alert blasts. And so every morning I get up and I read, and they're--all day, I read my e-mails about what's going on. And, and it's amazing. It, it literally has changed the way I look at the world because I didn't really think that much was going on. I didn't look too much far, farther outside, too far outside my, my own little world, my, my family and my business. But the world has changed. And it, it shot, has shot in--has shot right past our community, even though we have fueled the change. We're buying more than anyone buys on line. We use--again, I mentioned to you in the break about the technology. I, I don't believe there's a, a digital divide. Fact: Black people have more access to computers than any other race. Speaker 1: Now--. Speaker 2: We have more access than any other race. Speaker 1: Now, how do you--well, you know, a lot of people would be surprised, I am, about--. Speaker 2: Over ninety something percent of the secretarial pool in America is still black females. All the, most of these companies, when they upgrade their technology, they literally give those computers to the secretaries to take home. I was, a friend of mine was a secretary. And when I found out this information during my work at Burrell [Advertising Agency, Chicago, Illinois], I asked her. And she said, well, I got--we don't use those things. I got a--I got three sitting in my closet. And so I did my own little research, and then I looked up more of the numbers in the research. And we do. We have--all of our schools. Now, we may not have them as plentiful and as up-to-date as the non-black schools, but they're there. We have the libraries. More black youth download, illegally and legally than any other race. So what's the problem? Now, we know how to download, and we know how to take it illegally and now, legally, but we don't know how to use the internet as a tool for developing businesses, developing knowledge, learning about different things. There's nothing you can't do on that thing. And what scares me is that they're gonna close the door, and we, once again, will be left out when this door closes, and then forced to do other things, cause right now, the average, the average, if you--you could take the average gang leader and drug dealer and, you know, give 'em, give 'em a PC, give 'em a laptop and maybe show him how he can, you know, grow his business better and maybe then if he'll see options, he'll be able to see how he can change his business model. You know, back in the old days, the, you know, mafia guys used to wash their money. Well, we have so many opportunities now for people who have no opportunity or think they don't, to--they have a chance now. And it's all in that box, all in that digital box. But we're looking there. We're not looking there. We're scared, some of us. And some of us is just looking, listening to people telling us, yeah, it's a digital divide. So if someone keeps telling you, you know, it's a duck, it's a duck, it's a duck, then it'll become a duck to you. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So that, that's my biggest concern, is that this whole paradigm is passing us by. Story_ID: 10803 Speaker 1: Yeah, when you look back at what you've done so far, is there anything that you would do differently? Speaker 2: Yeah, I would have taken school more seriously. I would have taken time off and condensed that five year run to get my BA into a normal run, and would a gotten a MBA. And then I would have become more technol-technology su--efficient. I would have learned more about computers much earlier. And, and played my drums. Then I would have said the heck with all this crap and just, you know, played drums (laughter). Story_ID: 10804 Speaker 1: Okay, now, did your parents ever--get a chance to see you become successful? Speaker 2: Well, I kind of think I've been success for a long time. I think that--. Speaker 1: Yeah, I would, I would think from what you described, I guess, you started doing things that nobody else in the family was doing, you know, way back--. Speaker 2: Eleven, twelve years old. So, they saw me in that first parade. And, and before that, my father used to always take me to--I think that was actually the Christmas parade that they did at Thanksgiving. Didn't they do the Christmas parade around Thanks--yeah, yeah. So he used to always take me to that. And I'd sit on his shoulders as a little kid and watch the parade. So I think, and my father was the type of person from the old school that didn't show a lot of positive emotions. If you did something bad, he'd let you know, but when you did something good, you know, he would kind of pooh-pooh it off to you, but he would tell the--I would find out later that he would tell all his friends. He would tell all my uncles and his brothers that--what I did. So I kind of learned to accept that early. It was kind of--I used to--when I was younger, I used to feel bad because my father and, my father never saw me play drums. And to me, that was my biggest accomplishments--my biggest accomplishment. He would come pick me up a lot of times when I didn't have a car, when I was very young. But he never really saw me play. My mother saw me at one talent show, but--and they were alive when I did the other things. So I'm sure they got joy and got a lot of joy out of the things that I did, even as a young person. I know they, they never really understood it when I got in the music business. And they never really understood what I did. I mean I think for a little while they thought I owned a record store or something. So, but it was--when I, when I traveled, when I started traveling a lot, you know, they kind of hung their hats on that. They all--Jun's over in Europe again or Junior's doing this and Junior's doing that". So again, when I would around to my aunties and my uncles, then they would, they would tell me, yeah, your daddy, yeah, your daddy said you did and your mama said you were over there. So I think that they did. I think that they--but they definitely never discouraged me from doing anything. I wonder sometimes now what was wrong with them to let their twelve-year old kid go on the road with this strange family that they didn't really know that well at all. But they did, and I think that--I thank God that they did. I think--I look at my kids now. And I say, wow, I would never, you know, ever do that, you know, let my kid, my--any of my daughters or my young son go away with strangers. And then sometimes I think, wow, well, you know, look what your parents gave you, let you have your opportunities, and look what happened to you, kids. Speaker 1: There's a wonderful picture of you and two of your daughters that I saw on the internet. Speaker 2: Ah, yeah, yeah (laughter). Speaker 1: It's a beautiful picture of--. Speaker 2: There's a famous photographer who took that pic--actually, he did a whole series. That's, that's interesting. I forgot about that. This fellow named Barry Mayo, who--actually, he's an entrepreneur. He used to own V103 and a bunch of other stations. But he, he became a photographer and, and excellent photographer, one of the best I've ever seen. And I like photography, specifically black and white photography. And so he did a shoot for me. He did about maybe fifteen different shots. And he got 'em into the Contemporary Art Museum. People would come in and say, I saw your picture at--some people would stop me on the street, "didn't I--haven't I seen you before"? They would see, my picture was in the airport at O'Hare Field during, they had a big showing for black photographers a couple of years ago. And I was all over the place. I was all over the country. And he posted that on the internet. But my--that was my youngest daughter, Jordan, Jordan, and next to the youngest--now, Jordan is my sixteen year older. Miraia (ph.) is my eighteen year old. Then I have a--Jordan's a--Jordan is a strange kid. She, she started playing the violin maybe at around nine or ten. She saw--she would go to her friend's, lessons with her friend and see her friend play. And one day, she just kind of started playing the violin and took her to lesson, and the teacher said, oh, how long has she been playing? And I--she hadn't been playing. She just, so I know she has a gift. But when I started liking it, she was playing the violin. And then she started playing the piano, and I started liking that. So everything I started liking, she like would switch to something else. So now she plays soccer, and I don't like sports, but I've come to be a soccer fan because she plays soccer. And the Miraia, my sixteen year old, she's been a ballet dancer since she was about four years old. And she actually retired at about fifteen. She was, she did professional ballet--she played--she danced with Homer Brian. She danced with the Chicago Ballet Company. She had a chance to go dance with the Dance Theater for--at Harlem. But she got tired. She was fifteen. So she retired, and then I have a twenty-three year old. And she's--that's Carson. And Carson is an actress. She started acting in college, and my oldest daughter has been acting and taking drama all, most of her life. But Carson never showed any special for--talent for acting. (siren sound). But I went to--when Carson was in college in Ohio, what's the school, Hofstra, not Hofstra, that's in New York, the school in Ohio. Speaker 1: It's so many. Where is it near? Is it near Dayton or Cleveland? Speaker 2: Not too far from Cleveland. The whole city's named after it. Anyway, I went to her--she started acting in college, and I went to a play, and I was amazed. This kid was like, she was this great actress. So, but she, she decided that--she's still in, she's at Northwestern now. And she works full time and goes to school. Speaker 1: It not Wooster, is it? Speaker 2: Wooster, yeah. She went to Wooster. Speaker 1: College of Wooster, right. Speaker 2: College of Wooster, College of Wooster. And so she's studying for, for--she wants to get her MBA. She says maybe she'll go back to acting. Then my oldest girl is twenty-seven, (unclear) Season Allegra. She went to Hofstra in New York, and didn't come back. She stayed there, went to New York, pursued her act--acting career, did some off-Broadway, independent, a lot of independent stuff. And recent, recently, she did her own play here in Chicago. She did a play, a local play that she wrote it and directed and produced here in Chicago. But all my girls and I just had a son. I have a, he'll be one year tomorrow, Joshua August, and I, I'm very, very proud of all my kids in-including the little, little boy. But my girls are my joy. And I traveled a lot when I was raising them. I was in the--either playing or either in the music industry, and I, I missed a little bit of the growing up. Their mothers were very, very good people who I think, Joan and Freda, my ex's, that they raised some, some fantastic girls. And I was there, I helped, and, but they're all very talented. They understand what I do. And they watch me. They encourage me tremendously, and they actually are my buddies. They're my friends. I talk to them, they talk to me, and I'm looking forward to this little one-year old, who, he's, he's a mess. He--I really do see--he looks just like his mother. He looks just like Tajma, but he, he acts just like me. And it's kind of scary, so I'll see what I got coming. Story_ID: 10805 Speaker 1: When you look back on, on the things you've done this, thus far, what would you consider as your legacy? Speaker 2: My children. My children, I say that--I think people would differ. I, I consider myself a teacher. I think I've taught my children some good lessons. I also know that I've touched a lot of students through Columbia and through just speaking. I had a letter from a fellow who was from Hawaii, who was one of my students that I don't even remember him. And he wrote me a letter last month from Hawaii, telling me how I had changed his life in teaching him at Columbia [College, Chicago, Illinois]. And so, and that was, that was the only I've gotten like that. It was a real deep, long letter. But I think my students, people that I've taught, I've got--I've had people come up to me on the street and say thank you for some lecture or whatever that I've done. But my children first. I think that they'll be able to take a little bit of Jun Mhoon into the future and hopefully, pass the good stuff on to their kids. And so I, I think my children. Speaker 1: And one last question is how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Ha, ha, ha, ha. As a good person, as a straight shooter, as someone who taught and helped other people. I enjoy helping people. I think that I enjoy that. Next to playing drums, I can run my mouth and talk to somebody and try to teach them something, and I find also, when I try to do that, I also, once I shut up, I start learning. I, I realize, okay, you know, well, what he's saying makes sense too, and, and, and I listen to myself when I talk, not out of vanity, as much as I learn when I hear myself talk. Sometimes it, it amazes me how much stuff I know, you know, after I run my mouth, I say, damn, geez, I didn't realize that I knew that. And so, yeah, I think that's it...