 Story_ID: 166062 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Ma'am can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Sure. My full name is Steen King Miles. Legal name is Ollisteen, O-L-L-I-S-T-E-E-N, Davis D-A-V-I-S, King, KING, Miles, MILES. Speaker 1: All right and ma'am, what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: August 20th, 1946, South Bend, Indiana. Speaker 1: And what is your occupation and title? Speaker 2: I am a retired journalist and former state senator for this great State of Georgia. Speaker 1: All right and what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date I believe is February the 21st, 2014. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: In my home [in Decatur, Georgia]. Story_ID: 166063 Speaker 1: Okay, now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask as a warm-up. I know this seems like deja vu, but they only require a short answer. The first one is do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And what is it? Speaker 2: Shrimp. Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite color? Speaker 2: Red. Speaker 1: A favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Springtime. Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Jamaica. Speaker 1: And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Yes, "Trust in the Lord with all thy heart. Lean not to your own understanding, and in all thy ways acknowledge him and he will direct your path" [Proverbs 3: 5-6]. Story_ID: 166064 Speaker 1: All right, now I'm gonna ask about your family history. I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side, but separately and then we'll put 'em together. So can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: My mother's full name is Rose, R-O-S-E, Edna, E-D-N-A, Wheeler, W-H-E-E-L-E-R, Davis, D-A-V-I-S. Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Her date of birth is February the 3rd, 1926. Speaker 1: And she was born in? Speaker 2: Collins, Mississippi. Speaker 1: All right. Now what can you tell us about the ancestors on your mother's side and the activities of, of her people? Speaker 2: Sure, the ancestors on my mother's side if we go back maternally on my mother's side I know the most about, and I can go back I think to my great-great-grandmother's parents, and they were Parthenia and John Draughn, D-R-A-U-G-H-N, and my great-grandmother. And I don't know who--well, my great [grand]mother's name was Lucy Draughn, and she never married. She had three children, three girls, two of them were by white men, one daughter by a black man who was my grandmother. Grandma Lucy was Choctaw Indian and white, and I'm believing that Parthenia was in--was Indian and that Mr. Draughn was, was white. She was called--grandma Lucy was called a mulatto, but she had no black blood, and I believe that that was the designation that they gave to people that were mixed with Indian and white in those--in those days, as well as, as, as white and black. But again, she never married. She had these three girls. My, my grandmother's name was Christine, C-H-R-I-S-T-I-N-E, Mage, M-A-G-E. And her last name of course Wheeler when she married my grandfather, Darncey, who was D-A-R-N-C-E-Y. That's about it on, on, on mom's side. I don't very much about grandpa Darncey's side of the family, but I do know that grandma Lucy was a--was a bit of a character. She--again, she never married. She had these three children. My one aunt--one of the girls died very young. I'm told she was about thirteen. But gunt Floyd or Floydia, F-L-O-Y-D-I-A, was--well, she looked like a white woman and for me, this little chocolate child, coming to visit in the summertime seeing this white woman with gray-blue eyes and straight white hair and white skin, a very thin, very proper looking lady. And she--I, I, I couldn't believe that she was my aunt. But that was the family on that side. Grandma Lucy was a bit of a character. She had--her, her bedroom in grandma Christine's house was spooky. She had this thing that they called a chifforobe. Today it would be called an armoire, and in there were all kinds of dried leaves and herbs that she would go out into the woods and get these various herbs and, and, and so forth. And she could cook up any kind of tea that you can imagine. She also had a piece of rubbery something in there that we were told was a piece of, of, of a skull. And I don't whether that came from somebody in the--in the Indian side of the family or what. But was a spooky character. She was very--she was a short little lady, and she had these piercing eyes, and she'd look at you. And, and she walked real pigeon-toed and shifted about. And she had the--she had the mouth of a sailor. And-- Speaker 1: In terms of the expletives and--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yes, yes, and she was--she was just--but a churchgoing woman (laughter)--but a churchgoing woman. But that was--that was Grandma Lucy. Story_ID: 166065 Speaker 1: Darncey Wheeler is, is your grandfather, right? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And that's her husband? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: No, her-- Speaker 2: That was Christine's [Christine Wheeler]-- Speaker 1: Okay, Christine's, okay. Speaker 2: Again, Lucy [Draughn] never married. Speaker 1: So great-grand--Lucy was your great-grandmother? Speaker 2: Yes. Christine was my grandmother. Her husband was Darncey-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --my mother's [Rose Wheeler Davis] father, and he was an extremely dark man. Now mind you, these folks were very, very, very concerned about color. And up until the day she died, my grandmother and great-grandmother would tell me that as dark as I was, I should never marry anybody as dark as me and have those little piccaninny babies, and that they weren't going to claim them, and that my mother shouldn't have married my daddy [Austin Wheeler] because he was too dark. But here grandpa was deep, deep ebony. And I asked my grandmother one time, I said, "Well, grandmother, if you don't like dark-skinned people, why'd you marry grandpa?" Well, there was no answer, and I was out of line anyway. But at any rate, grandpa Darncey was a very kind man. They called him Doc, and people would come from all over for him to read, not tea leaves, but coffee grinds. He would--he would pour, pour out the, the coffee and, and then just kind of tell their fortunes. And they would come and have him take fixes off of them, you know, some weird kind of--they called it hoodoo, as opposed to voodoo. And grandpa would take these fixes off of them, the "fixes." I'll never forget granddaddy saying to me that--he said whenever a woodpecker is pecking on your house, somebody you know is going to--going to--going to die. And I've, I've, I've had that to be true. I've, I've, I've had that experience. Story_ID: 166066 Speaker 1: But let me go back to Grandma Lucy [Draughn]. Grandma Lucy and a woman, Ms. Maggie [ph.] up the road. I was playing in the yard and cut my knee open. I think I was about seven years old, and I cut my knee open. It was a huge gash. And Grandma Lucy and this woman up the road, Ms. Maggie, they got these filthy, dirty rags with soot and spider webs and stuff on 'em, and she put that on my--on my knee. And they said--and they said (laughter)--it sounds so--but they said some mumbo jumbo, and after a bit when they took those rags away, I kid you not--I am totally sane in this interview by the way. When they took those rags away, that thing had--it didn't scab. It was smoothed over, and it's smoothed over and I still have that space, that, that scar, that smoothed over space on my knee all these years later. And as large as it, you can imagine the size of it when I was a child--not a stitch, not anything except for some really weird, dirty, sooty, spidery webbed rags. And I'll, I'll never forget that. I'll, I'll never forget that. But that's my mom's side of the family. But back to grandpa [Darncey Wheeler]. He was a very kind, very gentle man. They called him Doc, and he--he was just kind of a--I don't know just--he wasn't a witch doctor, but he was--he was a healer. That's the best word to describe him. He was a healer of maybe spiritual and physical ills. Story_ID: 166067 Speaker 1: Did they own their own land-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --your grandparents [Christine Wheeler and Darncey Wheeler]? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: And I think that the land came down through Grandma Lucy [Draughn], from her--from her parents [Parthenia Draughn and John Draughn]. And I think that they had over about twenty acres there in the Friendship [Mississippi] community. The Friendship community out from Collins [Mississippi] in the rural area was named based on the name of the church. So in the community the church was really the hub of the community. And if the church was called Friendship, then you lived in the Friendship--in the Friendship community. So the land did come down through, through Grandma Lucy and passed on to her daughter and--who subsequently passed it onto her daughters and sons. I think they each had maybe four or five acres or, or, or. But they farmed. They farmed. They always had chickens and cows and hogs and every kind of produce imaginable. They lived off the land. They lived off the land, and one would probably characterize them because of income as poor, but in terms of having everything that you needed, they had--they had. And being landowners back in the--you know, in the '20s [1920s]--it wasn't forty acres and a mule, but, but they owned their own land and were able to farm it, and, and, and, and have a good subsistence. Speaker 1: Now the land is still in the family, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: Most of my cousins have it down, down there in Collins. I have one brother--a couple of brothers who have just a sliver that nobody has ever you know--the other cousins live on it. Speaker 1: Okay, and what I understand is that there's a cash crop of watermelons are growing then. Was that the truth? Speaker 2: Well, my uncle, before he passed, my blood aunt's husband, did, did a just a really good income of selling watermelons as, as a--as a delicacy to the Chinese. They would come and get them by the tractor trailer loads and ship them out from the port to China. Story_ID: 166068 Speaker 1: Now your mother [Rose Wheeler Davis]--now what did your mother look like? Did she look like her great-grandmother [Lucy Draughn] at all or, or-- Speaker 2: My mother's complexion was a tan, and she had long, long straight hair. But she was not as fair as, as my grandmother [Christine Wheeler] was. My grandmother was, was fair-skinned. But I guess with grandpa Darncey [Wheeler] being so deep chocolate, the, the darker skinned prevailed, and, and my mother was--and they ran the gamut in, in--of her siblings were from deep dark to, to tan, to kind of a banana yellow, if you will. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Now, now what, what, what did your mother say about growing up? Speaker 2: You know, and that's the interesting that when you're young, and my mother died very young, so we didn't have the conversations necessarily about, about what she wanted to be. She did say that--she said times were hard, and she always wanted us to have more than she had growing up. So we were kind of spoiled perhaps a little bit in that regard. But she said that she had one pair of shoes for Sunday and one pair of shoes for school, and that she, she went through the eighth grade, which is what girls in those--the--that era did--[Great] Depression era. But she didn't speak on having a particularly difficult life, but they just didn't have a lot of material things that she would see. And, and, and she'd talk about this Sears Roebuck [& Co.] catalog as being the wish book. You know, when the Sears Roebuck catalog came, they just couldn't wait to see all the goodies. And they would dream about having these things that the saw in the Sears Roebuck catalog, which ended then in the--in the outhouse--(laughter), which-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --which they had up until the time I remember, until the '60s [1960s], the early '60s [1960s]. In fact, when my grandmother in the very early '60s [1960s] got indoor plumbing, they had a, a newer little home built for her there on the place, and she absolutely could not bring herself to go to the bathroom in the house. She'd take a bath in the bathtub, but she could not bring herself to do something as dirty as going to the bathroom inside the house. And she would continue to go down that path (laughter) to the outhouse-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--yeah. Speaker 2: --even though she had indoor plumbing--indoor, indoor plumbing. But it was well into the--it was in the early '60s [1960s] before they had running water and electric lights. They still had--they were using hurricane oil lamps. It was like going to a foreign country when we visited from Indiana to rural Mississippi. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, so your mother had an eighth grade education, and she basically--she, she was a housewife or did she work outside the home at all? Speaker 2: Growing up she was basically a housewife. Daddy [Austin Davis] never wanted her to work, but with so many kids she wanted to get what she wanted to get. So she would work part time as a maid, and the rest of the time she as at home. Speaker 1: Okay, did she have any special talents? I mean-- Speaker 2: No, actually. No, not--she was a great cook, and I guess her special talent was being a loving, giving soul, and very much a support to daddy. Story_ID: 166069 Speaker 1: Let me ask about your father's side of the family. Can you give us your father's name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: My father's full name was Austin Andrew Davis, and he was from Bassfield, Mississippi, but the community was called Sweet Water [Mississippi]. And again, based on the C.M.E. [Christian Methodist Episcopal] Church. And his father's name was Albert Davis, and daddy's mother's name was Ollie Davis. And that's how I got my name. My name Ollisteen, and there was a little change on the spelling, but it was Ollie on the paternal side and Christine on the maternal side; that's Ollisteen. But--and I don't know anything else about daddy's side much except I do know what my great-grandfather's name was Ab [Davis]. And I understand that granddaddy had four brothers who went to Georgia, North Carolina, Alabama, and of course, he was there in Mississippi, and another one might have been in Mississippi. But they scattered about. And like granddaddy was born ten years after slavery. And I would talk to him one time. I interviewed him about what it was like growing up in, in that time period. And he would talk about how a black man could be lynched and killed for daring to lift his eyes to a white woman. And when they were walking down the street that they would have to cross over to the other side, rather than be on the sidewalk at the same time with, with, with a white woman. And he said, but they could rape our women and they could do anything they wanted to you know, to, to black woman. And he said and thus the range of colors that we have in the family, the different complexions in the family. But granddaddy was a--an original mason. He could not read or write. He worked on the railroad building all the way up to Chicago [Illinois]. And he was quite the sage, despite the fact that he didn't have a formal education. He was a very, very educated man and a very wise man. And I gravitated toward my paternal grandfather more. I didn't see either one of them any more or less than the other, but I gravitated toward grandpa-- Speaker 1: That's Albert Davis? Speaker 2: Albert Davis, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. And-- Speaker 2: I never met Ab. And there was another relative--there were a couple of them--that granddaddy told me about. One that granddaddy told me about by the name of Dave. And Dave, during slavery, was never a slave. He escaped, and he ran into the woods, and he would come in granddaddy said by cover of dark, and he would take all of massa's clothes off the line and go in there and get the hams out of the smokehouse and then head back to the hills. And graddy said--granddaddy said and they could never cotch him. Well, years later my aunt and I, my father's sister and I, were in the Copiah County, Mississippi courthouse looking up family records. Because I've always been interested in, in, in genealogy, if you will, and knowing who my ancestors were and what they were like. So we're in the courthouse and we find a relative on dad's side, and I believe that she was grandma Ollie's mother, but her name was Penny Reynolds. And we have some McBrides on that side of the family as well. But the records in the courthouse on this slave woman said: you have to watch her 'cause she's a runner. So in my DNA, you know, it's before I'll be a slave, I'll be buried in my grave. But I just found that very interesting that the notation in, in the court records there is that she was a runner, and you had to watch her. Speaker 1: Right, right, those are interesting stories. I wonder why more families don't have some story about slavery passed down, but yeah. Speaker 2: Some people chose to forget. And I think in my family, particularly I know on my dad's side, that those stories were very important. Story_ID: 166070 Speaker 1: It was very important for my father [Austin Davis] that we knew who and whose we were. And so every summer of my life, Larry [Crowe]--every summer of my life was spent in Mississippi, as growing up as a child. And I often said when I got grown that I was gonna get a station wagon. And I was gonna have all the stickers from Canada and Smoky Mountains like the other kids had. Because when you came back from summer and you wrote a theme--what'd you do this summer? Went to Mississippi (laughter). Speaker 2: Okay, now is this Bassfield [Mississippi] that you, you go down to or-- Speaker 1: Both places. Speaker 2: Bo--both places. Speaker 1: They're very--they're very nearby. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: It's one suburb of--or another, if you will. There--Bassfield and Collins [Mississippi] were about ten, fifteen miles apart. Speaker 2: In--I believe--are they close to, to the Gulf [of Mexico] or are they-- Speaker 1: From Hattiesburg [Mississippi] is the nearest-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --large town--about thirty-five miles from Hattiesburg. And Hattiesburg is about an hour from Biloxi [Mississippi] or, or Gulfport [Mississippi]. Speaker 2: Okay, (unclear)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, so it would be-- Speaker 2: --hour and a half from the coast. Speaker 1: --on the southwestern tip of the state. Speaker 2: Okay, okay, now let's see. Now what did your-- Speaker 1: Southeastern. I'm sorry--southeastern. Story_ID: 166071 Speaker 1: What did your father [Austin Davis] want to do and what did he wind up doing? Speaker 2: I don't know what daddy wanted to do. And he, too, died at a very early age, and we never had those conversations about what he really wanted to do. But I know what he did and that was he was a very public person there in South Bend [Indiana]. He worked at Studebakers Automotives [Studebaker Brothers Manufacturing Company] building those cars that were ahead of their time, and provided a decent living for us. He later became a pastor who went to seminary there at Mishawaka [Indiana] at a place called Bethel College [Mishawaka, Indiana]. And so he was a pastor, as well as working. In those days, they didn't have the big megachurches where the pastors made mega salaries. They, they worked in addition to being a pastor, especially when there were so many kids. There are nine of us. There were nine of us. Yeah, I'm the oldest of nine. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Now, so had--did your father go to the service? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He served in World War II [WWII]. Speaker 1: Okay, and-- Speaker 2: Served in World War II. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: Didn't talk about it much. And he would often say that those who talked about the horrors of war and bragged about all they did probably didn't do anything but be a cook, because it's not something that you want to relive. War is indeed hell. And it's just something that, that he didn't--he didn't talk much about. I do--I do know that those horrific race riot that that they had at Camp Shelby [Hattiesburg, Mississippi] down in Mississippi--Camp Shelby is where daddy was stationed, and he never--he never talked about it. But that is where so many of the black soldiers were massacred. But again, he, he, he nev--he never talked--never talked about it, but he was infantry out of Camp Shelby in World War II. Story_ID: 166072 Speaker 1: Okay, now did he [Miles' father, Austin Davis], he meet your mother [Rose Wheeler Davis] before the war [World War II, WWII] or after the war? Speaker 2: I think he was in--he was--he was in, in the [U.S.] Army when he met mom. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Home on leave as I'm told, met her at the--what's called Big Meetin' and that was--that was revival down at Friendship [Baptist] Church [Friendship, Mississippi]. And he said he saw that pretty pecan tan woman with that long hair, and he was just--he just fell in love at first sight and decided that that was gonna be his wife. And he asked my mother to go for a walk with him. And she said, oh, now, no, no, no, she couldn't leave the church grounds because she in be--she'd be in big trouble. And so she said but she kind of liked that old bigfoot man. And big feet, that is not--that--that's not symbolic. Daddy wore 14 Quad E. That's a big--that's a big bone--that's a-- Speaker 1: And that's pretty big, big shoe Speaker 2: That's a big foot. Speaker 1: How tall-- Speaker 2: That's a big foot. Speaker 1: --was your father? Speaker 2: He was 6'4" so he needed-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--that's-- Speaker 2: --a bit of a platform for, for that height. But he started writing her letters, and she talked about how she would pour over these letters, you know, reading every word that he would write professing his undying love for her. And after three years--well, after a couple years of courtship, he came and he asked grandpa for her hand. And Grandpa Darncey said that aunt Lovey--my mother's sister had just gotten married, and he didn't have anyone to tote his water. And so he--daddy said well, I'll dig you a well. And daddy gave him a hundred dollars, and that's a lot of money back in those days--gave him a hundred dollars to dig a new well so he wouldn't have to worry about somebody totin' his water. And the joke was that daddy paid a hundred dollars to marry mom, you know, what a dowry (laughter). But--so they were married in--I wanna say 1940--1940--it had to be 1943, because I was born three years after they were married and I was born in '46' [1946], nine months and three days after he was discharged from World War II. And, and then he took mom and moved to South Bend [Indiana] where the Studebaker [Brothers Manufacturing Company] car was being manufactured. He wanted to go to a small town. He wanted to go to a place where he could raise his family and earn a decent living and so he didn't go to Indianapolis [Indiana]. He didn't go to Gary [Indiana] to the steel mills, or Chicago [Illinois], where many people from Mississippi went. He went to, to South Bend. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, now was there--was there a railroad connection to South Bend--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh yes-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --yes, yes. What you'll find is most people from the Carolinas, Florida, Georgia primarily ended up in Virginia, [Washington] D.C. area, up to New Jersey and New York. But people from New Orleans [Louisiana], Mississippi, Tennessee, Arkansas, they followed the train line and it was the crescent-- Speaker 1: Chicago (unclear)-- Speaker 2: --and from down the City of New Orleans all the way, and you'll find people all the way up to Detroit [Michigan] all the way following that train line. Story_ID: 167656 Speaker 1: Now when you consider your parents' [Rose Wheeler Davis and Austin Davis] personalities and their dispositions, their sense of humor, how they walk, how they talk, what they look like, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: My father. I'm the firstborn. I have a lot of his personality, being outgoing, gregarious, great sense of humor, great intellect, and great care and compassion for people. I also inherit that from my mother. My mother was a very sweet, loving, giving woman who was rather shy, and that's part of me too that most folks wouldn't believe. But I could just assume be in a corner reading a book and be happy as being in front of a camera. But I would have to say that I'm probably more like my--more like my dad. Story_ID: 167657 Speaker 1: Well, tell us about your brothers and sisters, which you have how many altogether? Speaker 2: Eight. Speaker 1: Eight. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, well can you name them from the-- Speaker 2: From the top. Speaker 1: Yeah, from the top. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: To the bottom, yeah that's it. Tell us a little bit-- Speaker 2: The second one-- Speaker 1: --bit about 'em you know. Speaker 2: --second brother, the second child--and we number ourselves. Hi, this is number one; hey seven, how are you? But the number two is a boy, Austin, Jr.--Austin Andrew, Jr. His birthday was February the 11th, 1940--40--let's 40 [1940], '46 [1946]--two years later would be what--'48 [1948]-- Speaker 1: Forty-eight [1948]. Speaker 2: --forty-eight [1948]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And Austin retired from the South Bend Police Force [South Bend, Indiana]. He was drafted into Vietnam [War] at seventeen, and he, he was very close to mom [Rose Wheeler Davis]. He wouldn't wanna be described as a mama's boy, but he was very close to mom, and led a pretty sheltered existence there in South Bend [Indiana]. And when he came home from Vietnam, he was a person I didn't know. What happened to my brother, because he came home physically, but he didn't come home psychologically. He was smoking and drinking--you know, drinking beer like it was water, and of course had suffered from--somewhat from PTSD [post-traumatic stress disorder] and--but just a really great guy. We often laughed that Austin would give you the shirt off of his back, but you'd, you'd have to undergo a first--a good grilling first and foremost. He had the first dime he ever made on his--on his paper route. And one day he asked me when we were in our late teens, how do you garnish someone's wages? And I said I don't know. I guess you have to go to the court or something. I said why, who? He said daddy [Austin Davis] owes me thirteen dollars and he hasn't paid me. So he was trying to figure out a way that he could garnish daddy's wages in order to get his thirteen dollars. But--had a great sense of humor. He could make you laugh just by talking. And he tended to stutter when he got really excited and so. But my, my greatest story about my dear brother who--and we were very close, but I said Austin, you really need to stop drinking. And he was trying to self-medicate. Again, I don't--you know, you take a seventeen-year-old kid, put 'em in the jungles of Vietnam thousands of miles away from home, picking up bodies in the jungle with infrared lights--search missions, retrieving bodies, and, and so he drank. He literally drank in addition to the sarcoma that we did found out later that he had. He drank himself to death. And he--I, I told him when--Austin, you drink too much. You, you, you should really stop drinking. You know, he said Steen, I'm addicted to alcohol and looking at you, you must be addicted to food, so I'll stop drinking when you stop eating (laughter). And so I was like touche, okay. But that was Austin the second, and he has two fine sons, my nephews--three actually. He has three boys and one, one, one daughter and really good--really good kids. And my sister-in-law did an excellent job of, of, of raising them. The next child is Dr. Mary Sanders. She is the only one of us with a Ph.D. She is a retired educator and what a trooper. She is a beautiful woman. She's been married to my brother-in-law for close to--I think this year is forty years--1974. They met in college down at Indiana State [University, Terre Haute, Indiana], and they adopted a little girl. And they're just a great couple--just a great couple. Mary, again, is a retired educator. Two years ago--and to show you the kind of resolve and nettle that we possess in our family, she had a brain tumor in her head the size of an orange that had been growing for some fifteen years the doctor said. And she underwent successful surgery. And to see her today, you would not know that she had you know, survived that and, and cancer and still looks absolutely gorgeous and just a wonderful, kind, kind lady. That's number three. Number four is Richard--did I tell you Mary's birthday? Mary's birthday is 10-4-49 [October 4, 1949]. And if you saw her, you wouldn't make her a day over forty-five, when she's over sixty--thin, long pretty--that Indian hair, you know, and just a beautiful lady inside and out. Story_ID: 167658 Speaker 1: The next one, number four, is the only one who took height after daddy [Austin Davis]; in fact, he's two inches taller than daddy; he's 6'6". That's Richard. Richard's birthday is 9-2-50 [September 2, 1950]. And all of them, by the way, graduated from [John] Adams High School in South Bend [Indiana] on the east side. Richard, with his height, was a star basketball player and went to Lincoln University [Jefferson City, Missouri]. And Mary--I'm sorry; go back. Mary graduated from Indiana State [University, Terre Haute, Indiana]. Austin didn't go to college. He was drafted into the [U.S.] Military. Richard went to Lincoln University in Missouri, the HBCU [historically black college or university], and played basketball. And he went into the [U.S.] Air Force--retired from the Air Force and is now a barber, just kind of taking life--taking life easy. He has three girls and one son--three girls and one son. So that's Richard. Richard was the baby, and he was spoiled--no kids for six years. And the next one is Mae. Mae was born on October the 4th, same day as Mary, but in 1956. And so the winters were rough in South Bend, so if you do nine months, everybody was born in August, September, October. I have a sis--two sisters on October the 4th, one brother on Oc--October the 6th, one brother on October the 9th, one brother on October the 11th--lot's of birthdays in October. But back to Mae. Mae is a homemaker. She has three children--no, four children, two boys and two girls. And she is the only one remaining in South Bend. The next brother is Buford, Buford Lewis Davis. Buford was born in '57 [1957], October the 6th, 1957. He graduated from Indiana University [Bloomington, Indiana]. He's a systems analyst. He has two children, a boy and a girl. And Buford is--we call him the Professor 'cause he majored in math and computers, and he's just--you know, he's just a wizard. He's just smart, and, and again, we nicknamed him the Professor--great guy. All of them are great, great people. I like--I love my brothers and sisters, but I also like them a lot. The next one is Philip, and Philip was spoiled because then he was the baby for four years. His birthday is 9-26-58 [September 26, 1958], and Philip is a plumber and a jack of all trades, served in the Military as well. He went into the Military. He is also extremely smart, but there was a--there was a ritual. He was spoiled. Between he and mom [Rose Wheeler Davis] it was like a dance. Mom, let me have the car. No, Philip, you're not gonna get the keys to my car 'cause all you're gonna do is run around in the street with your little thuggy friends and run all the gas out of my car. Oh, mom, let me have the car. I promise I won't stay out too late; I won't have anybody else in the car; and I'll put some gas into it--back and forth and back and forth about fifteen minutes each time. And you know the end of that story. Mom gives him the keys, he rides his thuggy friends in the car, and runs all the gas out. And the next time they go through the same ritual. That's Philip. Then nothing for four years, and the next one is DJ. And he is a captain on the police force down in Hattiesburg, Mississippi. He's the only one living down there where mom and dad are originally from. And he has three daughters and a grandson. He is--his birthday is 10-9-62 [October 9, 1962]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Sixty-two [1962] or sixty-three [1963]--sixty-two [1962] I believe. Yes, 'cause I was a sophomore in high school [at South Bend Central High School, South Bend, Indiana] when he was born. And then the next one is--the baby is Brad, who's a police officer here, graduated from Ohio State--I'm sorry--The Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio]. He would correct me (laughter). And he's a police officer, and he could be my son. He's seventeen years younger than me, if I had started having children early. And he has three children. And again, he's a police officer here in, in DeKalb County, Georgia. So that-- Speaker 2: Now somebody--now you had some relatives in Trotwood [Ohio], right, in that area? Speaker 1: My sister and-- Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: --brother-in-law lived in Trotwood for a while. And then they also lived in-- Speaker 2: This is Trotwood, Ohio. Speaker 1: Yeah, Trotwood, Ohio. Well, the bu--the last two boys graduated from high school at, at Trotwood[-Madison High School, Trotwood, Ohio] in Dayton [Ohio]. And they were--they lived with Mary after, after mom passed. Dad was killed in a car accident in '68 [1968]. And he was forty-seven at the time. And then mom died at fifty-one of breast cancer. And so the last two boys--everybody else was grown, but the last two boys my sister, Mary, said Steen, I don't have any children. You've got two. Why don't you let the boys live with me? And so we agreed that the boys would come and live with her and Lee. And so at twelve and thirteen when mom passed, they lived with her, so--in, in, in Dayton and in Cleveland [Ohio], and Columbus [Ohio]. They lived in three cities in Ohio. Story_ID: 167659 Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: I loved the wintertime and the smells of coffee brewing and bacon frying and mama's [Rose Wheeler Davis] biscuits in the oven with scraping the frost of the windows or building a tunnel through the snow. And I guessed I loved to sing, and we would go caroling at Christmastime. And I guess that would be my favorite time was Christmastime. And we'd go caroling. And Suzie Carr's [ph.] mother would have the little [sound effect]--the little horn to tune--you know, to give us the tune and we'd start singing and go house to house singing. And people would invite us in and give us hot chocolate. You know, you didn't worry about somebody putting something in the food or anything like that in, in, in those days. But that--that's probably one of the--one of the fondest childhood memories was Christmastime or the winters in South Bend [Indiana] with family. It was always a lot of family around--big family. Speaker 1: And I see you, you had a lot of snow in South Bend, right? Speaker 2: Oh yes. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --yes, thirteen-foot snowdrifts common, common. Speaker 1: (Unclear)-- Speaker 2: 'Cause South Bend is in a valley, and so everything that came over from Chicago [Illinois], the lake effect, just dumped into the valley, in, in, into South Bend. We were like the snow bucket of the Midwest. Speaker 1: South Bend is the home of the great Notre Dame University [sic, University of Notre Dame, South Bend, Indiana]. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Big Catholic university-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --with golden dome-- Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: --of football history. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: You know. Speaker 2: My parents second, second home was on Ed--Eddy [Street] and Colfax [Avenue, South Bend, Indiana], which is right down the street. Eddy Street runs right into Notre Dame, and you could stand up on the second, second level and--upstairs and look out and see the gold--the gold dome. And it was really a gold--it's a golden dome at, at Notre Dame. There was a lot of influence from Father [Theodore] Hesburgh as well, who was the first chair of the Human Rights Commission [United States Commission on Civil Rights] for the country. And I, I think a lot of that spilled over into South Bend. While I don't know segregation except what I saw visiting, you know, the family in Mississippi, I can say--I, I, I do know discrimination, but there was a real effort made I think in South Bend was kind of--there was a real effort, again, because of the influence of Notre Dame and Father Hesburgh toward, toward brotherhood, and diversity, and, and, and equality--didn't always work--didn't always work. There--you know, I, I vividly remember some discrimination, but I don't know anything about segregation, of not being able to try on clothes or not being able to sit anywhere I wanted to in the theater or ride the bus. That kind of thing was not part of our, our reality at the time. And I entered school three years before Brown v. Board of Education [of Topeka, 1954] and went to my neighborhood school. I wasn't bused. You know, I could cut through the alley that we have in the Midwest and be right there at school, a block away. But you couldn't go through the alley for safety reasons. You had to walk all the way around the block, but lot of very, very positive influence from Notre Dame on the South Bend community. Story_ID: 167660 Speaker 1: Now did your neighborhood [in South Bend, Indiana] have a name? Speaker 2: Southeast side I guess. And it was interesting because many, many African Americans lived on either the west side, the south side or the east side. But then there was this pocket called the southeast side where nobody lived (laughter). We called it the twilight zone or no-man's land because there weren't very many African American families there in the--in the '40s [1940s], '50s [1950s], and '60s [1960s]--early--no, '40s [1940s] and '50s [1950s], because by the '60s [1960s] urban renewal had begun. And so families from the south side, where they had, you know, torn down a lot of houses and whatnot, they moved to the southeast side. But I wouldn't take anything, anything in the world for the very diverse experiences and exposure I had at an early age with people. And it has absolutely shaped who I am today--who I am today, which is a love--a love of people, and I see you as a human being. I can see that you're European, and I can see that you're African American, or a Latino, or an Asian, but I see you as a human being without preconceived notions about who you are or stereotypes about who you are. You're either nice or you're a jerk, you know, and will, that determination will come along. But I wouldn't give anything for that early exposure. Story_ID: 167661 Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: The sights were, again, the snow. The sounds were--I can't pinpoint sounds, but smells I can. And again, the smell of coffee and bacon and biscuits and--yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But sounds, sounds are difficult; sou--sounds are difficult. The sound of singing; the sound of singing from the quartets that would rehearse at our house before going on to do a concert someplace. And some of those people included some greats like, like Sam Cooke. And these people would come to the house because there wasn't a rehearsal hall. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: And they would come to the house and they would rehearse and sing and, and then go off to--you know, go off to a venue and, and sing at the churches. There was one place called the Hearing House, where African Americans had concerts and, and, and whatnot. It was a community center of sorts over on the west side. But those were the sounds, the sounds of singing, and there was a lot of that. There, there was a lot of that. Story_ID: 167662 Speaker 1: Where did you start school? What was the name of your first school? Speaker 2: Franklin Elementary School. It was on Sample Street [South Bend, Indiana], and I think it's no longer there. But I went there from kindergarten through sixth grade. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: To Franklin Elementary--Benjamin Franklin Elementary School. Speaker 1: Now, now what were you interested in, in, in school and, and--well, first of all, what was the racial makeup of the school. This is--this was-- Speaker 2: In most instances I was the only African American in my class. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: At, at that time--at Franklin at that time, if there were twenty black kids out of a population--school population of three hundred in the whole school maybe, that was generous. From first--from kindergarten through second grade, there was one other black boy that was at school there in my class at the time. And then he moved away and I was heartbroken because Donald [ph.] was the only person who looked like me, and I knew that Donald liked me and I liked Donald. And when he moved away I was just heart--heartbroken. But the racial makeup was, I would say, 99 percent Caucasian. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so how were treated in school? Were you-- Speaker 2: I was treated well. I, I was treated well, except one incident that stands out--well, a couple. I've always been curious, and I guess that's probably--you know, journalism being my calling. But I was always curious and old folks would call it nosy, but I always wanted to know. And one day some, some boys at school--we used to have recess periods back in the day where you could go outside on the playground and play around and, and you know, run off some steam and then come back. And this particular day some boys had been roughhousing during, during recess, recess on the playground. And the teacher, Ms., Ms. McIntyre [ph.], said that no one was supposed to look because the boys were gonna get a paddling. And she brought them in into the hallway, and I stuck my brown nose around the corner to see what was going on. And she said, Ollisteen, come here. And me, I'm like, how you know it was me? Well, who else in the class had a brown nose sticking it around the corner being nosey while the boys got a paddling. That was one humorous incident. And that was the only time I ever got in any trouble in school was that--I got a swat as well, and they were laughing. They could hardly contain themselves because, you know, it was just too funny. And she wants to know how did you know it was me, and so that was the only time I got in any real trouble. Story_ID: 167663 Speaker 1: But the other time was more--was more traumatic, and that was in second grade [at Benjamin Franklin Elementary School, South Bend, Indiana]. I, I--I've shared this story often because it was one of those ah-ha moments. It was an epiphany for me, and it was very much a teaching moment on the part of my father [Austin Davis], and that was having to go to the bathroom. And I raised my hand. I only had to do number one, nothing serious. And the teacher, Ms. Sinoff [ph.]--I'll never forget her--she--I don't think she--she was just an unhappy person. I think she was just an unhappy person, and she ignored me. And I raised my hand again, and she continued to ignore me. And finally, you know, after not being able to go--and today a child would have just left the classroom, but you obeyed adults. And I sat there and I wet my pants. And there was this puddle of water underneath my--underneath my seat. And the other kids were looking and laughing and pointing, you know. And when I went home, the, the urine was freezing on--it froze on the back of my little, little dress--and got home and I could tell dad was furious 'cause his nose would stand open. His nostrils would flare. And-- Speaker 2: Did he go--did he go to the school? Speaker 1: He went to the school, but I never knew what he said or what happened. There was never any conversation further about it from that day forward. But that day daddy said--he said--my nickname was Teenie. He said, "Teenie, there are always gonna be people who don't like you, and if they don't have a reason they'll make up one, you know." He said you can be--you can be--"They'll call you fat, they'll call you skinny, they'll call you four-eyes, you wear glasses, you know, you're too dark, you're too light. People will find a reason not to like you." He said, "But I want you to remember to love yourself, know that your mom [Rose Wheeler Davis] and I love you, and know that God loves you." And he said, "You get it up here, and no one can ever take it away from you. No matter what happens they can never--you get it here, and you go back to that school and you show that teacher who you are." And I went back to school. Well, there was another little teacher by the name of Elizabeth Greer [ph.]. And I dearly to this day revere, and love, and admire that woman. When it comes to great teachers in my life, they are my father, they are Ms. Greer, and there's a man by the name of Harry Kevorkian. But Ms. Greer was my fourth grade teacher and I was a prolific writer. I loved to write, and she saw this writing ability in me and she nourished it, and she would enter my little themes into writing competitions and I would win. And she didn't miss an opportunity to find a way to get me before audiences there for assembly programs. And when I graduated from [Benjamin] Franklin Elementary School [South Bend, Indiana] I was number one, followed by my best friend, Francis Lemansky [ph.], and then Sheldon Squadarsky [ph.], in that order. And when I walked across the stage to get my little certificates, and I gave the graduating class address. And guess who had to give 'em to me? Ms. Sinoff. And she said, "Oh, Ollisteen, we're so proud of you," and I was proud of myself, thank you very much. But that particular day was a lesson learned-- Speaker 2: How old were you-- Speaker 1: --about how you take-- Speaker 2: Oh, I'm sorry. Speaker 1: I was--I was seven years old, in the second grade with the incident of wetting my pants. And seven years old, and I, I, I remember that as if it were--as if it were yesterday, not so much with pain anymore; there's no pain. There is the gain of taking lemons and making lemonade, taking a negative, and turning it into a positive. And that, that was the lesson that I've carried with me for much of my adult life. And there's always a better day. There's always a better day. And that the glass for me is always half full as opposed to half empty. Story_ID: 167664 Speaker 1: When you were saying you graduated first, you're talking about high school or grade, grade school [Benjamin Franklin Elementary School, South Bend, Indiana]? Speaker 2: Grade school. Speaker 1: Grade school. Okay, right, that's right. All right so, did you have middle school? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Riley Junior High, James Whitcomb Riley Junior High School [later, James Whitcomb Riley High School, South Bend, Indiana]. Speaker 1: The great poet. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: And that was really uneventful except, you know, it was seventh and eighth grade. You're adjusting and you know, trying to wear lipstick and you know, wanting to wear straight skirts. And dad [Austin Davis] said no, you're gonna wear dresses still, and you know, discovering yourself. I'll never forget one day I sneaked and put on some lipstick and well, because it was a junior high with the senior high. And so I wanted to wear lipstick like the senior high girls, and the rule was you didn't get to wear makeup or lipstick until you were fourteen, in high school. Well, I would sneak and put it on, and they had these rough paper towels. And I'd try to clean my lips before daddy picked me up from, from school--didn't work and had blisters all (laughter)--(unclear) from those rough paper towels, trying to clean the lipstick off. And so finally he said you had on some lipstick today huh, huh? Why, 'cause you know--and that was another thing, do not lie. And to this day, I do not care for people who lie. I--lying bothers me because it was so drilled in us: if you tell the truth, you might not get in trouble. You might not get a whuppin', but I you lie--and daddy said if you lie, you'll steal, if you'll steal, you'll kill, and you know, on down the line. But he said if you tell one lie you gotta tell another to cover up the first one, so you may as well tell the truth in the first place. So I was like, I, I--why (laughter)--because he could see it. And so he relented and I guess with--maybe with mom's [Rose Wheeler Davis] help--bought me my first tube of lipstick. Story_ID: 166082 Speaker 1: So seventh and eighth grade [at James Whitcomb Riley Junior High School, later, James Whitcomb Riley High School, South Bend, Indiana] was largely uneventful. These, these are the two crisis, you know--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, well, you know, I got to do the things. I was a cheerleader, you know, I got to--the only thing eventful about seventh and eighth grade was I sang in the choir, and I really wanted that solo part singing 'O Holy Night,' but another girl got it and I didn't think she could sing as well as I could. But beyond that pretty uneventful. Speaker 1: Okay, okay so-- Speaker 2: And then it's on to [South Bend] Central High School [South Bend, Indiana]. That's where the fun really begins. Speaker 1: Okay, well, cent--let's go to Central High School. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, all right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Now are you still like one of the only blacks in class? Speaker 2: No, actually. Out of our graduating class I believe of 375, I want to say there were at least--at least 75 to 100, so it was fully integrated, but not necessarily predominantly black. Yeah, went there from ninth grade to twelve, of course. That's when I saw discrimination full blown, in that a basketball team would be pretty much all black, but you're only gonna have one cheerleader. And I've, I've lived to see that happen with my own children, you know, forty years hence. That's discrimination. That's that subtlety that you can't quite put your finger on. That is to me much more debilitating than overt segregation, because at least in segregation you know where you don't go and you know where you stand. And when it's subtle, you're not quite sure and you can't quite put your finger on it. And to me that's more debilitating. But so there's only gonna be one black cheerleader, and the color issue was, was prevalent. And I'll never forget in, in, in, in my junior year of being elected to the queen's court, which was really--those things were important to a girl. I was very popular with everybody and I, I guess well liked. But I had been elected to the queen's court, and the little friends were saying oh, "Congratulations, Ollisteen, you know; you've made the queen's court." And then that afternoon dead silence because I had been taken off and replaced by a, a girl who was lighter brown, which was very, very hurtful, but at the same time-- Speaker 1: Now how--who, who did that? Speaker 2: The, the administrators--you know, they have the control and the power to do that and they did. Story_ID: 166083 Speaker 1: But in retrospect too, I don't know whether it was all discrimination or was it a fact that I wasn't acting very queenly when I first came to, to [South Bend] Central [High School, South Bend, Indiana]. I got into a lot of fights, and that might have been part of it as well. Speaker 2: These are real fight-- Speaker 1: But I didn't start any. Speaker 2: Were these physical fights? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yes, sad to say. My cousins--older cousins--were like the big brothers I never had, and they taught me how to box. And my father [Austin Davis] also had a boxing gym that--you know, for the--for, for the teens and trying to help keep the neighborhood kids out of trouble and whatnot and--but these cousins taught me how to box. One cousin, in particular, who was a Golden Gloves champ, and he taught me how to physically box, like that, you know, right cut and all that; I could box. And so I come to Central and these girls say oh, you think you're cute and you talk like a white girl. And, and you know, I was smart and here I came from a different world, so to speak, and so every day somebody's gonna beat me up for no reason. And here again, Central drew kids from all parts of town. It was Central, and it was located in downtown South Bend [Indiana]. And so this one particular day this, this, this girl is going at it, and I told her to stop because she was making all of us look bad. And she jumped on me. Well, I beat her up (laughter)--not proud of it, but--and I mean I boxed her. And she was about six feet tall. Her name was Lucy Johnson (ph.). I'll never forget her. And so they had to literally pull me off of her. Well, nobody else quite bothered me anymore after that, after I gave her a good sound whipping, and you know, and then straightened up my little dress and back I went to being Ms. Priss, if you will (laughter). But it was I guess kind of disarming for me to speak so properly and, and be Ms. Prim and Proper. But I was a quite a bit of a Laila Ali, if you will, and probably would have been quite a good boxer in, in another time, but-- Story_ID: 166084 Speaker 1: So were, were you involved in school activities [at South Bend Central High School, South Bend, Indiana]? Speaker 2: Oh yes, oh gosh, yes, yes--in the choir, in the American Field Service, in the school executive board, Spanish club, drama--gosh, I was a cadet teacher spending time--you'd go--in our senior year we went half-day to school, and the rest of it we went to an elementary school and, and shadowed the teacher and taught school, so we were cadet teachers. But I was very involved in many extracurricular activities in school. Our senior class, we had our first black president of our senior class, a young fellow by the name of Michael Warren. We're all so proud of Michael; and in fact, this year, 2014, we celebrate our fiftieth anniversary, so that's going to be quite fun. But Mike, again, was a star basketball player, handsome, very nice guy, and ended up going to UCLA [University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] out in California playing with Lew Alcindor and--well, Kareem Abdul Jabbar--and went on to be a rather successful actor, played Bobby Hill on 'Hill Street Blues.' And the first time I saw him on the silver screen I was in New York [City], and I started screaming in the theater. It was 'Foxy Brown' or something like that. And there's--I said my God, it's Mike and--but we had a very, very accomplished class, if you will, among the African American students--doctor, university professors, a journalist, and a state senator. Speaker 1: Yeah, [HM] Reginald Webb is--was--did you remember him. He was--he was a couple of years behind you--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: No, I don't--I don't know-- Speaker 1: We've interviewed him. Speaker 2: No, I don't know-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Don't know. Speaker 1: Yeah, Mike Warren was a big--was a star basketball player--(simultaneous)--yeah, at UCLA. Speaker 2: And his father--his father gave me my first piano. His dad gave me my first piano, but his dad also worked at Studebakers [Studebaker Brothers Manufacturing Company, South Bend, Indiana]. And most of the African Americans, the family--the fathers worked at--worked at Studebakers--and again, you know, homeowners and a fairly decent, decent life for, for their families. Speaker 1: Now you said I think off--not in this interview, but you said that you're also related to--your nephew is Jimmy King, one of the Fab Five. Speaker 2: Yes, by marriage--by marriage. Speaker 1: By marriage-- Speaker 2: --King-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes, he was number 24 and that's number 24 of the Fab Five, and that's something--when you don't have a story of, of dysfunction, it seems as if popular media does not think that worthy of reporting. And, and I use Jimmy as it--as an example. He had a mom and dad and grew up in Plano, Texas, just decent hardworking people, but raised him in a--in a middle-class environment. And even with ESPN's recent reunion, they just did a tiny bit of a video clip of his parents and said nothing about--oh, and he grew up in Plano, Texas, and that's that, but nothing else about his family, which were normal people, so I guess the abnormal rules. If you don't know who your father was, or he left and abandoned the family, there's no story there. There, there's, there's nothing perhaps unusual there. Story_ID: 166085 Speaker 1: You're a senior in high school [at South Bend Central High School, South Bend, Indiana] and what is your career goal, or, or do you have one? Speaker 2: I had one, yes. Speaker 1: Okay Speaker 2: I wanted to be a UN [United Nations] ambassador. I wanted to travel the world, learn a number of different languages and be a UN ambassador-- Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: --a UN interpreter. That's what I wanted to be. Second to that was movie star. Speaker 1: Okay, now you were in American Friends, right? Speaker 2: The-- Speaker 1: Yeah, American Friend--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Foreign exchange. Speaker 1: For--foreign exchange, right, right. Speaker 2: Foreign exchange. And one of--one of our students was from, from London, England, a young girl by the name of Ruthie Hilton (ph.). I interver--viewed Ruthie when Princess Di [Diana, Princess of Wales] passed and called her to get the, the reaction of the Brits. But Ruthie had, of course, a very clipped British accent, and we're still in contact to this day as old--as old women. But when I went to school--went to school down to Ball State [University, Muncie, Indiana], here I, I already spoke "properly," if you will, and then on top of that--because we were hanging out in the streets together--oh, The Beatles and all of that. And where are you from? You know, this chocolate girl talkin' "white," whatever that means, and then with a British accent on top of that. It was quite amusing, quite amusing, quite amusing. Speaker 1: Okay, now did you graduate with any honors or anything or-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --particular (unclear)? Speaker 2: No, just a bright above-average student, but I didn't graduate with any-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --any honors. Speaker 1: It wasn't like grade school. In grade school you were the top student. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: And (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --were, were there just too-- Speaker 2: I think-- Speaker 1: --too many distract-- Speaker 2: --the distractions--the distractions of, of trying to fit in of--you know, the boys, of dating and all of those kinds of things just kind of maybe impacted my, my ability to be all that I could be I think, I think. I wasn't remembering as well the lesson that daddy [Austin Davis] taught me back in the second grade. Story_ID: 166086 Speaker 1: Had you received any college counseling [at South Bend Central High School, South Bend, Indiana]? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: None whatsoever. Dad [Austin Davis] wanted me to go to Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia], and I didn't know anything about Spelman unfortunately. That is so sad to say. And the counselors were not giving us any information at all, you know. The boys had information about colleges because they are on scholarship. For the other African American students in that environment it was--it was not a nurturing environment for the African American students. And for those of us who did graduate and did graduate with decent grades and so forth, telling me where to go to college was just unheard of, you know. That conversation wasn't, wasn't had, even though I was a cadet teacher, a bright student, those conversations were not had by the counselors. What we learned was from people in the community who'd gone to various schools. I was following--wanted to follow--my first choice of college was Marquette [University, Milwaukee, Wisconsin]. And by this time, we've got all of these other kids, and Studebakers [Studebaker Brothers Manufacturing Company, South Bend, Indiana] has closed, and the money was just not there for me to go to Marquette. And here again, thinking that--daddy paid my way to college. I would have been eligible for all kinds of financial aid with that number of kids in the family, but that wasn't information-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --that I had. And so, like I said, my father paid my fees to go to--to go to college. And I opted for Ball State [University, Muncie, Indiana] because of someone else there, a big brother type figure that I knew who was going to Ball State and followed him there, because I was going to be a, a, a business education teacher. Speaker 1: Okay, so, now did you do anything over the summer before the summer between high school and going to Ball State? Speaker 2: Going to work--no. Speaker 1: Now you--didn't you have some experience in high school working for a newspaper? Speaker 2: Not working, I was-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --a contributor to the-- Speaker 1: Oh, okay, writing-- Speaker 2: --local newspaper-- Speaker 1: --you were writing. Speaker 2: --writing, yes, as part of the yearbook staff and being on the interlude staff. I wrote for the local paper this--I still have that--a couple of columns that I wrote for, for the South Bend Tribune [South Bend, Indiana], the local newspaper, as a contributing high school page reporter. They had various ones of us from the different high schools that would contribute stories about what was going on at our school for the local newspaper. So journalism was my calling. I, I, I always loved to write--heavy in English, wrote poetry, and, and again, a really good writer; it was my love; it was gift and--but to go into journalism, for what? You know, you're going to college to teach school, which is what women my age did. You were gonna be a nurse or you're gonna be a--maybe a social worker, but journalist, I have no role models. There were none, even if I'd grown up in, in Chicago [Illinois], maybe, you know, with some of the African American newspapers--the journalist like Ethel Payne and, and others, that, that--there were no role models for me. In fact, I was the first African American woman on television in South Bend [Indiana], after going off to school and, and coming back home. You know, I didn't finish at, at Ball State. Speaker 1: Okay, but at Ball State now what, what I've heard it was called Cornhuskers University--(unclear)-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) I referred to it as Cornhuskers University. It's down in southern Indiana, and again, second, second encounter with, with discrimination and out and out bigotry. I mean, there were just places that students at Ball State--African American students--didn't go. And out of that population there was probably a hundred of us. And you know, the, the, the community itself was not very--not very welcoming at all-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --to say the least. Story_ID: 166087 Speaker 1: So you were there [Ball State University, Muncie, Indiana] from '64 [1964] to '65 [1965], then, then you met your husband. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Yes, who is the big brother of a--of a classmate. And I didn't know him, but he said he saw me and he decided I was going to be his wife, so. But we were married in, in 1966, and moved to Cincinnati, Ohio, and stayed there for--stayed there for a year. I enrolled in the University of Cincinnati [Cincinnati, Ohio] and got pregnant with my oldest daughter. And because my husband was in computers, one of the first at that time, he could write his own ticket. And the Bendix Corporation [later, acquired by Honeywell International, Inc.] was courting him heavily to come back to South Bend [Indiana], and he did, and I did. And they even hired me as a secretary over at the Bendix division in Mishawaka [Indiana]. Speaker 1: Now, now were in, in Cincinnati in '68 [1968] when Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was killed? Speaker 2: Early, yes, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And had an uncle--that was April, April of, of 68 [1968]. And my, my uncle from Mississippi had come to Cincinnati for a, a minister's conference; he was a minister. And he said, "I went to Detroit [Michigan] and they were riotin' up there," and then he said, "I went to Erie, Pennsylvania, and they were riotin' up there"--"rotten" is the word that he used. And he said, "And now I'm here in Cincinnati, Ohio and they're rotten here," you know, with his rich Mississippi accent. But yeah, we, we had a little Volkswagen--a little Volkswagen Beetle, a little red Volkswagen. And we had to put a sign in the side of the window Soul Brother, so that the people throwing bricks and stuff would not--would not vandalize our, our cars, because they were, you know, vandalizing and throwing bricks and burning and so forth over the--over the death of Dr. King. Story_ID: 166088 Speaker 1: Now you, you were hired in '69 [1969] as a part-time disc jockey back on [University of] Notre Dame's [South Bend, Indiana]--is, is it--is this a South Bend [Indiana] or, or Notre Dame station--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: South Bend. Speaker 1: WNDU, right? Speaker 2: W Notre Dame University. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The station was on the campus. It was owned by the Brothers of the Holy Cross. And I heard, at that time--at that time, I was working as a director of community services for the Urban League. And that was my full-time job. Well, I heard about this opening at WNDU, and I thought that sounds like fun, and so I went and applied and was hired, and kept my daytime job, though, because it was only two hours a night, two nights a week for two dollars an your--two, two, two--and did that for a bit. Funny story, the man who hired me there, Harry Kevorkian, and I tell people all the time that I, I knew Armenian before the Kardashians. And Harry--funny story--they, the men, all of the other disc jockeys, all of whom were Caucasians, had pinups on the wall of the Sports Illustrated buxom blondes. And so I thought, well, I ought to have my pinup too. So I got my picture out of Ebony magazine of, of Richard Roundtree, [John] Shaft, you know, with his barrel chest, and I took and put my pinup on the wall. And oh, they raised Cain. They went to Harry and they were complaining and Harry said, "Well, guys, if you can have your cheesecake, seems to me she could have her beefcake." And they took their pictures down and that was the end of that. And it wasn't a huge racial incident or anything like that. It was just that was the end of that because of Harry's fa--fairness. It wasn't long, though, that he asked me to audition for the television side because it was a combo shop. He asked me to write some copy, and I, I did. And he put me in front of the camera and I audition, and he said she's a natural and he hired me. And I found out later, just two years ago quite frankly, from his family that he was under a lot of pressure for hiring me for two reasons. One, I didn't have a journalism degree, and second to that, you know, this black female. And Harry was like, she's the most qualified. Here's what she wrote; here's how she looks. You tell me. And so he stuck to his guns, and that was my beginning as a broadcast journalist. He taught me everything that I know. He--after he retired from being the news director at the station, he went on to teach journalism at [University of] Notre Dame [Notre Dame, Indiana]. Story_ID: 166089 Speaker 1: Now this is 1969-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --when you're hired [at WNDU, South Bend, Indiana]? Okay. All right, and--okay, so how did things progress? You--now this is--is this the time when Father [Theodore] Hesburgh was making national news and-- Speaker 2: This is a time when also--when the FCC [Federal Communications Commission]--it was shortly after Marcia Clark is, is, is a name that should be in the annals of broadcast journalism, worked for CBS, and unfortunately was killed in a plane crash. But this was a time when the FCC was beginning to breathe down the necks of stations around the nation, saying that you must begin to hire people who look like the demographics of your communities. And so Harry [Kevorkian] was ahead of the game and didn't have to be forced to do it. He took it upon himself to do it, which was to hire women and to hire, hire, hire minorities. But that was--that was the atmosphere. That was the period of time in which affirmative action--and I'd have to say that I'm a product of, of affirmative action. Many African Americans who were pioneers in, in broadcast journalism at the time were being recruited to go to Columbia, the Columbia School of Journalism [Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism, New York, New York], and I wasn't one of those. I didn't apply and didn't make, make that effort because I was married and had a family, and that kind precluded my doing some of those things that others were able to do because they were so--not so tethered, if you will. Story_ID: 166090 Speaker 1: Okay, so at WNDU [South Bend, Indiana] you, you had started off as a part-time disc jockey, became a news reporter in '71 [1971]. Speaker 2: And talk show hostess. Speaker 1: And talk show hostess, yeah-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: With the--not the--is this the show 'Coffee Talk' you referred to? Speaker 2: It is; it is-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --it is. One of the--one of the gentlemen there--I can't think of his name right off hand right now, but he, he, he, he said we have our own Barbara Walters in, in, in, in, in, in Steen. Interviewing I think was my--was my forte. Speaker 1: Now so what sort of guests would you have on the show? Speaker 2: Oh gosh, one of the most brilliant--Shirley Chisholm, and, and that is someone that I was absolutely awestruck by, this diminutive little powerhouse, and being in her presence you could feel her passion and her power. She was awesome. The toughest interview I ever had, which taught me a lot, was [R.] Sargent Shriver, brilliant man, Maria Shriver's father and of course, the Kennedys' brother-in-law. And I-- Speaker 1: Now--well, go ahead. Why were they so tough, I'm just curious. Speaker 2: Oh, because he was--it was when I learned how to make certain that you're ready with a follow-up, and that you are, are able to deal with someone who is like pulling hen's teeth in getting them to respond or to expound. For instance, I asked him what he thought of President [Richard] Nixon. And he said nothing. And I said would you--would you care to expound? He said there's nothing else to say, you know. And I'm like help me, you know, and he wouldn't help me until finally I asked him the question that made him open up, and, and, and that question was what is it like to be a member of the--of the Kennedy family and working in your brother-in-law's [John F. Kennedy] administration? But again, he put me in a posture of learning how to be fast on your feet--thinking fast on your feet because that was the toughest interview I've ever had. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, now, so, national figures are coming into South Bend [Indiana] as well as-- Speaker 2: Saudi Arabian sheiks, Sheikh--the name Sheikh Yamani [Ahmed Zaki Yamani] from OPEC [Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries] back in the day. I'm so--of course, being Notre Dame [University of Notre Dame, South Bend, Indiana], you've had--you had a lot of interesting people that were--that were coming through, and those were--those were the gems. Those were the gems. For the most part, the show dealt with local issues, a strictly public affairs show that dealt with local issues, local organizations discussing events that were occurring, that sort of thing. Story_ID: 166091 Speaker 1: Okay, now in--is it true that in '72 [1972] you moved to Cincinnati [Ohio]? Speaker 2: Cincinnati, Ohio. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: Worked for WCK[Y] radio in Cincinnati, Ohio. Speaker 1: WC--yeah, and so how did that kind of come about, the, the job at WCKY? Speaker 2: Do you know, I think that they, they heard about me. Someone told them about me because they recruited me. I did not apply for a position there. It was--they were--they recruited me, and I thought it was a huge big deal to work in Cincinnati, Ohio, at WCKY with a fellow by the name of Nick Clooney, Rosemary Clooney's brother, and the father of George Clooney. Who would have thunk? Story_ID: 166092 Speaker 1: A legendary figure in broadcasting at that time in Cincinnati [Ohio] was a fellow by the name of Al Schottelkotte and he had a reputation. Oh, he would throw trashcans in the newsroom. Those kinds of things just don't hap--the newsroom of today is--on one hand, it is very, very, very passive and the fire and the arguments, and even fisticuffs that would occur in the newsrooms of your just don't happen today. But the news was, was, was, was pure. Conversely, today, you have an atmosphere that is very placid, very nonconfront--confrontational, but yet the news is not pure; it is more tabloid. But Al Schottelkotte, there was a girl in Cincinnati by the name of [HM] Jocelyn Dorsey, and Jocelyn was a reporter at Channel 5 news, and she was leaving to go to Atlanta, Georgia. And we thought, oh my gosh, she's going to the South. And Jocelyn became the first African American woman on WSB-TV here in Atlanta. The other notable in, in Cincinnati was a fellow by the name of Phil Donahue, who was the forerunner of, of, of really of Oprah [Winfrey], who Oprah forced out of syndication in, in Chicago [Illinois], the 'Phil Donahue Show.' But those were--I didn't stay there very long in, in Cincinnati that-- Speaker 2: Wa--was-- Speaker 1: --that first time-- Speaker 2: --Rush Limbaugh there? I'm sorry. Wa--was-- Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: --Rush Limbaugh there? Speaker 1: No, I don't-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --I don't remember him at all. Story_ID: 166093 Speaker 1: But I learned that mom [Rose Wheeler Davis] had, had breast cancer and you know I--and I came back home to South Bend [Indiana], was rehired by, by WNDU, yeah, yeah--stayed there about another year or so. And a high school buddy by the name of Gary Weinstein went to school at Indiana University [Bloomington, Indiana] with a guy by the name of Bill Cameron. And Bill was working at WMAQ radio in Chicago [Illinois], the NBC owned and operated station. And they were looking for a reporter, an anchor. And Bill told Gary and Gary remember his classmate and told me about it; I applied. I went over there. I was wearing a afro at the time. And we called them afros then as opposed to natural, which is, today. And I put a wig on, went to the interview. I didn't care about whether I got the job or not. I was just doing because Gary told me about it. And I'm sitting there with my legs crossed and--because I am a big fish in a little pond in South Bend where I know everybody and breaking stories right and left, and I'm making ten thousand dollars a year in 1973, and that was pretty decent money. And Frank Barnico [ph.] was the news director, and he said you know, well, we'll start you at twenty thousand [dollars] with residuals when you appear on the FM station. I'm like--legs came uncrossed. It was like, my gosh, that's double what I'm making, you know. And--but I very confidently told him that if he simply wanted a minority, that I understood that there was an Asian young lady that he was looking at and perhaps he might wanna hire her, because I had no desire to be exhibit A or B--or B. but if he wanted somebody who was going to do the job and do it well then I'm your girl. And I went back home and I didn't care whether I got the job or not. And Harry [Kevorkian] called me in that Monday and he said so you applied at MAQ, huh? And I said well, yeah, and he--I said but I probably won't get. He said you probably will because I told him I didn't want you to go. And he told me that's the best recommendation he could get, so he was gonna offer you the job and-- Speaker 2: So, so this is the general manager, Charlie Warner, right? Speaker 1: Charlie Warner was the general manager-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --of MAQ. He later went to Mizzou, the University of Missouri [Columbia, Missouri], as an instructor there. And as you know, University Missouri is one of the finest J-schools [journalism schools] in the nation. But Charlie Warner was the general manager of WMAQ, NBC O and O, high cotton. And I kid you not, this is when I learned about corporate leaving no blood on the carpet--clean kill--left work on Friday, Charlie Warner was the general manager; came back on Monday and I now remember his name. It's just come to me. But there were three memos in my box. The first one was Charlie Warner's resignation. The second one was from New York [City] NBC accepting Charlie Warner's resignation. And the third memo was please welcome the new general manager of MAQ radio, Lee Davis. And I was like oh my gosh. Here I come from a place where people--you know, you literally just transitioned from life to death on the set and, and, and people being fired that way. And there was another incident where one of the, the, the disc jockeys--and I went in to do the news and he left with the program director and he never came back. And I'm like okay, where is he? You know, I'm done with the news. And they put some music on 'cause he was gone, fired in the middle of his air shift. Story_ID: 166094 Speaker 1: Now you were at [W]MAQ [Chicago, Illinois]--you were doing--were you on the air at all at, at-- Speaker 2: I was on the air-- Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: --yes, yes, on the air reporter. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: A reporter and on the air doing, doing newscasts-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Out in the field, seeing people like the [Almighty] Black P. Stone Nation and the--oh gosh--got an award from them from--they were--one of the brothers was killed--Black Panthers. And I can't think of the name right now. It escapes me, but it was one of the, the--one of the Black, Black Panthers--the--one of the brothers that was killed. Speaker 1: Oh, Fred Hampton. Speaker 2: There you go. Speaker 1: Yeah, Fred Hampton-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and Mark Clark. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: And yeah, there's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Fred Hampton. Speaker 1: --the shooting-- Speaker 2: I have a Fred Hampton Award-- Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Speaker 2: --during that time. But mom [Rose Wheeler Davis] passed in '78 [1978]. And in 70--'79 [1979], my contract with NBC was not renewed. And I lost mom, I lost husband, and I lost job all within a six-month period of time. And nothing but the grace of God kept and sustained me. I didn't have to any tranquilizers. I didn't start hittin' the bottle or any of that. It was God carrying me through that very dark, dark period. Soon after that I became news director for WBMX radio in, in Chicago [Illinois]-- Speaker 1: Now, now what happen at-- Speaker 2: --and then onto [W]VON-- Speaker 1: --what, what--what happened though? I mean, is there--I mean, in terms of the, the MAQ job--the job at MAQ? Speaker 2: Oh, because--in fact, the news director said that, that I had spent too much time away, you know, having to go over to South Bend [Indiana] seeing about mom. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that was a personal issue that corporate, corporate. And so my contract was not--was not renewed-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --was not renewed. Speaker 1: So, so were you really distracted during this period of time in terms of focus on work with your mother being ill-- Speaker 2: Oh, I would think so. Speaker 1: --and you going through problems at home too? Speaker 2: I, I would think so. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I, I would absolutely think so. Your husband's gone, your mother's dying. I think that that might be a bit of a distraction, but it wasn't to the point that it affected my work on the air. The--it was the time that I spent away going to see about mom, you know. In fact, it was right after the last week when she--when she passed, and I didn't get back on time that Monday. And I had spent the last weekend with her, and, and again, she was literally dying. She went into a coma that Tuesday, and she, she died that Thursday. But that, that was the--that was the straw of not getting back that Monday when she went in the coma on Tuesday. Story_ID: 166095 Speaker 1: Well, WB--you, you were hired by WBMX radio [Chicago, Illinois], is that right? Speaker 2: Pardon me? Speaker 1: WBMX radio. Speaker 2: Yes-- Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: --worked with a fellow there when I was news director and doing the news, a young fellow by the name of Tom Joyner-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --who became world famous, if you will, as the fly jock, flying between--after that between Texas and [W]VON/GCI, doing--he'd do a morning show in the--in Texas and he'd hop on a plane and come to Chicago [Illinois] and do, do the 'Afternoon Drive' at VON/GCI. The other thing that, though--that occurred at [W]MAQ [Chicago, Illinois] that I'm quite proud of and it's not in the history books at all is the fact that we--the same news director--the guy that ended up being news director was Rich Reman [ph.], Al Swanson, Bill Cameron, and myself. And we did a series of investigative reports called the Milk Bilk [ph.]. And it was to expose some Illinois dairy farmers selling stale milk. And as a result of our investigation, the Illinois legislature [Illinois General Assembly] began requiring the dairy farmers to put freshness dates on the milk. The FDA [Food and Drug Administration] soon followed and today we have freshness dates on all kinds of food products, but it started right there at WMAQ, with that four of us doing that series of investigative reports that led to the Illinois legislature passing a law that required the dairy farmers to put freshness dates on the milk in Chicago. And we got an Associated Press Award for it, and that's the impact--that's the kind of impact that good journalism can have on our communities. Story_ID: 166096 Speaker 1: Now you were invited by President [James Earl "Jimmy"] Carter to visit the White House as part of a national group of journalists? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Now this isn't during this period of time, right? Speaker 2: This was in--when I was with--in 1979 is when I went to the White House with President Carter, his administration's invitation. So that would have been with--I think that would have been with [W]VON/GCI [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Okay, so you-- Speaker 2: --I was at VON and GCI then. Speaker 1: --you went to GCI in '78 [1978]. Speaker 2: I was--'78 [1978], '79 [1979]. Speaker 1: From '78 [1978], '79 [1979]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And, and what happened? You were at [W]BMX [Chicago, Illinois] then for about a year? Speaker 2: Yeah-- Speaker 1: And then? Speaker 2: Yeah, and then moved to VON/GCI. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In fact, the general manager at BMX became the general manager at VON/GCI and brought me over as his news director there. But there were thirty-five of us news director and journalists from around the country who were invited to the White House. It was a special briefing with President Carter and, and we had lunch and took pictures with him and all. And I'll never forget coming back to Chicago [Illinois] sitting in [Chicago] O'Hare [International Airport, Chicago, Illinois], and tears were running down my face, to think that I had been invited to the White House, and my mother [Rose Wheeler Davis] and father [Austin Davis] weren't around to share in, in this high honor. And a lady walked by carrying some bags, a rather portly African American woman. And she said baby, what's wrong? And I said there's nothing wrong. I said these are tears of happiness. I said I just left the White House with the president, you know, and, and my mom and dad are not here to, to share. And she said well, baby, I'm proud of you, and I know your mom and daddy is too. And that lifted my spirits, but that, that, that was one of those special, special moments of here's this, this woman who among all of these other journalists from around the country, only thirty-five of us selected to go--to the White House to meet the president. That was special. Story_ID: 166097 Speaker 1: Okay, now, the program director that brought you over to [WVON/]GCI, was that [HM] Barry Mayo or-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: No, okay. Speaker 2: Barry Mayo was not the program-- Speaker 1: Okay, he was the--okay. Speaker 2: --he was the program director but the-- Speaker 1: General manager. Speaker 2: --was Ernest James. Speaker 1: Ernest James, okay. Speaker 2: Yes, and I know Barry. I know Barry well. He was one of those--wonder kids--wonder, wonder kids--wonder kinds. He had a guy by the name of--[Robert Warren] Bob Pittman was the program at, at [W]MAQ [Chicago, Illinois] and Bob Pittman went on to become the head of AOL and--AOL-Time--Times-Warner. I looked up one day and saw him sit--sitting on, on the set of the 'Today's Show' [sic, 'Today']. And I said oh my gosh, that's Bob Pippman. And Barry Mayo and Bob Pippman were, were these Young Turks program directors that were just way ahead of their time--way ahead of their time. And it, it, it was no wonder to me that, that Bob Pippman--from Mississippi--from Hattiesburg, Mississippi--went on to, to become AOL and Time Warner [Inc.]. Speaker 1: Okay, so GCI is located downtown Chicago [Illinois] on Michigan Avenue, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay and a lot of celebrities would end up on the air. So what are some of the-- Speaker 2: Oh, at that--at, at that time VON was--oh gosh. You're thinking of WGC--oh, wait a minute--WJCL, the, the Johnsons' station was on Michigan Avenue. Speaker 1: That was WJPC, yeah. Speaker 2: JPC. Speaker 1: Yeah, they were there. Speaker 2: JPC, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: But--oh, some of the old-timers. The first African wom--American woman to head a radio station of any stripe in the country, a woman by the name of Bernadine C. Washington, who was a good friend of [HM] Xernona Clayton's. And in fact, when I moved to Atlanta [Georgia] told me, "You look up Xernona Clayton and you tell her I said to take good care of you." But--oh and the old-timers like Bill Cook. Was it Bill Cook--Bill Cook or Al Cook? And Joe-- Speaker 1: You got me on that I think but-- Speaker 2: --and Joe Cobb--Joe Cobb was the voice of the Soul Train. He was the one that did that high pitched soul train. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Joe Cobb--and all of these old-timers were in the newsroom. And here I came as the news director and brought that news department actually into respectability. It was Al--it was Al Cook. Because I think-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --Cook was also a dear friend of Bernadine C. Washington's. He's gone now. Speaker 1: Yeah Herb-- Speaker 2: Oh gosh. Speaker 1: --[HM] Herb Kent did the Sunday show (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Herb Kent did the Sunday show. Speaker 1: Herb Kent the Sundays. Speaker 2: And there was-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--"Cool Gent." Speaker 2: Who is the pastor that sings the gospel--the gospel great there in Chicago. It's--he has a choir with him. Oh gosh, those names are escaping me right now, but-- Speaker 1: (Unclear)--yeah, I can't think of-- Speaker 2: Reverend-- Speaker 1: --the one now. Speaker 2: --Reverend Munson, Munson the--Munson--the Munson Singers [ph.]--oh gosh--it was Munson, Munson. It was the Munson choir. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And of course, the [HM] Reverend Jesse Jackson as a young man covering Rainbow/PUSH and some of the folks over at the Chicago Defender. I love Chicago. I love Chicago. Story_ID: 166098 Speaker 1: But while at [W]MAQ [Chicago, Illinois], one of my favorite stories is when we were covering sometimes the mob. And you wouldn't get caught in Cicero, Illinois, after sundown. That was an Italian community where you just didn't stay over there after dark. But I'll never forget this reporter by the name of Rich Samuels, worked at Channel--at Channel 5 and we were covering the, the trial of some of the mobsters connected to, to Tony Accardo. They called him "Big Tuna" and lived up in Lake Forest [Illinois], which was the next suburb up from where I lived in Highland Park [Illinois]. But at any rate, we're covering this mob trial, and they told--they went up to Rich and said, "Get that camera out of my face, shut that camera down." And Rich, you know, being--you know, hotdog reporter said you know, I--this is a public sidewalk. I have as much right to be here. And the next thing you know they take his fifty thousand dollar camera, they throw it to the ground, and they smash it to smithereens, and beat up Rich, put him in the hospital. And I learned then in the mean streets of Chicago [Illinois] if you don't want the camera on you, sir, it's fine with me. I'm not going to go to Cook County (laughter) trying to get that story. I'll let it go. Speaker 2: All right so-- Speaker 1: Those were good times, oh good times. Story_ID: 166099 Speaker 1: Okay, so your, your, at [WVON/]GCI when Harold Washington and [HM] Gus Savage are elected the--to-- Speaker 2: Yes, yes-- Speaker 1: --[U.S.] Congress in--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --the Independent Voter League--yes, Mayor Richard [J.] Daley, with all of his famous malapropos. And Harold Washington was a really decent guy, just a consummate, to me, public servant. Richard Daley was the consummate politician slash public servant. And I'll never forget, you know, here we are today talking about drones spying on private citizens and whatnot. And back in those days, the police were spying private citizens. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And Richard Daley said in, you know, the famous words were: "Well, if you're not doing anything wrong, who cares about who's spying you?" Or when he was caught giving insurance--city insurance business to his--to his son [Richard M. Daley], he said: "It's a poor father that doesn't take care of his son, you know, and you can kiss my mistletoe." That was the end of that. You know, it was kind of the end of--end of the story. And another great moment was when Muhammad Ali came back from Zaire, you know, The Rumble in the Jungle. And there was this crush of reporters. We're all going--I think we were coming through [Chicago] City Hall and through the revolving doors there. And in a crush, I, I, I, I tripped and fell. And Muhammad Ali lifted me up by the arm and he said, "You too pretty to get hurt." And I was like, "Oh my God, he thinks I'm pretty number one." And I said--I went back to the station and I said, "Never washing this arm again," you know, 'cause Muhammad Ali had rescued me, you know, from, from being trampled--good times. Story_ID: 166100 Speaker 1: Okay, but in '81 [1981] you went to--you came to Atlanta [Georgia], right? Speaker 2: In '80 [1980]. Speaker 1: In, in '80 [1980], okay. Speaker 2: In '80 [1980]--1980. Speaker 1: So what, what happened? What, what, what made you leave [WVON/]GCI [Chicago, Illinois] to come to--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Remarried--re--remarried to Bob Miles from--he was from Savannah [Georgia] and, and wanted to be closer to home and so south I came and south I, I remain. And that was, again, in 19--1980--moved and didn't know a soul. A couple of people were kind of looking out for me. One of them was a fellow by the name of [A.] Reginald Eaves, who was a former Fulton County [Georgia] commissioner and public safety director here in Atlanta [Georgia], and he made some phone calls on my behalf. And of course, then there was--there was [HM] Xernona [Clayton]. Story_ID: 166101 Speaker 1: UPI, right? Speaker 2: UPI, United Press International. And I was appointed broadcast editor--regional broadcast editor by the folks up in, in Chicago [Illinois] who know of my work there and knew me there. And so that's how I was promoted to, to that position. And I can tell you it was challenging at first because here we are in, in the South and here we are in an organization that here, again, predominantly white males. But because I had been in an environment like that most of my life, it, it didn't take the toll on me that perhaps it, it might have. I got precious little cooperation when I had to put on the UPI's Broadcast Awards. And I enlisted the service of, of the news director from WSB-TV [Atlanta, Georgia], and they were able to help me with putting together the awards program. And it was one of the best that they--they'd ever had. The first time they had, had, had videotape of the awards because, as you know, UPI is, is print. But UPI was on hard times and--but let me go back, because while at, at UPI, I was on a couple occasions able to go out on the tail end of the Atlanta [Georgia] mass murders. Those--the killings-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --of all of those young boys, and staking out a couple of times. Wayne Williams, who was subsequently convicted for those--for those crimes, that is probably the most significant thing that, that I remember about my time at UPI, other than trying to maneuver through some of the, the challenges of, of, of tradition, we shall call it. Speaker 1: Are, are any stories about that here 'cause this-wa--was Atlanta--would you say Atlanta was behind Chicago in terms of the attitude of a white male establishment, or was it about the same? Speaker 2: I would say behind. I would say behind because you have to understand that while Chicago is viewed as, as, as one of the most segregated cities in the nation in terms of the pockets of where people lived, there was still more experience in dealing with people of color than here in this region of the country. And I would say probably about twenty years difference in, in, in, in, in, in some attitudes--about, about twenty years. That said--that, that that said--I was able to learn quite a bit about the region through my work at UPI in terms of location and people and that sort of thing. And so, each experience--each experience along the way, be there challenges, have been incredible learning experiences-- Speaker 1: Now-- Speaker 2: --and very, very rich learning experiences because out of the situation, even at UPI, we ended up--we ended up whereby because of an attitude of excellence, and when there is excellence, when there is competence, always instills confidence, and out of that I believe comes a greater sense of camaraderie, lifelong friends in every arena, whether they were people of color or, or, or, or, or, or, or, or different backgrounds--different ethnic backgrounds. And so UPI was challenging, but out of those challenges grew some really rich friendships that's still--that lasts to this day in every instance--in every instance, and here, again, always striving for excellence, always trying to make lemonade out of lemons, and-- Speaker 1: Now-- Speaker 2: --understand that people, people come to situations with their--their own set of experiences, their, their own set of sometimes preconceived notions. And you watch that just melt away. You watch that melt away. So UPI was-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --one of those--was one of those initially valley experiences that turned into--that turned into something really good. Story_ID: 167665 Speaker 1: Atlanta's [Georgia] a city--when you get here--is a city really on the rise, right, in terms of black political power? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Maynard Jackson-- Speaker 2: Well, I think that it had--it had risen. It had risen by the time that I got here. Maynard Jackson's first election was in the '70s [1970s] and so the black political power, if you will, had risen at that point. And so you had--you had an African American mayor; you had an African American public safety director at that time in person of initially [Asaph] Reginald Eaves; you had--and then you had George Napper, police chief--every seat of power was occupied primarily by, by an African American in the late '70s [1970s], early '80s [1980s], the '80s [1980s] when, when I arrived. And so--but for me that was not--that was not a novelty. It was people of excellence who had been duly elected to a position that it, it, it didn't seem to me--it didn't seem to me out of place. And I know that sounds bizarre, but it didn't feel as if we had arrived. It is where you're supposed to be when you're good and when you've done well and when you've prepared yourself. It wasn't something that--and I--and I'm having a difficult time with this because my perspective is so totally different. My expectation is that if you are good and if you prepare yourself and if you put in the work and the sweat equity, that there is a reasonable expectation that you should be at this place. And you may not like me, and you may try to hinder my progress, but you can't prevent me from getting there. And so to see these individuals there in these positions of power and authority was a source of pride, but it was not something that was not expected. Story_ID: 167666 Speaker 1: You said you saw certain negative attitudes melt away in certain instances. Do, do you have an example of that? Speaker 2: Sure, in our--in, in, in, in, in, in much later--well, no, let's, let's even talk about, about UPI [United Press International] even. You can't say even though I was appointed by the folks in Chicago [Illinois] and this is Atlanta [Georgia] in the South, you can't say that they appointed someone who couldn't write. You can't say that they appointed someone who couldn't do the work. You can't say that. And so the respect factor builds again because of, of, of the product that you are--you know, the product that you're putting out. And so I saw things--I saw--I saw people who had different notions. And there was one guy--there was one guy in particular who after that awards ceremony [United Press International Broadcast Awards], I saw a complete reversal in his attitude. Speaker 1: Who is that and can you tell us who it was or, or, what--or what they were--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: He was the--he was the state editor who went on to become the head of a PR [News]wire and who called me on a couple of occasions, you know, needing some, some direction or some assistance or some recommendation for him. But he was one of those individuals that, that just gave me absolute you know what. But, a--again, I saw that change. I saw that change. Story_ID: 167667 Speaker 1: Okay, so you're--you're at UPI [United Press International] when Andy Young--when [HM] Andrew Young wins the [Atlanta, Georgia] mayoral race in '83 [1983], I guess, right? And in '84 [1984] you moved on to WXIA[-TV], right? So what is--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: And here's what happened-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --here's what happened. As I said earlier, United Press International, the competition from AP [Associated Press] was stiff. Scripps Howard [E.W. Scripps Company] had, had sold them; they were losing money; and it was bloody Friday; it was bloody Friday. And eight people were called into the office one by one, and summarily fired. Our checks were bouncing (laughter), literally. Our payroll checks were bouncing. We had taken a 25 percent pay cut and first--you know, the pay cut first and then reimbursements weren't being made for, for travel and expenses and that sort of thing. And again, eight people were called in one by one and fired on that Friday. Guess who the ninth person on the list was? And I didn't--you know. I missed being fired by one person, by one person. But--here again, they were about to fold. The handwriting was on the wa--wall, and we began shopping our resumes. And one of the places that I sent my resume to--now mind you [W]VON/GCI [Chicago, Illiniois] at that time then was owned by the Gannett Corporation [sic, Gannett Company, Inc], and Gannett owns WXIA. And when I was moving here, I tried to get a transfer to WXIA, without success, because they said I had--while I had television experience, I had too much of a radio background and so I wasn't hired then. In '84 [1984], however, the same person who rejected my resume hired me at the insistence of the general manager at that time, and so I was hired at XIA as an assignment editor. And after a couple--about a year, as an assignment editor I was promoted to managing editor. And I really had my sights set on being, being a news director because I was in that management track. And as managing editor, I directed the, the coverage for the station, and I'm very proud to say it was the first time--the first time that we became number one in the market, beating out in the timeslot WSB[-TV]. And we all got very nice bonuses from the general manager at that time while we're--while we were managing editor, and made a concerted effort on each newscast to make sure that we had balance and diversity of stories in each newscast, and very, very proud of that fact. And why did I leave managing editor? Because they hired a young lady, thinking that they were stealing somebody from WSB, and her only experience was being Tom Brokaw's--the wife of Tom Brokaw's southeast regional producer. It was her only experience, but she had them snowed over at SB, and the new general manager thought that they were getting this prize. And they abolished the position of managing editor and made her news director--I'm sorry--assistant news director. And the responsibilities of the two jobs was too duplicative, and I was made--demoted, quite frankly, to a reporter. Speaker 1: Okay, okay so this around 1989 when this-- Speaker 2: Yes--yeah, about '89 [1989]. Story_ID: 167668 Speaker 1: Were you satisfied or did you start looking around? Speaker 2: Oh no, no, no, no, no, un-un. There was a good bill--bit of consternation in the compu--in the community. People were writing letters. Martin the third--Martin Luther King, III wrote letters an--because again, I was the only African American news manager in town [Atlanta, Georgia]. The only other producer of, of--a show producer was a young lady by the name of [HM] Sidmel Estes. And so there were others in community affairs, but nobody as news managers in those--in those newsrooms. But no, here again, I've got children to raise. You know, take lemons and, and make lemonade. And the general manager who hired me had been promoted to Gannett Corporation [sic, Gannett Company, Inc] in Arlington, Virginia. And when he came back through, it was so funny to see the venerable Cecil [L.] Walker say, "I bet you're saying to them, na, na, na, na, na" (laughter) because I ended up being quite a good reporter. Well, had had that experience. I just hadn't been on television in a--in a while. And there's a guy at--there was a guy at the station, at, at, at [W]XIA[-TV, Atlanta, Georgia], by the name of Jon Shirek, who's one of the old veterans there, and when I did my first live shot, he led the applause in, in, in the newsroom. And the individual who, here again, gave me so much grief ended up flopping as assistant news director--news director and, and ended up being relieved of her, her duties and, and went on to other places. Story_ID: 167669 Speaker 1: Now in '89 [1989], I suppose as, as a reporter anchor you won an Emmy Award, right? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Tornado--I think it was tornado coverage--was--and I don't remember whether it was Cobb County [Georgia], it's in there somewhere--or whether it's Cobb County or whether it was Gwinnett [County, Georgia]. I know there was--because most--in fact, the, the two that I received were, were tornado coverage, and one was--one was best newscast. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So as--let's see. So you're, you're at WXIA [Atlanta, Georgia] in--until-- Speaker 2: Nineteen ninety-nine [1999]. Speaker 1: Nineteen ninety-nine [1999], so this a long--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: And during, during that time we, we won a couple of AP [Associated Press] awards; I think four Atlanta Association of Black Journalists [AABJ] Feature Awards, and then 1996 Journalist of the Year--Pioneer Journalist of the Year Award from, from AABJ. Speaker 1: Okay, so this is during the time that-- Speaker 2: And a Gannett [Company, Inc.]--a Gannett corporate award. Story_ID: 167670 Speaker 1: Yeah the big stories in Atlanta [Georgia] would--I get, get--guess the ela--the election of Bill Campbell in '93 [1993]--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yes, I was--I covered, covered Bill Campbell and Michael Lomax, who went on to become head of the--"a mind is too terrible to waste" [sic, "a Mind is a Terrible Thing to Waste," UNCF slogan]. What is that? Speaker 1: United Negro College Fund [UNCF]. Speaker 2: The knighted--went on to become the head of the United Negro College Fund. What other major stories were, were, were happening in Atlanta at the time? There were a lot of stories related to mistreatment of children. Those, those were difficult; a lot of drug activity; a lot of murders. I never--I'll never forget doing a story at the Fulton County Morgue [Fulton County Medical Examiner's Office, Atlanta, Georgia], and I think they since stopped that practice, 'cause I was--I would go--I would always look for the X, which was something that I was taught. There's a fire and everybody's gonna report when it started, how it started, number of injuries, that kind of thing--maybe response time. But there's always an X on the street, if you will, that leads you to another place, and it could be--it could be a pet who survived the blaze. That would be one of those X's. Another one would be trying to find that nugget, pulling that nugget out of the story that nobody else is going to have, and that's something that I prided myself in. But we, we break stories; we'd, we'd get--we'd get the interview that nobody else could get; you know, we talked to gang members. Story_ID: 167671 Speaker 1: I would go anywhere anytime, talk to anybody about anything. And one of my favorites is we had--Winnetka, Illinois, enacted a law that said people couldn't have guns. At the same time Kennesaw, Georgia, enacted a law saying people must have guns--yeah. So we were doing--you know, the juxtaposition of these two--of these two stories--and I went up to Kennesaw, Georgia. And there's a man up there by the name of Wildman Dent [Dent "Wildman" Myers]. Wildman Dent runs a Civil War Museum [shop], and he has six shooters on each hip--pistols on each hip. And he was an avowed racist. And this David Duke, there was newspaper in his shop. And the photographer and I go up there and it's almost dark. It's dusk, and we're up in Kennesaw. And the photographer was native to this area and you don't wanna be--you don't want dark to catch you in some areas, and this place is one of them, Kennesaw. So we go up there and we are in his shop, and he says to me, "I don't talk to reporters." And I said, "Oh, I'm sorry; my name is Steen; how are you?" "And I don't shake hands." And I said, "Oh," and I saw his literature. I said, "Oh, sir, you're a racist, huh?" And he said, "Yes, I am." And this woman was standing over there, and I said, "So, is this your wife?" And she said, "No, but we live together." And I said to him, "So you're too chicken to marry her, huh?" And that broke the ice. It was like, this woman is crazy. Well, my photographer, by the name of Robert Amos (ph.)--Robert was like shaking his-"Steen, let's go. You're up here; it's gettin' dark; you're in the Civil War Museum messing with this man who says he's a racist, and he's got loaded pistols on each hip." And so he looked at me when I told him he was too chicken to marry that woman, and he said, "You wanna see my museum?" And I said, "Well, sure," so we went to the back and the first thing we see is a Ku Klux Klan suit with the little pointy hat and all, and it's yellowed with age. He said, "You know what that is?" And I said, "It looks like one of the little silly outfits that people ran around in up around these parts." He said, "That's a Ku Klux Klan robe and hat." And I said, "Yeah, okay, and?" And so then we--he--he's still looking at me like, "I don't believe her." So we walked around and he had these little figurines that--you know, the black figures eatin' watermelon or whatever. He said, "You know what that is?" And I said, "One of those little silly statutes." And he said, "It's a piccaninny; you know what a piccaninny is?" And I said, "No, I don't," and I said, "And what does that have to do with the Civil War anyway; it's silly. You need to be ashamed of yourself." And it's--he's rolling the whole time; Robert's rolling the whole time. And they used it when I retired from, from [WXIA-TV, Atlanta, Georgia] 11. Make a long story short, we go back finally into the front of the shop, and I get the interview. He extends his hand to shake my hand. And I said, "Oh, you're gonna shake my hand. Are you kidding me?" You know, and he, he said long as that stuff don't run--rub off. And I said well, I got enough of y'all in me. I don't need any more (laughter). So he's like cracking up. And then he says--he says, it's gone be ashamed when the--when the revolution come and halfway decent people like you have to die. I said not if my crazy Vietnam husband gets to you first, and he just threw back his head and he laughed and we went out and finished. I did my standup, finished the story, came back to the station, and the venerable John Pruitt, who was at WSB before, but came back to WXIA for a stint, he said you got an interview with--at--with Wildman Dent? He said he never talks to reporters and, and, and he stopped because he, he didn't wanna say that he's not talking to reporters and let alone a black reporter. But that's my story about Wildman Dent. But it's, it's meeting people where they are and not looking at them with fear and not looking at them as if they're superior, but just a human being to a human being and just being who I am, which is a bit of a cutup. Story_ID: 167672 Speaker 1: We broke down some barriers that day that lasted, fast forward fifteen years when [HM] President [Barack] Obama was elected and everybody--and I'm no longer a reporter; I've been in the [Georgia State] Senate--and everybody's running around asking the usual suspects, "What do you think about our first black president?" And they're asking [HM Andrew] Andy Young and [HM] John Lewis and others. But I said, "They ought to be asking somebody like Wildman Dent [Dent "Wildman" Myers]." And so I called him, and not to do a story, but just out of my curiosity I wanted to know how he felt about the first black president, this avowed racist. And so I asked him if I could come up, and I said, "Do you mind if I come up and talk to you?" He said, "Sure, come on up; we'll have lunch." I went up there. Well, guess what? By now he's married this woman; there's a twelve-year-old child, and on his wall is a collage of pictures of some African Americans and Asians and others of his friends. And he--we sat and we chatted, and he talked about how difficult it was, and he grew up in Alabama, sharecropper. He said, "We were poor, you know," and he said, "I fear that somebody will try to hurt him and blame it on people like me, you know." And I said, "Well, you know, people are arming themselves out of fear." And I said, "You have an opportunity to diffuse some of this, you know, and, and just talk to people and tell them just, just wait and see." And so he said, "Well, you know, I, I, I, I think will. I think I will." So I gave him a copy of my book ['Teenie: Newslady in Training'], and he and his wife walked me out to my car, and he gave me a big hug this time. And I said, "Lord, your, your reputation is forever ruined up in these parts," but it was a heart space. And after he read the book, he called me up and, and thanked me and said, "Y'all were rich." And I said, "No, not by a stretch," you know, and he--and went on to talk about how poor he had grown up and how some of these--the area, the times, the circumstance shaped his false notion of being a racist. And he's, he's really not; he's, he's really not. He's just parenting a philosophy that he thought popular at the time--he thought popular at the time, but, but--yeah, anywhere, anytime, anyone about anything. Story_ID: 167673 Speaker 1: You were a witness to Nelson Mandela's receiving the-- Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes. Speaker 1: --the Congressional Gold Medal in '98 [1998], right? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, the speaker of the house, at the time Newt Gingrich, and I was among I guess about--they were maybe ten of us Georgians who were selected to, to witness Nelson Mandela receive the Congressional Gold. And I was seated three rows from the--from, from the platform were Mr. Mandela and the president were seated, and of course the speaker. And poor Mr. [William Jefferson] Clinton was just--President Clinton was nodding off, and he was fighting sleep there, trying to keep his eyes open. And he--and he had--he had a little red something underneath his--underneath his eye there. Well, this was during the time of the Monica Lewinsky scandal. And I--I'll never forget everyone asking Mr. Mandela what he thought about it. And Mr. Mandela, the, the very genteel aristocrat that he--that he was, said that he was not accustomed to abandoning his friends in time of trouble, and he was not about to begin, and President Clinton is my friend and forever shall be. And that was the end of that. Well, we were sitting there, and I was seated next to Jane Smith, who was the head of the National Council of Negro Women, and [HM] Dorothy Height on, on, on, on, on, on my right side. And I was sitting there thinking, I thought, "poor Bill" (laughter). It looks like that Hillary [Clinton] might have popped him a good one (laughter) because he looked like he had been up all night, and she probably gave him what for. But I was extremely proud of our first lady for keeping the family together and dealing with the president as, as she saw fit behind closed doors. But it was clear that he, he was fighting sleep and had this red mark underneath his chin. And I don't want to even begin to suggest that the first lady might have given him what for. Story_ID: 167674 Speaker 1: Now there's an awful story in '99 [1999] too about this day trader, Mark Barton, who goes on a shooting spree. Did you cover that story? Speaker 2: Yes, and I didn't cover it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I was directing the, the coverage of it. I didn't direct the coverage. It was right after I had been removed from managing editor, and as managing editor I would have directed the coverage of that, that shooting spree at, at Perimeter Mall [Dunwoody, Georgia] is where it occurred. And the, the new assistant news director did not have me to fall back on, and she did not have the news director to cover for her. The news director was in--was in--is--was in Russia, and the shooting broke out. Well, the--our crews were the first ones there and the last ones to get on the air because she did not know what to do, and she couldn't put, put the finger of blame on me. Well, the general manager called a meeting of the newsroom, and he asked, "What the you know what happened?" And--to a person, and I didn't say one word. I didn't have to, but they told them that she didn't know what the heck she was doing. And it was soon after that, that she was removed from the position of assistant news director was abolished, and she went her--went her merry way--went her--went her merry way. But I'll tell you that I had a dream during the time of, of, of my removal from the position of managing editor. And in this dream this person, this woman who became the assistant news director, she came at me with two pies--cream pies--in her hand. And she threw one at me and it hit me, and I took my hand and I wiped this cream away from my face and took her gently into my hands--my face--and I slowly wiped this cream back into her face. The setting--the setting was in a food court, and there were all the same reporters and photographers sitting around. And in this dream it was--I was exonerated, and what she had tried to do to me came back full force in her face, like a mask. Fast forward to the incident that you speak of, and that's when I was exonerated, and what she had tried to do to me came back full force on her. And I had no idea where that was, but I know it was a food court, and I didn't see the shooting; the shooting didn't occur, but that scenario, that setting--and that it what ended up happening with her. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: This may be a little bit of my grandfather [Darncey Wheeler] there. Story_ID: 166112 Speaker 1: Now you ended your association with WXIA-TV [Atlanta, Georgia] in 1999 and entered politics. Now what, what, what happened? Had you become-- Speaker 2: You know as a reporter, no one quite sees the underbelly of society like a street reporter, or medical personnel, or, or police, your first responders. And because of all of the myriad social conditions that I saw out there of drugs, of teen pregnancies, of you know, the murders at, at the time in Atlanta [Georgia]. We just had a plethora of gang killings and did a story one time from, from the morgue that every, every eight minutes somewhere in this country a mother or father or parents are going to identify their child that's been killed in one of these gangland-style slayings. And so I had been approached by some folks in DeKalb County [Georgia] about running for, for CEO, and it was an opportunity for me to give back and to try to make a difference in my community. And I, I prayed about it, and I thought about it, and I sought counsel from a couple of people. And I had a cousin--a male cousin--in Nebraska--in Omaha, Nebraska--who was dying of cancer. And I went up to, to see him, and he was very, very weak. I was teasing him. He's a first cousin. And I said, "You can't have people from your school seeing your feet look like this, man." So I was trying to give him a, a pedicure, and I did manage to do one foot, couldn't do the other one 'cause he was a little too weak and just really needed to lie down. And he looked at me and he said you ought to be in some public office. And I said, "Why would say that?" I got chill bumps, because no one knew what I had been praying about, as to whether I should make this move. And he said, "Because you're just like uncle Austin [Davis]," my father. He said, "You're all about people." And of course, he died a week later on April the 15th, as I was doing a standup about nothing being certain and taxes. And it was about at that hour that he--that, that he passed, but I took that as a sign to go ahead and, and leave my comfort level in order to try to make a difference. I went to the, the general manager and the station manager when word was leaking out that I was probably going to leave. Some funny little political games started playing, and they were calling the station pretending that they were ministers and saying that, "We understand Steen is going to run for CEO and we wanna help her." And again, the political game started early. And I told the general manager and the news director that I wanted a leave of absence, and that was not possible. And I said these words: "If you can give a leave of absence to," at that time one of our reporters under threat and suspicion of murder, "to get his head straight, than certainly you can give me a leave of absence to run for office. But since you can't, then I have to resign." And I'm not kidding you, it was as if the weight of the world lifted off my shoulders at that moment, and I didn't know where my next dollar was coming from. And the general manager said well, "Steen, we, we believe that you're going to win, and he said we'll make certain that you get your pension and, and all of that"--I'm pension? And I didn't realize that monies had been building up for the fifteen years that I had been there. I was fully--I was vested, and those were monies that I used to live on when I ran for CEO of DeKalb County. It was my first venture into the political arena, and I didn't win. And I'm thinking, "Now Lord, hello. I believe to my heart that this is what I am supposed to be doing," and I believe that it was confirmed by my dying cousin, but I didn't win. Story_ID: 166113 Speaker 1: Well, sitting in my den about three years later, after going to work for MARTA [Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid Transit Authority], they called and needed some help with their media relations, and I was hired as their media relations director. And I was fully intending, however, to run again against the individual who won, but I didn't want to run on any of his missteps that were highly publicized. I was going to run on the issues, and on the issues, he was doing a good job. So I'm back and forth, back and forth, back and forth. Should I run; should I not? I'm sitting in my den reading the newspaper, and there's an article that a young woman who was in District 43 was going to run for [U.S.] Congress. And that was a very crowded field of the Atlanta [Georgia] city council president, the former CEO of DeKalb County [Georgia]--two former senators were going against the venerable Cynthia McKinney. And I thought why is she doing that? And that little voice--that tap on the shoulder--said, "That's where you run." And I ran for, for, for senate--for [Georgia] State Senate--ran and had a runoff and won that and then won by a, a landslide in November to represent primarily white Republican Rockdale County [Georgia] and primarily black and Democrat DeKalb County [Georgia]. And that is how I came to be in, in, in the political arena. Speaker 2: So this is--this election's in 2004, right? Speaker 1: This was in 2004, yes. Speaker 2: Okay, all right, all right, so, so what was your--it says here that you won 75 percent of the vote in the general e, e--election. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yes, yes. Speaker 2: So is there--is that because of the, the organization here in DeKalb--I mean the-- Speaker 1: No, no. Speaker 2: --Democratic organization? Speaker 1: It's because of the service I believe, and I ran on the--on the slogan of a, a servant-leader. And because I have been in involved in the community at every level, from PTA [parent-teacher association] to Jack and Jill [of America, Inc.] president to being involved in my church, being involved in United Way, being on this board, and that board, serving in my community at every capacity, at every opportunity, it, it, it resonated with the voters that here is someone who has not only--I'm not toss--just talking the talk, but I have indeed have a proven track record of walking the walk and really trying to make a difference in my community. And it's not--for me it is not politics, it is not campaign rhetoric; it is life, and life experiences that--when you talk about the issues of education, when you talk about economic development, when you talk about transportation. These are issues that I know well, and it resonated with the voters. Story_ID: 166114 Speaker 1: What were some of your accomplishments as, as [Georgia] State Senator? Speaker 2: I was only there one term, but I was the go-to person for the--for the lieutenant governor, carrying the water for some prime legislation, including PeachCare [for Kids], to make certain that, that children in--that needy children were able to get affordable insurance. I, I was able to get monies to close a landfill in Lithonia [Georgia] that had lain dormant and, and polluting for over ten years. And I was able to get money to close that landfill. I was an early signer on legislation that was passed and put into law, Georgia's anti-smoking law. I was able to get money for a respite care center in Rockdale County [Georgia] for, for relief for caregivers of mentally challenged young people, gosh, getting money for--sponsoring the bill and getting passed into law to have motorcycles for our state troopers, stricter requirements, driving experience for our young teen drivers. These are all laws that were passed, but also there's just a number of bills that we were co-sponsors, co-sponsors on during, during our tenure. And I think also, when you talk about affordable healthcare, I introduced a measure on the senate side to require large companies like, say, Wal-Mart to provide health insurance for their employees, because many of those employees--their children were coming to the state for, for insurance and for their healthcare needs. And so we sponsored legislation to make certain that those companies were, were providing health insurance for their children. It didn't pass. It didn't pass, but at least the doors were opened for the conversation and the dialogue about the need for healthcare for all of our children. Speaker 1: Okay, so now you were in the state senate from 2004 until-- Speaker 2: One term, yes. Speaker 1: So one, one term is what? Speaker 2: One term--it's two years. Speaker 1: Two years, okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: All right, all right, so 2006. Story_ID: 166115 Speaker 1: Well, what happened in 2006 that-- Speaker 2: I ran for lieutenant governor. Speaker 1: Okay, so you decided to not run again for the [Georgia State] Senate? Speaker 2: Well, it was difficult to live on sixteen, seventeen thousand dollars, and I, I was not going to find myself in a position or have myself in a position where I was bought and bossed. And so I still wanted to continue to serve in that chamber. And the lieutenant governor was running for governor and so that position was open. And I ran and came in third out of five--four men. There were five of us in the field, but four men, and I came in third. Each of the other two, the, the frontrunners, had over a million dollars each and yet, we ran well enough to, to force a runoff between the two, and we only had pennies. We, we only had, had pennies. And perhaps I--you would have thought I learned my lesson about not having--not having the money. Aptly as the president [HM Barack Obama] so aptly put in his recent State of the Union Address for 2014, he said that it is the power of the vote and not the size of the bank account that drives our democracy, and I believe that. Speaker 1: So your, your term earned--in, in the state senate was over in 2007, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And--okay. And so, so in, in--after losing the election for lieutenant governor, what did you decide to do next? Speaker 2: I have been writing a weekly opinion column, I have been traveling, I have been speaking, I am an International Ambassador for Peace, which has taken me to the Holy Land and to, to South Korea, and marched in the streets of Jerusalem [Israel] with Martin Luther King, III. And so while I didn't get to be that UN [United Nations] ambassador, God with his sense of humor did see fit to make me an ambassador of sorts. And so we again have been, sense that time, traveling and speaking and writing an award-winning column in fact. Just last year, we received a Georgia Press Association Award for, for editorials, for, for our contributions to the local legal organ. So that's basically what I've been doing for the last two or three years. Story_ID: 166116 Speaker 1: Oh, you wrote your, your childhood memoir-- Speaker 2: In 2007-- Speaker 1: --in 2--2007. Speaker 2: How could I forget that. Speaker 1: Yeah--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yes, yes. 'Teenie: News Lady in Training.' Speaker 2: Yes, yes--has nothing to do with, with the news. We're working on that one, but "News Lady" is a moniker that people gave me. Sometimes they couldn't remember my name, but they'd remember the face and, "Aren't you that News Lady?" And so the--it, it, it kind of stuck. And I used it on the ballot, quite frankly, because here, again, I didn't have necessarily the name recognition, but I had the face recognition. So when I put News Lady, they knew a: that I was a woman, and they could make the connection perhaps with the--with, with, with the name. But back to the book 'Teenie[: Newslady in Training].' 'Teenie' is a childhood memoir, and it's basically is--one of the reviewers said it is a valentine's--a daughter's valentine to her father, and it is a testament to the power of family and to the power and the impact that fathers can have on their--on their children in helping them to be successful in, in, in--and, and be everything they can be. My father [Austin Davis] left us much too soon at forty-seven. He was killed in a car accident, but apparently God saw fit to take him home because his assignment was over. And that was to instill in us a healthy dose of faith, family, friends, and the importance of giving back for, for how you have been so richly, richly blessed. And I find myself--I, I laugh sometimes, because as a child our house was always full of relatives or anybody else, even sometimes strangers that needed a place to stay for, you know, however long it took them to get on their feet or to find a job or whatever. And I find myself now here at, at my home it's always family; it's always whoever--whosoever will, let 'em come. And my baby daughter--I used to fuss about--daddy, we don't have anything. Why are all these people you--(unclear). And my, my youngest daughter said, "Mom, you just can't keep runnin' Hosea William's soup kitchen [Hosea Feed The Hungry], you know." But I supposed those, those lessons of community and of family and the work ethic and a commitment to excellence in whatever it is you, you, you try to do, those lessons have served me well over my life. And so the book 'Teenie' chronicles the years from, from dad meeting mom [Rose Wheeler Davis] up to and including his death. Speaker 1: Okay, now what are--do, do you have a plan to follow up on the book and write the--another-- Speaker 2: Yes, yes, I have begun-- Speaker 1: --portion of your memoir? Speaker 2: --I have begun working on the, the second book, which I won't be able to use "News Lady" because I see that one of my colleagues that I have a deep regard and respect for, after my 'Teenie' came out, a book entitled 'Newslady' by [HM] Carole Simpson came out. And so my book will be entitled something else that I won't say right now, because I would like to be able to use that title (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Story_ID: 166117 Speaker 1: In 2012 you launched a, a campaign for the U.S. Senate, right? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Twent--not in 2012--in-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No, I am currently-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --in 2014--well, actually, I announced in 2013-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --my candidacy for, for U.S. Senate. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And the election is in 2014. The primary election will be held in May--in May--May 20th. And the winner will then go on to the general election against a Republican nominee in November. Speaker 1: Okay and who are you running against? Speaker 2: They're at--currently are four of us. There is Todd Robinson, there is a gentleman by the name of Dr. [Branko] Radulovacki and there is myself, and then there is Michelle Nunn is, is the fourth person. Speaker 1: She's a daughter of Sam Nunn-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --(Unclear)--senator. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Yeah (unclear). So, do, do you stand a good chance you think? Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Absolutely. But seriously, it is an uphill battle. It is a challenge, but I'm in it for three reasons. Number one, I believe that we need a moral vision in Washington [D.C.]; we need to begin putting people above politics and even money. Secondly, I'm running because I believe that my deep personal and professional experiences will allow me to help bridge the racial, the political, and the economic divide that I believe thwarts our growth here in Georgia and in the nation. And then thirdly, to give us a choice. Here in Georgia, there has been a lot of talk about the presumptive candidate simply because someone is the daughter of and because they have the deepest pockets and largest war chest. I believe--I believe sincerely that in today's climate, when we hear so much about everyone in Washington in elected office in [U.S.] Congress are millionaires, they are out of touch with working and middle-class people, and the struggles that people have just daily to try to achieve that all American dream. And, and it sounds lofty, but I do believe this child of an illiterate grandfather [Miles' paternal grandfather, Albert Davis] that couldn't read and write down in Mud, Mississippi, and here I am sitting here today running for U.S. Senate, having won every journalist degree except a Pulitzer and an Edward R. Murrow, from a grandfather who couldn't read and write, to a granddaughter who can read very well and who can write very well, thank God. I believe that in this current client, the economic climate that we're in, the, the, the, the things that have happened in the country with the evisceration of the Voting Rights Act [of 1965], with the young boy that was shot down for playing loud music with the--here in Georgia, the young boy who was rolled up in a mat and the cover-up that occurred, and, and, and, and, and the coed that was killed on campus, and all of the things that are swirling about, the lack of jobs, the disrespect for the environment, our refusal to go along with the president [HM Barack Obama] and, and invest in renewable energies like wind, and solar, and hydro--water. I believe that people are going to respond to a message, and someone who can carry that message and be their voice and truly be of the people, by the people, and for the people, that we're going to prevail. And I believe that in my heart or I would not be doing it because it's crazy to try to with the pennies that we have, with the lack of the well-paid staff and organization that we have. But we have a formidable team of volunteers, of people who are dedicated, and people who believe that we can in fact win and turn this thing around. Story_ID: 166118 Speaker 1: We always ask this question, and you've already addressed some of it. We always ask people for what their hopes and concerns are for the African American community. And I think you've given me most of your concerns right now, but what your--and some of your hopes too. But what are your hopes for our community here in Atlanta [Georgia] and in the nation? Speaker 2: My hopes for the African American community is that we would go back to the African construct of self, and that is "nommo" [sic, Ubuntu]--"I am because you are and because you are I am." That sense of community that propels us into wanting to make certain that each of our families--that each of our families--and there's an African proverb that says: "The ruin of a nation begins in each home." I would love to see our families restored to, to mom and dad, and dad being able to earn a decent income so that--so that mom can be there with the children, and so that we don't have these latchkey children. I would love for our community--that every child---these bright children with so much promise---that they be able to get the world-class education that I received, a world-class education that allowed me without a journalism degree to be able to compete in an industry that allowed me to win all kinds of awards. I would love for our children in the African American community to have that world-class education, not just a, a degree, but a real true education that allows them to get a decent job to be able to take care of their families. I would love in the African American community for us to be able to protect and understand our relationship with the environment. We take for granted when we go into the--into the kitchen and we turn on the faucet and good, clean, potable water comes out. But how much longer can we continue to pollute the water tables and to pollute our environment, and expect to be able to, to, to, to not just be sick. And I would love to see that in the African American community. I would love to see in the African American community the day when my twenty-two-year-old grandson and his friend, a twenty-two-year-old, said to me just the other evening--he calls me Nana as well--and he said I am fearful of going outside of DeKalb [County] and Fulton County in the State of Georgia. I can't imagine having to be a young African American male and walking out of your door every day and doing just innocent things like walking down the street, or maybe being just a nuisance and a pest, playing loud music, and not have to worry about your life being taken. That's what I would love to see in the African American community, which is no different than the desires of any other community because we all want to be valued, and we all want to feel as if we are contributors, and we all want to feel as if we have--that we have worth. That is what I would like to see for, not just the African-American community, but all of our communities, and understanding that underneath here--underneath here there's a heart that beat; underneath here we still bleed read; and each and every person wants the same things, you know, life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness; and to understand finally--I mean, we've got to get past this nonsense of dividing and, and, and, and the divisions because of race, the divisions because of sexual orientation, these insane divisions that prevent us from being all that we can be as a state and as a nation. And I believe that I my heart of hearts; that is heart space; that is heart space. And to be involved in political, it's ministry, it's mission, it is doing the people's business, trying to at least, in the truest sense. Story_ID: 166119 Speaker 1: Now when you look back at everything you've done to this point in your career, is there any major move that you would wish you could undo or change? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No. Perhaps one. Perhaps one and that is not listening to my father [Austin Davis] in every instance, not going to Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia]. I wish that, even though I didn't know anything, you know, and I had to be the, the--you know, the, the final arbiter here, but I wish that--if, if there's a regret, it is not going--not going to Spelman and not listening to a very wise man who gets smarter every day that I live; my dead father gets smarter. Story_ID: 166120 Speaker 1: Now, once again, if you look back over everything you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: Of making true change in some of our newsrooms, of making true change in some of our communities, and of being a person that had integrity, and raised two beautiful daughters, and has two beautiful grandchildren. Story_ID: 166121 Speaker 1: Tell us about your family. Speaker 2: My family. My daughters [Kellie Lovejoy and Heather King]? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Okay, my daughters are really nice people. I've had friends who would call, and when they were young, nine and ten, have conversations with my daughters when they answer the phone. Both of them are very bright women. Both of them are very God-centered women, not religious, religious, religious, but they're God-center--women of deep faith, women who have a sense of community, women who are well-educated and degreed, women who have a--have a deep sense of community. And the greatest compliment that, that I have received is my girls saying that--the older girl saying that her chief role model is her mother. And for the baby girl to say that the biggest lesson I ever taught her was faith. One has--is the highest ranking civilian in, in government in, in, in [Washington] D.C. She is also in the [U.S. Army National] Guard, promotable to colonel in the Army Guard. And the baby girl is with corporate America, director of human resources. And both of them are, are master's degreed. Story_ID: 166122 Speaker 1: Okay, now is there anything I haven't asked you before that we need to cover before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: I can't think of anything; I can't think of anything. Can you? Speaker 1: No--well, there's always something you can ask, but I guess we--well, the last question is similar to legacy, but a little different. Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: You know, the legacy question is something that you can't answer yourself. That's determined by others, but I would like to be remembered as a--as woman who did the best I could with the hand that was dealt me and tried to make a difference for, not only my family, but my friends and my greater community in whatever way I could, sharing the gifts and talents that God blessed me with. And I would like to think--I would like to think that, you know, when, when the screen fades to back, I wanna slide into the home plate. I want my pearls to be broken and hangin' by a couple of strings here, my hair standing all over my head, my suits dusty, one shoe on and one shoe off, and hear the big umpire say, "Safe," that I will have used it all up. Speaker 1: Okay, well, thank you very much. Story_ID: 160202 Speaker 1: This is myself and Hosea Williams. Both of us received awards that evening. He received the Manuel Maloof Award for the [DeKalb] County [Georgia], and I received Excellence in Media Award. Videographer: All right. Speaker 1: And that picture is Ms. Mayree Barnes, myself, Governor Barnes--former Governor Roy Barnes--and Brenda [Foye] Cornelius, who was an aide to the governor. Videographer: Okay. Speaker 1: That's myself in African attire with national NPR [National Public Radio] talk show host, [HM] Tavis Smiley. Videographer: Good, next. Speaker 1: That is me and Justice Robert Benham and his wife. Justice Benham was the first African American on the Georgia Supreme Court [Supreme Court of Georgia]. Speaker 2: That is Cynthia McKinney, former congresswoman, the first African American congresswoman from the deep South and myself and again, having won an award at that event. Videographer: Okay. Speaker 2: That is my now twenty-two-year-old grandson on the back porch with our signs in my campaign for [Georgia State] Senate. Videographer: Okay. Speaker 2: That is former Essence magazine editor, Suzanne Taylor [sic, Susan L. Taylor] and myself. Videographer: (Unclear) description please. Hang on, hang on. (Unclear). Okay, next. Speaker 2: That is my high school classmate, seated next to me, Michael Warren, who played 'Hill Street Blues,' Bobby--Bobby Hill. And seated next to me is Helene Dermer and the other young lady, I'm not sure of her name. Videographer: Go ahead. Speaker 2: In this picture is [HM] Xernona Clayton, the founder and CEO of the National Trumpet Awards; R. Benjamin Johnson [HM Robert Benjamin "Ben" Johnson] who was formerly with the [William "Bill"] Clinton Administration and Jimmy Carter in both instances as White House special advisor, and myself at The Trumpet Awards. Videographer: Okay. Speaker 2: That is a former colleague who is the current primary anchor at '11Alive News,' [HM] Brenda Wood, and myself. Videographer: Okay. Speaker 2: That is the late preeminent attorney, Johnnie Cochran, famous for "If it doesn't fit, you must acquit," and myself. His daughter [Tiffany Cochran] and I worked together at WXIA-TV '11Alive' in Atlanta [Georgia]. Videographer: Okay. Speaker 2: That is three generations: Kelia (ph.), Lovejoy--Kellie Lovejoy--and me--me, my daughter, and granddaughter. Do I need to say it again? Videographer: Nope, go ahead. Speaker 2: And that is, I believe, at a thirtieth class reunion--Michael Warren and myself. Videographer: Okay. Speaker 2: Are you gonna turn it up? Videographer: No, we, we rotate it later. Speaker 2: Oh, okay, okay. That is the current DeKalb County Sheriff, Thomas Brown, a candidate for United States Congress and myself, celebrating my victory as Georgia State Senator. Videographer: Okay. Speaker 2: That is me in the middle with my babies in my fourth grade Sunday School class at Greenforest Community Baptist Church [Decatur, Georgia]. Speaker 1: That is me and my mentee, a young girl I had from the time she was eleven until she graduated from high school with a HOPE Scholarship. Videographer: Okay. Speaker 1: That is me years ago working for the Urban League in South Bend, Indiana. Videographer: Okay. Speaker 1: That is me in disguise when I won an Associated Press Award for portraying a homeless woman and begging in Woodruff Park in downtown Atlanta. Videographer: Okay. Speaker 1: That is me and my two--I call 'em elder joy and baby joy, Kellie and, and Heather. Videographer: One second, hold on. Okay, next. Speaker 1: And that is an earlier picture of me around 2000 of Heather and Lee, my grandson, myself, little granddaughter Kelia, and Kellie. Videographer: Okay. Speaker 1: That is me at one of many speaking engagements. Videographer: Okay. Speaker 1: That is me with a Korean pastor when I ran for CEO [of DeKalb County, Georgia]. Videographer: Okay. Speaker 1: That is me receiving an award for Excellence in Journalism from Delta Sigma Theta Sorority, Incorporated. Videographer: Okay. Speaker 1: That is me as senator--a greeting card that I sent to constituents. Videographer: All right. I think there might be--go ahead and put the next one up but I think you might have hit that spot on the wall. Let's see. No, we got that one. Okay, description for this, please? Speaker 1: That's me and Mike at our fortieth class reunion. Speaker 2: Mike Warren? Speaker 1: Yes, Mike Warren. Videographer: All right, next. Speaker 1: That is high school buddies and classmates at our forty-fifth class reunion. And that is Helene Dermer, myself, Gail Grabowski (ph.), and--I know, Jeanelle Labke (ph.) and Gail Grabowski. Videographer: Okay. Speaker 1: That's more classmates at the fortieth and--let's see, that's Carter Wolfe (ph.), me, and--oh gosh, I can't think of their names. That's enough, jut classmates. Speaker 2: What's the name of the school? Speaker 1: South Bend Central High School [South Bend, Indiana]. Speaker 2: And these are one, two, three, four, five ladies who had an impact on DeKalb County [Georgia] Schools. We were awarded an award from the DeKalb County School System. Videographer: Okay. Speaker 2: And these ladies are with the National Council of Negro Women. They are Jane Smith, who was the president; that is [Annie] Lois Keith, who was the local president, at that time, Senator Connie Stokes, and myself. Videographer: Next. Speaker 2: And that's me sitting at the assignment desk in the newsroom at WXIA-TV in Atlanta. Videographer: Okay. Speaker 2: And that's classmates again. And I believe that that was our thirty-fifth class reunion. Videographer: Hold on one second, please. Okay. Speaker 2: That is me and photographer Jaffa Breedlove interviewing then Congressman Newt Gingrich, who later became the speaker [of the house]. Videographer: Next. Speaker 2: That is me in the fourth or fifth grade--I don't remember which--at Franklin Elementary School [South Bend, Indiana]. Videographer: Good. Next. Speaker 2: That is my baby daughter, Heather, hugging me as we celebrated my victory to election to the senate. Videographer: Okay. Speaker 2: That is my sister, Mary, the third of the nine, and we were at a Delta Sigma Theta event. Videographer: Okay. Speaker 2: That's just me standing in the fore. Time's running out. Speaker 1: That is the piece of campaign literature for my senate campaign. Videographer: Okay. Speaker 1: That's me and Congressman [HM] John Lewis, veteran civil rights worker. Videographer: Okay. Speaker 1: That is me and the so-called Fly Jock--not flying anymore, but Tom Joyner, nationally syndicated radio-- Speaker 2: You got it? Speaker 1: --personality. Videographer: Haven't seen anything like that since you pinned that basketball against the backboard. Speaker 1: (Laughter) that is me and Martin Luther King, III in Jerusalem [Israel], as we walk the streets of Jerusalem for peace. Speaker 2: That is me as a member holding the rifle there--as a member of the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] Citizens Academy here in Atlanta. Videographer: Okay. Speaker 2: That is myself and President Jimmy Carter when I was one of thirty-five news people ele--invited to the White House. Speaker 1: And that is me and a very young Tom Joyner, when he had a whole lot more hair--nationally syndicated radio personality. Speaker 2: And that is me in South Bend at WNDU-TV, a very young me. Videographer: Hold on please, hold on. Okay. Speaker 2: And me as news director at WVON[/GCI] radio in Chicago [Illinois]. Videographer: Got it...