 Story_ID: 322542 Speaker 1: My name is Ed Anderson. I'm with HistoryMakers [The HistoryMakers]. Thank you for the opportunity to interview you for HistoryMakers. You and I have already talked about what HistoryMakers is all about. You know that it's a national 501(c)(3) organization with a goal of chronicling the lives of five thousand African Americans in the next two to three years. The HistoryMakers project is the largest project- oral history project since the WPA [Works Progress Administration; Work Projects Administration] project of the 1930s when the lives of thousands of African Americans who had been enslaved was chronicled. Our goal is to videotape the lives of approximately five thousand people and make assessable to the public through the latest technological means for research by students and others who desire to research the lives of those who we will be interviewing. Here with me today are Scott Stearns, who is our primary videographer and also Corey Ball [ph.] who is interning and preparing to be a full time videographer with HistoryMakers. Let me start by asking you to state your full name and spell it please. Speaker 2: My full name is [HistoryMaker] Diane McCoy-Lee. That's Diane, D-I-A-N-E, M-c-C-O-Y, which is my maiden name. Married name is Lee, L-E-E. Speaker 1: Please give us your date of birth and place of birth. Speaker 2: February 3, 1947, Chicago, Illinois. Speaker 1: What is today's date? And where are we located? Speaker 2: Today's date is February 21st [sic. February 20, 2006]. We're in southwest Atlanta, Georgia. Speaker 1: And your occupation? Speaker 2: Staff development professional for the State of Georgia. I write training for child protective service case managers. Story_ID: 322543 Speaker 1: Let me ask five People magazine type questions just to relax us and get us started on this interview. What is your favorite food? Speaker 2: Fried chicken. Speaker 1: And our favorite color? Speaker 2: Red. Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation spot? Speaker 2: The beach. Anywhere. Speaker 1: And what is your favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Spring. Speaker 1: Spring? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: You have a favorite expression or saying that you enjoy or repeat? Speaker 2: There is a phrase that I keep telling myself and at times I find myself having to repeat it so that I'll believe it. And that is, if you're gonna pray, don't worry, if you're gonna worry, don't pray. Story_ID: 322544 Speaker 1: Ms. McCoy [HistoryMaker Diane McCoy-Lee], I'd like to ask some questions about your family during this segment. Let's talk about your mom. Please state her name and spell it please. Speaker 2: Dimples Hester [Dimples Broadway Hester]. That's D-I-M-P-L-E-S, H-E-S-T-E-R. Speaker 1: What is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: May 11. I wanna say 1927. She was born in Arkansas [sic. Chicago, Illinois]. I'm not sure what part of Arkansas. Speaker 1: And what do you, what are some of the things you remember about your mom as you grew up? Share with me her background and things you remember about growing up with your mom? Speaker 2: Well, the way that I grew up was a bit different from a lot of African American children. My mother and father [Charles McCoy] were fortunate enough to be one of the very first families to move into Ida B. Wells' housing project [Ida B. Wells Homes] in Chicago, Illinois. That's one of the first public housing projects. And at that time that was a very wonderful place to live. People were screened. You had beautiful lawns with flowers and modern appliances. So they were very lucky to be one of the first families to move in there. I can remember when I was a very young child, my mother was very doting. She had three girls. We always dressed in frilly dresses. But then at the age of five, I went to school one day and came home and my mother wasn't there. My Aunt Betty [Betty McCoy], my paternal aunt came by with some butter cookies late at night and I distinctly remember that. And I still couldn't understand where my mother was. Well what happened was she fell off of a ladder at her job and injured her spinal cord and she was paralyzed from her waist down from that point on. That was back in 1952 I believe. She stayed in a hospital and rehab institute for approximately three years, at which time my three sisters [sic. two sisters] and I lived with various relatives primarily our [paternal] grandparents [Cora McCoy and Ivy McCoy]. Then my mother came home from the hospital. It was very difficult for her and for us because I was about six or seven years old, my older sister [Lolita McCoy Foxworth] was a year older, my younger sister [Denise McCoy Hardin] was three or four, living with my mother because she had different needs and we had needs. The first thing she had to do was convince people that she could raise three girls in the projects from a wheelchair by herself, because at that point in time my parents were separated. So it was a different, a different time. We had lots of fun. My mother was a strong woman and she still is. She was just a pillar of the family, one of the people that everybody in the family came to for advice. She did hair from the wheelchair. That's how she made extra money. She had us make little bubble gum toys, she made extra money that way. And I can remember we were the only kids in the neighborhood that had these colorful plastic ribbons. Well they were leftover plastic strips from somewhere, I don't know where she got them from, but we were just the envy of the projects because we had these plastic ribbons. And so I look back on fond times growing up. Speaker 1: Your mother is still alive? Speaker 2: My mother is still alive. Speaker 1: Does she continue in a wheelchair today? Speaker 2: Yes she does. Speaker 1: And she was able to successfully raise her three daughters (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, she did. Speaker 1: --from the wheelchair? Speaker 2: Yes she did. Story_ID: 322545 Speaker 1: How else would you describe your mom [Dimples Broadway Hester]? Speaker 2: Oh, my mother is a very strong willed woman and I, I'd have to say that that's where--that's how I was instilled to work for people and with people. After my mother became handicapped, and she went through a period where she was very depressed, as anyone would be, but then she picked up the mantle and she started working for handicapped rights. She worked for Chicago Transit Authority [CTA] when they started working on buses for handicapped people. She worked with The Woodlawn Organization [Chicago, Illinois]. She served on the board of directors at Park Shore East Cooperative [Chicago, Illinois] for people with handicaps making sure that they had access. So she's very strong woman. As a matter of fact she has a, a mission or what have you working with elderly, you know she doesn't consider herself elderly I guess and she puts little packages together for the people in nursing homes a few times of year and delivers them herself. Speaker 1: And she was able to somehow support a family? You say your dad [Charles McCoy] had departed by then. She was able to support her family? Speaker 2: Yes, she did. She was one of the top Avon [Avon Products, Inc.] representatives as well. That was another little part time job that she had, yeah. She did a good job (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So what lessons did you really learn that you would want to share with this audience regarding making it as a result of observing your mother? Speaker 2: When you asked me I just thought of something, one thing that she often said to us, "You don't have time for a pity party," you know. "If you're going through trials and tribulations, you don't have time to feel sorry for yourself because that's time wasted." And I guess based on her having instilled that in me, I give myself a period of time. If I'm going through some difficult period, I'll say okay I'm gonna give myself two days to be depressed and after that I'm done with it. I gotta move on. And I would say my mother instilled that in me. Story_ID: 322546 Speaker 1: Let's talk about your mom's [Dimples Broadway Hester] parents. What was your mom's dad's name and where was he born and when was he born? Speaker 2: Horner Broadway was his name. He was born in Arkansas and I don't know the year, I'm sorry. Speaker 1: What did he do for a living? Speaker 2: The profession that he had when I was coming up was a security officer. I think he did some construction work in his younger years but as I was coming up he was a security officer and then retired. Speaker 1: So you had a relationship with him? Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: Got to know him? Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: How old were you when he passed away? Speaker 2: I was an adult. I would say I was in my mid-twenties. Speaker 1: What are some of the things you remember from Horner Broadway, your grandfather? Speaker 2: The one thing I really remember was he'd make a trip south every year and he would bring back little cotton balls and he would tell us about cotton. This is how cotton starts. This is a cotton plant. And I always wanted him to take me with him because I had never been to the South and I wanted to see animals, farm animals. I wanted to see things growing you know, vegetables and fruit growing on trees and vines and he never would take me and I can remember to the day he died, I was still begging him, "Please when you go south, would you take me?" Yeah. Speaker 1: When you speak of the south, you mean his home state of Arkansas (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: You never got a chance to go there? Speaker 2: I never got a chance to go. Speaker 1: So you have relatives there that you never met perhaps. Is that right? Speaker 2: Probably, probably yeah. Speaker 1: Tell me about his wife, your grandmother. What's her name? Please spell her name and tell us where she was born and when. Speaker 2: Her name is Rosalee Broadway and she was born in Arkansas. Don't know the year. She was a very petite woman. She was not even five feet tall. She was maybe four feet eleven and you always see her in high heels. She always wanted to be taller I think. She had high heels and a hat, a tall hat. She was a very beautiful woman, long hair, nice figure, dressed very well and she was like his little doll. He was very tall. Speaker 1: About how old were you when she passed away? Speaker 2: She passed away just a few years after or before, she passed away just a few years before my grandfather, yeah so I was in my twenties. Speaker 1: What stories did you hear from her about her upbringing? Speaker 2: The story that stands out most is the way that she ended up marrying my grandfather. Speaker 1: Tell us about that? Speaker 2: She was fourteen years old. They both lived in the South and she described her family as being a very poor family with a number of children and they had one pair of shoes, everybody had to share but my grandmother because she was so small she had her own pair of shoes and she was very proud of that. My grandfather approached her and asked her to marry him and he then went to Chicago [Illinois] and he said, "Well as soon as I get to Chicago, I'm going to send for you." He sent money for her to come to Chicago and she decided she didn't wanna be married anymore so she didn't come. And if I remember correctly, the story has it that he had to go back to Arkansas and make her live up to her promise to marry him and then he brought her back, at age fourteen they were married. Speaker 1: And how old was he? Approximately (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He may have been a couple of years older-- Speaker 1: Just a couple? Speaker 2: --not much though, yeah. Speaker 1: Any knowledge of Rosalee's parents, your Grandmother Rosalee's parents? Speaker 2: I think her parents did come to Chicago at least her mother. I think her mother and father and lived there in their, their building, they had a three flat building on the South Side of Chicago. I don't remember ever having met them. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have any knowledge of their names? Speaker 2: I don't remember. I can get the information from my mom though. Speaker 1: Or whether they were descendants of free people or enslaved people back in Arkansas, any knowledge of that? Speaker 2: I have no knowledge of that. Speaker 1: Let's talk again about your grandfather, Homer [sic. Horner] Broadway, any knowledge of his parents? Speaker 2: I don't have any knowledge of my grandfather's parents, no (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Any talk of where they may have been from other than Arkansas? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Whether they were descendants of slaves or free people? Speaker 2: I don't. Story_ID: 322547 Speaker 1: Let's talk now about your dad, tell us your dad's name and his date of birth please, and please spell his name? Speaker 2: Charles McCoy, C-H-A-R-L-E-S, M-C-C-O-Y. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: He was born in Arkansas in August, August 11th and if my mother [Dimples Broadway Hester] was born in '27 [1927] he was probably born in '25 [1925], '24 [1924], 1924, '25 [1925]. I don't--didn't have much of a relationship with my father because as I mentioned when my mother had her accident in around '52 [1952], my father was no longer in the home. When we came back to the home to my mother after her you know convalescing for three years, it was just my mother in the home. Speaker 1: He had already departed prior to the accident? Speaker 2: Yes--no, during the time that she was in the hospital-- Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: --he established another lifestyle yeah. Speaker 1: Any idea how they met? Speaker 2: I don't remember hearing about how they met. I do remember her mother [Rosalee Broadway] not liking him and-- Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: --and not being very much for that marriage, but you know. Speaker 1: Did you have a relationship with your dad as life went on beyond the time of your mother's hospitalization? Speaker 2: Not really. I would hear from him maybe once a month. My mother used to encourage us to go to the furniture store, C. McCoy Furniture was the family furniture store. My father had a store. My uncle Clarence [Clarence McCoy] had a store on 35th [Street] and Cottage Grove [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois]. She would encourage us to go and visit him on a regular basis because she wanted us to be connected with my father. But those were trips that I wasn't really interested in because it was something that was mandatory. I just had to do it. It was not something that I wanted to do. I didn't really have a relationship with him. Speaker 1: So he continued to live in the same town though for some years? Speaker 2: Sure. Story_ID: 322548 Speaker 1: Tell us about his [McCoy-Lee's father, Charles McCoy] parents, do you recall them and if so, please give his father's name? Speaker 2: His father's name was Ivy McCoy. Speaker 1: Please spell that? Speaker 2: I-V-Y, M-c-C-O-Y. Speaker 1: And where was he from? Speaker 2: To my knowledge he was from Iowa [sic. Arkansas]. He was a white Irishman and my grandmother Cora McCoy, C-O-R-A, McCoy was from Arkansas I believe and story has it that when they met his family was very much against him marrying my grandmother. She was a very dark complexion woman. As a matter of fact they disowned him, so I never knew of any of his relatives. But Papa, that's what we called him, all my relatives he and my maternal grandfather [Horner Broadway]. I was very close to both my grandfathers. I liked them both quite a bit. I wasn't as close to my grandmothers, but my grandfathers, yeah. Speaker 1: How long was Ivy and Cora your grandparents, your father's parents, how long were they married, any idea? Speaker 2: Oh quite--long time. I'd say at least sixty years. Until they passed. Speaker 1: So they spent a lifetime together? Speaker 2: Yes, they spent a lifetime together-- Speaker 1: And how many-- Speaker 2: --we lived with my--with Cora and Ivy, my oldest sister [Lolita McCoy Foxworth] and I. Speaker 1: Describe their relationship. How many children were there and what was life like in the Ivy and Cora McCoy household? Speaker 2: They had about eight or nine children and the children were very close. They owned a brownstone building on 40th [Street] and Oakwood Boulevard and at that time that was prestigious address. Speaker 1: Is that in South Side, Chicago [Illinois]? Speaker 2: Yes. It's in South Side of Chicago, up the street from Holy Angels School [Holy Angels Catholic School, Chicago, Illinois] where I attended grammar school-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and they rented out the basement or the first floor or--they had apartments in, in the building. But their apartment went the length of the building. It was never very neat but it was always a comfortable, loving home. Mama was always, that's my grandmother's name, she was always cooking. As a matter of fact that's how I learned to cook and I love to cook today. She was always cooking. She always had flour on her hands, there was always wonderful aromas coming from the kitchen. The only difference that I don't know I grew up not to be very comfortable with was the fact that I was used to wearing dresses when we were with my mother [Dimples Broadway Hester]. When we, my oldest sister and I, went to live with my grandmother, we wore jeans and striped t-shirts like little boys and what we call in those days brogans, those clunky shoes. Speaker 1: I can relate. Speaker 2: We didn't dress frilly like we did and that was different and my grandmother did not know how to comb our hair either. So we looked pretty rough going to school every day, yeah so. Story_ID: 322549 Speaker 1: So life for Ivy and Cora McCoy in South Side of Chicago [Illinois] in the late 1800s, early 1900s, have you heard them talk about what life was like for an interracial couple in those days? Speaker 2: There was never any talk about that. There was never any talk about that, but I do distinctly remember and as growing up as an adult, it was an understanding that the lighter complexion children were more favored. The lighter complexioned grandchildren were more favored. The darker complexion children were less favored and the darker complexion grandchildren were less favored. Speaker 1: How did this-- Speaker 2: And that was on the part of my grandmother. My grandfather did not make a difference. Speaker 1: Does your knowledge of an Irishman ancestor impact you in any way? Speaker 2: You know it's strange you should ask me that because for a while I acknowledged St. Patrick's Day. But after a point in time I said I don't think I'm going to identify with that. That's my last name. McCoy is my last name and it is you know the Irish ancestry, but they never embraced me. The community that embraced me was my African American community, so that's where I identify myself and from that point on I stopped wearing green on St. Patrick's Day (laughter). Speaker 1: Any knowledge of your Irishman grandfather's parents-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --or his native land of Ireland? Speaker 2: No knowledge whatsoever. There was never any talk about that. Speaker 1: Any knowledge of your Grandmother Cora's ancestors or her parents? Speaker 2: Her mother was alive when I was very young. I don't remember her name, and I can get those names for you. She was very close to her-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --but I didn't spend a lot of time with her. Speaker 1: And where was she from, was she from Arkansas as well (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think she was from Arkansas as well. Speaker 1: All right. Any knowledge of whether the ancestors of Cora were descendants of enslaved Africans or free Africans back in Arkansas? Speaker 2: I have no knowledge and I guess during the time that I was growing up that was not something that people talked about-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --it was not something that they were proud to remember or pass on. Speaker 1: Is there anything else about your ancestors that you'd like to share with your audience at this time? Any memories from your upbringing that you'd like to share with the audience? Speaker 2: Well just for the sake of my African American identity, it was interesting to me as I was coming up. I had two aunts on my father's side who were very fair. And they always encouraged us to marry Caucasian men. They had at different points in their lives and they encouraged us to do so. That was, as they felt, the ideal thing to do. You'd have a better life if you did that. You'd have prettier children if you did that (laughter). I guess they got that from, from their mother, Cora. Speaker 1: Did you follow that advice? Speaker 2: No, no. Story_ID: 322550 Speaker 1: Let's talk a little about any other incidents from your upbringing that you'd like to share with the audience? Speaker 2: I can't think of anything right now. Speaker 1: All right. Let's talk a little about your early years, about your early years. What is your earliest memory of growing up? What is your earliest memory and you did grow up in Chicago [Illinois], is that right? Speaker 2: I did grow up in Chicago. Speaker 1: Okay. What are some of your earliest-- Speaker 2: My earliest memory I must have been about four because my father [Charles McCoy] was a furniture salesman, we had--we were one of the first families to have a TV okay. Speaker 1: And about how old were you at that time? Speaker 2: About four. Speaker 1: And tell us the date of your birth again. Speaker 2: Nineteen forty-seven [1947]. Speaker 1: All right so. Speaker 2: I can remember my mother [Dimples Broadway Hester] and father having an argument in the bedroom and my sister Lolita [Lolita McCoy Foxworth] and I were watching TV in the next room, and I remember my mother coming out of the bedroom and she had a suitcase and she had her hat on. She was dressed and she left, left the house. She couldn't have been gone long but that's the most vivid memory that I have as a very young child them fighting and my mother getting a suitcase and leaving the house. Speaker 1: And that memory remains with you 'til this day (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah it does. That's the last memory that I have actually of my father living with me. Speaker 1: Considering your story, I'll ask you later on what impact that memory may have had on the rest of your life-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: --but first let's talk about you mentioned a sister Lolita-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --what other siblings were there in your family, children of Charles and Dimples McCoy? Speaker 2: My sister Lolita, she's thirteen months older than I am, and my sister Denise [Denise McCoy Hardin], who's five years younger than I am. Story_ID: 322551 Speaker 1: Are there other memories that you can share with us of your growing up? For example, describe what family life was like on a school day in your household while your dad [Charles McCoy] was there and then later on after your mom's [Dimples Broadway Hester] accident and she became confined to a wheelchair, what was a regular day like in the McCoy household? Speaker 2: I don't have any memory other than that one memory of my father that I mentioned a moment ago of family life-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --before the accident, before the accident that my mother had. I really don't have any other memory. I do remember at that time my sister [Lolita McCoy Foxworth] and I attended a public school, Doolittle public school [James R. Doolittle, Jr. Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois], and after my mother's accident we then went to Holy Angels [Holy Angels Catholic School, Chicago, Illinois] to school. But our life just dramatically changed after my mother's accident. We didn't even see our apartment again for maybe another year and a half at which time they would let her come home for a couple of hours to spend with us and we really didn't even know her at that time. And she looked different. She was in a wheelchair. We knew nothing about people in wheelchairs. That's what I remember. Speaker 1: When your mom did return home, what are some the adjustments or even what way of life did you have to learn in order for a family to be formed and for life to go on? Speaker 2: Our life was very different from the typical children. We assumed many caretaker responsibilities for my mother. That was just the way that our family life had to go on. There were things that she needed to do to maintain herself that we had to help her with and there were adjustments that she had to make. Let me give you an example, braiding our hair. She would have to have us sit in the chair and lean back or what have you to, to braid our hair, but it was something that we adjusted to. Cooking, we had a housekeeper. She was on public aid, but at that time she could have a housekeeper because she was handicapped. That was someone who came in every day. She cooked our meals, cleaned the house, ironed the clothes, which was very different from most of our friends. I didn't like their food, most of the housekeepers. One of them, one of the housekeepers I can remember I just wouldn't eat anything that she cooked because she dipped snuff. Can you remember (laughter), okay and she dipped snuff and it seemed like everything she cooked was brown and it was either chili or spaghetti or chipped beef and gravy. I almost starved to death because I wouldn't eat the woman's food. Speaker 1: Maybe with a little snuff added you were thinking? Speaker 2: Okay (laughter). Speaker 1: So your mother was able to take advantage of public assistance programs as far as getting outside help to ensure-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --that the house went on. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And sounds like that you had several different people coming in, not the same person for years. Speaker 2: No, right, um-hm. The longest time one housekeeper stayed was maybe two, three years. Speaker 1: Were you able to build a relationship any of them (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes, um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 323205 Speaker 1: Mrs. McCoy [HistoryMaker Diane McCoy-Lee] you were about to tell us about family life in the McCoy household with assistance, and with a mom [Dimples Broadway Hester] who was in a wheelchair but not so disabled or handicapped. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Holidays were usually spent at another relative's house. My mother didn't cook. That was something she didn't do. So on the weekends when the housekeeper wasn't there, we had fast food, which was one of the reasons I wanted to learn how to cook, because I like home cooked food and I kind of taught myself how to cook for that reason. We didn't have meals together because my mother was in the bed most of the time. Most of her waking hours were spent in the bed. She would get up to comb our hair or if she had a doctor's appointment, what have you. But most of the time was spent in the bed. And usually once a year she would be hospitalized. Speaker 1: Was she in pain? Speaker 2: My mother? Yeah. She, she has been and still is from time to time in a great deal of pain. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: And like I said once a year her kidney would flare up or what have you and she'd have to go into a hospital and be hospitalized for a week or two, and every time that happened it was a scary time for us because it was reminisce of the time she went away and stayed away three years. Speaker 1: Are you comfortable in discussing the nature of the injury she sustained? Speaker 2: Sure. She fell off of a ladder. She was working hanging curtains in a--it was a beauty shop in the back and a restaurant in the front on the South Side of Chicago [Illinois]. And she was hanging curtains to beautify the area and she fell off a ladder on some glass plates and severed her spinal cord, which left her paralyzed from the waist down. And at that time my little sister [Denise McCoy Hardin] wasn't--I don't think my little sister was a year old. Story_ID: 323206 Speaker 1: When she [McCoy-Lee's mother, Dimples Broadway Hester] returned home and y'all returned home, of course children have to go to school, tell me what getting ready for school was like in your household? Speaker 2: Well, you remember when I was a little girl it was frilly. Then we went to my [paternal] grandmother's [Cory McCoy] house and it was blue jeans and striped t-shirts and very rough looking. Well coming back to my mother, we had to go back to being frilly again. I mean we had to stay very neat and tidy. Everything had to be crisp, clean, neat at all times and that took some adjusting to after three years of just living like little tomboys, but she made sure that we had everything that we needed to be presentable and represent her as we left the house. Speaker 1: You've given your siblings names, please give them again and tell us where you fall in the birth order? Speaker 2: My oldest sister is Lolita Foxworth [Lolita McCoy Foxworth], she's thirteen months older than I am. My younger sister Denise Hardin [Denise McCoy Hardin], she lives in Arizona, she's five years younger than I am. Speaker 1: Okay. What street did you live on? Describe your block for us. Speaker 2: 552 East 37th Place [Chicago, Illinois], Apartment 605 (laughter). Speaker 1: Sounds like you lived there for some time. Speaker 2: Yes we did. Speaker 1: How long? Speaker 2: Oh gosh. My mother stayed there until I was twenty and we moved there when, I think I was born when she lived in that apartment, so for many, many years she, she was very reluctant to leave and it wasn't until I got mugged going to visit her that she said I gotta get out of here. But yeah, we watched Ida B. Wells [Ida B. Wells Homes, Chicago, Illinois] turn from a very wonderful place to live and I describe it when I attended school, graduate school [University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], and people talked about the projects and how terrible the place was. I said, "You know what that was the best place to live when I grew up there. I had the park district on one side where I could go and take tap dance, ballet, what have you. I had the, the library over here where I could participate in reading activities. I had the YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association] over here where I had classes," so I was surrounded by organizations that had activities for me every day of the week. Speaker 1: Please continue to describe your block, your neighbors, your community in Chicago [Illinois]? Speaker 2: Well in those days a village really did raise a child because everybody knew who the children were. I could remember on one occasion my mother and I--she took the family out, we went somewhere to visit a relative and we came back and a neighbor Ms. Jamie [ph.], I think was her name, she said, "Dimples, someone was stealing your television and I saw them walking out your backdoor with the television, and I said take that television back, that television belongs to Ms. Dimples." People just looked out for people that way. The children congregated out in the backyard. All the apartment buildings, they were just two, three story buildings at that time. You know the back faced a courtyard type situation and they all played in the backyard together. Everybody knew everybody else's children. You don't dare do anything or Ms. so and so is gonna tell your mother. When two children got into it, those parents got together at either one of their houses and sat down and talked about it. It was a wonderful, wholesome environment. Story_ID: 323207 Speaker 1: Tell me, what are some of the sights and sounds and smells from today that remind you of your growing up? Speaker 2: Can't say a lot of smells. Because again my mother [Dimples Broadway Hester] didn't cook and some of the things I cooked, it took a while before I learned okay. I guess some of the fragrance, some of those Avon [Avon Products, Inc.] fragrances because since my mother was an Avon representative, we always had the latest fragrances from Avon. Some of the sights, a little old couple would take walks every day. It's a husband and wife holding hands. They must have been seventy, eighty years old but you'd see them every day walking down the street holding hands through the projects [Ida B. Wells Homes, Chicago, Illinois]. We looked forward to planting flowers in our yard in those days. My neighbors in the building, we could sit on our stairs and have tea parties. And we'd get little food items from the house and have our own little dishes, it was that clean. You could just sit on the stairs and have tea parties. So I can remember that and that was fond memories. Story_ID: 323208 Speaker 1: Any other memories of interacting with the children of the community? Was there a high turnover rate in the apartment complex or did everyone feel as you and your family? It's a great place to stay and we will value our community. Speaker 2: Until I became an adult, it was a wonderful place to stay and people stayed there. I can remember one of my first boyfriends lived upstairs and we'd knock on the pipe and in those days boyfriend meant I would speak to you when I saw you and you'd speak to me and then we'd run back home and say, "Oh, he said hi to me." But we'd knock on the pipe to say hello to each other because he lived in the apartment over us. But people were, they were, they were, they bought into the community. They believed in keeping their homes nice and neat, the halls nice and neat, their yards nice, planting flowers as I said and children had to be in at a certain time. You didn't see children hanging out outside. Speaker 1: Did Ida B. Wells [Ida B. Wells Homes, Chicago, Illinois] complex take a turn for the worse, and if so, around when and why? Speaker 2: When they started building other housing, they called it, Ida B. Wells around the original Ida B. Wells. That's when it took a turn for the worse. And then Ida B. Wells, I need to say this, means so much to me. I keep a picture of Ida B. Wells wherever I go and whatever office I'm in for as long as I can remember, I have a picture of Ida B. Wells there. But when they started building, they built an extension over and those buildings would say eight, ten stories high, very little grass, a playground that a couple of buildings would share, elevators, okay for children and families to go up and down on. And then they built the Darrow Homes [Clarence Darrow Homes, Chicago, Illinois], that was an extension of the Ida B. Wells over here and those buildings were fifteen, sixteen stories high and at one point in time I counted the number of people on each floor, we're talking a hundred people on each floor, and they have one area in the middle of maybe six buildings, asphalt for the children to play. The, the park district was gone, the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] was gone, the library turned into a junior college. So you've got all of these people, all these families with no support system around them. It was just doomed to, doomed for failure. Speaker 1: A formula for failure. Speaker 2: Sure. Story_ID: 323209 Speaker 1: What elementary school did you attend? Speaker 2: Started off at Doolittle [James R. Doolittle, Jr. Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois], a public high--a public grammar school and I think I had kindergarten there. But after my mother [Dimples Broadway Hester] had her accident and we went to live with my [paternal] grandparents [Cora McCoy and Ivy McCoy], we went to Holy Angels [Holy Angels Catholic School, Chicago, Illinois]. I graduated from Holy Angels, both my sisters [Lolita McCoy Foxworth and Denise McCoy Hardin] and I. Speaker 1: Is that because the family is Catholic? Speaker 2: My grandparents were Catholic. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: All of my aunts and uncles on my father's [Charles McCoy] side went to Holy Angels. We graduated from Holy Angels, yeah. Speaker 1: Were there any teachers there that influenced you? If so, what were their names? Speaker 2: I think her name was Sister Marie Daniels [ph.] and she was an African American nun and it was just such a novel thing for me to see an African American as a nun. I always looked up to her. Speaker 1: What kind of student were you? Were you well mannered? Were you rambunctious? Were you mischievous? Were you a scholar? What kind of student? Speaker 2: In grammar school I would say I was pretty introverted, particularly when I was with my grandparents. I didn't want to be noticed because I knew in those days when I went to school; I was not nice and neat. I can tell you one day I went to school we had the little jumpers, blue jumpers with the white shirt, blouse underneath-- Speaker 1: Mandatory uniform? Speaker 2: --a mandatory uniform. I got to school one day and I had forgotten my blouse. I had on a undershirt with my--I took a napkin that I'd taken from home, drew buttons on it and a color and put it up here and just hoped nobody would notice. But I mean my grandparents didn't think to check us when we went out of the door. It had been a while since they had little children in the home so they weren't used to that. So we went to school not looking as nice and neat as the other kids when we were staying with my grandparents. However when we went to stay with my mother again, she cleaned us up and we were nice and neat going to school and that's when I became a little more social--sociable. You know I had friends. I did pretty good in grammar school. I wasn't an honor student in grammar school but I was--I didn't get failing grades either. I excelled once I went to high school because that was, I guess that was one of the first challenges-- Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: --I was told I couldn't go to Loretto Academy [Chicago, Illinois]. You know as you're in eight grade and they have all the schools coming tell you about the schools and what school do you want to go to, or come to visit the school and apply here, and I went home and I said, "Oh mommy I wanna go to Loretto Academy." And she said, "Well honey you can't go to Loretto Academy, we don't have the money." I said, "Well that's where I wanna go to school." So determined that I was gonna go there I talked to people at the Y [Young Women's Christian Association (YWCA)], they said, "No problem, we'll give you a scholarship," because I had been working with a group of adolescent little girls at the Y, they gave me a scholarship. We talked to the priest at Holy Angels. He found scholarship money for me and I was able to go. Story_ID: 323210 Speaker 1: So we see that young Diane McCoy [HistoryMaker Diane McCoy-Lee] had dreams and aspirations even as an elementary school student [at Holy Angels Catholic School, Chicago, Illinois] to include going--knowing the high school [Loretto Academy, Chicago, Illinois] that she wanted to attend and in fact making it happen. What other dreams and aspirations did you have as an elementary school student? Speaker 2: When you talk about that, it makes me think about something I wanted to do. They started talking about air raid shelters when I was a little girl in grammar school and where would people go. When you see on TV people talking about, "Oh well I'm gonna build an air raid shelter and we're gonna put food there so that if we have a, a bomb or what have you or nuclear attack or something I'll have some place to take my family." I said, "Well where are we gonna go?" You know there's no place in the projects for people in the projects to go? And I said, "Okay well there's that incinerator room." I think I even went to the management office [at Ida B. Wells Homes, Chicago, Illinois] at about ten or eleven years old and talked to the people there about the possibility of them taking those incinerator rooms and cleaning them out enough, not where the garbage, but the area around that and putting supplies down there so the people in the projects will have some place to go in the case of a nuclear attack. It never happened. But that was my first commitment to wanting to do something for my community. Speaker 1: What was the purpose, the original purpose of the incinerator rooms? Speaker 2: That's where the garbage, you know it was an incinerator-- Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: --but it--but the garbage went down into something else down there and there was a huge room that didn't have garbage in it. I don't know what the purpose of that area was for, but I figured it would be a nice, because it was underground, it would be a good air raid shelter for the people in the projects. Because each little group, each little housing court like four buildings had an incinerator at some location with an incinerator room. Speaker 1: What other dreams and aspirations, during the early years of elementary school? Speaker 2: I can remember wanting to be a lawyer and of course that changed early on and I decided I wanted to be involved in social work at a very young age. Speaker 1: How young? Speaker 2: You know I would have to say even before high school I was leaning towards, I was leaning towards working with my community-- Speaker 1: All right sure. Speaker 2: --to do something with my community. Story_ID: 323211 Speaker 1: Did you and your family attend church? If so, please describe your religious experiences as a young child. Speaker 2: I had to attend church every Sunday and many days through the week. That's just the way it was in Catholic school. My mother [Dimples Broadway Hester] didn't have to attend church because they couldn't get her into the church at that time. They didn't have--it wasn't handicapped accessible. The priest would come to the home maybe once a month to say Mass for her and give her own communion and have her confession. My mother wasn't--she was, she was as much a practicing Catholic as she had to be for us to attend Holy Angels School [Holy Angels Catholic School, Chicago, Illinois] let me say that, but we were very religious. I can remember wanting to be a nun at one point. I believed in the Catholic faith. Speaker 1: So you grew up Catholic? Do you continue your Catholic tradition? Speaker 2: We attend Mass on occasion because my husband [Robert C. Lee] grew up Catholic as well. But there are some teachings in the Catholic religion that I just don't agree with and quite honestly I feel more fulfilled attending a Baptist service. Story_ID: 323212 Speaker 1: Where did you attend junior high school? Speaker 2: High school was Loretto Academy [Chicago, Illinois], an all-girls Catholic high school on the South Side of Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 1: A dream fulfilled? Speaker 2: Yes, yeah. Speaker 1: Who were some of your friends there and who were some of the people who influenced you there? Speaker 2: Mother Peter Claver was our speech teacher and she had a speech team, forensics team they called it in those days, and you could either do dramatic interpretations, comedy, extemporaneous or debate team. And I was on the forensics team and Mother Peter Claver was also our history teacher. I was horrible in history, horrible. I couldn't remember anything. And I come to realize I couldn't remember because it wasn't about me. They were making me remember things that I could not relate to at all, same with geography. My world consisted of Ida B. Wells [Ida B. Wells Homes, Chicago, Illinois] because we didn't go anywhere else. Even when I started going to high school outside of Ida B. Wells, I'd get on the train, go to high school. I knew nothing about the neighborhood, and I'd go right back to the projects. So geography was something that I saw no need for. My world was very small. So Mother Peter Claver couldn't understand. "Well Diane [HistoryMaker Diane McCoy-Lee], why can't you remember these history dates? You can take a speech home, two or three pages, and have it memorized the next day or two? What's going on here?" I said, "I don't know and I couldn't figure it." So the way that I passed history was to give speeches to my history, my history class, my geography class because she wanted me on the forensics team because I was good. I could always bring some trophies back and we always competed with, we were the only black team that competed throughout the State of Illinois. We never saw, I never saw and any of the, the contests that we went to, I never saw any other African Americans. And our school, we were good, we were very good. Speaker 1: So from a confidence developing point of view being on the forensics team was good for you? Speaker 2: It was very good for me, yeah. Speaker 1: How did it enable you to maximize your development from an academic perspective? Speaker 2: Well again, a couple of my classes I wouldn't have passed if I didn't give speeches to the class. I rated very high going into Loretto Academy and in those days you had the A group, the B group, the C group. I was in the A group which meant that was college preparatory and there's a memory of that high school time that's still very painful. I was in the A group. I took Latin, algebra, geometry, all the classes that the A group had to take but because the nuns knew that my mother [Dimples Broadway Hester] was in a wheelchair and that we were on public aid, they didn't think I should go to college. They insisted that I take some clerical courses because they said, "You can't go to college, you've got to be--you know you got to get a job so you can help your mother." And I'm saying, "No, I wanna go to college." So as a senior I ranked in the top ten of my graduating class, but they did not encourage me or give me any information about scholarships until I pushed and pushed and pushed. And they finally gave me one application to apply for and I had like twenty-four hours to get all the information together which was almost impossible and then I had to get to my job which I was working part time as a cashier in a grocery store. And I got there with my information, my mother helped me put everything together, but I didn't have my transcripts and the school said, "I can't give you your transcripts to take," so I was not qualified. I was devastated. I went back to the school and I said you know I was late for work but I had to tell them because I thought it would make it a difference. "You know I didn't, I wasn't able to apply for this one scholarship because you didn't give me the information I needed." And they were so out of tune to where I was and how committed I was to going to college, they gave me a World's Finest Chocolate bar and said, "This will make you feel better," (laughter). Speaker 1: My, oh my. Speaker 2: That's a painful memory. Story_ID: 323213 Speaker 1: So you were intrinsically motivated to prepare yourself academically for college at an early age? To what extent did your mother [Dimples Broadway Hester] and other relatives inspire you to attend college? Speaker 2: Well just like my mother didn't think I could go to Loretto Academy [Chicago, Illinois] she really didn't think I could go to college. She wasn't discouraging me but she wasn't saying, "Yes you can, yes you can, yes you can." But I was determined that that's what I was gonna do because just like, and then I guess she didn't realize the example she set for me. Just like everybody thought she couldn't raise three children from a wheelchair in the projects [Ida B. Wells Homes, Chicago, Illinois], I knew that just because I came from the projects, didn't mean that I couldn't go to college and be successful. Speaker 1: Who were the great motivators in your life in terms of going to college and doing other things beside your mom? Speaker 2: There was a counselor at the Y [Young Women's Christian Association (YWCA)], oh and her name just escaped me. We were so close and she worked with me and encouraged me to go to college. She helped me get the scholarship from the Y. When I told her I wanted to start a preteen group at the Y, she worked with me to get my little preteen group together and have fashion shows and talent shows with them, oh her name escaped me again. Anyway we were very close. She was a big influence on my life and unfortunately once I got in high school we lost connection. She left the Y and moved on and you know. Speaker 1: You had one sister who was near your age and another not far behind. To what extent did y'all share the same motivation for college and other things in life? Speaker 2: We didn't. My older, my older sister [Lolita McCoy Foxworth] went to a Catholic high school afterwards. Well she went to a public high school first 'cause that's where she wanted to go and she was a socialite. I never was. She dressed very well. I mean she had everything matching. The biggest thing to her was making sure that she looked right when she left the house. I didn't even have to worry about it because I had a uniform. I wore the same thing every day but it was a delight when I had a saint's holiday. So I was out of school, I could go to my sister's high school with her and I could dress up like she did. But that was the only time I got to dress up. She didn't, she didn't have any aspirations to go to college. She wanted to be a cosmetologist and she went to Dunbar Vocational High School [Dunbar Vocational Career Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] where she learned cosmetology and that's what she wanted to do. My youngest sister [Denise McCoy Hardin], she didn't really have aspirations to go to college, but it just happened. As she was graduating, somebody said, "Well I can give you a scholarship. Do you wanna go?" And she said yes, so she ended up going to college. I think she went a couple of semesters but she didn't finish. Story_ID: 323214 Speaker 1: While you were in high school, President Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was assassinated. Where were you and how did that impact you? Speaker 2: I was sitting in class at Loretto Academy [Chicago, Illinois] and with that being a deeply religious you know I was, I was saturated with Catholicism. The room just became quiet and people cried. People were very touched. It was, it was like the world had come to an end almost. It was just, it was a difficult day. It was a very difficult day. They had it over the loudspeaker, information as it came in, and people were just devastated. Story_ID: 323215 Speaker 1: Having been born in '47 [1947] you grew up during the Civil Rights Movement. No doubt you remember Rosa Parks sitting in Montgomery [Alabama] on the bus and refusing to give up her seat to a white man and the ensuing work of Dr. Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and other Civil Rights Movement or civil rights leaders during the movement, what role if any, well how did the Civil Rights Movement impact you as a young woman coming along? Speaker 2: I felt as if I had my own battle. As an African American female I was affected by the racism. I, I came in contact with it at school, at the high school [Loretto Academy, Chicago, Illinois] again, by not being encouraged to go to college. I felt as if that was a form of racism. I experienced it in contests that I entered, junior team or top team Junior Citizen. I think I mentioned to you earlier when I competed for Junior Citizen, I was the only black person competing and we sat in a room and there were five or six judges, one of which was black and they asked me a question. They said, "Well what do you think racism is all about?" And I said, "It's fear. Fear of the unknown." I still believe that to this day. They gave me second place and they said come back next year, they just weren't ready for a black person to win. I went back the following year and I got first place. So I experienced racism as an individual. Speaker 1: What are some of your other experiences during high school that come to mind? Your successes, your traumatic moments and so forth? Speaker 2: Most of my success had to do with my classes. I had good grades and the forensics team, the public speaking that I did. I didn't have a lot of unpleasant times other than the piece about going to college. I was not encouraged to go to college, but other than that I enjoyed high school. I enjoyed going to an all-girl school because we didn't have any pressure. There were no boys around, so you didn't have to impress anybody. You can devote all your attention to your studies and praying. Speaker 1: And so if you had to redo high school you would select a similar setting, the same or similar setting (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I sure would, I sure would. Story_ID: 322563 Speaker 1: So Ms. McCoy-Lee [HistoryMaker Diane McCoy-Lee], did Vietnam [Vietnam War] impact you and/or your friends to any great extent? Speaker 2: Not really. I didn't know a lot of people who went there and came back injured. My first husband [Barry Brown], I think it had a great impact on him. He was troubled before he went there, and I think it made him even more troubled having been there. Speaker 1: Did you know him prior to his going to Vietnam? Speaker 2: I did. Speaker 1: When did you first meet him? Speaker 2: I was twelve or thirteen years old in either seventh or eighth grade when a friend of ours introduced us. Said he had this wonderful guy he wanted me to meet and he introduced me to him. Speaker 1: So you knew each other as children, as young adults? Speaker 2: Yes, we did. Story_ID: 322564 Speaker 1: After high school [Loretto Academy, Chicago, Illinois] you went off to college? Speaker 2: I did. Speaker 1: Tell us about that experience. Speaker 2: Again, that was a challenge, because nobody thought you know a poor girl coming out of Ida B. Wells [Ida B. Wells Homes, Chicago, Illinois] should be trying to go to college, but I was determined I was gonna go. I went. I had work-study so I spent half of my day peeling onions or carrots and the rest of my day going to classes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What college did you--? Speaker 2: So I didn't have a big social life, Southern Illinois University [Carbondale, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Southern, all right, all right. Tell us a little bit more about your freshman year at Southern Illinois. Speaker 2: I was not very popular because I was, I mean I can remember walking around campus with khakis and a poncho. I had a red plaid poncho that was my uniform. I didn't have a lot of fancy clothes. I didn't have any money. I was there on a shoestring budget so I didn't, I didn't have much of a social life. Again half the time I smelled like onions and the other half of time my hands were orange from the carrots so, studying. Speaker 1: Do you feel that the Catholic school curriculum prepared you to be successful academically in college? Speaker 2: I do. Speaker 1: All right. What other experiences during--did you complete your freshman year? What happened in your life during your first year of college? Speaker 2: When I went away to college, that was my--a serious breakup from my soon to be husband [Barry Brown], and I was in college for two--about two semesters when he came in contact with me. He called me and explained to me that he was going into the [U.S.] military. So all those things that I didn't like about him, they were gonna be changed because the military was gonna change him. So would I consider going with him again or would I consider marriage? And shortly after that I went back home and we got married. Speaker 1: And you started a family? Speaker 2: We did. Speaker 1: And then what happened? Speaker 2: I went to North Carolina, Camp Lejeune [Marine Corps Base Camp Lejeune, Jacksonville, North Carolina], spent seven or eight months there with him. He was in the [U.S.] Marine Corps. Speaker 1: And what year--you finished high school in what year? Speaker 2: Sixty-five [1965]. Speaker 1: And so this is during you went off to college during the '67 [1967] year and you got married during that, during what year? Speaker 2: I got married in '66 [1966]. Speaker 1: Sixty-six [1966]? Speaker 2: My daughter [Tamila Brown Taylor] was born in '67 [1967]. Speaker 1: All right. And you went off to Camp Lejeune and continue with what happened. Speaker 2: Very isolated. Lived in a, what I describe as a cabin. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Had no creature comforts and the only way that I was able to convince him to let me go back to Chicago [Illinois] was I told him you know all the babies that are born down here are ugly. There's something they do at that hospital, so with that said, I kept telling him that over and over again he then agreed to let me go back home. That's when the abuse started really bad when I was in Camp--at Camp Lejeune and isolated from everyone. Speaker 1: What was the nature of the abuse? Speaker 2: It started just putting you down, damaging your self-esteem, trying to convince you that you were nothing and nobody, not capable of anything, you're ugly, a bad person, you're not worthy of anything and it went from that to physical abuse. Speaker 1: This is prior to his going to Vietnam? Speaker 2: No this was while--yeah. Wait a minute. Yes. That was prior to, prior to him going to Vietnam but he was in the military. Speaker 1: All right you went back home to Chicago? Speaker 2: Um-hm. I went back home to Chicago, I had my baby. He was--he spent a short time with my baby and I before he was shipped off to Vietnam. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: For a couple of years. Speaker 1: All right and after Vietnam what happened? Speaker 2: After Vietnam he came back as I said even more troubled than he was before and more abusive than he was before. We tried to have a family life and got an apartment but he was, became increasingly abusive and that's something that happens with family violence, it escalates over a period of time. It never diminishes without help you know. Speaker 1: Did it escalate in new ways? Speaker 2: Yes. Extramarital affairs, that was just something that you were supposed to accept and deal with, putting you down in front of other people, and that became commonplace. I can remember I loved my job. I was working at a phone company at the time and I was told, "You can't go to work anymore. You think you're doing so much with your job, you can't go back." And he wouldn't let me go back to work. I had to quit my job. And I was devastated but then I started a little business of my own making pillows and earrings and what have you. I made extra money that way. But that controlling, just, just controlling and isolating me from everyone that was close to me. Speaker 1: Did you attempt to do anything about this in terms of contacting others whether they're family or friends or the authorities? Speaker 2: I did. Speaker 1: And what-- Speaker 2: Contacting the authorities in those days they would just tell you kiss and make up. You know, "You love your husband, he loves you, it's just a minor argument, it's gonna be okay you know." I went to my family members and family members became threatened because he would go and damage their property or threaten them if they provided me with a safe place. Story_ID: 322565 Speaker 1: To what extent did you abuse--were you abused before something more serious in terms of intervention took place? Speaker 2: Well, when my daughter [Tamila Brown Taylor] was, oh I guess she must have been four years old; I left and went to my mother's [Dimples Broadway Hester] house to stay. And I was in the process of well I don't know if I started divorce, I was definitely separated and thinking seriously about divorce and I went out one evening, came back and he [McCoy-Lee's first husband, Barry Brown] just popped up out of nowhere and hit me in the face with his fist and broke all the bones on the left side of my face, required numerous staples and plastic surgery. Speaker 1: Now at one point prior to this, you divorced him, is that right? Speaker 2: It was after that that I did divorce him. I did divorce him and tried to have a life with my daughter. It was impossible because he was everywhere. He knew my routine. I had established myself an apartment, furnished the apartment with no help from him, got my daughter in school, had a good job, but he was there. When I'd leave to go to work, he would pop up out of nowhere. When I get off from work he was there, at my daughter's school he was there. There was absolutely no way to get away from him. He was just ever present. And after a period of time, I realized there was no way I was gonna escape him. And with him talking, "Oh we need to raise our family you know we need to raise our daughter, she needs a two parent family, it's gonna be all right. I'll never do that again," which is typical behavior. We got back together and remarried. Speaker 1: So you felt that he still loved you in spite of the abuse? Speaker 2: You know, I always felt he loved me, but I say some people are able to love a teaspoon worth and some people can love a gallon. He was only capable of loving a teaspoon because he didn't love himself and you can't love another person any more than you love yourself. And I think that's the way that he was raised. Neither one of us had a father in the home. And so we didn't have a blueprint for what family was supposed to be. I knew that a family was supposed together--stay together and that was my responsibility to keep my family together no matter what, that's what the Catholic religion taught you. Whoever you choose and you have your children by, you know you stay with that person and make that marriage work. Speaker 1: So you had the Catholic teachings and did you also still love him? Speaker 2: I did. Speaker 1: So you continued on? Tell us what else happened in your relationship after that? Speaker 2: We remarried, we bought a home, I had my son [Barry Brown II] in '74 [1974] and the abuse escalated. It got worse and worse. I tried to leave again and went to family. They didn't want me to come because again they were threatened by him. And it wasn't until the abuse got so bad and I was made to do things that I didn't wanna do. They were just not part of who I was that I knew one of us was gonna die. Either I would die at his hands or I was gonna kill him. We were both marksmen, we collected guns. We'd go out and shoot all the time. I had a wonderful home in a residential community and one night I just, my gun was under my pillow and I was so tempted to, to shoot him and let that be that and just say, "Oh well, it was self-defense," and hope somebody would believe me and realize what I been through. But I couldn't see myself killing my children's father. I didn't think my children would be able to accept my killing their father, so I left and went to Denver [Colorado]. Got on a plane with my two children and my sewing machine and went to Denver, Colorado. Speaker 1: This is in about what year? Speaker 2: This was about '77 [1977]. Story_ID: 322566 Speaker 1: Then what happened? Speaker 2: I got established in Denver [Colorado]. He [McCoy-Lee's first husband, Barry Brown] knew where I was, which was at my sister's first until I got a little townhouse there, got a good job, got my children [Tamila Brown Taylor and Barry Brown II] in school and he sold the house. I didn't ask for any of the money. But he insisted that I come back and I said, "No I'm not coming back. I'm going to get a divorce." The next thing I knew I came home one day. I'd given my daughter a pajama party and I'd taken some of her friends home. When I got back to my townhouse, he was outside of my townhouse. And he said, "I can either beat you out here or you can take a chance on us going inside and talking." Speaker 1: And what did you do? Speaker 2: We went inside. Speaker 1: Then what happened? Speaker 2: Talked. Next thing you know I had to start packing up. He was taking his family back to Chicago [Illinois]. He had sold the house, so we had an apartment on North Michigan Avenue and it just, it was, it was something akin to torture. It was something akin to torture. He had just lost all sense of control at that time. I was able to transfer from the phone company in Denver to the phone company in Chicago. So I had my job and I would go to my job during the day and I would come home in the evening to a beating. And it would go all night, interrogation and beating and my children were made to witness this. And I would get up in the morning. He would take me to my job. He'd pick me up in the evening, bring me home to more interrogation and, and beating. And this went on for about a week until such time as I went to my supervisor--I went to the health department at the phone company downtown and I said, "Listen, my husband is beating me and I'm afraid he's gonna kill me. Can you help me?" And they said, "No, we don't have any, you know we don't have anything to help anybody in your situation." So I went back to my job and went back home and after maybe two more days I went back to the health department in the building and they said, "I'm so glad you came back. We didn't know what department you were in. We didn't know where you were, but we found some help for you." And they got my supervisor, Menyong McKenna [ph.], she came up and they told her where she can take me, which was to the homeless shelter on the North Side of Chicago which is where I ended up with my two children. Speaker 1: And this the year was about? Speaker 2: Seventy-eight [1978]. Speaker 1: How long did you remain there and what was life like in a homeless shelter with two children? Speaker 2: I never experienced anything like it in my life but it was worse--I mean it was not as bad as having to be beaten every day. It was--I was at the point where it was either do or die. I had to do whatever it took to get away from that situation and I was prepared to die if that's, if that's what it took. You know I hated to take my children into that situation, but that's what we had to do. Because my daughter was growing up seeing this and for fear that she would grow up feeling as if this is what she had to look forward to or this is what she can expect from a man, and my son growing up seeing this feeling as if this is how I'm supposed to treat a woman. It was just--I was at that point, do or die. The shelter was a homeless shelter. Speaker 1: Before moving to that point-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --you mentioned that you observed your mother [Dimples Broadway Hester] receive some abuse. Speaker 2: That was the last memory that I had of my father [Charles McCoy] when I was maybe four or five years old before my mother had the accident. Speaker 1: Did that have anything to do with in addition to your Catholic training believing that you should receive similar abuse? Speaker 2: You know psychologically or subconsciously knowing that or wanting to believe that your parents loved each other and that you were born out of love and with that being the only memory that I had, I'm sure that had an impact. Speaker 1: Additionally you mentioned that your husband was abusive before Vietnam and more abusive after Vietnam, to what extent do you feel that his experience in that environment contributed to his abusive nature later on? Speaker 2: I think the [U.S.] Marine Corps period, the, the--something about the way that they train the Marine Corps. I think given his personality and his, his disorder that he had going in there that just exacerbated it. That just added fuel to the fire. Story_ID: 322567 Speaker 1: Let's again fast forward to the homeless shelter with two children [Tamila Brown Taylor and Barry Brown II], and you're not wanting your children to believe that a relationship that they would have in the future should be like yours, please continue what you were telling us regarding that? Speaker 2: Well, when I first got to the shelter, we were in a room with my two children. It was an old hotel, that's what it was and there a number of many fifty other people there some families, some single people. I was just at the depths of despair one night when I woke up in the middle of the night and the room was filled with moths and I started killing moths and I'm saying, "Oh my God I got my children here." I can't go to my job because he'll [McCoy-Lee's first husband, Barry Brown] find me there. They made me apply for public aid. I'd never been on public aid, never planned to be on public aid, I had a job and we had sizable income, we had savings, why? Then I was sitting outside that morning, I couldn't sleep, I went outside it was about five o'clock in the morning and the newspaper was delivered and I looked in the newspaper and my mother [Dimples Broadway Hester] had written an article to a columnist in a newspaper asking for me, what can I do, where can I get help and kind of described my situation. And I said well if my mother believes, I gotta keep going. Speaker 1: Now you were in a homeless shelter but your situation was different from other homeless, jobless women there. Speaker 2: Yeah, I had different issues. I was not homeless because I couldn't find a job or because I had a mental illness that made so I couldn't, you know establish myself in, in a place, I was homeless because I was in fear of my life. I was being abused. I couldn't live safely in any place because my husband was always there. And he found the shelter you know, a family member told him where the shelter was, where I was. So in a sense I wasn't even safe there. It was at that point, well I did try to have him committed and I think I mentioned to you. He broke out of the mental institution and then we went to court, the judge said he's paranoid schizophrenic but not recommended for commitment. And he left before I did. In, in, in court where I filed for divorce it was much the same thing, it took two years to get the divorce and they could not make him give me any of the savings. His attorney finally gave up and said, "I can't represent you anymore." But it was at that shelter that I saw more women coming in there who were battered women as well. Speaker 1: And what did this inspire you to do? Speaker 2: I started working with some people at the shelter who wanted to establish a program for battered women and used that to give me strength in working with other women. I started going with women to recover some of their belongings when they knew their husband was at work you know knowing that that was you know the only time they could get some of their belongings. I started working with women going with them to court and and working with them gave me strength and around that we organized a program for battered women and then went on to open a shelter. Speaker 1: When was your divorce final? Speaker 2: My divorce wasn't final, it took two years so it was about 1980, '81 [1981] before it was final. Story_ID: 322568 Speaker 1: When did you first make your efforts, successful efforts to start a shelter for battered women? Speaker 2: Well, a group that I started working with at the homeless shelter, I worked with them to open Greenhouse Shelter on the North Side of Chicago [Illinois] and have programs for battered women and I actually served on the board of directors for the Council on Battered Women [Atlanta, Georgia]--no, that was Chicago Abused Women's Coalition [Connections for Abused Women and their Children], I'm sorry, in Chicago. Speaker 1: Was this the first shelter for battered women? Speaker 2: It was the first shelter for battered women in the City of Chicago, maybe in the State of Illinois. Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit more about its success over the years? And does it still exist? Speaker 2: It does still exist. The Greenhouse does still exist and it was--I seem to be the voice for battered women on that board of directors because I kind of knew what people needed. I knew my children [Tamila Brown Taylor and Barry Brown II] needed someone who understood what they had been through so we needed a children's program in that shelter. I knew that we needed support groups because I knew that I gained strength by talking to other women and realizing that I wasn't the only person in the world that this was happening to and many, many women were in the same situation that I was in. So we needed support groups in that shelter. We needed people to give them legal advice. Now all the things that women needed I was able to contribute that information to make sure that we had a comprehensive program at the shelter. Speaker 1: How was your shelter funded? And who were some of the political operatives who helped make funding and operation possible? Speaker 2: It was funded through private corporations. We did a lot of fundraising ourselves. The house itself, it was a house that was donated to us and I don't remember who it was donated by, but we did a lot of fundraising ourselves and I don't remember the corporate sponsors right now. I can go back in my records probably and tell you who some of them were. Speaker 1: Approximately what numbers are we talking about? How many people are served by this shelter? Speaker 2: That shelter could only accommodate maybe twenty women and children, it was small. Speaker 1: Was it generally full? Speaker 2: Always full, always full and many times had to turn women away. I took women in my home. My daughter once asked me, "Mommy when are we ever gonna be able to just live by ourselves?" Because I always had a family. If there was not room in the shelter and that family didn't have anyplace else to go, I would take them into my home until we could get them into a shelter or other safe place. Story_ID: 322569 Speaker 1: And from a vocational perspective, you have worked with battered women for a living since your own experience? Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, in Chicago [Illinois] I did keynote addresses for which I was paid. A stipend or honorarium or what have you for giving those speeches, just describing where I was and how I felt and what it took to get out of that situation for other women and for the women to understand more about this whole issue of family violence and what needed to be done. And I went from there when I came to Atlanta [Georgia] I got a job with a Chicago Abused Women's Coalition [Connections for Abused Women and their Children] in Chicago--Council on Battered Women here in Atlanta and I was a client services manager for the sixty-five bed shelter, which was the largest shelter in the State of Georgia I'm sure and I was their first client service manager. They had an old home that was donated and had enough money to add on to that home so they were able to accommodate sixty-five women and children. Speaker 1: When did you come to Atlanta for that purpose? Speaker 2: I came to Atlanta in '88 [1988] right after I got my master's degree. Speaker 1: So throughout this time your experience from high school [Loretto Academy, Chicago, Illinois] throughout the marriage [to Barry Brown], throughout the battering period, you continued to work on your education? Speaker 2: I did. Speaker 1: And when did you finish your college degree and what did you major in? Speaker 2: I got my bachelor's degree from Chicago State University [Chicago, Illinois] in social work. I actually went through the University Without Walls [program] getting college credits for the speeches that I was giving and the work that I did with battered women. I got my master's degree from the University of Chicago School of Social Service Administration [Chicago, Illinois] in, master's degree in social work in 1988. But prior to that, I started the first service for battered women in a hospital. I worked at Jackson Park Hospital [Jackson Park Hospital and Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois] from 1981 to 1986 I believe it was. And that was the first hospital based program for battered women in the State of Illinois because at that time when a woman came into hospital and she said she had been beaten by her husband, there was no documentation in the medical records of what she went through and she was just treated and sent back home, whereas that was the opportune time to offer a woman services when she came into the emergency room. You know, in addition to treating you, we have a safe place for you to go if you want to go there. And even if you don't want to go to a shelter, I can refer you to support groups where you can get some information. And that was completely staffed by volunteers at the hospital and many staff at the hospital came to that program because they were experiencing violence. They were being abused. Yeah. Story_ID: 322570 Speaker 1: Throughout it all you have prepared yourself academically to further deliver a service to battered women. To what extent has your academic preparation, your experience, your passion led to where you are right now, and how do you feel about what you're doing for women in need and families in need? Speaker 2: That's interesting you should say that because I worked with the Council on Battered Women [Atlanta, Georgia] here for four years, then I went back to Chicago [Illinois] for a couple of years, came back here in '94 [1994] and started working for the Department of Family and Children Services [sic. Georgia Division of Family and Children Services], working as a child protective case manager and that was supposed to be an entry level position. I would soon become a supervisor and you know what have you. Never did take a supervisory job. I did case management for six years and adoptions for a couple of years. Right now I'm writing training for child protective service managers, case managers and I'm currently writing family violence training. So and it's real interesting because I just finished writing a curriculum and the statement that was made to me: this sounds like it came from a battered women's advocate. It doesn't sound like it came from a CPS [child protective services] worker. I said well you know what? But it has come full circle because so many children are impacted by the violence that they experience in their homes, and there needs to be made that connection. If you help the mother, you are helping the children. Story_ID: 323216 Speaker 1: And now Ms. McCoy [HistoryMaker Diane McCoy-Lee] you are using your academic training, your experience and your passion to work with DFCS [Georgia Division of Family and Children Services] and other organizations to move things forward in an area where so much help is needed. Share with us some of the things you are doing and some of the issues involved. Speaker 2: Well, right now I'm writing training for case managers and child protective services, and I was recently assigned to write the family violence training. So it's come full circle because I understand the relationship between family violence and child abuse. Recently there was legislation passed in Georgia, as well as other states, that said if a child witnesses family violence, that's a form of child abuse. And it is because it psychologically damages that child. Well there needs to be made that connection to where people understand that when you help a woman whose being abused, you are helping her children. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: And in many states most child protective services organizations have joined forces with the coalitions in that state against domestic violence. We've not done that in Georgia yet, and I'd like to see that collaboration and I'm working with our family violence unit for the state and the Georgia Coalition Against Domestic Violence [GCADV] to hopefully make that collaboration before I leave this position. Speaker 1: Is there anything others can do to help in that effort? Speaker 2: People can go to the website for their state coalitions against domestic violence. Every state has one and read up on it and learn more about the cause and effect of domestic violence, the many ways that women are abused and the cycle that that violence goes through, become more educated about the issue, understand and believe that children are seriously affected by that. There is intergenerational cycle of abuse. I mean children are being taught every day that this is how I'm supposed to behave as a man. I've got a very, very dynamic tape that I use in the training that I wrote that shows how a little boy witnessing his mother being stabbed by his father, grew up to be an abuser. We've got pictures of him as a little boy and how the little boy, he's abusing puppies and grew up to be an abusive man as an adult and that's happening in our society. And it doesn't have to happen. It doesn't have to happen. Speaker 1: Mrs. McCoy-Lee, is there anything else you'd like--well first of all is there a Georgia website that you have committed to memory that you'd like to share with the audience? Speaker 2: I think its www.GADV.com [sic]. I think that's Georgia Coalition Against Domestic Violence, GCADV, I'm sorry, um-hm. Story_ID: 323217 Speaker 1: Is there anything else you'd like to add to or add that we didn't ask regarding your life experience, regarding your training and regarding the things that you and others are doing now to help alleviate family violence? Speaker 2: Well I guess initially I'd like to say that nothing happens by accident. I, I regret that I went through all of that, but I would not have done the work that I've done with battered women had I not experienced it firsthand. I'd like to say that children, families who have children beware of your behavior in front of your children and beware of what you're teaching them. I'd like to say to women that even though you may have a strong, strong religion that teaches you shall obey your husband and cleave to him and what have you. There are a number of bible verses that support men having control over women, and I'm not saying just go out there and be a feminist, but I'm saying do not let anyone abuse you psychologically or physically. Love yourself more than that and there's help out there if you are in that situation. Speaker 1: Why is it important, and I think you already answered this in part, why is it important that you tell your story? What do you want? Speaker 2: Because there are millions of women who have the same story, the same story and so many of them feel as I did, that they're alone, that they're the only people who are experiencing this. They are embarrassed, they are ashamed and they are afraid. And what I want them to know is they don't have to be. They have nothing to be embarrassed about, nothing to be ashamed about. And there is help there for them if they just reach out for it. Story_ID: 323218 Speaker 1: What do you still want to do that you have not yet done? Speaker 2: I'd like to see an end to domestic violence. I'd like to--I plan to work as a volunteer once I retire in that area. I'd like to help with the laws if I can because we still don't have laws to protect women until after the fact. Things have moved along, but not, not to the place where they should be. Speaker 1: You mentioned retirement, you're not considering retiring are you, Ms. McCoy-Lee [HistoryMaker Diane McCoy-Lee] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yes, I am. I am. Speaker 1: Only to continue your ministry, your work it appears. Speaker 2: Absolutely on my terms. Speaker 1: On your terms. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Understand. Is there anything that you have done already that you would have liked to have done differently? Do you have any regrets in terms of, in terms of your life and I understand that the whole issue of abuse, understand how that is something that you would like to have done differently, but in terms of developing the expertise and being able to deliver services to those in need, is there anything that you have done already that you would have liked to have done differently? Speaker 2: In terms of delivering services to, in terms of my work with battered women? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: I don't think so. In my work now, I'd like to see us get much further ahead in making that connection between child abuse and domestic violence, but we got a ways to go here in Georgia. Story_ID: 323219 Speaker 1: Now in terms of the African American community, what are your hopes and what are your concerns for the African American community as a whole? Speaker 2: Well one thing, people feel as if the African Americans have more violence in their homes than anyone else and what people don't understand is that the larger majority of people, African Americans who experience in their homes have to be use public services. So the shelters include them in their statistics. The domestic violence programs include them in their statistics because they intend to use those services, whereas people who are wealthier, don't have to go into a shelter. They can go off to a resort until the bad guys go away; tell the doctor to give them some Valiums so they can help deal with the situation. So you don't get those numbers but it's just as prevalent in white communities, Hispanic communities, Asian communities, as it is in African American communities. And it makes me shudder every day that I open up the newspaper because there are a few days that you can open a newspaper and not see a case where family violence has caused the death of someone either adults, often children. Speaker 1: Is family violence more prevalent nowadays than it was in generations past, if so why? Speaker 2: I don't think it's more prevalent, I think we're more aware of it now. I think there are more people who are admitting this is what's happened to them because they do believe and they do know and they're hearing about services available to them. I think in the past it was a lot more taboo, something that you are just too embarrassed to admit this happened in your home because somehow you felt responsible for it. You're responsible for keeping your family together, maintaining a happy home and admitting that that's going on in your home, is very embarrassing. But people are understanding that it's not their fault. Story_ID: 323220 Speaker 1: What values do you consider most important and why? Speaker 2: Family. Family is, is everything to me and I guess part of the reason why I stayed with that first husband [Barry Brown] was because that was their father. I wanted my children [Tamila Brown Taylor and Barry Brown II] to be raised by their father. That was in my Catholic upbringing. That was very, very important. It was instilled in me. It's my responsibility to keep that family together. I still believe in family but not at the risk of my life or my wellbeing. And my family means everything to me. Speaker 1: You have mentioned first husband, is there a husband now, and if so-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --tell us about him and how you met him and what life is like for you now? Speaker 2: Life is great. I met my current husband as teenager. We went to a prom together. I was not romantically inclined, we were just people who knew each other and went to a prom together. I think he liked me a lot then, but I was in love with my first husband. I didn't see my current husband, Robert [Robert C. Lee], and I didn't see him for, ooh I guess twenty years at least and we lived in the same neighborhood until I had gone through everything that I had went through and was divorced and raising my two children by myself and free from the violence and ran into him and we dated and got married. He's a wonderful guy-- Speaker 1: Great. Speaker 2: --he's wonderful. But he often says you know that first husband spoiled you for anybody else because you just don't take anything (laughter). Speaker 1: Well, we're so happy that things are going great now (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They are. Story_ID: 323221 Speaker 1: How do you want to be remembered, Mrs. McCoy-Lee [HistoryMaker Diane McCoy-Lee]? What do you want people to say about you in years to come after you're gone? Speaker 2: I want people to say that she did the best she could for people that she could. That she tried in whatever ways she could to help people. That though she made mistakes, she gave it her very best. That's what I'd like for them to say. And I'd like for people to realize you know a lot of times you hear about issues such as family violence and because you don't see black faces out there, you don't feel as if we are involved in the making of laws and the establishment of services because I was probably the only person involved in Chicago [Illinois] when I was there. But there are black women who are involved and who are committed and who are working against family violence. Story_ID: 323222 Speaker 1: What message or lessons do you have for your children [Tamila Brown Taylor and Barry Brown II], your grandchildren and the rest of the world? And tell us about your children and grandchildren. Speaker 2: You know I think about last night. I had all my grandchildren here over the weekend-- Speaker 1: And how many grandchildren you have? Speaker 2: --I have six grandchildren. I had five of them here over the weekend for Founder's Day. Speaker 1: And how many children? Speaker 2: I have two children. Speaker 1: Founder's Day in Atlanta [Georgia] that means Founder's Day at? Speaker 2: Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 1: Please continue. Speaker 2: And my grandson [Calvin Taylor II] will hopefully be going to Morehouse. He was accepted to Morehouse next year. He should be going. But my granddaughter asked me last night as I was going through newspaper clippings and pictures for this interview, she said, "Gran, I wanna know what happened? I wanna know, I wanna know about what happened and my grandfather [Barry Brown] what did he do," because she never really knew. So we told her what we thought she could handle last night and let her look at some of the newspaper clippings because she was very concerned, and as to what I would tell my children what I want my grandchildren to know, I think my daughter knows. She is very much an advocate for women and for battered woman. She lived that life with me. She was twelve years old when she was at the shelter. She wrote an article for the shelter newspaper. But I want them to know that that's not appropriate. It's not appropriate. Violence can come in many ways. Abuse comes in many ways, psychological, emotionally as well as physically, and you don't have to take that. And you should not be abusive okay. My son knows I won't tolerate it. You don't even look like you're about to (laughter)-- Speaker 1: Understand. Speaker 2: And my grandchildren as well. Story_ID: 323223 Speaker 1: Why do you think history, HistoryMaker McCoy [HistoryMaker Diane McCoy-Lee], why do you think history is important? Speaker 2: You don't know where you're going if you don't know where you've been. I think my history is very rich. Now like I said if it hadn't been for my mother [Dimples Broadway Hester] being the strong woman that she was and saying against all odds, "I'm gonna raise these three girls in the middle of this project [Ida B. Wells Homes, Chicago, Illinois] by myself from a wheelchair," you can't grow up in that environment without feeling a sense of strength as a black woman. And I think that was that upbringing that made me feel as if there's not much I couldn't do and that's why I guess I didn't die in that situation where I could have and I think that's why I was able to come out of that situation with my mental abilities intact and with a commitment to helping other women who are in that situation. Story_ID: 323224 Speaker 1: You've answered this to a large extent, but let me just ask pointedly. What do you want your legacy, what do you want your legacy to be? Speaker 2: I'd like for my legacy to be that I experienced family violence to the greatest degree and that I used that experience to provide services for women who are experiencing the same thing that I did, the women and children. That's what I'd like for my legacy to be. Speaker 1: Thank you HistoryMaker-- Speaker 2: Thank you. Speaker 1: --[HistoryMaker] Diane McCoy-Lee. Speaker 2: Thank you. Speaker 1: Thank you for the lessons that you've shared with us. Thank you for being so gracious as to share your time with us. Speaker 2: Thank you. Speaker 1: Thank you, God bless you. Story_ID: 323225 Speaker 1: This is a picture in approximately 1982 of Tammy [Tamila Brown Taylor], my daughter Tammy and I. I made her prom dress when she was graduating from high school, Cathedral High School on the North Side of Chicago [Illinois]. I was very proud of her dress as she was. We designed it and I made it for her. Speaker 2: That's a picture of my mother Dimples Hester [Dimples Broadway Hester], my sister Lolita [Lolita McCoy Foxworth] is to her right. That's my oldest sister and I'm on her left. That's approximately four years ago when we went back to Chicago to celebrate Mother's Day and my mother's birthday with her. Speaker 1: That's my youngest sister Denise [Denise McCoy Hardin] who lives in Arizona with her first grandbaby Caleb [ph.]. And that was taken maybe two years ago here in Atlanta [Georgia], 2004 here in Atlanta. Speaker 2: That's my Girl Scout troop in Chicago, Illinois. The date was between '72 [1972] and '74 [1974]. I had a troop of a total of twenty-one girls. I kept that Girl Scout--I started that Brownie troop actually and I kept that troop for two years when I fled Chicago going to Denver [Colorado]. I had to leave my Girl Scout troop and that was a very sad thing that I had to do. Speaker 1: That's a picture of my graduation from Chicago State University [Chicago, Illinois] in 1981. I attended Chicago State University, University Without Walls [program]. I already had two years of college credits and the remaining two years at Chicago State was spent giving speeches and doing work with battered women for which I got college credits for. I ended up with a degree in social work from Chicago State University in 1981. Speaker 2: That's my granddaughter Taylor Bolden [ph.]. She's the only child of my stepdaughter Tiffany [ph.] who is now deceased. She lives here in Atlanta. Taylor is ten years old. Speaker 1: That's my husband Robert Lee [Robert C. Lee] and I attending a prom back in I think 1965, St. Elizabeth High School in Chicago, Illinois. Speaker 2: That's a picture of me I think receiving a top teen award [Junior Citizen], competed with all of the park districts in the City of Chicago and for Madden Park [Madden Park Homes, Chicago, Illinois] in Ida B. Wells [Ida B. Wells Homes, Chicago, Illinois]. I got the top teen award. I think it came with a monetary award of a hundred dollars or so. I was the first black person to receive that award in the City of Chicago. Speaker 1: That's a picture of our forensics team from Loretto Academy [Chicago, Illinois]. That's Sister Peter Claver in the back, the nun in the back. I'm on the second row, second from the right. Those are some of our other team members on the forensics team at Loretto Academy. Speaker 2: That's a picture of my mother. My mother is on the far left at the bottom, Dimples Hester. She is working with other handicapped people for handicapped rights in Chicago, Illinois. It's because of my mother that I grew up to be as determined as I am today because she was determined. All the stores downtown needs to have access for handicapped people, and they did not have it so she fought until handicapped people had more rights in the city and access. Speaker 1: That's a picture of a group of teens that I worked with for UNICEF [United Nations International Children's Emergency Fund] at the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] in Chicago. Story_ID: 323226 Speaker 1: That's a picture of a Junior Citizen contest that I was a participant in. The first year that I competed, I came in second place. I was I think the first black person to compete in that junior citizen contest. The second year I came in first place. They told me to come back and try again. Speaker 2: That's another picture of our forensics team from Loretto Academy [Chicago, Illinois]. That's me on the left kneeling down. That picture was taken approximately 1963. Speaker 1: This is a family picture. That's my mother, Dimples Hester [Dimples Broadway Hester], formerly Dimples McCoy seated and I am in her lap on the left. My father, Charles McCoy, is seated holding my sister Lolita Foxworth [Lolita McCoy Foxworth]. Behind my father is my paternal grandmother, Cora McCoy, and my paternal grandfather, Ivy McCoy. Behind my mother on the left is my maternal grandfather, Horner Broadway, and my maternal grandmother, Rosalee Broadway. Speaker 2: That's a picture of my sister Lolita and I. I was probably four and she was five. My mother always dressed us alike, having our birthday parties at the same time and what have you. Speaker 1: That's a picture of my two sisters and I. And that picture had to be taken in the '80s [1980s]. That's my sister Lolita Foxworth on the left. I'm in the middle and my sister Denise Hardin [Denise McCoy Hardin] on the right. Speaker 2: That's a high school photograph of one of the many speech contests that I entered. Our forensics team traveled throughout the State of Illinois competing with other private high schools. That was probably taken 1962 when I was doing 'A Raisin in the Sun' [Lorraine Hansberry] an excerpt from 'A Raisin in the Sun.' Speaker 1: That's a grammar school from--graduation picture from grammar school Chicago Holy Angels [Holy Angels Catholic School, Chicago, Illinois] in approximately 1961. Speaker 2: This photo was taken probably 1978. I was still a resident at the homeless shelter with my children. I gave the keynote address for the first conference against domestic violence in the State of Illinois to a gathering of approximately three hundred people. Speaker 1: That's the audience and at that gathering the title of my speech was On My Own and Still A Victim [ph.]. Speaker 2: This is a picture of my husband and I at our wedding, June 1960--1985 marriage to my husband Robert Lee [Robert C. Lee]. That's his brother to your right. My daughter Tammy [Tamila Brown Taylor] is to my right. My niece Melody [ph.] is in front and my son Barry [Barry Brown II] is in front. Speaker 1: That's a letter that I wrote to then President Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.]. I think the date of the letter is 1978. I was a resident in the homeless shelter with my two children and at the present, at the time that I wrote the letter, I was sitting in the office of public aid wondering why I had to apply for public aid and I had a job but I couldn't go to it because there was no one to protect me from my husband [Barry Brown]. Speaker 2: This is a letter that I received from the White House informing me that they were sorry to hear about my situation and that they would put me in contact with people who could help me. And in fact they did connect me to the witness, victim witness group [Victim Witness Services] who provided a great deal of assistance to me at that time. Speaker 1: That's a picture of my husband Robert and I that was taken a few months ago, this is 2006 at a recent cruise that we took to Jamaica. Speaker 2: This is a picture of my son Barry, his wife Stacy [ph.], his daughter, that's his wife Stacy in the green, that's his daughter Jasmine [ph.]. This picture was taken last year 2005. Jasmine's twelve, Justice [ph.] the little one is four. Speaker 1: This picture was taken last year this time, that's 2005 at the Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] Founder's [Founder's Day] occasion when my son, oldest grandson Calvin II [Calvin Taylor II] on my left, my daughter Tammy is in the middle and her husband Calvin Taylor, Sr. a graduate of Morehouse was taken last year. My son, my grandson was just accepted to Morehouse and will be attending next year. Speaker 2: This is my daughter's family Camron [ph.] on the left, Carson [ph.] in the middle and Calvin on the right. Speaker 1: This is a newspaper article from the Parade magazine and the Sunday newspaper in 1981 when I became employed at Jackson Park Hospital [Jackson Park Hospital and Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois] and stated a program for battered women as they came into the emergency room. That was the first program for battered women in the State of Illinois based in a hospital where women would come in and once we found out they were being abused, we referred them to shelters and services from the emergency room...