 Story_ID: 10327 Speaker 1: So if you would just state your name and spell it. Speaker 2: Haki Madhubuti, H-A-K-I M-A-D-H-U-B-U-T-I. Story_ID: 10328 Speaker 1: If you would just say what your, you know, favorite color is. Speaker 2: I don't know if I have a favorite color. I mean, there are colors, I guess, more than anything else. I'm more geared toward the earth tones. You see, and so there's not a favorite color. Speaker 1: Favorite phrase? Speaker 2: For me at this age a favorite phrase would be "no." Speaker 1: Favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Always summertime. I'm a sun person. Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination or favorite place in the world? Speaker 2: Well, probably my home. Doing the kind of work that we do, my wife [Safisha Madhubuti] and I, we haven't had a chance to really travel and do vacation stuff. Story_ID: 10329 Speaker 1: I would just like you to talk about, you know, growing up in those early years and what they were like. Speaker 2: Sure. Well, I was born in Little Rock, Arkansas and--in 1942, and you know, America was America apartheid, in a difficult situation because I do not know if my mother [Maxine Graves Lee] and my father [Jimmy L. Lee] were married. I know when I was born, I was born in a home with a midwife, and my father was off gambling. My father was a street person--I mean, serious street--and I was supposed to be named after him, and that didn't happen because he wasn't around, and so my mother--I guess she asked one of the midwives for a sheet with names on it--and this is how I visualize it. I think she asked them to put the sheet on the wall and give her a dart, and she threw the dart at the sheet and it landed on "Don," okay? Now L--my middle initial was for Luther named after my grandfather, her father, and Lee is after my father's name so maybe they were married. But we left Arkansas before I was one year old and landed up in Michigan, okay, Inkster, Michigan, and later on to Detroit [Michigan], but they stayed together probably maybe a year. I'm not sure. I was too young, but I've never known him to live in a house with my mother. Our early years in Detroit were very, very difficult. My mother was not an educated woman. She could read, she could write, she could compute, but she did not have a full high school education. My father was highly intelligent because he was able to basically earn his living off the streets. I've never known him to work for white folks at all, and when he got to the city, he went right into the underground, okay, dealing numbers, had nightspots. And my mother was a woman who was unusually beautiful. Her beauty was not only external but internal. She was physically beautiful, but also she had a very giving heart. And she was so beautiful, I would see--I would just--she would take my--I have a sister. She's a year and a half younger than I, and we would walk, and I would see--I mean, men would literally just stop their cars to--like we were standing and waiting on buses and offer her rides. This is how striking her beauty was, and I think that it was both a prayer in some cases and a curse in other cases. Story_ID: 10330 Speaker 1: My early recollections of my mother [Maxine Graves Lee]--I lost my mother when I was sixteen. She OD'd [overdosed on drugs]. She ended up an addict, but prior to that, because of her lack of education and because we were in a very strange city, Detroit, Michigan, the only jobs she could acquire were do day work, clean up white folks' homes, cashier at grocery stores, and then finally a barmaid. And at that time in the '40s [1940s] Detroit was very hot in terms of clubs, you know, Sonny Wilson's and all of these clubs, she worked at them. And so by working in these clubs she immediately became part of that nightlife. She was Miss Barmaid in 19--what--48, something like that, and so she would attract a different kind of men, okay, but prior to her even going into that difficult nightlife she worked as a janitor in one of the apartment houses owned by one of the big Baptist ministers, and this guy was, you know, pretty sweet on her--the only reason I'm going into this is because all of this really shapes my life--and of course, the minister was married, and he gave us the basement apartment, but apart of her servicing him, she had to also clean up the apartment building, and some of the most painful times of my life to see her carrying these garbage cans down from the third floor. And I was still--what--eight, nine years old, ten years old, and my sister and I, we would try to help as much as we could to clean the building, but to see this guy come in there and demand sex, demand, you know, all kinds of other things played very heavily on me as a young boy. And we moved out of that situation, and then she moved right into the nightlife because of her beauty. She could--I mean, she was just such a stunningly pretty woman. But, getting caught in that nightlife, started drinking rather heavily and began to move into drugs and as a result of that moved into prostitution. And I always say that I grew up around pimps and whores slamming Cadillac [automobile] doors, you know, on the lower east side of Detroit, Michigan, which is true, you see? Her major friends at the point I became a teenager were basically other prostitutes and other women in the--that worked the nightlife. And these were good women for the most part, and obviously I could not distinguish whether they were, you know, the type of women that my sister needed to pattern herself after, but what happened is my sister ended up becoming pregnant at fourteen. Story_ID: 10331 Speaker 1: [My sister] had her first child at fourteen, her second child at sixteen, her third child at eighteen, and fourth child. I mean, all the way up to around twenty-three, twenty-four years old she had six children and never been married. So all this was on me as a young man, a young boy trying to negotiate my way in the world. And when she became impregnated with her first child, this kind of threw my mother [Maxine Graves Lee] over the edge, you see. And this was a time when it was not acceptable for women to have children out of wedlock, and she had been impregnated by one of the local gang members. This guy was about twenty-one years old. My sister was fourteen, and so what does, you know, one do? I mean, what--and for me being the man of the family, I went looking for him, you see, and of course, when I found him, you know, I hit him, and he and several other people hit me back and, you know, beat me almost within an inch of my life which, of course, had another profound effect on me. And when I came home all bloodied up, my mother beat me again for getting beat, you see. Story_ID: 10332 Speaker 1: So during the same period [1950s], my mother [Maxine Graves Lee] had asked me to go to the Detroit Public Library [Detroit, Michigan] to check out a book by Richard Wright [author], and the title of the book was 'Black Boy,' and I refused to go primarily because I hated being black, you see. This was the problem of being raised in apartheid America that all the images, all the symbols, all my teachers, all those symbols of important were basically white, and every place I faced them, they were telling us that we were less than nothing, and so when my mother asked me to go check out Richard Wright's book, I refused, but eventually I did go. Didn't go to the librarian because at that time librarians were white. The Detroit Public Library [Detroit, Michigan] was less than about, maybe twenty-five blocks from our house, and I walked over there and found the book on the shelf, put it to my chest, walked to an un-peopled section of the library, and sat down and began to read. And for the first time in my life as I read 'Black Boy' by Richard Wright, I was reading words that were not insulting to my own personhood, words that in many cases were very liberating because I could identify with Richard Wright who was actually the protagonist of 'Black Boy'--it's semi-autobiographical. And, he was, you know, in the South, and I'm up in Detroit, but I could feel what he was feeling, you see, and checked the book out, went home, in the room that I shared with my sister read the book all night and finished it the next day. Now I was--what--fourteen, fifteen years old, the first book I had read by a black person, and it did not change me, but it forced me to begin to question the world differently, and as a result of 'Black Boy' by Richard Wright, I began to check out other books that he had published at that time, and he turned me on. After reading 'White Man, Listen!,' he turned me on to other books so I began to read, you know, Chester Himes [author] and Langston Hughes [poet, author], found Margaret Walker Alexander [author, poet], and eventually found Gwendolyn Brooks [poet] and Claude McKay [poet] and Jean Toomer [poet], and so this literature--for me it was fundamentally liberating because I had no idea that black folk had created a body of literature because at that time--this was in the '40s [1940s] and early '50s [1950s]--there weren't any black studies or nothing like that, and so as I began to read these books, I began to collect them, and being very poor--I mean, I think that in many cases our family defined poverty--a single mother, you know, working the nightlife, not having too much of anything, and so I would buy my clothes from the Salvation Army, second-hand stores, from Chinese laundry. I would buy my clothes, my shirts, my pants. It was a very painful time and a very difficult time and--but it was a defining time for me because the literature said that there's much more out there. There's a larger world out there. Story_ID: 10333 Speaker 1: And so my mother [Maxine Graves Lee]--my mother actually was murdered, and I found her. It was very difficult because being a very young man, I just could not phantom why she had to die so young, and when we had her funeral--which I received my first new suit--I didn't wear a tie because I just did not want to honor the situation, and I did not speak, and I listened to people lie about her, and my sister was with her first child. I left Detroit [Michigan]. I got on a Greyhound bus and came here to Chicago [Illinois]. I lived in a YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] on the South Side of Chicago and went to Dunbar High School [Chicago, Illinois], finished high school, and ended up in the military at seventeen years old. I was hard as rock. I was like stone, and the only thing that really kind of, say, played into kind of a human side or spiritual side was the literature, you see. Understand just like most black folks in this country, I was raised in the church. I was raised in a Baptist church. I was raised in a Methodist church, AME [African Methodist Episcopal] church, and the grandfather on my father's side was a minister, okay, and so I had all that playing, but I saw so much corruption in the church and especially with my mother because all of the ministers were hitting on my mother, all right. And so I just kind of just put that aside, even ended up in the Catholic church for a minute, you see, and was consider--I mean, strong--I had--thinking about even becoming a Catholic because I was looking for something quiet, really, really quiet in my life because I was--in my life it was party every weekend. Every weekend it was party, party, party, and I saw at one level the Catholic church being a sense of order and sense of structure which there wasn't any in my life, not any structure at all, and I left the Catholic church primarily because one of the priests hit on me, and as a result of that I said, "I can't--I'm not dealing with this," and I just left and, of course, ended up here in Chicago. Story_ID: 10334 Speaker 1: When I graduated from [Dunbar] High School in Chicago [Illinois] here, I was six foot one, about 131 pounds, looked like a walking skeleton, and I couldn't get a job anywhere, and so I said "what I will do, I will try to go into the military" so I said "I'll join the [US] Air Force." So I went down to register with the draft and tried to get into the Air Force and, you know, pass the mental exam, the IQ [intelligence quotient] and all that stuff, but I couldn't pass the physical. I mean, the doctors that measured my heart basically said that I had a heart murmur. They gave me a sheet of paper and said "you don't even have to go into the military at all." Now for a young man who didn't have any options, I was crushed because the military was basically a poor man's job, you know, a poor boy's job, and so what happened, I was reading the '[Chicago] Defender' [newspaper] one day, and there was this ad saying "looking for salesman," you see, "to see the United States and to come down to this hotel"somewhere around 63rd and Cottage Grove [Chicago]. So I went down there, and a black man, rather handsome, well-dressed black man, and a woman were recruiting young people to go through Illinois into Missouri selling magazines so I said "okay, I'm ready. Let me go and get out of Chicago," And so we ended up in Galesburg, Illinois, I believe, and I was going through the community, black communities generally, you know, making my spiel. You sell these magazines, and you basically lie that you're working your way through college or university. Now, no one ever talked to me about going to a university or doing college work, and so I had to really kind of get the instructions from this man to tell me how to deal with this so I said "okay, I'll pick Howard University [Washington, D.C.]" since it was basically the capstone of black education at that time. And I had read Sterling Brown [poet], and Sterling Brown was teaching at Howard. Rayford Logan [historian]--I had read Rayford Logan's work, and he was teaching at Howard University, and of course, I had read E. Franklin Frazier [sociologist], and he was, you know, teaching at Howard--'Ain't No Black Bourgeoisie' and others--and so I knocked on the door down in Galesburg, and a black man answered the door, and I went into my spiel. Boom--"I'm trying to work my way through Howard University"--boom. Before I could get to the next line, he said "I graduated from Howard," okay, you know. "Come on in. Let's talk." Well, within--I guess two or three minutes, he realized that I was lying, that I had never even been to Washington D.C., let alone Howard University. But rather than jump into my chest, he said you know--just said "well, look, let me talk to you." He said "are you hungry?" I said "yes, I am," and his wife, you know, made me a sandwich and gave me some milk. And he said "well, look, the best thing you can do for yourself is to acquire a university education," and I was very clear with him. I said "I'm poor; I don't have any money. That's the only reason I'm out here with these strangers selling these magazines in a place I've never been is because I don't have family. I don't have money," and he said "well, I know it's difficult now, but think about community colleges, you know. Think about correspondence courses, think about anything, but just even one course at a time, but think about a university education," and he took a subscription to 'Jet' [magazine], to 'Ebony' [magazine], and I think maybe 'Life' [magazine], all right, and then he did something which no one had ever done with me. He gave me a twenty dollar bill and said "put this in your pocket and keep it for an emergency." He said "don't use it. Just use it for emergency." And I left and got back with the group, went on down to East St. Louis [Illinois]. I got very ill, and the people I was traveling with left me in the hotel, okay. Now I had--what I was traveling with, I had everything I had in my life I was traveling with. I had my new suit I had for my mother's funeral. I had an overcoat. I had a flugelhorn. I thought I was going to be a trumpet player until I heard Louis Armstrong [trumpeter]--I really, really listened to him--and I had my slide rule, thought I was going to be a halfway mathematician, okay--this is before computers obviously. And since these people left me, all I had was the $20 and my possessions so I ended up going to the poor man's bank, which is basically a pawnshop. I pawned everything, paid the hotel bill off, and went into St. Louis [Missouri] and, you know, found my favorite Y[MCA, Young Men's Christian Association] again, and I said this time I'll try to go into the [US] Army. Story_ID: 10335 Speaker 1: Okay, I couldn't get into the [US] Air Force so I--you know, got through the mental exams and all of that IQ [intelligence quotient] stuff and went to have the physical in this large gym, and I looked around--see, one thing I learned growing up, you learn how to lie. You know, you learn how to rap. You learn how to, you know, put on different kinds of faces, and so I looked around the room and saw these doctors, and I looked for the youngest doctor and went to that person, and he checked my heart and asked me to do some pushups and asked me "was anything wrong? " I said "well, I'm just nervous, the first time I've been around this many white people in my life," okay. Anyway, I got in the [US] Army, okay, so I'm on my way to basic training, Fort Leonard Wood, Missouri, and I'm reading Paul Robeson, okay, because I kept this love of reading, and so with all my--I had my books with me which--about eight or nine books I was carrying with me and my clothes and etcetera. I didn't pawn my books--well, they wouldn't take the books anyway. So I'm reading Paul Robeson [entertainer, author], and about 6:00 in the morning we arrive in October--we arrive down in Fort Leonard Wood, Missouri. This white thirty-five, forty-year-old drill sergeant barks at--you know, "all you," you know, "get off the bus. Get off the bus." We jump off the bus, and I got my book in my hand, and he sees Paul Robeson's big, black, magnificent face on the book, and he looks at the book, and he barks in my face, you know, "what's your Negro mind doing reading this black communist?" Now, this is the first time I heard a double negative used so creatively, okay, so I couldn't say anything because he snatched the book out of my hand, and he said "okay, all you women up against the bus." Now there aren't any women there. These are men so I'm saying "deprogramming's starting early," okay. "Up against the bus," and so we jump up against the bus, and here I'm thinking "what am I doing here? This man got my book. I mean, he's already, kind of dissed me already," and he held my book over his head and commenced to tear the pages out of the book, and give a page to each one of the recruits, and said "use this for toilet paper" so at this point I don't know what to do. I mean, I'm in the Army now. I can't go AWOL [absent without leave], all right, Story_ID: 10336 Speaker 1: But luckily I was reading a book by a man by the name of John Oliver Killens [author], and the title of the book was 'And Then We Heard the Thunder,' which was about black men in European's war on the world number two, commenting on World War II, and what I learned from John Killens was that when you're outnumbered, keep your mouth shut. You know, think about your options and, you know, move accordingly. And so as I stood there that cold morning in October of 1960, I thought about several things--one, that I would never, never again put myself in the position where I would not be proud of who I am, see. I decided that I'm not only going to adopt blackness, that I'm going to be black, and that I'm not going to ever, ever make an excuse for being black, okay. Two was that if I was going to be a black or a man of African ancestry, what does that really mean if it doesn't have substance behind it, and the only way it could have substance is that I have to do some serious studying. And I decided to put myself on a re-education program, and from that point on I began to read, to study, to--everything I could find written by black folks. And luckily because of the reading I had done before, W.E.B. [William Edward Burghardt] DuBois [scholar, social scientist, political activist], was like at the top of my list, and so I began to slowly but very deliberately go through the work of W.E.B. DuBois, you know, starting with '[The] Souls of Black Folk,' 'Black Reconstruction,' his book on--'The World in Africa.' I mean, he was very important. DuBois was very important, and also DuBois was important because he was light-skinned like me because there's this ambiguity of being this color and, of course, claiming blackness, claiming Africa, and what did that really mean for a person of this skin shade. And so I put myself on this re-education program. And the third thing which was critical and which, of course, has stayed with me until today, I really realized the importance of ideas--that ideas and the creators of ideas around the world--we all tap dance to somebody's ideas. If it's one of the Christians, an idea. If it's one of the communists, an idea. If you're Marxist, it's an idea. If you're a Sikh or a Buddhist or a Christian or a Muslim, those are ideas, and ideas are powerful. In fact, if you remember the Sugar Hill Gang [rap group], well, "these are ideas," and so I decided that morning, maybe not as strategically as I'm laying it out now, but I decided that I was gonna to give my life to ideas. I was gonna become part of the idea business. I didn't know how, but I knew "I'm not gonna spend my life tap dancing to these people's wishes. I'm not gonna be digging ditches all my life. I'm not gonna"--I mean, but I had to do a lot of this to get to where I am today, but the point I'm trying to make is I knew where I was going at eighteen years old. I just realized that, and that these ideas were critical, important, and so my life had been formed by supreme poverty, had been formed by apartheid in its rawest form, had been formed by the underground economy where our people had to work and most certainly my mother and my father had to work, had been formed by the type of conditions poverty imposes on people, especially in terms of my sister getting pregnant so early and then children after that all the way up to early twenties, had been informed by me as a young man having to go into the military just to stay alive, you see, and so this literature was critical. I can't even began to express to you how important the literature was because the literature gave me a way out. It's something that said to me essentially that we do have men and women who think. We do have men and women who are not partying every weekend. We do have men and women who essentially are searching the universe for answers, you see, and so putting myself on this re-education program, I discovered the Evelyn Wood [speed] reading program, and during that period, Evelyn Wood was very popular, and I took the course. It was a correspondence course. I learned to read rather fast and to read with a critical eye, and I began to basically devour close to a book a day, and I did that for the two years and ten months that I was in the military. An awful lot happened in the military, but that would take another whole book for me to go through all that, but for the most part the military was very beneficial for me because there was not a war, and the slogan or the motto of the United States Army at that time was "hurry up and wait," you see, and so rather than wait, I waited in the libraries, and I began to systematically collect books. That's when I started my real serious collection of African American literature and just began to study. I spent my evenings studying. While other brothers were basically chasing women, I would chase books. I would chase these books, and every place I was stationed I would begin to just spend most of my time in used bookstores, and I'd discovered used bookstores primarily by going to Salvation Army stores where I would, you know, I would buy my clothes as a kid. When they--in every Salvation Army store there was always their book section, and I would begin to pick up first editions of, say, you know, Richard Wright's [author] books and Ralph Ellison's [author] books for twenty-five or thirty cent, and so the logical extension from the Salvation Army stores was bookstores. They didn't have a lot of new bookstores during this period. This was still in the early '60s [1960s], and so I would find these used bookstores, and I would just spend my time in them buying books and studying, and I decided that I was going to go to college. Story_ID: 10337 Speaker 1: I began to take college-level courses in the military, you see, and finally when I got out in August of 1963, I got an early out to go to school. And in September of 1963 the second thing that happened that changed my life was the murder of the four little girls in Birmingham, Alabama, because I could not understand why this country was killing our children. And when those four little girls were murdered in Birmingham, Alabama, in a church praying to a God who didn't even look like them, then I realized that I had to make a choice, and the choice was very clear to me. The choice was to continue to join America and to play the game like everybody else--like everything's all right, and just when something affected you personally, then you'd talk about racism, you see. But when I saw what was happening because--I had even tried to organize in the military, you see, and got in a lot of difficulty as a result of that--but when those four little girls were murdered, the choice for me was not a choice. It was almost like a demand. "Here you've been trained to be a killer for the last two years and ten months. What are you going to do?" And I decided to work in the liberation struggle, you see. Now obviously I had to work another job--they only take--to earn a living, but I spent every hour, minute of my time working with the liberation struggle here in the City of Chicago [Illinois]. I worked with CORE [Congress of Racial Equality]. I worked with SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee], worked with SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference], worked primarily with the Black Arts movement, the Black Empowerment movement and, you know, Operation Breadbasket, you know, before [Rev.] Jesse [Jackson] became "Jesse." I worked with Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr] here in the city trying to open up the West Side so I was involved in all that primarily as a foot soldier and--but the persons who had the major impact on my life, and I'll stop after this, are in this order--Malcolm X, El-Hajj Malik Shabazz. He was the first black man that I had seen who would stand up to white folks and tell them the truth without tap dancing, rubbing his belly, and scratching his head. Story_ID: 10338 Speaker 1: The people that had the greatest influence on me are Malcolm X, El-Hajj Malik El-Shabazz. Who at time had left the Nation of Islam, and the reason Malcolm was so important is because he's the first black man, especially at a national level, that spoke out against racism and white supremacy directly to white men without, you know, tap dancing, acting silly. Not only a man who was seeking the truth within the context of the wider world but also trying to, at some point, reconcile his life among the lies that he was living within the context of the Nation of Islam. And I'm sure that Malcolm knew that once he decided to leave the Nation of Islam that his days were numbered, and that type of bravery, that type of commitment to truth meant a great deal to me. And when he was murdered, when he was assassinated, it affected me. It affected me a great deal. It really hurt a great deal to the point where I'm very close to the family today. I was very close to Betty Shabazz [wife of Malcolm X], and so the Shabazz family is like an extended family of my own. Story_ID: 10339 Speaker 1: The next person or persons who were critical in my early life were mentors. I never met Malcolm, but Dr. Margaret Burroughs and Charlie Burroughs [co-founders of the DuSable Museum of African American History]. When I was in the military, I was stationed in a missile base out in Arlington Heights, Illinois, and again reading and trying to find my life. "What am I going to do with my life?" I began to go down to the DuSable Museum. Now the DuSable Museum of African American History--at that time it was like Negro history, all right--but it was located in 3806 South Michigan Avenue [Chicago, Illinois] right in Margaret Burroughs' and Charlie Burroughs' home, and I was really very impressed with this, that this couple--she's an artist. He was a writer. Charlie Burroughs had been trained in the USSR [Union of Soviet Socialist Republics]. I mean, he has education. He had been raised in the USSR, spoke Russian fluently. On the second floor of the museum was where they lived, their home. They had one of the best libraries I have ever come across. They opened it up to me without asking for ID [identification], all right, and so they kind of accepted me as part of their extended family. And so between 19--I guess '61 [1961] for about two or three years I worked as a volunteer in the museum, and what I saw and which was critical to me was how much of themselves they put into building that museum. They didn't have any grants, didn't have any money, didn't have people telling them what they need to do or should do. They just said this is what we're going to do and began to do that, and what was important is that when people of prominence would come from out of town, they would always stop by the museum so I would meet some of these people, and so Charlie Burroughs introduced me to Russian literature, and I began to read, you know, [Fyodor] Dostoyevsky and [Leo] Tolstoy, [Vladimir] Mayakovsky and all the Russian writers, poets, and [Boris] Pasternak, and as a result of that, again it just continued to widen my whole horizon, and we became very close friends. Story_ID: 10340 Speaker 1: The next person was Dudley Randall. Dudley Randall was the founder of Broadside Press of Detroit, Michigan, and he had founded Broadside Press in 1966, and he and [Dr] Margaret [Burroughs, artist, educator, institution builder] were close friends, and he was at that time--see, Broadside Press was publishing poems on sheets of paper, fine paper, and that's why it was called Broadside Press, but he decided to move into book form, and his first book was actually 'Point Counterpoint' with Dudley Randall and Margaret Danner, a fine poet herself. And so when he came to Chicago [Illinois], I asked him would he consider publishing a book of mine? I had published my first book, as a result of the urging of Margaret Burroughs, myself which was 'Think Black.' That was 1966. In 'Think Black' we had pooled the poems together and took them to a printer on the West Side of Chicago, printed about 600 copies, and I would just stand on corners and go to rallies and wherever there were demonstrations. I would sell a book for a dollar a hit, and I had learned this from Margaret Burroughs. You know, you just do what you feel is necessary, and you do it, and I did. I sold about 600 books in a week, and so I went back to press, and then when Dudley Randall came to town, I asked him if he would consider publishing my next book, which was 'Black Pride,' and I asked him would he publish it and would he consider writing the introduction for it, which he did, and that came out in 1968. Now in the meantime, after Dudley Randall, I had met Hoyt Fuller, Hoyt W. Fuller, who was critical in this whole scheme of things. He was critical in our history and most certainly our literary history. Hoyt W. Fuller was the managing editor of 'Negro Digest' which eventually became 'Black World' magazine, which was the most influential monthly magazine published by black folks. And he was the first that I could say "international" black man I ever met: urbane, college-educated, had traveled around much of the world, had traveled extensively in Africa and Europe and the Caribbean, was a man who had read, I thought, more than I had, you see--he had read the literature--and he was an editor, you see. And we started--with Valerie Ward [Val Gray Ward, theater founder] and others, we started the OBAC, Organization of Black American Culture, okay, and Hoyt Fuller became our mentor in the writing workshop part of it, and I and Carolyn Rodgers [poet], Johari Amini [poet], Sam Greenlee [writer, poet], and many, many others came through that workshop so Hoyt Fuller was like the next level. Story_ID: 10341 Speaker 1: Now during this period, I met Gwendolyn Brooks [poet] so Gwendolyn Brooks--I met her down in Woodlawn [Chicago, Illinois neighborhood]. She was teaching members of the Blackstone Rangers [Chicago gang] to write poetry, and we had heard about her in the OBAC [Organization of Black American Culture] workshop, and I and some of the writers said "let's go on down and visit Gwendolyn Brooks. I mean, she's in, you know, our community." We didn't know she lived right in the community. Everybody had heard of Gwendolyn Brooks, but we didn't know anything about her. We had read her work and just all admired her. And so I and about three or four other writers walked in there and began to sit down and listen to Gwendolyn Brooks. Well, that went on for awhile, and she started the Gwendolyn Brooks Workshop in her home. At that time she lived right around the corner from where we were located at that time. She lived at seventy--7428 South Evans Avenue [Chicago], and so we started having the workshop in her home, but we became very, very close friends to where we are today [1999] she's like a surrogate, you know, a mother to me. Story_ID: 10342 Speaker 1: And so those people [mentors] were critical in terms of my maturation and in terms of my direction, and so if you notice out of the people that I've mentioned, they're all thinkers. They're all very serious about black struggle. Half of them are institution builders, okay, and so the steps I took in my life were quite logical. When I started Third World Press in 1967, I lived in Englewood [Chicago, Illinois neighborhood] at that time in a basement apartment about the size of, you know, this table back here that I shared with other animals, you know, and I was at that time attending Wilson Junior College [now Kennedy-King College, Chicago, Illinois] and so I asked Johari Amini [poet] and Carolyn Rodgers [poet] to come onboard. "Let's"--you know, "come on and help me with this press, this Third World Press," and we started with $400 and a mimeograph machine, and that's how we, you know, began to move, but I would not have started that press if I had not seen what Dudley Randall [publisher] had done, what Margaret Burroughs [artist, educator, institution builder] and Charlie Burroughs [writer] had done, the kind of human kindness that Gwendolyn Brooks [poet] had in her heart, the type of work that Hoyt [W.] Fuller [journalist, editor] was doing in terms of trying to build 'Negro Digest,' 'Black World' magazine so all of that was very important, and most certainly Malcolm X was always talking about self-reliance, about "do-for-self" that he had learned from Elijah Muhammad and the Nation of Islam. Story_ID: 10343 Speaker 1: The one thing I found curious was how was your mother [Maxine Graves Lee] aware enough to go tell you to go read 'Black Boy' [by Richard Wright]? I mean, what was it? An assignment? And so what? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: How would--? Speaker 2: Well, at that time Richard Wright [author] was probably the best known black writer in the country, you see. His 'Native Son' was the first black book to be part of the Book of the Month Club selection, and 'Black Boy' was hitting the charts also, and of course, he was being hounded by HUAC [House Committee on Un-American Activities] and hounded out of the country because of his left leanings, and so he was in the news, and my mother was a reader that--I mean, she had read Chester Himes [author]. I remember her buying Chester Himes' 'Cast the First Stone.' If you know anything about Himes, that book was about women in the life, okay, and so I can, you know, give credit to her for introducing me to Chester Himes and to Richard Wright. So I think that's the primary reason. It was not like she was in any reading groups or she was talking to other women that read a lot. It was that in her spare time, basically during the days when she didn't have to work--she worked nights--most times she would read, and that's how I came upon the literature. Speaker 1: And what do you think--? Why does reading--why did it attract you at that time? You know, I mean, why did it attract you? Speaker 2: Well, we didn't have television. Television was out, but--we couldn't afford it, and our radio was always in hock, you know, and so there was really not that much for us to do, you see, other than in terms of trying to entertain ourselves. And so reading and most certainly literature about oneself became increasingly important when I was trying to find these answers, you know, trying to answer the questions of not only "who am I" but "why are we here," and "why are we so poor," and "why is it that we have to go through this" when I can clearly see that there's another whole element in the community, mainly white folks, who are doing very well, especially in Detroit [Michigan]. You know, they had the--this was where the automobile industry was, and you had, you know, ostentatious wealth, and then so for me the literature was like an escape, all right? I did not find it necessarily at that time in the church. For awhile I was in the Boy Scouts [of America], but that didn't really work to really kind of--it didn't capture me as a young man, and so the literature--and I guess the other part of it, I was a loner, you know. At that time I was trying to play trumpet and into the arts. I felt the arts was very important and trying to find my way, trying to find a way, I guess, in terms of--and always just trying to answer these questions, and the literature more than any other art form was giving me answers, you see, also--primarily giving me answers before I even asked the questions, you see. And so that's I think why the literature became so important to me, and reading was never difficult, okay. You know, thank Damballa I learned to read rather well and early--and as a result of that--and I would keep notes. When I was in the military, each book I would read, I would write about a 250-word essay on the book--and--which did two things. One, It honed my critical sense around literature, but also it displayed a real lack of writing talent, and so as a result of that, I began to study writing, began to--I would check out whatever books I could from the library on writing. You know, "how can I become a better writer," and once I got into--got out of the military and got into college and begin to just get "A's" like it was just like they were giving them out free because I could write well. I was at that level and took a couple of creative writing courses in college and saw that "this was what I'm going to do with my life," and that was primarily it. Story_ID: 10344 Speaker 1: But at that time and during apartheid America, the schisms between black and white--in everything except sex, you see. These white men would be after my mother [Maxine Graves Lee] like black on coal, you know, like white on rice. Now they didn't want to be seen publicly with her, but they would come, you know, trying to buy favors, and so I'm saying that this whole sexual life between black and white or sexual life between races always existed but primarily, you know, white men taking advantage of black women. And so all that was playing on me as a young man, growing up with all this pain, a certain amount of fear because I saw a lot of death when I was growing up. I saw a lot of death. You see, when you grow up in the life, you have no life, you see. When I was twelve years old, I was cleaning up bars and taverns. I would leave the house like four or 5:00 in the morning--well, maybe at 5:00 in the morning and go to a neighborhood bar to clean it up, and then I'd leave there and go to my paper route--you see, I've always had to work--and so I'd go to my paper route and deliver my papers, and then I would go to school, and then in school I still had to work in order to eat lunch. I had--I would clean up the auditorium. So it was always very difficult, and so work has never been a problem for me, and I knew that I had to graduate from using my back and brawn to using my mind. "How would you do that," and so it got back to the ideas, and I knew also that I was not going to go into the life. Even though my mother was there, my father, "I'm not going there." I saw my first murder at fourteen years old. I was cleaning up this bar in Detroit, Michigan, and there was two brothers, you see, at the bar drinking, and all of a sudden they started arguing. I'm back there mopping the floor. They started arguing, and the first black man hauled off--boom--knocked this man down, and this guy went down crying. He was crying. I said "what is this man crying about," you know, and he went into his--he had a purse. He went into his purse and came out, and he started slapping this guy, and I said "what is this?" This is--I mean, you don't slap this guy." Well, he had a razor blade right between his two fingers, and every time he'd slap him--boom--he'd take the skin off. Boom--slap him. Boom--take the skin off. Well, what happened, this guy was a homosexual--the one that got hit, all right--and this guy, the other guy was evidently his boyfriend, and they got in an argument, and it was so bad, he got--he killed him--so I saw this guy die right there on the floor, you see, in his own blood, and you know, I ran out of there. I got out of there. I don't know what happened 'cause I just left, okay, but the point I'm trying to make is that we lived in a very violent world, very violent, and and so this violence was in keeping in terms of how my mother was killed, and so all this--all of that, and it's much more. What it did to me was make me very hard and very angry, all right, and very afraid. You see, what I'm saying, so when you have all this fear in you, then you put on all kind of fronts, all right, in terms of "how am I going to make it? How am I going to make it? Who's going to protect me," you see, that I did not have a mother or a father to protect me. "Who's going to protect me, but who's going to protect my sister and her children," you see? All this was playing on me as a young man, and so when I found the literature, the literature empowered me at levels which I had never been empowered before. Why? Because these--it showed me that these men and women who had experienced the world, lived in the world, can write about this world, be published in this world, and can continue to function sanely in this world, you see, because I'm looking for a sane community somewhere, and that's why I ended up in the military. I thought it was going to be sane, all right. Well, contrary to popular belief, it's not very sane, but it was sane enough for me, and that's why I don't really put the military down too much because I was not in it during the time of war, and it really pretty much saved my life because it was the first time in my life I had new clothes, first time in my life I had three meals a day, first time in my life I had a salary, all right, that, you know, one could halfway maneuver on 'cause I was sending half of it to my sister, and the first time in my life I was able to study, you see, without interruption, all right, and where I would never suggest that my own sons or my own cultural sons or the men that I--and young boys that I mentor go into the military, I will say that it helped me at a time of great distress. Story_ID: 10345 Speaker 1: Let me ask you about your father [Jimmy L. Lee] and what--I mean, you had sort of a classic, you know, case, you know, what they view as sort of classic, but how have you come to terms with this? You know, people talk about black role models in our community. I mean, how have you come to terms with that and what--I mean, you said from your mother you got reading, but your father, you said, was bright. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: He was really a pretty bright person. Speaker 2: Well, I think from my father I got this whole independent streak where one just will go and do the work and fight. What I do remember about him--and he's still alive; he's in Detroit [Michigan]--was that he was always gone and--but he always had money in his pocket, and for the brief time that I did stay with him here in Chicago [Illinois] after my mother passed, for awhile he ran a wheel. He ran a numbers wheel, okay? This was before lottery. This was--I mean, the lottery really hurt the black community in many ways, so he ran a numbers wheel, and I used to drop policy on the South Side of Chicago and a very independent streak, you see, but very selfish, you see, in many ways. I don't think he really cared for me or my sister. I don't think he loved us at all. I may be wrong about that, but he never told me he loved me, okay, and I'm sure he didn't tell my sister that so we never were close. He played the trombone. I play the trumpet so he was very musical, and so I guess I respected him to a certain degree, but we were never close. We never had a conversation. It was always him telling me what to do, and only until when I became an adult did I put some, you know, real distance between all of that, but I never blamed him because I'm saying again growing up in apartheid America makes people crazy. You see what I'm saying? Racism just makes people crazy. I mean, it makes white people crazy, makes black people crazy, makes anybody who experiences it crazy. We don't do things that are in any way remotely sane, okay, and as a result of that, I look at my father and say "he did the best he could with what he had to work with, and being a black man in America--." And what people don't realize even today in 1999, moving into 2000, racism is not only alive and well in America, it's a growth industry. And this is why I fight, you know, for affirmative action, you know, because in--see, primarily affirmative action, its real definition means the ability to affirm your actions, you see. And I'm saying white people always do this. White people always had affirmative action, and so what I was trying to get to was "where can we began to build the structures and institutions where we can affirm our actions," you see. And I saw my father leasing his businesses in his nightlife trying to just do that in the best way he could so I'm not one who blames my father. I would never blame him--or my mother--for what I have or do not have, did or could not do, you see. I learned to be a father. I learn to be a man by observing what fatherhood was not and what manhood was not, so I was able to begin again dealing with these ideas and knowing that "this did not work in my life, then there has just got to be a better way" so the question for me always as a very young man--"what is the better way? What is the way that will allow us to be productive, to be loving, to be sane, to be community-minded," and I found those attributes in those mentors, you know. Malcolm X and Margaret Burroughs [artist, educator, institution builder], and Charlie Burroughs [writer] and--who were strangers to me, who took me into their hearts, into their minds, into their homes, you know, Gwendolyn Brooks [poet], Dudley Randall [publisher], and Hoyt W. Fuller [journalist, editor]. These people took in a stranger, all right, and so they made a bet. They said "well, this man, this young man, he has qualities," all right, and I was not going to fail them at all, you see, and so my father was never a hindrance in that sense. I mean, once I was on my own, I'm on my own, all right, and so I'm not depending upon him or anybody else. Story_ID: 10346 Speaker 1: And now in my own personal life, in terms of my family, my wife [Safisha Madhubuti], and I've been married twenty-five years, and our children--I had two children before I got married. My oldest son, Shabaka Don, doing very well, works for American Airlines [corporation], okay? I was the best man at his wedding, all right. My eldest daughter is completing her master's degree at Cornell University [Ithaca, New York], all right. The children that my wife and I had, our eldest daughter, she went to Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia] for two years and then finished up at Columbia [College, Chicago, Illinois] here, and now she's assistant editor of 'The Source' magazine. Our middle boy just graduated from Northwestern University [Evanston, Illinois] with a degree in civil engineering, and he's working with an engineering firm down in Raleigh-Durham [North Carolina], and our youngest son is in his second year at Northwestern in computer science, but all that came about as a result--and even my marriage and staying with my wife so long--and we'll be together until we die--is because I didn't have it--so I'm saying "I did not have it." I knew how difficult it was for me to make it. "I'm not going to afflict this on these children," you see, and so even with the children I had who--I was't--I was married to my first wife, and I married primarily because she was pregnant, okay, because I did not want this child to come into a world without a father, that I'd try and be the best father I could be, you see. Now all of this is not only because of what happened to me but also with study. I've had a chance to really study. I read E. Franklin Frazier [sociologist] when I was eighteen years old so I'm reading serious sociology when I'm eighteen years old, all right, so understanding what is happening in the black community, not only reading E. Franklin Frazier, reading Rayford Logan [historian], you know, reading [Melville J.] Herskovits [anthropologist]. I mean, I'm telling you I'm doing serious reading. I'm dealing with ideas that the average young man wouldn't even come across because they're out here in hot pants lounge on, you know, hot pants night or something like that. So I'm trying to answer questions, you see, and one of the real criticisms about me as a young man, was I never did smile and partially because I didn't see much to smile about, and partially because that was just my demeanor at that time. Because, see, trying to be black in the black movement, and you're not black--it was just another world and, see, what happened to me, most certainly working in the Black Arts Movement here in Chicago [Illinois] and elsewhere, is that I was always challenged because of "am I really black?" They'd say "are you really black?" Now, the only way I could prove it to myself and to prove it to other people, and as a young man, you always gotta prove it. See, I don't--it doesn't bother me now obviously, but as a young man, you gotta prove it, and the only way I could prove it was to outwork everybody. You see, I would produce, I would produce, I would produce, and that--it worked, and that's why Third World Press came about. That's how why at one time we had three bookstores, African-American book centers. That's why we have the Institute of Positive Education [community research center, Chicago, Illinois]. We've got two schools over there, New Concept School [preschool] and the Betty Shabazz International Charter School. That's how all that came about because I'm saying, okay, that for me I felt that I could write and that I could publish, but that was not enough, and for me writing is very difficult. It's not like I can just sit--I mean, I've got to work just like everybody else, but I felt that I could make a larger contribution other than just my own personal work by building these institutions, you see. Story_ID: 10347 Speaker 1: Let's talk about the [Civil Rights] Movement and your experience here because what--put your life into some context. What was happening at that time and particularly what was happening here in Chicago [Illinois] because you came here really before--? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: You came here before the Movement really got started. Speaker 2: Well, there was always some phase of it going, but it was not--it really erupted after '65 [1965], you know, '66 [1966], '67 [1967], most certainly all through to [Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr]'s assassination [April 4, 1968] and--but what happened essentially was that once I got out of the military in 1963, I had already been influenced by what was happening in the South, and what people do not talk about much is that the southern Movement was basically led by students, and so these were young people my age that I could easily identify with. These were young people who were just tired of just tap dancing to this nonsense, and so they began to put their lives on the line, you know, sitting in and marching and boycotting, and then, of course, Rosa Parks came along and just changed the whole nature of the struggle, and that's when King got involved and--but at the same time you had SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] working. These were young people, Stokely Carmichael [social and political activist] and others, and so I was influenced by these students because I'm saying I could identify with them because I was the same age, and so when I came out of the military, I immediately began to organize with other people here in this city. And we began to organize for--the reason Black Studies exists or Africana Studies exists because we started organizing at the university and college level because then you didn't have nothing at all, and we were just shut down--well, we shut down Wilson [Junior College, now Kennedy-King College, Chicago, Illinois]. We just organized to get these courses in. So King came and, as you know, began to try to move on the West Side to try to make change over there. I did not agree necessarily with all that King was doing, but I respected him, you see. I did not necessarily believe in a non-violent struggle, especially having had the military in my background, but I felt that this man had put his life on the line, and he was very serious, and as far as I could tell, he was an honorable man, you see. Now obviously I read all the [negative] literature about King after his death, you see, and I say that sure, some of that is probably true, but it does not--for me it does not take away what he gave. I mean, he was essentially an honorable man, a man who was not corrupted, a man who essentially said "my people first," and and he led us. And so if you look at the major picture on King, you will see me in one of the shots. I was in the church at one of the rallies before we went to the West Side and--which was like--on most of those trips to the West Side, marching on the West Side and Marquette parking lot, you'd just see white people who were basically just fanatic, okay, who--their lives were being interrupted, they felt, by these black people intruding into their communities. And not thinkers, you see, not men and women, boys and girls who had given this any thought other then "we're being invading their community," and therefore if we are invading their community, they'd react, and they reacted in a very negative way. And I must say that most of the marches I went on here in Chicago, basically it was a large contingency of whites also. It was blacks and whites marching so I just want to make that very clear. Story_ID: 10348 Speaker 1: And so much of the struggle [Civil Rights Movement] here in Chicago [Illinois] was for basically open housing, and we began to move toward this whole economic struggle. That's why Operation Breadbasket [economic improvement organization], and that's where I first, you know, met [Rev.] Jesse Jackson who had moved to Chicago to be with [Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] and to begin to, you know, to live here and work himself. Now I was working at several levels. I was also working within the context of that movement, but I was also working in the context of the Black Arts Movement which was, you know, just as important to me, and OBAC [Organization of Black American Culture] was the basic vehicle for us here at that time, Organization of Black American Culture Writer's Workshop, and Hoyt W. Fuller [journalist, editor] was the spirited point, the mentor, the man who was a theoretician, and the interesting thing about Hoyt W. Fuller was that he was not provincial or parochial in his thinking, that if you look at most of the major writers coming out of the '60s [1960s], all of them were published in 'Negro Digest/Black World' magazine. He was not a man who said "okay, I'm just going to publish people who think like me." He didn't do that, and as a result of that, he had an entree into most of the writers' environments, whether it was Toni Cade Bambara [author, activist] or Toni Morrison [author] or Alice Walker [author]. In fact, I first met Alice Walker back in the '60s [1960s]. I picked her up at the airport to bring her down to OBAC to--she had just published her first book which was 'Once.' And all the writers for the most part would come through OBAC, Johnny Williams [John A. Williams, author], and of course, Sam Greenlee [poet] had made his name with 'The Spook Who Sat by the Door,' and others. And so we would basically do readings around the city [Chicago], okay, and then publish books. We would support each other, and the important thing about the OBAC Writers Workshop for these young writers coming up was that we offered, you know, serious criticism of each other's work. I mean, it would be downright fights up in there, and Mr. Fuller would basically sit back and observe and then, you know, very quietly bring some order then. But he published all of us, you see. The first time I got any serious money for writing was writing for 'Negro Digest/Black World' magazine. As a result of Hoyt Fuller and Gwendolyn Brooks [poet], I began to meet other writers. Gwendolyn Brooks in 1967 had gone down to Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee] at the writers conferences [Black Writers Conference] that John Oliver Killens [author] was running at that time at Fisk University and suggested to John Killens that he invite me down, and I was invited down the next year and and was received in a very, very almost like a rock star, and I had published two books, and as a result of that move down there, I was offered two jobs. Story_ID: 10349 Speaker 1: I was offered a position at Cornell University [Ithaca, New York] and offered a position at Talladega University [Talladega College, Talladega, Alabama], and obviously I wanted to go to Talladega since it was a black school, but generally before you can acquire the position or they accept you, you have to go in for an interview and give a talk. And so I went down to Talladega, gave a talk, I mean, lectured and read poetry, and then they withdrew the offer, okay. This was a black university. I mean, I'm saying that my stuff, you know, 1968, sixty--'68 [1968] and '67 [1967], '66 [1966], it was just fire, you know, so I went to Cornell since I couldn't get a job at Talladega, and I said "I'm just going to do the same thing--I'm not going to change one word." And I got the job so I became the first black writer in residence. I might have been the first writer in residence at Cornell University up in Ithaca, New York. I'll never forget that, and as a result of that, I taught one course and--now--but I had to--I not only had to read poetry, but I had to sit down with the great white men of the English department in order to see if I was qualified to teach there, and I'm in my--what, middle twenties, I guess--and these men--so I want to teach black literature, and they are going to quiz me on black literature. Well, I'm from the streets. I knew after the first question that these guys didn't know what they were talking about. You see, I realized that only one man at that table had read seriously in black literature, and so what I did was, essentially, I would take the questions and turn them around and direct them back at them, and they couldn't answer the questions. Only this one guy could answer the questions, all right, but I got the job, okay, and that was nineteen--what, 1968. No, 1969--'68 [1968], '69 [1969], right, and so in '69 [1969] was when the [African American] students took over the Cornell University [Willard Straight Hall, student union] when they went in with guns and weapons and took over the administration there. Now these were my students. I did not urge them on to do that. They planned that themselves. We had very lively conversations in my class, but this was something they decided they needed to do themselves, and I supported them. In fact, when the administration asked me to become part of the negotiating team, I refused, you see, to do that. Now other professors there did become, but I didn't, and as a result of that, that's when we got James Turner [Black studies scholar] to come in to lead the Africana Studies Department where he's still there today [1999], but that came out of that, my being at Cornell University. Story_ID: 10350 Speaker 1: Now what happened also prior to even my going to Cornell [University, Ithaca, New York], you had these Black Power conferences going on all across the country, and I was also always involved in them, whether in Newark [New Jersey] or whether in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], and I would basically read poetry, and I had become very close to Amiri Baraka [poet, author, philosopher] who used to be LeRoi Jones. I had become very close to Larry Neal [scholar, author, philosopher], close to many of the writers across the country, especially the poets, you see, and so I was very active in this movement [Black Arts Movement]. Now in 1969 a young writer for 'Ebony' [magazine] by the name of David Lorenz. I had met David here in Chicago [Illinois] at the old Sutherland Bar over there on 47th and Drexel, and at that time the Sutherland used to do a lot of jazz, and so we used to go out and read with a lot of the jazz musicians, ACM [American Conservatory of Music, Chicago, Illinois] and people like that in the ACM, and I read one poem--I guess I don't remember the title of it--but anyway the poem, it affected David so much he was laughing, and he fell off his chair, okay. And so along the line he, I guess, remembered the poem and persuaded Johnson Publishing Company to allow him to do a story on me, and I guess the--but the hook was you're the first black writer in residence at Howard--at Cornell University, and so he came there. Moneta Sleet, the famous Pulitzer Prize-winning photographer, took the pictures, and they ran that story in 1969, and as a result of that story--which had poems from my book--the new book was just about to be published was 'Don't Cry, Scream.' And so when 'Don't Cry, Scream' hit and the 'Ebony' article hit, 'Don't Cry, Scream' took off. I mean, it just sold phenomenally well, and that kind of put my name on the map as Don L. Lee [Madhubuti's former name]. Story_ID: 10351 Speaker 1: Now after '69 [1969], I decided to leave Cornell [University, Ithaca, New York]. I just didn't want to stay up there any longer even though James Turner [Black studies scholar] asked me "would I stay and help out." I said "I can't--I'm not staying in this--I'm getting away from this--there's too many white people up here." So I left, came back to Chicago [Illinois], wrote to the University of Illinois [at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana-Champaign, Illinois], okay, and then I got a call about maybe six months after 'Don't Cry, Scream' [book of Madhubuti's poetry] was published. I got a call from Dr. Andrew Billingsley who was a famous sociologist, but he--at that time he was the vice president and the provost and vice president of academic affairs at Howard University [Washington, DC]. Now this is interesting. Now he called me and said "well, Don [Madhubuti's former first name], how about coming to work at Howard?" And it took me by surprise, you know what I'm saying? Now here I had--what, four or five years ago, I'm lying about trying to work my way though Howard University, and here the provost asks me to come teach there. So I said "I don't know if I can do that," because I had started Third World Press [publishing company]. We had started the Institute of Positive Education [community research center], and so we had these institutions going here [Chicago], and I didn't really want to leave again. He said "come on down." You know, "come on and look at and see what we're doing." Now, what had happened--so I got to Howard. He had already hired John Oliver Killens, the fiction writer from Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee], so John had started these writers conferences at Fisk University. They brought him to Howard University to do pretty much the same thing. He had hired Stephen Henderson [scholar], one of the best minds, theoretical minds in the whole black literature, culture, and most certainly in terms of music and the blues, and so he had these two men there, and he said "come on and work with us," you know. I'm saying "how can I do this? I really want to do this, but I can't leave Chicago again." So I said "Dr. Billingsley, I would really like to do this, but I can't leave Chicago." He said "well, we're going to do this then. What about you commuting?" Now I hadn't read [Alvin] Toffler [author, futurist] yet. I hadn't read 'Future Shock' [futurist sociological book by Alvin Toffler]. I didn't know anything about, you know, the lack of permanency and the new communities and stuff like this, so I said "well, let me think about it." And I wasn't married or nothing. I wasn't attached at that time so I said "okay, let me"--so what happened, I took the job, and I would commute between Chicago and and [Washington] DC every week. I would go in. I would fly in on Tuesdays and fly back on Thursday nights or Friday mornings. And three years--they gave me a three-year contract, but anyway each time the the time would come up, they'd say "can you stay another year? Can you stay another year?" Anyway, I turned it into eight years. For eight years I commuted between Chicago and DC every week, every week, all right, and which is a very--there's so much. It was a very important time because for me, being in DC, I became more attached to the international community. You see, I began to work with the African Liberation Support Committee. We begin to work with--you know, at that time a brother by the name of Howard Fuller [educator, instutution builder] who now is--used to be the superintendent of schools in Milwaukee [Wisconsin] and--but Howard Fuller at that time was really in an independent struggle. He had founded a school down in North Carolina, Malcolm X Academy, and so we were about building these independent institutions. And so I began to travel to Africa. I began to take part in international struggles. I began to, you know, really be a minor force in, you know, writing about and thinking about Africa, and so during that period I wrote--well, let's see. After 'Don't Cry, Scream,' 'We Walk the Way of the New World' came out. 'We Walk the Way of the New World' was--I was writing that when I made my first trip to Africa in 1969, and I went to Algiers [Algeria], and what was happening in Algiers, they had the first Pan-African festival. A lot of the brothers and sisters from the [Black] Panther party was leaving the country, and they had to--they went to Algiers, and they went to Cuba, okay. So I went to Algiers, and I was able to hook up with some of the brothers and sisters there, and they had this big festival, and that's where I met Nina Simone [singer] and Archie Shepp [saxophonist] because we were on this program together where I read poetry with Nina Simone and Archie Shepp and Ted Joans, a poet out of Indiana who's now living--at that time he was living in Timbuktu [Mali], and so this whole international world began to open up. In fact, much of the work that we were doing in Algiers and a lot of activity was on the Franz Fanon [psychologist, theorist]--like--street, you know, that had been named after Franz Fanon, a Martinique psychiatrist 'cause we had grown up with Franz Fanon reading 'Wretched of the Earth' and his other books. So it was a very difficult but exciting time so I'm saying that there's this--so this black movement had become like an international movement, and what I learned in terms of travel, you know, to Africa and other parts of the world was that all of these brothers and sisters were learning from us, that they revered what we were doing here in the United States, and so that placed us in a position where we now felt that we were not only just a civil rights movement--as Malcolm [X] had defined it, a human rights movement--and that this movement was not only United States or North America-based. It was world-based, you see. Story_ID: 10352 Speaker 1: Why was that OBAC [Organization of Black American Culture], and what is its legacy, and why was it so important? Speaker 2: Well, I think OBAC was trying to institutionalize--most certainly for us in the writers workshop--the importance of literature, the importance of us telling our own stories, and that storytelling was critical in terms of just getting it down so that at least it would be there for posterity. It would be there for our children, etcetera, etcetera. So another level of OBAC was that this whole quest for institution building. Now what I began to learn and began to really appreciate--again from the [Dr.] Margaret Burroughs [artist, educator, institution builder] and from Dudley Randall [poet, publisher] and, of course, what we were trying to do in OBAC, and at that time I had already founded Third World Press--was the importance of ownership, all right. See, what happened in the movement, and most certainly here in Chicago [Illinois], whenever we wanted to do a rally or whenever we want to read, we'd have to go to a church. We had to go to somebody else's space, and if we said anything that the preacher or the reverend didn't appreciate, we're gone, all right. So it was very clear to me that we had to move toward our own space. We had to own this stuff, all right. Now if we need to move toward ownership, at some point you had to move toward money and resources, and so that was clear for me, very clear that this was like the problem. And so at that time I saw around me a lot of brothers and sisters taking money from the government and taking money from other granting sources, and I felt that that's going to run out. Number one, not only is the grant going to run out, but I think that in many cases they were compromising their position in order to get that money so it seemed to me that we had to move toward the development of businesses, move toward the development of some type of product that we control from inception--boom--all the way up that we sold in the marketplace. So therefore I became much more serious about Third World Press, very serious about the ownership so in 1974 we bought our first location over here on Cottage Grove, 7524, 7526 South Cottage Grove [Chicago]. We bought that space, put our school [Institute for Positive Learning] over there, and put our bookstore there, and put the publishing company and the magazine over there on 7524 South Cottage Grove so I'm learning all of this primarily from struggle, you see, that you cannot call a meeting or call a forum or a gathering if you don't have space for people to meet. So we bought that space because it could easily sit four or five hundred people, all right, 'cause we would have school during the day, and if we were going to have what we called "nation studies" classes in the evening, we'd just break it down. We'd break the school down and put chairs out there for people to come. We did that for a good ten or fifteen years. Story_ID: 10353 Speaker 1: In fact, [Minister Louis] Farrakhan [leader of the Nation of Islam] got back up at our place [Institute for Positive Learning, Chicago, Illinois]. Now this is a story within itself. Nineteen--this is what--1976, Abena Joan Brown [theater founder] and I, we were co-leaders of the Midwest zone for FESTAC [Festival of African Culture], okay. We'd take in brothers and sisters from this country to Nigeria, all right. Jeff Donaldson [artist] is head of the whole thing, okay, so we got these zones all over the country so Abena and I worked together, and we took over 300 people paid for by all kinds of other sources and got 'em into Nigeria. Get into Nigeria--I'm in charge of housing, okay, so we're in this compound where all this new housing had been built for the thing and got everybody settled in, and I guess the third night there Stevie Wonder [singer, musician] comes to our compound, and lo and behold in his entourage is Louis Farrakhan, all right. Now you understand [Honorable] Elijah Muhammad [former leader of the Nation of Islam] had died, okay. The Nation [of Islam] is in flux. They don't know what's gonna happen, what's going on. I mean, Warith Muhammad [Elijah Muhammad's son] is gonna take over--. They don't know what's going on. You got four or five people claiming ownership of the Nation of Islam, all right. So Farrakhan's in there so I, you know, introduce myself, and he's got a short Afro and almost like a short beard on and stuff like that so we don't know what he's gonna do. So one of the brothers said "well, he's talking about going back into entertainment." I said "oh." I mean, I didn't think nothing about it, okay, because--I mean, I didn't know that much about Farrakhan at that time, so I just let it slide by and just went on about my business. Well, lo and behold, after we get back from FESTAC, I get--a person comes--Ibrahim Muhammad comes to see me at the Institute of Positive Education over on Cottage Grove [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois], and he said "Minister Farrakhan is thinking about coming back with the Nation of Islam with the message of teaching," and he said "he wants to meet with you." Well, I said, "why do you want to meet with me?" I mean, you know, and then he'd go through all that stuff--"you're a leader in the community." I said "well, I'm not buying that, but let me just talk to some people, and I'll see." So I called, you know, [Lutrelle] "Lu" Palmer [journalist], Vernon Jarrett [journalist], and a lot of other people in the community, Wesley South [journalist, radio personality], and I say "well, do you think we ought to meet with this guy," and they said "okay, let's go ahead and meet." Well, what happened, at that time a lot of volatile stuff was going on in the Nation [of Islam]. People you know, fighting each other, and so rather than meet at the Institute [for Positive Learning], we meet in my home. At that time I'm living at 76[th Street] and Bennett right across from South Shore High School [Chicago, Illinois]. And we met in our basement, and he said "yeah, I want to come back up. I want to, you know, start a Nation of Islam again." And our question, and most certainly my question, "well, what's your involvement with the the assassination of Malcolm X?" Because I'm not gonna help this guy if he--and he basically said that he did not--he was not involved in it, but he helped create the climate for Malcolm's assassination which, of course, we knew that, but he was very honest about that and--but we said "okay, we'll help you, but we're not really concerned about trying to start another kingship." 'Cause we all felt that the Nation of Islam was basically a royal kingship with Elijah Muhammad at the top and that most of us as nationalist Pan-Africans basically felt that we didn't want to bring that back into effect. And he said it was not going to happen. Well, obviously it did happen, but the point is that he told us at that time that it wasn't going to happen. So we strategically placed interviews. We strategically, you know, began to set up security for his home and stuff like that, and then he had his first coming out. The major speech was at our place at the Institute of Positive Education. Was it ninety-seven, ninety-eight? Not ninety--'77 [1977] or '78 [1978]--I'm not sure, and I would have to go back to the files myself, but he came out. That place was packed. They were out in the streets, all right, and that's where he made his first speech at. Story_ID: 10354 Speaker 1: The point is I'm saying that the Institute of Positive Education became kind of a pivotal point in terms of my own development and the development of Pan-African nationalist thought and struggle in the city [Chicago, Illinois] because we would have most of the major speeches. We had the first white supremacy conference in the country at the Institute of Positive Education. We brought in Nivi Fuller. We brought in Chancellor Williams [historian]. We brought in John Henry Clark [historian, author]. We brought in Eyosef Bengekane (unclear). These were major thinkers and historians at that time, you see, and we had a two-day conference there, you see. I mean, obviously the mass media didn't know anything about it, but I'm saying that essentially people who were in struggle and people who were thinking about these questions, you know, came, and we struggled. We were very involved in founding the Council of Independent Black Institutions. This is the national structure for independent schools, black independent schools, you see. Story_ID: 10355 Speaker 1: So my involvement, my wife's involvement, Safisha Madhubuti, whose--actually she works out at Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois], Dr. Carol Lee. See, our view of struggle has always been if what we did was not supported by the people we are trying to impact, then we don't need to do it. So it was never about writing grants and trying to go to the people who don't even like you, you see, to pay for what you're trying to do. There was never even thought of so we said "okay, we're going to have to work these sixteen, seventeen hours a day to get this done." So all the money--I'm talking about all the money--that I earned from my poetry books, that I earned from speaking, that I earned from, you know, doing--and I've always taught at the college and university level--went into building these institutions, you see. So there's never--I'll never have to apologize--you see what I'm saying--that what we have here black folks built, all right, and I think that's one of the major reasons that I think that people have such respect for us because they know that we did this on our own, you see, through sheer gut and hard, hard work. When we got the place on Cottage Grove [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois], it was a shell. Now I'm not a carpenter, but I learned how to do carpentry work. We put a crew together and went in there and transformed that place, you see. And almost the same thing happened here [7822 S. Dobson Avenue, Chicago, Illinois]. We used to--we started--actually in terms of open space over there on 78th and Ellis [Chicago]. We had two storefronts right on the corner of 78th and Ellis. They're still there. We're not there now, but they're still there, and we rented those two spaces. One space was Third World Press [publishing company] and the other space was the Institute of Positive Education. Now we've always been very active in terms of health and stuff like so we used to three times a week--we saw ourselves as the cadre, all right, the young revolutionaries. We would run down here to Grand Crossing Park [Chicago, Illinois], and we'd do four or five miles at least four or five times, the women and the men, okay. And we'd run past this school over here, and we'd say "what could we do if we ever got that space? What could we do," all right. Well--as we know it's been on Cottage Grove for fifteen years. This space vacated. The Catholics got out, okay, so I found it that it was for sale so I went down to the archdiocese. This is about ten years ago, ten or eleven years ago [1988-1989], and I talked to the man in the real estate office and say "well, what do I need to do to get on the bid list so we can bid for this property," and he said "the bid is closed," you see. You know, by that time I was Haki Madhubuti, and he said "the name is closed." I said "well, when was it open," and he said "well, it's closed now," all right. Now having been in the struggle a long time, I know you don't talk to people like that so I just said "okay" and walked out, and I began to call some of my Catholic friends and say "who is the man? Who do I need to talk to," you see. And they said "well, you need to talk to Bishop [Wilton] Gregory." And I had faintly known about Bishop Gregory, but see, Bishop Gregory is black, okay. He was at this thing in South Holland, Chicago. So I started calling Bishop Gregory. Boom--"can I get an appointment? Can I get an appointment?" He never returned my calls, so I said "let me do this. Let me call"--I called him. I left Don L. Lee. I left that name. I got a call the next day, and his secretary said "well, are you the poet?" I said "yes." They said "Bishop Gregory can see you on such and such a day for fifteen minutes," all right. So I told my wife, "I'm gonna sell this deal," okay, so I got, you know, all the stuff together, books and everything, and went to see Bishop Gregory, and Bishop Gregory received me in a very formal way. Fifteen minutes turned into two hours. When I left, I had a letter in my hand from Bishop Gregory to [Joseph] Cardinal Bernardin stating that we not only should be on the list, we should be at the top of the list, okay. Got back to Cottage Grove. The white man from the real estate office called and said "I don't know what happened, but you're on the list now, but in order for you to stay on the list, you got to bring in $50,000 in a week." $50,000 in a week. So I'm not going to tell this guy I got $50,000, which I don't have $50,000, all right, so I called the brothers and sisters together. I say "look, they're trying to really jack us off," you know. I know that nobody else is putting $50,000 down, you see, but this guy is getting back at me, all right. So I say "let's do this," so my wife and I, we took a second mortgage on our house. We came up with over half the money. Other brothers and sisters came with the other part of the money so in three days I took him $50,000, all right, and with our bid, all right, and we knew that there weren't any other serious bids on this place. This is a half a block. That's at a school over there. That's that church, and that's this place right here, you see, and for us it's very valuable property. For them we know it's not that valuable, but they're gonna, you know, and at that time this place was occupied by some some brothers and sisters just doing some minor work, nothing very serious. Anyway our bid was accepted, you see. Now the next move was how do you find a half a million dollars? How do you find that in order to buy the place, you know, and that's just another whole struggle. I found it. We found the money. We got the money from South Shore Bank, all right, and Milton Davis [bank founder], you see, working with Milton, and I got the money, but it's always been a struggle. This place was a mess. One of the priests was raising pigeons in this place over here. We had to come in and fumigate the place and just completely just redo everything so struggle has taught me. This struggle has taught me that you take what you have and you make it better. Story_ID: 10356 Speaker 1: And the one person who has basically been like kind of a guiding light behind all of this has been for me Gwendolyn Brooks [poet]. Gwendolyn Brooks--I met her. She had just turned fifty, all right. I'm in my twenties. She had just turned fifty. She had won the Pulitzer Prize earlier [1950, for 'Annie Allen'] but the Pulitzer Prize because she was black. She was the first black to win the Pulitzer Prize. It did not put her in any prize position, all right. And so when we hooked up, she was speaking here and there, and she would drop my name wherever she went, and these people would generally call me, and I would go speak also, all right. We became very close. We became very close. I mean--so when I was at Howard University [Washington, D.C.] with John Killens [author, scholar] and Stephen Henderson [author], we'd put on these black writers conferences and, you know, bring Gwendolyn Brooks in as much as I could and--but the point is that I got this spirit. See, what I got from Gwendolyn Brooks was this whole--not only to become the best writer that you can become, best poet that you can become, but she has this genuine spirit of kindness, you see, of kindness, of giving, you see. When she got the Poet Laureate [of Illinois], she called me and asked me--she asked me do--"can I do this?" She asked me like I can give her permission, but she wanted to know would it be the right thing to do so I said "yes." She asked me about "what do you think about me getting a natural?" I said "well, that's great." She asked me about "what do you think about me leaving Harper and Row [publishing company] and coming to Broadside Press [publishing company]?" I said "Gwen, that would be a great example," all right, and it has been, you see, but she--see, what she exemplified for me was this was a person that could not be corrupted, and see, coming through struggle, you see a lot of corruption, all right. You see a lot of corruption, and so that for me was a major, major, major example. Let me bring this stuff up to 1999 so Gwen and I became--Gwendolyn Brooks and I became very close, just like family, her daughter Nora and husband Henry Blakely. Her mother at that time was still alive. When her mother died, I gave remarks at the funeral. When her husband died, I gave remarks at the funeral, and so when I left Howard, I'm ready. You know, I think I had done good work in the city, and I thought I could get a job. I couldn't get a job. Nobody would hire me, and the reason they said they wouldn't hire me, they said that I did not have a terminal degree, which is true, all right, but I knew it was an excuse. I knew it was a political reason that they did not want to hire me. I mean, my books were selling well. I had just published a book called 'Enemies, A Clash of Races,' and I was just like on these people like, you know, hot on fire, all right, and I couldn't get a job. Even some of the people I had helped get jobs here would not even jump so I told my wife [Safishi Madhubuti] "don't worry about it." You know, "I'll work it out." I had gotten married in '74 [1974]. We had one child and I think another one on the way. Story_ID: 10357 Speaker 1: So when I met my wife, Carol D. Lee [Safisha Madhubuti], she had already finished undergraduate school at University of Illinois [Urbana-Champaign, Urbana-Champaign, Illinois]. She had a master's degree from the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], and here it was very clear that this wasn't no fool, all right, so they invited me down to this program that she was involved in to read poetry to the young people. And obviously I'm, you know, a single black man, and she looked halfway decent, you know, so I'm coming in, and a whole lot of women around here looking decent, too. So I go in and, you know, read my poetry. Just like any red-blooded young black man, I'm getting telephone numbers and stuff like that, and she always remind me. I said "well, you know, I got your telephone number." She said "well, you got everybody else's telephone number, too," and so now what I told her, I said "yeah, but I called you," all right, and so we began to work together. At that same time--this is prior to my going to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.]--I began to work at the University of Illinois Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] campus. I was teaching in the English department there, and two of my students there, Chaka Walton and Jabari Mahiri, were doing undergraduate work, and eventually when they graduated, they came to work with me at the Institute of Positive Education [Chicago, Illinois], and Soyee Walton, also who is a very important person in the terms of our early foundation. But my wife-to-be at that time, Carol Lee, she decided that she wanted to, you know, play an important part in developing the Institute of Positive Education, and so we would have these long discussions, and finally she said "we need to stop talking about education and build a school," and then she said well, "how can we do it?" I said "well, let's do it," all right. Now she's an educator. I'm a poet. I said "let's do it," all right. So we rent this space over here, and we had Third World Press, and we rented the storefront next door so we're gonna do after school tutoring. We're gonna develop a curriculum for them, and we're gonna do it in this community so we did. Then what happened, we got so many students, so many children, that the parents in the community said "why don't you all go full-time?" I said "well, how are we gonna do this?" We didn't have no money then, you know, just the money that we were working and bringing in, and so Carol said "let's do it." Well, I said, "how are we gonna hire a teacher? We don't have any money," and she said "don't worry about it, let's do it," okay. So she quit her position at Kennedy-King [College, Chicago, Illinois, formerly Wilson Junior College], tenure track, everything, and came to work 400 dollars a month doing our school over there, okay, in a storefront. And then less than six or seven months after that we bought the space on Cottage Grove [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois], and then, of course, we became a much larger program, but the strength that she showed. Now, this is interesting because I hadn't asked her to marry me. We were seeing each other, but I was, you know, seeing a couple other sisters, too. I'm saying, I mean, you (unclear) a serious brother, all right. And--golly (laughs)--but anyway it became very clear that we were on the same wavelength, and after I left for Howard, we began to continue to see each other, and in 1974 we married and been together ever since. Story_ID: 10358 Speaker 1: But then what happened, after I left Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] and I couldn't find a position, I called a friend of mine, Dr. Darwin T. Turner, who's one of the major theoreticians in terms of black literature in the country. He's deceased now, but he was a very important figure in black literature, and he was the head of the African American Studies Department in the University of Iowa [Iowa City, Iowa], and I called Darwin and I said "do you think I can get into the Iowa writing program," because the Iowa writing program was a major program. It's probably still the major program in the country, and Darwin said "I don't know, man. You might not want it. Your stuff is so--you know, I mean, they may not want you. You're too political, you know. They're not dealing with this political stuff," all right, so I said "invite me down there to speak and invite the guys who run the program to my talk, and let me just work it at that point," and so he did. And I just went literature all the way--boom--I got into the program. And what is unusual about all of this, I could not move to Iowa City [Iowa] just like I couldn't move to [Washington] D.C., but nobody's offering me money to travel back and forth. I got to pay to get in at the University of Iowa so my wife [Safisha Madhubuti] and I talked it through, and we decided that I would drive 500 miles a week to work on this degree and to teach at the University of Iowa, and I did that and, you know, received a degree, MFA [Master of Fine Arts], at the University of Iowa, and so I got the terminal degree, and once I got a terminal degree, then I said "come back to me now and talk to me about this," and so anyway I got the position out at Chicago State University [Chicago, Illinois]. Story_ID: 10359 Speaker 1: The way I teach, and I've been teaching now since I was what about twenty-four or twenty-five years old, I don't accept excuses because I don't believe anybody's life was more difficult than mine, and what you've been through, I've experienced, and I want to challenge you to come what you're going through now to do this work, you see, if you're serious about it. And so again my life story has helped in terms of the way I function and teach and work in the world. So shortly after I got to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.]--I had to do the grunt work for about three or four years--and then people in the department, which was mainly a white department at that time, recognized that here's somebody who's important and began to look at the literature, look at what I'm doing, building the press [Third World Press] and so forth. And as a result of that, I started the Gwendolyn Brooks Center at Chicago State University [Chicago, Illinois] about ten years ago, ten, eleven years ago [1989], and then shortly after that, I talked the president into bringing Gwendolyn Brooks to Chicago State University as a distinguished professor at the university where she is now, and she will be until she decides that she doesn't want to be there anymore. And for every year for the last ten years, we've put on these major writers conferences--the only annual black writers conferences in the United States, you see, probably North America every year for the last ten years. So--but all of that has come about--why? My interaction with John Oliver Killens [author, scholar], Stephen Henderson [author], interaction with [Dr.] Margaret Burroughs [artist, educator, institution builder], Charlie Burroughs [writer], interaction with the thinking and thought of El-Hajj Malik Shabazz, Malcolm X, Hoyt W. Fuller [journalist, editor], Dudley Randall [poet, publisher], and most certainly Gwendolyn Brooks [poet], you see. All this came about. I mean, we bought this property. We were able to swing the bill, and why? Because I came out of struggle and coming out of struggle saying "you don't accept no. You don't accept cannot do," you see, and as a result of that, you just--I mean, I just go and do it, and when people say no, then you go around. You see what I'm saying? There's always somebody telling him what to do, and these are mainly men, all right, for the most part. And as a result of that, we've been able to build one of the major independent schools, New Concept School, and we got one of the few black charter schools in the country, the Betty Shabazz International Charter School [part of the Institute of Positive Education]. Story_ID: 10360 Speaker 1: Now what happened, after I finished up with MFA [Master of Fine Art at the University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa] and our children--we got our children there, and by that time my mother-in-law is coming to move with us. We all sat down and talked to my wife [Safisha Madhubuti], their mother, her daughter about going back to get a Ph.D. Why? Because we felt that in this movement, only the men were receiving credit for the building of the schools [Institute of Positive Education/New Concept School, Betty Shabazz International Charter School], you see, and I knew better than that. I said "yeah, I'm one of the founders, but my wife--she put her heart, soul into this school with other sisters and brothers." So I said "it seems to me that the only way you're going to get recognized is you got to get a Ph.D." And so what happened, we talked her into going back to school. Now she said "okay, I've been out of school twenty years." So I went out and bought the GRE book. You had to take the GRE, Graduate Record Exam, and, you know, sat down with her, played like I was studying with her, and she studied the exam. She took the exam and scored very high, applied at [University of] Illinois [Urbana-Champaign, Illinois], Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois], and [University of] Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], got accepted at all three institutions, and decided to go back to Chicago because she knew if she got a Ph.D. from Chicago, she didn't need any references, and she got accepted, got the second highest fellowship, you see, and guess what? She booked, and we sat down and talked. We talked this through. I said "look, baby, don't go there and start arguing with these ignorant professors about their stuff. Give them what they want. You've been through struggles. Give them what they want and get out because once you got the degree, you can do what you want to do." She booked in three years. She walked Ph.D. in hand in three years, dissertation in hand, got out. In less than a year her dissertation was published by the National Council of Teachers of English, which is the largest body of English teachers in the world, all right. They published it, you see, and now she's associate professor tenured at Northwestern University so I'm saying all of this. I'm saying I don't buy can't do. She doesn't buy can't do. Our children don't buy can't do. All our cultural children, all the young men and women that we mentored--this--I mean, in the last two days, just these two days, Sandra (last name unclear), one of the major cultural people in the city--she died this last week. We had the funeral this past Saturday. Lee Bey who's the writer at the [Chicago] 'Sun-Times' [newspaper]--he writes on architecture. Now I've been reading this young man's work for the last year or so. I said "damn, this is really amazing, this black man writing about architecture." So he called me and said "I'm doing the obituary for Sandra (last name unclear)." I said "I'm glad to talk to you, brother, because I was going to write you a letter and congratulate you on your work you've been doing." He said "you know, I was one of your students at Chicago State University." I said "oh, no Lee, I didn't realize that." He said, "yeah, I'm here because of what I got from you." Boom--that's one. Now two--Bennett Johnson [activist], one of the major strugglers in the city, his mother died. Her funeral was last night, yesterday. We go to the church out there in Evanston [Illinois] and a young preacher there doing the funeral, and he said "well, you know, Professor Madhubuti's here, and he's gonna say a few words," and as he introduced me, he said "he doesn't realize I was one of his students at Chicago State University." He said "he helped put me on this track," you see. So I'm saying one point--all this, as difficult as it is, that you have these children coming out. We have these young men that are coming out and are doing well, and so for the last--what--I've been in this struggle for thirty some odd years, you see? I'm carrying serious--and I'm a half a million dollars in debt, you see, in terms of carrying debt, but that's nothing. What is important is that we have these structures that we've built, and that as long as I breathe, as long as my wife breathes, everything's gonna be all right, you see. We can not only make this work, but we're going to continue to grow, you see. Story_ID: 10361 Speaker 1: You know, I have some questions. I want to come back to the school and everything, but I have some questions so I don't forget. Hoyt [W.] Fuller [journalist, editor] and the 'Negro Digest/Black World,' I thought--isn't there a story about--and wasn't--what was--. Speaker 2: Well, there's two stories, one about how the name was changed. Val Gray Ward [theater founder], myself, her husband Francis, and other cultural people decided we just got tired of the skin whiteness in 'Ebony' [magazine], and we set up a picket line in front of John [H.] Johnson's [publisher] place. Before we could even form it, he called us in and asked us--this is when he had the old place, and at that time one of the demands was, number one, the skin white has to come out of 'Ebony.' Number two, he gives some help to the culture community in the city, and number three, rename 'Negro Digest' 'Black World' magazine. That's what had happened, okay. What happened later on was that Hoyt Fuller in his very independent way began to publish in 'Black World' magazine the Palestinian side of that struggle in Israel, all right, and as a result of that, he was called on the carpet by John Johnson, and John Johnson fired him. So we organized again, and I was basically the spokesperson for this period, and we brought in people from around the country, and we set up a picket line, and at that time he was on Michigan. He was on Michigan Avenue [Chicago, Illinois]. He had just moved into the new building, and so we set up a picket line around Johnson Publishing Company, and Mr. Johnson came downstairs and asked us upstairs to the meeting room, and he basically said that Jewish advertisers had called him and stated in no uncertain terms that he's got to stop publishing the Palestinian side of the struggle, and John Johnson--he told Hoyt Fuller this, and Hoyt Fuller said "no, I'm not going to do it. I'm gonna do what's fair," and he was fired, and then 'Black World' magazine was discontinued, okay. Now when John Johnson told us that, we felt that there was nothing we really could do because if your business is being threatened, if your livelihood is being threatened, it would not be fair of us to continue to picket this man because he basically told us the truth, and so we left, and we organized the new magazine, 'First World' magazine, and 'First World'--Hoyt Fuller left Chicago and moved back to Atlanta [Georgia], and 'First World' magazine was started at that point. Story_ID: 10362 Speaker 1: But Hoyt [W.] Fuller [journalist, editor] is very meaningful. I mean, he was like a big brother to me. He's about ten or eleven years my senior, and see, when I went to Cornell University [Ithaca, New York], I really couldn't go because I didn't have any money, all right, and Hoyt Fuller loaned me the money to go plus he did more than that. He loaned me enough money to buy a car. You see, I had a car. I had a red Volkswagen, but it was about twenty-five years old, and so he loaned me enough money to buy me a new Volkswagen. It was a year-old Volkswagen, and that's how I got to Cornell. I drove down there and, of course, paid him back, but he was very important. See, Hoyt Fuller and I, for about two years, two or three years, we used to have dinner every week together. We just--he lived down in Lake Meadows [Chicago, Illinois], and we used to go to a restaurant around the corner, and we would just sit and eat, and he would talk. He would just talk, and I would, you know, listen to him, but he was very important in terms of mentoring me because I was really crude. I mean, I came from the streets. I was just really raw, and what Hoyt Fuller did was basically just kind of refine me as a man, you know he refined me. He told me, you know, "slow down" because, see, I was here when Fred Hampton and Mark Clark were murdered [members of the Black Panther party killed on December 4th, 1969 by the Chicago Police Department and the Federal Bureau of Investigation], you see, and you know, we were ready to go to war, and if it wasn't for Hoyt Fuller and, you know, Gwendolyn Brooks [poet], you know, I might not even been here now. They were the ones that put the stops on me and just said "you can't do this. You need to just slow down," and so, you know, I owe them my life in many ways because we were hard. We were just very, very concerned about these guys, especially those police coming in and killing and murdering them like that. It was just downright murder, you see, and so it was a certain amount of fear in that city [Chicago, Illinois], but it was a certain group of people who were just saying "listen, let's go to war," and so they were very important. They'd pull me up to Hoyt's house because they were just--they were very afraid that I was going off the track, you see. It was Hoyt Fuller, it was Gwendolyn Brooks, and George Kent [scholar]. George Kent at that time was teaching at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois]. He was a full professor at the University of Chicago, teaching literature, you know, and and they didn't know how to do it, but they said "the only way we can do it is just pull him in there and just talk to him" because at that time I was working very closely with Amiri Baraka [poet, author, philosopher] and the Congress of African People, and the Congress of African People was a national organization basically working at the street level in terms of African liberation, not only here but also in Africa, and, you know, we were serious as we are now. We were serious as a first love. This was never a game for us, you see, and there is so much I'm leaving out, but I'm just saying that the seriousness is what we try to instill in our students today--is that you just cannot play with lives. You cannot play with your life. You cannot play with the lives of others and that you have to take your life very seriously--but not too seriously you can't smile at yourself and laugh at yourself, but most certainly out here in the real world you've got to take positions, you see, but you cannot take positions based upon ignorance, and so the first order of the day is that you have to study. You have to know what is happening, you see, wherever you are. Story_ID: 10363 Speaker 1: Back when you said the [Black] Muslims were in disarray, but I thought the Seventies--you know that they--a lot with the bean--the selling of the bean [pies]--. I'm just trying to put the Pan-African movement next to the Muslim movement. Speaker 2: Well. Speaker 1: Because there are a lot of similarities--. Speaker 2: Well, there are some, but most certainly a whole movement toward self reliance and self protection, self defense. Those are parallels most certainly, but when Malcolm [X] was murdered, there was a separation. There was a very serious separation. When Malcolm was murdered, many of us just refused to be involved in the Nation of Islam at all. I just refused. I didn't even buy the paper, didn't buy no more bean pies, and didn't go to the restaurants, nothing, didn't do anything, any of that after they killed Malcolm, and did not begin to really associate anymore until [Minister Louis] Farrakhan came along, you see. And so many of the brothers and sisters across the country felt the same way, you see, and even when Farrakhan came in, what really affected me a great deal was the good work that the Muslims were doing with young people, especially the young men coming out of prison, you see. And so even though we knew that corruption existed at the top, we would--at least I say I would basically say "okay, well, that's going to happen. It's happening in the church. It's happening among Muslims and Islam. I'm sure it's happening, you know, in other religions, too, but let's look at what's happening with the grass roots there," and for me, what they were doing with these young men was very important, and so I allowed that to influence me at a greater level. Story_ID: 10364 Speaker 1: How would you compare the role that 'Ebony' [magazine] has played versus the role here at Third World Press [Madhubuti's publishing company]? Speaker 2: Well, I mean, 'Ebony,' Johnson Publishing Company has had a much greater influence than we've had. It's a much richer company. 'Ebony' is a magazine. We publish books, not magazines. Mr. John [H.] Johnson [publisher] does have a book publishing side of Johnson Publishing Company. In fact, it is the oldest black book publishing company in the country. We would be the third--well, behind Broadside Press [publishing company], and but that's not their major vehicle. The major vehicle, of course, is 'Ebony' and 'Jet' [magazine], you see. Ebony and Jet for the most part, as far as I'm concerned, are very are highly middle class, you see? They're not going to take any serious chances, you see. The most revolutionary writer up there is Lerone Bennett, and Lerone Bennett is now one of the best historians that we've produced in this country. He's a good friend also. I met Lerone Bennett around the same time I met Hoyt W. Fuller [journalist, editor]. So in that case, obviously it's a much richer company. It has a much wider influence than ours, and it's older than we are. We are primarily a political house. I mean, we started publishing political work very early, and our major--our best sellers are political books--'The Destruction of Black Civilization' by Chancellor Williams, 'The Isis Papers' by Frances Cress Welsing, my own 'Black Men: Single, Obsolete, Dangerous?,' the works of Useni Eugene Perkins, 'Home is a Dirty Street,' the works of Gwendolyn Brooks [poet], literary books still very political in many cases. So we begin to look at our writers, you know, from Sterling Plumpp to the writers that we're publishing today. We just--Derrick Bell's books are all very political, and as a result of that, you have a certain signature in the world, and the signature is that if you pick up a piece by Third World Press, you've got to think, you see. And I'm just saying that I think you pick up 'Ebony,' you don't have to think about anything. You just look at pictures. You don't even have to be able to read. Now obviously I say this at my own detriment, you know, but ever since I picketed him twice I haven't been into 'Ebony' anyway so it doesn't really matter that much to me, but I will say that I do respect Mr. Johnson. I think that he's built a tremendous company, and I think that in his whole sphere of the world, he's doing what he feel is correct and right, just as I feel the same way, and I don't want to take any of that from him, and I'm sure he's had very difficult times like we've had difficult times, and I still have difficult times, but it's just two different worlds, you see. I come out of a very political world, and he did, too, at a time when he came up. You see, he had to borrow money from his mother in order to start 'Ebony' magazine so I think that in our own way we all contribute, you see, and that's why for me, I've kind of found common ground, you see, with that, and I've written for 'Ebony' before, you know, I went on this--the whole--I think maybe two articles, and they paid me rather well, but I did write a lot for 'Negro Digest/Black World,' [magazine] you see, before it was discontinued. Speaker 1: But that's what I'm trying to understand. What--was Hoyt Fuller employed by--. Speaker 2: Yes. He was employed by Johnson Publishing Company. Speaker 1: So you're talking about the work that he did was while he was there. Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: See, he worked for Johnson Publishing Company, and then, see, when he was fired as a result of publishing the articles that gave the Palestinian side of that struggle [in Israel], that's when he was fired, you see, and when he was fired by Mr. Johnson, then we went on the attack, okay, and then Mr. Johnson shared with us the problems, and then Hoyt Fuller left Chicago [Illinois] and went to Atlanta [Georgia], and and that's when we started 'First World' magazine. That's what happened there, and also Carol Parks who worked with him at Johnson Publishing Company, she also left Johnson Publishing Company because of her dedication to what Fuller--and was actually the assistant editor at 'First World' magazine. Speaker 1: And at the same time Lerone Bennett--do you think he was just a different type of person? Speaker 2: No, I think that Lerone Bennett had a family. He had children. He had mortgages. He's a historian. He and Mr. Johnson had a different kind of relationship than Hoyt Fuller. I do feel that Bennett--that Lerone Bennett was torn when Hoyt left. We did talk. He was torn, and it did stop our communication for awhile but just for a while because as I grew as a man and as I had my own family and responsibilities, I recognized that just because Hoyt took that move--Hoyt was single--that Lerone Bennett couldn't make that same move, you see, and he has a book coming out very soon that's gonna tear this--I mean, he has a book on Lincoln coming out, but he's taking a different approach to Abraham Lincoln than everybody else ['Forced into Glory: Abraham Lincoln's White Dream'], you know, so he's a very serious man, serious historian, and his book, 'Before the Mayflower,' helped to mold me, you see, as a person who's very concerned about the history of our people so he's one of the real men of this century along with the other people that I've mentioned. Story_ID: 10365 Speaker 1: I wanted to know why poetry attracted you. I mean, you could have been a journalist. I mean why--especially when you--you know, why that attracted you? Speaker 2: (nods for yes) Uh hmm. Speaker 1: And then why you opted to get into publishing and what you've learned in the process? Speaker 2: Well, the reason poetry attracted me is because it was closer to music, and I tried to become a musician, and I had heard Langston Hughes [poet, author] read his poetry to music. I listened to a lot of the musicians who were dabbing in poetry. Charlie Mingus [Charles Mingus, composer, bassist] was doing music and poetry, and so to me it was a natural song. I mean, poetry, I feel, is like the classical language, like our black music is like the classical music, and so I grew up signifying. You know, being six foot one, hundred thirty-one pounds with a sister just as pretty as my mother, and you know, every time the brothers would come after her, she'd say "I'ma get my brother on you." Well, I mean, I couldn't deal with these guys, all right, but I could out talk 'em, you see, and you know, so I would signify. And so poetry lended itself to my vocabulary and my style of, you know, writing and talking, and the more I read, the more I saw that this work could be broadened into a wider world, okay, so that's why. Now the reason I did not choose to publish with white publishers was because again what I learned from [Dr.] Margaret Burroughs [artist, educator, institution builder] and Charlie Burroughs [writer] and even Gwendolyn Brooks [poet] to a certain extent. This was the real key here. I did not feel that my work which is criticism of white supremacy--if I'm going to criticize white supremacy and then give my work which is sheer criticism to the same people I'm criticizing and then tell these people to pay me for criticizing them, it seemed to me to be a contradiction, all right. And I was not into contradictions, at least those that I could notice at that time, and so I bit the bullet and said "I'm gonna," you know, "let Broadside Press [publishing company] publish my work," like Gwendolyn Brooks had just went to Broadside Press, and Broadside Press published about maybe ten of my books, and then when it changed ownership, I decided to publish my own work here at Third World Press [Madhubuti's publishing company]. You know, that's basically it. Story_ID: 10366 Speaker 1: What lessons have you learned as a publisher and a publisher of basically this, you know, black political thought or you know also--. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But what have you learned? Speaker 2: Well, I've learned how to work with writers, and I've learned to be not only respectful of poets and writers but to understand how fragile many of the egos are because of we've been locked out so much. And I think that my ego has not had to take that kind of term because I decided that "I'm just gonna do this myself," but what happens all too often most writers are not able to do this [run a publishing company]. They're writers, and they feel that that's all they have time to do and all they can do, and I've been blessed to be a multidisciplined person and being able to not only write poetry and essays but to teach, be an educator, a businessman, poetry, and institution founding, but I work a long day. I put in sixteen, seventeen hours a day, but I came out of struggle, and I don't think that all the poets necessarily--most of them today didn't come out of struggle. They've come out of reading books. You see, there's a profound difference there, that as a person coming out of struggle, then what I see, I look at everything in terms of struggle, all right. And other people, they come from a generation now that's saying, you know, "art for art's sake." Well, for us art was art for people's sake, and that art was to serve a purpose rather than just to be on a page or be on the canvas or be on the stage, you see what I'm saying, that it was always a political purpose. That does not mean that it cannot be enjoyed and that we do not talk about the real subjects of the world, etcetera, etcetera, and we do not laugh and smile and so forth, but there was always this higher purpose, how--and there's this--Anderson Thompson [scholar] talks about this African principle which is "the greatest good for the greatest number of people," and that has been the principle I've tried to live by. "What's the greatest good for the greatest number?" So therefore since I've been blessed with the ability to dance with words and the ability for my books to sell, then I felt I need to put the money back into helping other people, and that's what we've tried to do in our own minor way, and that's how Third World Press [Madhubuti's publishing company] came about, and that's how it exists today, and we're gonna continue to transform ourselves and obviously try to move into a money-making company, and I think I have the people around here now to do that. You see, we moved from break-even to making serious money, but even as we do that, that money will be used in a way that's gonna continue to transform this community and transform the lives of our people. I'm not interested in becoming quote unquote "rich to be for rich's sake." I'm not interested. In fact, there's nothing I want. You see, I'm probably one of the few black men in the world that I have everything I want personally, in terms of my family, in terms of material needs. There's nothing I want. I'm saying that my kids know that there's nothing I want for the holidays, you know, because I don't need anything. I just don't need anything personally. What I need is to make sure that, you know, the Stateway Gardens [public housing project, Chicago, Illinois] and that the projects all around this country are just torn down, and people are given livable places to live. That's what I need. That would satisfy me, where people are--especially poor people and especially women and young children who are misused all over the world are not misused anymore, not abused sexually, not abused psychologically anymore. That's what I want. You see what I'm saying? So you say "what's your price? What kind of price?" That's my price, you see? I'm saying if you walked in here, if somebody walked in here with a million dollars or, say, walked in with thirteen million dollars and said "I'll give you thirteen million dollars for Third World Press," I'm not going to take it. I'm not going to take it because that doesn't solve the problem, all right, that the problem is a much larger problem, and I think that only as long as we keep our voices out there where you say "this is an alternative where the young brothers and sisters can get published and where the words are not going to be edited out," then it exists, you see, and as a result of Third World Press existing, other black presses have come into existence also, you see. That's what's important to me. Story_ID: 10367 Speaker 1: And so what I'm concerned about is the existence of an alternative, all right, because corporate America basically has taken over and will continue to take over, and unless we have independent structures, you see, in all the areas, independent structures--whether it's in film, whether it's in literature, whether it's in--I don't care where. We have to have independent structures, and I don't care. To me it doesn't matter whether these independent structures are black or white or Asian or women. It doesn't matter as long as they're trying to do good work. Now I had stopped working with white people in the Civil Rights Movement because I felt that in many cases they just wanted to either take over or they were treacherous, okay, but about maybe ten years ago, maybe a little less, Robert Bly [poet] called me who is, you know, a fine poet, a man who is very serious about the men's movement. Of course, you know Robert Bly from 'Iron John [A Book About Men by Robert Bly]' but Robert Bly is one of the finest poets in the country, and so Robert Bly called me. This was after Etheridge Knight [poet] had died. Etheridge Knight was, of course, one of the major black poets--had died, and Robert Bly and others were doing these men's conferences, and they would have Etheridge Knight come, and so he called me and asked me would I like to come--no, not would I like, but would I come and take part. What had happened, 'Black Men [Obsolete, Single, or Dangerous?, by Haki Madhubuti]' had been published, 'Obsolete, Single, or Dangerous?' It was back in 1991, I think it was, and 'Black Men' just took off. It just took--I mean, 'Black Men' sold a million copies, all right, and that's without any national exposure, all right, but what happened, when 'Black Men' hit, the sisters began to buy it, and the sisters read it. They began to buy ten, fifteen, twenty copies and send them to brothers in prison, and the brothers in prison began to send it around the whole prison network, and now we get all these orders from these prisons, okay, and so evidently Robert Bly read the book. He called me and said "would you come to this multicultural men's conference," okay. Now I had read 'Iron John' and you know, I've been doing this men's work. I work with the National Association--what is it--National Association of Black--anyway, black men. I'll come back to the name of our group. We've been doing these men's conferences for about ten, fifteen years, okay, in retreat areas around the country, and so Bly called and asked me would I come to work with them. Story_ID: 10368 Speaker 1: Well, what I see in the future of Third World Press [Madhubuti's publishing company] is moving beyond my editorship and ownership, and what will happen most certainly within the next two or three years is that the corporate structure will change. The people I'm bringing in now will be part owners of the press, and I'm bringing in, you know, skilled persons. We're in the middle of now developing our web site, you see, and that's gonna, I think, do very well for us. I would imagine probably me and one or two of my children will come in and work here, but I'm not necessarily counting on that. The way that the structure will be is that the ownership, the majority ownership will always be me, you see. I don't think that--at one point we were thinking about going public, but it just didn't work out because I couldn't find the money to do that, and so we decided to stay private, okay, and so what I'm doing, I'm bringing in people with deep knowledge in certain areas, and they'll get part of the press in terms--or just ownership of the press. We will continue to publish political work, but we're branching off into fiction. We just published a new piece of fiction. We're going to publish another piece of fiction in about the next four or five months. We're going to go deep into children's books again, gonna stay there. We have just started a new series of women books. We got a new book on feminism that we're bringing out. I think we'll be the first black company to really deal with black feminism in the country. So that's going to be, I think, a real good seller for us in 2000. We will continue to publish young writers. I'm looking at middle level writers, writers who have been published but who have been kind of really overlooked in terms of their own publishers. We're going after some of them, and then always looking for new creative writers and the elders who have been out there that won't come out even in print anymore. As for instance Addison Gayle, Jr [author], his work is out of print. John Oliver Killens [author, scholar], much of his work is out of print so we'll be looking at writers like that. Julian Mayfield [author, political advisor], his work is out of print, and I can go on down the line, there's a whole list. So we'll be looking at out of work fiction and nonfiction writers that their works need to be in print so we'll continue to do that. So I see the future of Third World Press as being, you know, a pretty bright one. We've been able to survive an awful lot in terms of this very difficult economic time, and I do see us moving into the category of making serious money, and this money will be distributed and shared among the people who work here as well as some of it put into our school and to bring down the debt that we now carry. I've learned to be a businessman. It's been very difficult because it's always been easy to get to my heart and so (laughs)--one of the reasons I've done weak as a business manager is just to say "Haki, you can't deal with this anymore because, you know, you just give away too much," and I accepted that because it's true, and even when I get books, my own books, I buy my own books so I won't have to take it from the press so that's basically it. My daughter--as I mentioned earlier, one of my daughters--well, one daughter just received a master's degree in history, and the other daughter who is now working at 'The Source' magazine so it's a good chance that one or two of them may come back in and work at the press, and kind of continue to move on. Story_ID: 10369 Speaker 1: At my age I think I'm moving into my second life. I'm thinking about Gwendolyn Brooks [poet] when she was this age [fifty-seven] and what she was going--Gwendolyn Brooks is eighty-two years old. She'll be eighty-three this next year [2000], and I'm looking to live at least to be eighty-three, and I really want to do some serious writing myself, and what I mean by that, I want to be able to write not on planes and trains and in airports and hotels but to just to give some full time to writing, and I've tried to do that with the last book, 'Heart Love,' and I'm working on a new book called--the title is 'Tough Notes: Letters to Young Black Men,' and I think it's going to make a difference. I've been blessed. I don't take any of this for granted. I think that the creator has blessed me with a good family, good health, good people to work with, a lot of love, and I very seldom complain, you see, and I don't care how difficult things get, it seems like something always happens to make things a little bit better. So it's been a marvelous time for me, you see, and I was talking about working on this men's movement, and I do think this men's movement is going to have an impact as we move into the new century. I mentioned working with Robert Bly [poet] in his multicultural men's movement, and we went to Buffalo Gap, Virginia, and there was fifty white men and about thirty-five black men and about ten Latinos and a couple of Asians and even a couple of Native Americans, and it was strange territory for me because I had not interacted with white men at any serious level for many, many years. Obviously I work with them on a collegiate level at the university [Chicago State University, Chicago, Illinois], but that's the extent of it, but to spend a week in a camp with these guys and to really listen to them talk about their fears and talk about their problems and mainly talk about their fathers and how they could never come to any kind of a conclusion about their fathers, it just brought me back to realizing that, you know, these men have the same kind of human problems we all have, and sometimes when you're only working in your own community, you know, you can't feel it and you can see it. And so that was good to be able to do that, and I do feel that if there's a--if civilization is to survive, we'll have to deal with our children, and this is why I think that one of my major contributions to the struggle has been building these schools, that I feel that racism is a learned activity, and that when white babies, Asian babies, black babies, Native American babies come out of their mother's womb, they're not racists. They're not gangbangers. They're not rapists. They're taught to be gangbangers, rapists, racists and that it is our responsibility, mother and fathers and people who work in the struggle, to give them a better world so they can be brought into this world with smiles on their faces rather than being battered, you see, by so many different institutions and people. And I feel that that's my work, you see, and even with this new book I'm working on, 'Tough Notes: Letters to Young Black Men,' I'm basically trying to give them the benefit of my life so they don't have to go through that stuff, but most importantly for them to realize that there's now a hope, but there's a way out, you see, and what is--everybody gotta find their own community. And you find this community and you work hard in this community to be loving and truthful with this community and trusting with this community, and the community will not fail you. But if you come with a treacherous eye, then you know that's what's going to meet you there, you see. What you come with, you'll be met with, okay, and I think that I and my wife [Safisha Madhubuti] and the people that we've worked with are basically try to do good work, you see, and so that's why we're here down here in this community rather than down on North or South Michigan Avenue [Chicago, Illinois], that this is the community that needs men and women who are dealing with ideas. Story_ID: 10370 Speaker 1: So you're saying with this multicultural--that was a turning point for you in some respects. Speaker 2: Well, only in the respect that I began to work with white men. I hadn't worked with white men since the '60s [1960s] and really feel that most certainly Robert Bly [poet], James Hillman [psychologist], and Brother Mead are very serious, and I met another guy by the name of John Densmore [musician]. John Densmore--for those of you who do not know him will recognize him when I tell you he was a drummer for the Doors, and he's a very serious man. In fact, he came to that conference with two black men, all right, and we had long talks while we were there, and as a result of that, he became one of the benefactors for our school [Institute of Positive Learning, Chicago, Illinois]. He's put close to $20,000 of his own money into our school, and he's invested in Third World Press also, and so that relationship came about as a result of my going to that [multicultural men's] conference, and the relationship with Robert Bly, I think, is very positive, too, and other men I've met as a result of that. Speaker 1: But in a lot of respects you were coming as equals, too at that point. Speaker 2: It had to be that way. Speaker 1: (simultaneously) It's different--. Speaker 2: Oh, it had to be that way. Speaker 1: It's different. Speaker 2: It had to be that way. I wouldn't have gone any other way. Story_ID: 10371 Speaker 1: Let's talk about the school and the role that the school has had, and what is even the ideology behind the school? Speaker 2: Well, our school, New Concept School and the Betty Shabazz International Charter School [at the Institute of Positive Learning, Chicago, Illinois], are what we call African-centered schools, and when we say African-centered school, okay, it's the same level that other people, other ethnic groups, and other cultures say "this is a Catholic school" or "this is a Jewish day school." It's that basically we try to fuse within the context of our curriculum our African ideals, African principles, and African family values that are not anti-life. They're not anti-life but give life and allow us to essentially not only be competitive in this world, but to be able to be men and women, produce men and women who are productive. An example--the graduating class of--I'm talking about higher education--we produced five engineers this year so I'm saying in the major colleges and universities in this country, five of our students came out as engineers, all right, and two of them went on to graduate school at Penn State [Pennsylvania State University, State College, Pennsylvania], one to get an MBA [Master of Business Administration] and one to get a master's degree in engineering, so I'm saying that we can look at all over the country our students have come out of New Concept School and--well, Betty Shabazz was just started two years ago--but who are going to be major players in the United States, and so for us and for me most certainly I felt there were two areas we had to impact. One was education, and the other was communication, you see, so our school was education and then the press [Third World Press, Madhubuti's publishing company] was at the communication area, and I felt that if we could make an impact in these two areas, then our legacy would be there, and then we would be able to produce good men and good women to carry on this work, and as far as the school is concerned, it's probably one of the few independent schools in the country that has a very strong alumni, and these alumni are young brothers and sisters that came out of our school, went on to public schools or other private schools, and were studying at colleges and universities across the country and who have not forgotten that it all started right here on the South Side of Chicago [Illinois], you see, and that's, I think for us, has been one of the reasons that we continue to go on because they feed us, and we feed back into those institutions over there. Story_ID: 10372 Speaker 1: I know that there--a lot of--you know, there are a lot of middle-class black parents trying to deal with those issues, and I don't think very effectively. Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, I think that my daughters went down to Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia], and so you had that whole Atlanta complex, and you see a lot of spoiled children down there, and to listen to my daughters talk about some of the nonsense that went on in terms of their studies down there, not necessarily with the schools but with dealing with the other students, that you're right. I think that there is a crisis among our young black middle-class children, and I think this major crisis has to do with buying into the material culture and buying into this culture to the point where you cannot even go outside unless you have certain jeans on or certain shoes on, which is really nonsense. And so consumerism has really, I think, failed us and has been part of the downfall, the continuing downfall within the context of our communities, and the best example I can give for that would be my wife [Safisha Madhubuti]. She did a three-year stint--project at Fenger High School, and so Fenger High School which is located on the South Side of Chicago [Illinois] is in a relatively middle-class community, and my question is that why do we go into these middle-class communities and where the black folks have nice homes, nice cars--they're furnished very nicely--and the school's all messed up? And I think that the reason is because the values are incorrect. It's not like--I mean, I would never go back to poverty. I wouldn't wish that on anybody, but at the same time, it seems that we invest all this capital into becoming middle-class. We need to invest the same type of capital into our intellectual side, too, and that's not happening. If that was happening, we would have nice middle-class homes and good middle-class schools, too, but at some point the material takes over, you see, so you got mothers and fathers working in order to maintain the material side, but they're not doing the same kind of work to maintain the intellectual side or to develop the intellectual side, and that, I think, is a value and a cultural problem, you see. And what we try to do over here at our schools is to invest into intellectual capital. We said how do we begin to bring these young people out of these schools where they begin able to think for themselves, able to produce for themselves but, just as importantly, able to go out into the world and challenge the nonsense in this world, you see, and each of them--generally these students are able to do that when they leave Betty Shabazz [International Charter School, Chicago, Illinois] or New Concept School [Chicago, Illinois]. Story_ID: 10373 Speaker 1: What are your views about the Civil Rights Movement? I mean, do you think it was a good thing or a bad thing? I mean, you lived though that. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, and you were in the struggle, but when all is said and done, what are your views? Speaker 2: I think it was absolutely necessary. I think that the Civil Rights Movement, or I would prefer Human Rights Movement, was absolutely necessary, needed, and has been very beneficial. See, there's a price you pay for liberation. There's a price you pay for freedom, and see, once you achieve freedom at certain levels, you have the right at that level to develop and to be productive or you have the right to destruct. You see what I'm saying? Freedom for many people was the okay to go ahead toward self-destruction, you see, because "now I can do this, I can do that, and I can do it in more places than I have been able to do it before." Freedom requires discipline, and it requires goals and objectives agreed upon by many people, most certainly families and cultural communities and so forth, and I still think that a great many people are like torn asunder out there on their own like live wire and not attached to anybody so freedom means that essentially you can do what you want to do, and so if you can do what you want to do, you can go out here and self-destruct not only yourself but in the context of your community, too. That's what freedom means, you see. And so I think that in many cases where we failed, in terms of our struggle, is not building the type of institutions that will attach themselves to all these children who have suddenly found themselves able to go out here and do what they want to do, all right. Most certainly as I speak to you this afternoon, there are about a million and a half young black men locked up [in prison], okay. These young black men are locked up, Latino young men are locked up, and young poor white males are locked up primarily because they got caught out here at a level of freedom, you see, that did not structure their lives to where they'd become much more productive or did not even give them jobs so they would not have to go out here selling drugs and, you know, pushing the underground economy, all right. And so I will never put down what happened in the '60s [1960s]. I think the '60s [1960s] changed the world and most certainly changed America for the best, but you must understand that as we came out of the '60s [1960s], you had a whole right wing who was organized and who were very upset because they didn't have any more slaves, all right. Who's gonna do this kind of work, this slavery work, and so black folks said "I'm not doing it anymore," all right, and it's a little bit more complex than that, but the point I'm trying to make is that the right wing has always been organized, and they become even more organized as we moved into the '80s [1980s] and into the '90s [1990s], and as a result of that, now they're trying to reverse everything that came about in the '60s [1960s], and I think that affirmative action is one of the major--I was speaking at Penn State [Pennsylvania State University, State College, Pennsylvania] about four weeks ago, and it was very clear that affirmative action for white folks at Penn State works. If your father went there, your mother went there, you can go there. Your grandfather, grandmother went there, you can go there. You see, if your aunt or uncle developed endowments, you can go there. You see what I'm saying? The white children--and this is not all across the board. I mean, poor white children are in the same kind of position we're in. I understand that, but I'm saying the white middle-class children, upper-middle-class children for the most part do have a way out. They don't have to go through this kind of stuff. Now we're not--when we say affirmative action, we're not trying to give black children, or Latino children, or Native American children a free ride. You see what I'm saying? If they can't pull their weight, they're not going to be able to stay there. That's even at Chicago State University [Chicago, Illinois], you see, but what has happened is that because I think we have been effective--see, it's just like in any area. We have competent people. Well--so let's say if you play ball, if you play football, you're not going to be on the team unless you can hack it. I don't care what color you are because it is war every weekend, all right. Now you look at the National Football League, and you look at the National Basketball League--many black players, all right. Now you look at [Senator] Bill Bradley [politician, basketball player]. He has a different kind of respect for black people because he played basketball with some of the best basketball players in the world, all right, and so he had a different line of respect. You see, these guys--there's no affirmative action here. These guys--yes, if it isn't affirmative action, they affirm their own action, and they're doing the job--so I'm saying essentially that black people going into any area, you're going to have that same type of response, and we're going to be able to rise to the level of competency, you see, and go beyond that because one thing that I know for a fact that we were told--at least I was told as a child "you always got to be better. You've got to be twice as good. You've got to be twice as good," and that hasn't changed, you see, and so as a result of that, all we got to do is get into the doors of finance. We got to get into the doors of academe. Just get into the door. We already made our tracks in music, you see? We already made it in athletics. You see what I'm saying? Wherever we're able to go into, we're gonna excel, but there are certain doors, they're just locking us down, don't want us in there. Story_ID: 10374 Speaker 1: But some people would say that we've lost--we've won the war but lost our souls. Speaker 2: Oh, I don't believe that. I think some people lost their souls. I don't think--I feel that some people never had souls, all right, and--but I think that for the most part the average black person out here want to do--let me tell you this. [Dr.] Andrew Billingsley [sociologist] wrote a very important book, 'Climbing Jacob's Ladder,' and he states in that book that about somewhere between 24 and 25 percent, maybe a little bit less, are in trouble, black folks, economically, you see, culturally, who have no understanding of what's happening in the world, but 75, 76 percent--these are working mothers and fathers taking care of their children, giving direction, their children going to college and universities across this country. It's working, all right. Now we all have our issues, but if it was more than 23, 24 percent, none of us would be able to walk around here at all, you see, so what I'm saying is at one level that--our school, we got over 300 students over there [Institute of Positive Learning, Chicago, Illinois]. That's an African-centered school. You have to have a certain level of consciousness to even want to send your children over there, you see. So I don't buy into the victimization of our struggle. I think that our struggle has empowered us more than it has victimized us, and yes, there will always be opportunists, and there will always be pimps, men and women who are pimps and will pimp anything that comes out, you see. That mindset is a part of America's mindset. This is a capitalist country and capitalism--you're essentially trying to buy and sell, all right, and I don't think that we are exempt from that, you see. We have black men and women who all they want to do is buy and sell, but I think for the most part, the great majority of black men and women here are working hard to try to make this a better world for everybody, and this struggle that we came out of in the '60s [1960s] helped us to get to where we are now. Were mistakes made? Absolutely, you see, but I think that the good that came out of the '60s [1960s] far outweigh the mistakes that were made during that period and even today. Story_ID: 10375 Speaker 1: As a black man, what are your views about the Million Man March? Speaker 2: Well, I help organized it, you know. We sat right in this room, Benjamin Chavis Muhammad [activist], Minister Louis Farrakhan [Nation of Islam leader], [Dr.] Maulana Karenga [author, activist, Kwanzaa founder], Bob Law [activist]. I can go all along the line--Rev. Frank Reid out of Baltimore Bethel church. We sat right in this room organizing this Million Man March because we saw some problems with it. We saw some problems with it in terms of exclusion. We saw some problems with it in terms of the goals and objectives of it, and we really rewrote the call here. Dr. Karenga took the messages that he received from this body here and went back to California and rewrote the call, and so we were involved in it. I think the Million Man March for what it did was very important, and what you must understand and what people must understand is even though the Nation of Islam was the primary organizers that called the Million Man March, those persons who came were primarily non-Muslims, you see. You're talking about seventy--I would say about seventy, over 75 or 80 percent of the men and women who came there, and women did come, but mainly the men who came were not Muslims. These were basically Christians, you see, Hebrew Israelites or men and women who are not involved with any kind of major denomination, you see. The small majority were Muslims so now what I saw that day, and I took my sons with me, and what I saw that day was essentially a spiritual uplifting, and this spiritual uplifting, I had never seen it before in my life. And that the smiles and tears that these men shared among themselves were not smiles and tears of hate, were not smiles and tears of anti-this or anti-that, but they were smiles and tears of "we can do it ourselves," and each of these men, most certainly myself when I left that march, came back with a different type of energy and a different type of connectedness to this--you know what I'm saying because you had over a million men there, and I'm saying that any time you can put a million men some place, black men someplace, who paid their way, all right, through great sacrifice, you see, and come there and connect and commune with each other and just look in each other's eye and just say "I love you" and that "you're my brother," and "I'm trying to do better," that to me was worth it, you see. Now, do I think that we need to keep doing Million Man's March? Absolutely not. I don't think that there should be anymore, you see, maybe not for another ten years. You see, I think that now we have to get back in our communities and continue to do the work that's necessary in terms of building these institutions, maintaining our families, making sure our children get the best that they can receive. I have to keep getting back to I think that the future is in the hands of our children, but they have got to have a chance, you see. They have got to have a chance to come through our family structures and community structures and receive love, and the other component they've got to receive very early is art. Why art? I remember for me, what kept me off the streets was trying to play the trumpet, you see, and then, of course, I found poetry a little bit later on. Most certainly for my own biological children, we put our children through art and everything, and I'm saying that making sure they understand that there are greater questions out here--there are greater questions out here. So I'm saying at one point family is key, art is important, and of course, a spiritual base, and whether the spiritual base is Christianity, or Islam, or Judaism, Hinduism, Buddhism, I don't really care. I'm not getting into anybody's religious wars, but I think that we have to have a spiritual connection, so I'm not going to join this group over here and then fight this group over here. It doesn't make any sense to me. I think that as men and women that there's something out here larger than all of us, okay, and whether I can define it, or you can define it, or whether--but each culture has its own definitions, and for me always the question has been who's right? You see what I'm saying? Are the Sikhs right? Are the Hindus right? Are Christians and Muslims right? Are the Yoruba right? Are the Arkan right, and I'm saying they're all right. They're all right, they're all correct, and they're all wrong and all incorrect. You see what I'm saying? They're incorrect when they're trying to say, "okay, this is the only way," all right, but when you reach out and say, "okay, we all have a part of the answer," then I think that is when we can begin to move, you see, and I think that's the major problem in whether you're Jewish or whether you're Muslim and whether you're Christian or whether you're Muslim. Well, it doesn't matter to me. That just doesn't matter to me. The point is what good do you have in your heart and how do you rise above the limited expectations of others and then try to do the kind of work and within the contents of that work kind of give the kind of love and the kind of spirit that would encourage others to do the same type of work, you see. And so the Million Man March was pivotal, it was historical, it was extremely important, you see, but at the same time a lot of mistakes were made, all right, and one of the greatest mistakes made was basically there was no database created. You see, we got a million men there, and we don't know where they are now. We didn't get names and addresses of all these million men, all right. We were too busy trying to collect money, all right, and so for the short-term goal, the larger goal was lost I think at one level, and so I'm saying that would be my criticism and--but I would never go-- I would never say it was not valuable because it was. Story_ID: 10376 Speaker 1: But Spike Lee [director, screenwriter] is an entertainer, you know. That--what he's trying to do, I think he went in trying to make movies that made a statement, and I think he has done that, but I think that he failed in many ways in terms of 'Get on the Bus' because it was nothing to do with about the [Million Man] March at all, and with 'Malcolm X,' I think he just dwelled too much on Malcolm X's young life, and I think that was really taking leave of--I mean, his interpretation was not necessarily correct. Story_ID: 10377 Speaker 1: I went [to Spike Lee's film 'Malcolm X'] with Betty Shabazz [activist, wife of Malcolm X] and the children, which is interesting to tell, I think, in itself because when Malcolm was murdered, assassinated, I was twenty-one and again with few resources and just hurt, but I promised myself that once I became older and with some resources, I would contact the Shabazz family and offer my assistance, and that's essentially what happened. It happened by my--you know, when we named Malcolm X College [Chicago, Illinois] here. Betty Shabazz and I were on the same flight going to New York [New York], and I introduced myself, and we began to talk and began to communicate and from that point on began to develop a kind of a familyhood. This National Wholistic Society--I was trying to think of the name National Black Wholistic Society. We put these retreats on in upstate New York at the now--which is the Betty Shabazz Wholistic Retreat, and we would invite Dr. Shabazz up to come spend time with us, and so she did come and became very relaxed and we became very close, and when Qubilah Shabazz was accused of trying to plan assassination of [Minister] Louis Farrakhan [Nation of Islam leader] when she was up in St. Paul, Minnesota, then Betty and I had become so close that she didn't even have to call me or nothing. I just got on the next plane and went to St. Paul, and we were having a news conference that next morning just before they went into court. I walked in. Of course, she smiled and so wanted to know what I was doing there, and I said "what kind of a question is that," that "I wasn't there when you lost your husband. I'm not going to stand by and let your daughter be taken without some brothers coming to respond," so we--you know, I was there, and as you know, we got through that because of lawyers like Kessler [sic, William Kunstler] and lawyers like Percy Sutton and others. Now as a result of that, especially interaction with the Nation of Islam because I had talked to Farrakhan before I left, Minister Farrakhan before I left, and he told me to tell Dr. Shabazz that if there's anything that he can do, let him know because he's not buying into this, you see. And so I let her know, and she said "thank you," and I went back and talked to him. He said "what can we do," and at that time we didn't know what was going to happen, but we needed money real badly, and so he said he wanted to raise some money for the family, and he asked me "do you think that Dr. Shabazz would meet with me," and I said "I don't know, but I'll ask her and just see and talk about it." Well, anyway to make a long story short, I did convey that message to her, and she said that she would definitely like to just meet and just kind of begin to talk this out and see what we can do, and so what happened was that we set up this meeting at the Apollo Theater [Harlem, New York], and that's when they had this gigantic meeting and fundraiser at the Apollo for Qubilah Shabazz. So my association with the family has been one of, you know, kind of a young brother to her and to the children a big brother, you see. I'm very close to the children, the girls now, and I'm working with Attallah Shabazz in this--we've got this retreat up--Upstate New York. It's the Betty Shabazz Holistic Retreat Center in Otisville, New York, and so I'm saying essentially is that we are here. I mean, I, and I think that what we've kind of created are here because Malcolm X passed this way. Betty Shabazz passed this way. [Dr] Martin Luther King [Jr] passed this way. Medgar Evers [civil rights activist] passed this way. We can go on down the line. Nat Turner [slave rebellion leader], Gabriel Prosser [slave rebellion leader] and Harriet Tubman [abolitionist] and Sojourner Truth [orator, activist] all passed this way. Paul Robeson [actor, author, activist] passed this way so I'm standing on, you know, large shoulders, and when you stand on shoulders like that, then you can't fail. I mean, you have disappointments, but you get up and you do your meditation now, your prayer, and you just keep on going, and you find good people to work with, and that's what struggle is about. You see, struggle is not about giving up because there's always going to be failure, you see, and what failure does, it either wipes you out and destroys you or it makes you stronger, you see, and with the type of history that we have behind us, it makes us stronger because we know that our mothers and our fathers have gone through much worse than what we have, you see. Story_ID: 10378 Speaker 1: What are your hopes for, you know, African-American people? What are your hopes or dreams? Speaker 2: Well, I would hope and I would work for us becoming much more empowered in this country. What our people do not realize is that on one level the richness of this country. I mean, just take the kind of richness of a Bill Gates [Microsoft founder], all right, and understand that in many cases we have to be on the cutting edge of development whether it's in electronics or in health care, in agriculture, that we have to be there to make our voices heard. And what I see all too often now is that we are, you know, we are workers. We work for other people rather than for ourselves, and what I write about and what I believe is that we have to move toward ownership. But ownership starts with owning oneself, you see, and so I think that there's ownership of self and then you move out to, you know, ownership within the context of one's family and community and so forth. It just moves out from the circle, but what happens all too often, we go into these major institutions, and we come out just going to get a job, you see. But where our students [of the Institute of Positive Learning, Chicago, Illinois] come out understanding yes, indeed, if one is an engineer, you may have to work in the engineering field for three or four years, but after that you're going to make another move, you see, and move toward going back, getting an MBA [Master of Business Administration], and then move toward owning your own company but ownership not just for ownership's sake but ownership in terms of how do we make better lives for the great majority of people? It gets back to the African principle, "the greatest good for the greatest number of people." It's not the greatest good for just a few millionaires or multimillionaires or billionaires. I have no interest in that whatsoever at all, you see. In fact, if I died a millionaire in the sense of hoarding a whole lot of money, I'd consider my life a failure. So I think that essentially what we must do is that we must be giving people and recognize that there are so many--as I talk to you, there are literally millions of young people going to sleep every night not even having fresh water, not even food. I'm talking about fresh water, so I think it's our responsibility, my responsibility to make sure that whatever we do, we're working toward creating better worlds for everybody. And obviously we start where we are with my own people, but we are indeed a universal people--but I think black people brought to this country a level of humanism that they were unexpected, you see? I'm saying any time people can come out of the type of horrific and genocidal experiences that our people come out of and still love, what else can we be? We're the people who are bringing light to this country, you see, and I think with that kind of light, it will continue on because that's basically the type of people we are, you see, and so it's my responsibility to make sure that that light is magnified a hundredfold in whatever I can do and whatever we can do as a people together. Story_ID: 10379 Speaker 1: What are your hopes for black writers? I mean, black writers are enjoying really a pretty good time. Speaker 2: Some of them, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I would say maybe about twenty, twenty-five black writers in the country who are able to live off their work. I'm not talking about newspaper people. I'm talking about creative writers for the most part, which is much better than from the era which I came which probably the only black writer at that time was Langston Hughes able to make a living at writing, but yes, now it has happened, and I might say that one--see, one of the reasons that I got into academe because I peeped white writers, that many of the white writers of my time were getting these writers in residence [positions] in these major colleges and universities, and they were allowed to write a great deal. That's what we have for Gwendolyn Brooks [poet]. Gwendolyn Brooks is a Distinguished Professor at Chicago State [University, Chicago, Illinois], but her major responsibility is just to write, you see. Now in terms of your question, when you look at the Walter Mosleys [author], when you look at the Terry McMillans [author] the Toni Morrisons [author], the Alice Walkers [author], the Gayl Jones [author], when you look at writers like that and others, all I can do is smile and say more power to 'em, you see, because at least the writers that I mentioned are very concerned writers, and they are helping the communities in many different ways. Walter Mosley is a phenomenal man, you see. Toni Morrison is a phenomenal woman. Maya Angelou [poet, author, director], who is clearly a millionaire, but she is a millionaire who has not lost her vision on community and continues to support her community so I'm saying Alice Walker--I can go all down the line so I'm saying that essentially--but those writers mentioned basically come out of struggle, too, you see, and as a result of that struggle, they said "okay, I know I made it now, but I have not made it unless these other writers are making it." I mean, Sonia Sanchez [poet, playwright], Amiri Baraka [author, scholar, philosopher]--I mean, these people are very serious about struggle and very serious about their book, and these are first-rate writers, you see, and so I feel very encouraged about what I see, and of course, I have a different kind of contact with all of them since I put on this major writer conference at Chicago State every year [Gwendolyn Brooks Center Writers Conference], but for the most part these people have come in and have not only donated their time but given money back to the university, you see, so I--and even with Oprah Winfrey [television personality]. You know, a lot of people like to put Oprah Winfrey down, but I say more power to her and what she's done for literature and primarily white literature, but--she's highlighted a few black writers, too, most certainly Toni Morrison, Ernest Gaines [author], Pearl Cleage [author], Edwidge Danticat [author], and so I'm saying they have been able to--and most certainly Maya Angelou, like a grandmother--that as a result of what Miss Winfrey has done is that she's put literature and most certainly black literature and literature of other folks back on the map, you see, and so for her to receive this award, the National Book Award, this year [1999] I think was apropos, and I applaud her for that so I think that literature--and so where people watching her, and many black folks who would not read are now reading, you see. Iyanla Vanzant [author] has been put on the map because of Oprah Winfrey, and all I can say is more power to them, you see. I think that--and what I've learned from Gwendolyn Brooks is that we all make our own space, our own time, and believe me, I just feel good about these people able to make it, you see. There's no jealousy in my heart. There's no ill feelings in my heart. I do feel sometimes they probably can do a little bit more, but that's them in their time. Something has to speak to them to do what they have to do, and that's fine, and so again I get back to where I started with is that I'm blessed as an individual and blessed in many ways which very few people can even ever understand, and if I can get up every day and continue to do this kind of work, then I think I'm doing my work, and I think that if there's good in the world, and you try to do good, then good will come back. Now I'm not--this is not mysticism with me, and I'm not even trying to get into a mystical thing. I'm not even talking about new age or nothing like that. I'm saying essentially is I do believe there is order in this world, you see. There's order and there's chaos, you see, and this order and this chaos is fighting every day, all right, and I think that those of us who are involved in trying to maintain order, we have to get up every day and battle, you see. You just can't rest. I mean, you can rest, but you can't rest, you see. There's always this fighting that's going on, and what I learned from Miss Brooks is that we can be winners in this fight, you see, and we can be mild-mannered winners. We don't have to be bragging about it. We just say well, you know, we had a good day and keep on going, you see. Story_ID: 10380 Speaker 1: What have you written that you're most proud of and why? Speaker 2: I think most writers and I, you know--well, I think I've written a few good books, you know. I was going to say my last book, 'Heart Love,' but I really--I'm proud of 'Don't Cry, Scream.' That was my third book, you see. I think I really cut some new ground in 'Don't Cry, Scream.' I'm very proud of my first book of essays which is 'From Plan to Planet [Life Studies: The Need for Afrikan Minds and Institutions],' you know, building independent institutions and minds, and what I was trying to do in 'Planet'--and I think that in 'Plan to Planet' I laid the groundwork for a whole lot of the African-centered thought, even though I may not get credit for it, but I know I did that. That was published in 1973. I'm very proud of 'Black Men: Obsolete, Single, [or] Dangerous?' because I got literally thousands of letters as a result of 'Black Men' hitting, and my selected poems, you know, 'Groundwork,' and of course, my last book, 'Heart Love.' I went into love poems. What I was trying to do with 'Heart Love' is to say essentially that we are lovers, you know, and that we can write about love and that we need love. We need men and women to love, and if that does happen, then we'd be much better people. The book I'm working on now, I think it's going to be a significant book. Now the important thing about my work and me is I think that I have somewhat of a national exposure without ever being published in book form by white people. No other writer at the level that I am can say that, no other writer, you see, and--have never been published in book form. My essays and my poems have been published in individual anthologies and stuff like that, but for me, I always felt that we could do it. We can garner a certain level of respect and other people to buy the work, you see, if we just stay on it and work hard at doing it, and so that does mean a great deal to me, you see, because I've had offers just like everybody else. I got one with Random House [publishing company] and University of Illinois Press, and I've had offers from, you know, several presses, but I decided to stay and try to build Third World Press [Madhubuti's publishing company]. Story_ID: 10381 Speaker 1: But will you comment on how you feel your writing has changed over the years? In this second phase what do you want to sort of explore? Speaker 2: The changes I think, because I think I've become a better writer--I learned craft primarily from Gwendolyn Brooks [poet] in terms of listening to her, reading her, and being a part of her workshops and obviously reading other writers, too. I still read a great deal so I think that my words are more careful. I talked about in one of my books, 'We Walk the Way of the New World,' that my lines have become longer, okay, and I think that that still exists. I think that my work is much more contemplative now because I'm fifty-seven years old, and so you, you know, you live--when I got past fifty--fifty for me was like a freedom time. It was like "wow, I made it," and that all of a sudden you don't have to make excuses anymore. If you've lived a half a century, so that means that you can give more, and these people should halfway listen to it. And so more contemplative, more meditative. I think it still has the same kind of fire and passion to it, and I think that the work, for the most part, ceased to be as didactic or as ideological as before, okay. If you look at 'Enemies: The Clash of Races' or look at some of the early work, I'm saying "boom--this is it. There's no other way." Well, I don't feel that way. I feel that there are many ways, you see, and I think we have--we all find a path, and we find a path, and it's a good path. You stay on the path, and you try to come to a common circle together, and you've gotta have this common circle, and I realized that the world is a very small place, you see, and my problem is that you have--not only the world is a very small place, you have a very small number of people running the world, all right, and most of these people, I feel are very corrupt, all right, so it doesn't matter whether the corruption comes from the Middle East among the oil barons, you see, or comes from Europe, you see. That--I lost my innocence in Rwanda you see what I'm saying? Black people--I don't believe in black superiority. I don't believe in any kind of superiority. I think that we are all flawed, and human beings are flawed, and so I'm saying that we're the people that kill other people, and I still haven't gotten over what happened in Rwanda and Burundi, and it hurt me so badly that I just couldn't even talk for awhile because I just couldn't believe that black people would do that to each other, you see, and of course, we moved from, you know, Rwanda over to, you know, Bosnia and Kosovo. And so I'm saying that there's this human gene of violence, this human gene where I can never visualize raping anybody, you see, and--but it happens every day, millions of times probably in a day, and most certainly I could not ever visualize hurting children. I don't care who the children are. I could never--I don't care how much a parent has hurt me or my family. I could never kill a baby of any race or a child of any race, you see what I'm saying. And even from that war, I would not go into a war situation. I've been taught to be a warrior. I cannot go into a war situation and inflict that kind of harm and death on a child, you see, or on a mother. I just I will not do it, okay. And I think that's the way we have to begin to raise our sons, you see. I just came from a meeting at the Ford Foundation [charitable organization] with [Dr.] Johnetta B. Cole [scholar, educator] and [Dr.] Beverly Guy-Sheftall [scholar, educator], two of the major thinkers in this whole feminist talk, gender talk, and that's what we did for four days, do this gender talk. And what I try to do at my work, most certainly 'From Plan to Planet [Life Studies: The Need for Afrikan Minds and Institutions]', is talk to brothers around the equality of men and women, you see. And I have a very important essay in a book of essays called 'Claiming Earth: [Race, Rage, Rape, Redemption: Blacks Seeking a Culture of Enlightened Empowerment]' on how to teach young--how to teach men to be anti-rapists, you see, that I think I'm one of the first black men to ever write deeply on that subject, how to become an anti-rapist, and I just cannot say--and I think the key to being an anti-rapist is really what do you think about your sister? What do you think about your mother? What do you think about your own daughters? Now can you visualize somebody raping your mother, your daughter, your sister, your grandmother? Now if you can say no to that, how can you rape somebody else's mother, sister, granddaughter, or daughter, you see? It doesn't make any sense to me, but you have to have that kind of passion, this kind of passion for looking for the good in people rather than always going to war, you see, and I think that's what's happening now. In all too many instances we're on a war footing, okay, and for men who are oppressed, that's the only way--see, when you're oppressed, the only way you can respond is fight, is that you got to go to war and, you see, these million and a half young black brothers locked up across this country, that's where they are. They're on a war footing. If I don't get to them or if somebody like me don't get to them, we're in deep trouble, you see. Story_ID: 10382 Speaker 1: As a poet, what do you think about rap? Speaker 2: I think rap is like in many cases where we were in the '60s [1960s] with our poetry so I'm saying the precursor to rap is what--the black poets and the Black Arts Movement, all right. You look at my early poetry, and you'll see this kind of--boom--this gunfire, but the problem with rap is that it's not political in many cases, and two, it is not historically-based, that I would not be where I am today if I had not come through Claude McKay [poet, author], if I had not come through Melvin Tolson [poet], if I had not come through Robert Hayden [poet], Gwendolyn Brooks [poet], Margaret Walker Alexander [author, poet], and so I'm saying therefore I have that weight, you see, that protein to stand on. Many of these young rappers haven't read anything, all right. But I feel that it does have great promise, you see, but it has not reached its promise. And my daughter works with them every day [at 'The Source' magazine], and she has the same kind of criticism, and most certainly since that much of rap is very sexist, you see. Story_ID: 10383 Speaker 1: What do you want to be remembered for? Speaker 2: Well, I would like to be remembered primarily just being a good man, you see. I'm not really concerned about this legacy of being a great writer and all of that. I think I'm a good writer, and I think I'm going to be a much better writer, but I would just like to really be remembered as a good man, a man who cared and a man who really--see, I don't even see what I do as a sacrifice. I see it as a commitment. I think there's a profound difference between sacrifice and commitment, and I think that my commitment is an undying commitment, and I would just like people to say "well, you know, Haki did a good job," you know, and "we're gonna continue to try to do, you know, what he did. It might not be the same thing, but we're gonna try to do good work," and that is simply it, and I learned that again from Gwendolyn Brooks, this spirit of kindness, the kind of spirit of--that if you do good and if there's good in the world, then you'll get credit for it, you see. It's not about winning prizes and all of that stuff. I'll never win any serious prizes, I don't think, but I'd like to be remembered as a good man and a good father, a good husband, and most certainly at that next level, you know, a good writer, you know. Story_ID: 10384 Speaker 1: You know, you talked about your mother [Maxine Graves Lee] and her death. Speaker 2: (Nods for "yes") Speaker 1: And you found her. What was that experience like? Speaker 2: Well, it was horrific. I mean, it just--it's like a shocking experience because her face was all messed up. She had been cut up, and so I went into a kind of level of shock, you know, and what happened essentially that she had gone out that evening and didn't come back, and so I knew where all the hotels were where they [prostitutes] would take the men, and I just went from hotel to hotel looking for her and, you know, found her so it was a shocking experience, and it will always stay with me. And which is the kind of experience I would never wish on any child, you see, because I was a child, you know, and even though I thought I was a man, I was still a child, and I didn't cry. I didn't cry until after she was buried, and that's when I cried, but when I cried, I cried alone, you know. Actually, it was on the bus coming to Chicago [Illinois] because, you know, you--at that time I was very young. I didn't have--I didn't know what was going to happen. I didn't know what I was going to do and the literature--again, I kept going back to the literature. I kept reading the literature, and the literature said "there's hope." You know, "you can move beyond this," and just luckily I fell in a community of men and women who were strugglers and who were serious also, and as a result of that, I am the man I am today...