 Story_ID: 47897 Speaker 1: Would you give us your name and spell it for us. Speaker 2: Okay. I'm Jesse Madison. The first name is spelled J-E-S-S-E and the last name is M-A-D-I-S-O-N. The middle initial is D. Speaker 1: D stands for? Speaker 2: Donald. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Which I never use because I don't like it. Speaker 1: You don't like it? Speaker 2: No, it sounds more like two first names. Speaker 1: Your birth date please? Speaker 2: January 1, 1939. Speaker 1: You really opened up the year good. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Home city and state. Speaker 2: I was born in Memphis, Tennessee. Story_ID: 47898 Speaker 1: Okay. What is your favorite saying or phrase? Speaker 2: Oh, I guess the one that I probably use more than any others, God is good all the time. Speaker 1: And your favorite food? Speaker 2: My favorite food. I have a lot of favorite foods, as you can see. Black eyed peas is my favorite food. Speaker 1: And what about the favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Spring. Speaker 1: Favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue. Speaker 1: And when you do find time for a vacation, where is your favorite place to go? Speaker 2: Las Vegas [Nevada]. Speaker 1: That's not very relaxing. Speaker 2: Well, sure it is. If you're a conservative gambler, you can have a lot of fun and stay there very inexpensively. Story_ID: 47899 Speaker 1: All right. Parents and spell it and tell us their home town. Speaker 2: Yeah, my mother's name is Mildred, M-I-L-D-R-E-D. Her maiden name is Peterson, P-E-T-E-R-S-O-N. My father's name is Walter L. Madison. That's W-A-L-T-E-R. He's a senior, because I have a brother of the same name. Both my parents were - now my mother was born in Mississippi somewhere. I don't remember. My father was born in Osceola, Arkansas. Speaker 1: And your siblings in birth order? Speaker 2: Okay. My oldest brother, well he was my oldest brother, he's deceased now, but he was the oldest. Ernest, E-R-N-E-S-T Madison and you wanted the birth city or birth date? Speaker 1: Oh, just the name of your siblings. You don't have to give us their dates. Speaker 2: Oh, Ernest, Walter, Eugene, Elsie and Edna. Speaker 1: So it was a girl ____________. Speaker 2: No, Elsie and Edna. Two girls and four boys. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: Actually I was sandwiched between two girls. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: So, you know I had a traumatic childhood right? Speaker 1: They spoiled you rotten. Speaker 2: No, they did not. Speaker 1: That's another story. Speaker 2: They were mean to me. Story_ID: 47900 Speaker 1: When you think of growing up in the Madison household, what kind of memory comes to mind initially? What was it like? Speaker 2: Fun. Secure. Love. Poor. I say that almost jokingly because as poor as we were, we didn't know it. We ate every day. My father's first job that I recall, he made $12.50 a week. But we made it somehow. Speaker 1: And you were sandwiched between two girls, give me the experiences, the good and the bad of that. Speaker 2: Well, the good of it was that it wasn't a problem. I mean I might - the brother older than me, immediately older than me, Gene, stood up a lot of time with me. He taught me how to read when I was three years old. My sister, Elsie, the older sister, told my younger sister and me stories, bedtime stories practically every night. And she was - and this was stuff she just made up. And she was an excellent storyteller. I mean we had the equivalent of a soap opera on the radio when we were very small simply because my sister told us stories that she made up and we would, we couldn't go to sleep at night until she told us a story. It was amazing, absolutely amazing. And even today she can't - she can hardly remember some of those stories that she told us, but it was fascinating. We - my youngest memory, we didn't have TV. We had the radio, but you had to turn the radio off at seven o'clock and so she told us stories. And those were good times. So, I really was kidding when I say it was traumatic because it really wasn't. The bad side of it was I used to play with dolls and my buddies used to tease me, use to tease me but I mean I was sandwiched between two girls, so I couldn't run with my older brothers, so - so I played house. Speaker 1: And had a lot of company. Speaker 2: That's for sure. Story_ID: 47901 Speaker 1: Describe your mother to me. What kind of memories - what kind of mother was she? Speaker 2: Quiet, except when she was angry. My mother was a strong woman. I think to a great degree she was overshadowed by my father. My father was the disciplinarian in the house. Although my mother whipped us more than he did. See corporal punishment was quite acceptable when I was growing up. I often tell people that if the child abuse laws had existed that exist now existed then, my mother would still be in jail. But she was very loving, very stern, extremely supportive. My recollection of my childhood all the way through my adulthood, my mother worked one day in her life that I can recall. I didn't know why. Apparently we were having some financial difficulties and she had decided that she was going to help out so she went to work and, of course, in those days, the only jobs available to some person like my mother was domestic work. She worked in this white woman's kitchen for one day and she was so abused that she came back in the evening and told my father that she didn't think she could take it and he said - my recollection is him saying, "That's okay. We'll make it somehow." And she never worked again. And we made it somehow. Story_ID: 47902 Speaker 1: Your father - what kind of man? What kind of man was your father? Speaker 2: He was the patriarch. As the kids would say now, he was the man. My earliest memories of my father was one of protecting us. If you understand that we grew up in the segregated South, there was a lot of protection that was needed, especially from the police. My father had a - although he was a Baptist minister - he had a reputation of being kind of crazy. And so you know when the policeman would come around to harass and otherwise assault, you now, black kids in the community, the word was don't mess with those Madison kids because Walter's crazy. I think it was for the most part an act because he was a gentle man, but he was a gentle man with a shotgun that hung neatly over the mantle and Daddy was not bashful for reaching for that shotgun when his - when he felt his family was at peril. But he was my hero. I just buried my father this year in April. He was ninety years old. My mother died in '84 [1984] so she was sixteen years ago when she died. But he lost his sight about five years ago and it was rough seeing this giant of a man, independent as hell, having to depend on somebody else to lead him around and then starting to get physically weak and have somebody take care of him and ultimately having to put him in a nursing home and hearing him say, "I've made my peace with God and I'm ready to go because I'm tired." But that was the kind of person he was. Strong man. Strong man. My role model. Didn't have all the formal education, but when I hear people talk about common sense is not common, well he was one of the few that - the old folds used to refer to his mother ___________. And I'm sure you haven't heard that. But it was taught to let him go, but I had to let him go. Speaker 1: Did he come from a big family? Speaker 2: Yes. There were fifteen of them. And he was the second oldest. His brother, his oldest brother is still alive. He's 92. He lives in Waukegan. As a matter of fact he was at the funeral. Of the - let's see. Now that my father's dead, there must be about four left. My oldest, his oldest brother and his youngest brother and then two of his sisters are the ones that are left. Speaker 1: Those are long-livers. Speaker 2: Yes. I remember the doctor telling my father when he went for an examination when he was about 80 years old told him he had the body of a 50 year old man. And I said I hope it's in the genes (laughs). Story_ID: 47903 Speaker 1: It would be good to inherit those. Can you think of a particular - that was your own personal experience with your mother that was really special to you? Whether it was something good or something, or some challenge that she put forward to you and the same - that kind of personal exchange that was between just you and your father? Speaker 2: That's a tough one. That is a tough one. What I do remember - I do remember the first stroke that my mother had. I was in the fifth grade, and I didn't understand what it was all about. But she was lying there in the bed and she couldn't use her right arm at all and then when she wanted to get up to go to the bathroom, my sister had to help her and that right side just kind of slumped and she drug it and dragged her leg as she - and I remember coming up to the bed and asking her, you know what's wrong? And she said, "I've had a stroke." And I said, "What's a stroke?" And she said, "Well, I really don't understand it myself, but I have high blood pressure and-" the term she used when it goes off, "can cause you to have a stroke." So then I went through a series of questions where, you know, what is high blood pressure? What causes high blood pressure? And she kept saying to me, "I don't understand all of it myself." Obviously, she couldn't tell me in medical terms about hypertension and all of that stuff. But she was really, you know, it wasn't get away from me. You know, ask your father. It was, "Well, I really don't understand, but here's what happens." And that - and I was sitting on the side of the bed while she struggled to try and explain to me and she was having difficulty because it had affected even her - the right side of her face which was slightly twisted. But I do recall sitting there on the bed listening to her try to explain to me what happened to her and it was like she was really trying to tell me, you know, and I guess that was kind of a special moment for me. I don't have a recollection, a special one recollection, of my father and I in a personal thing when I was younger. I guess I remember the last conversation I had with him, which was back in March because he died in April and trying to tell him that I understand that you've indicated that you're ready to die, and I want you to know that I understand and it's okay. And him struggling to try and all I could hear him say was I want to say something. And then he couldn't get it out. And I just - "that's okay. I understand." He never did - and he got frustrated with it because he couldn't say what it was that he was trying to say. But it was important for me for him to know that I understood those feelings and that it was okay. I mean at his age, he was 90 years old, the quality of life had gone to the dogs. Yeah, it's okay. He's a lot better off now. You're having me conjure up something - there painful memories. Speaker 1: They are so beautiful. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Because your parents were such beautiful people. Speaker 2: Oh, no question about it. Story_ID: 47904 Speaker 1: So your first day of school. What was that like? Speaker 2: I don't even know if I remember. Well, I do know that when I went to school - you could start - we didn't have kindergarten so it was the first grade. Speaker 1: What was the name of the school? Speaker 2: Carnes, C-A-R-N-E-S was the elementary school. Sat right up on the hill at the corner of Lane Avenue and Arrow Street in Memphis [Tennessee]. And my mother took me to register me for the first grade and in those days, you could register at five years old if you were going to be six by December 31st. And, of course, my birthday was January 1st, so I was - and my mother was really disheartened because - because of my brother's teachings, I was able to read so well, she wanted to get me started early. And Mrs. Nicholson was my first grade teacher and she said, "Well, rules are made to be broken." So she put me down as having a birthday of January 1, 1938. So then it appeared as if I was six years old. Then I remember, I probably don't remember much else. First grade. Story_ID: 47905 Speaker 1: And what - tell me what kind of child were you? Speaker 2: Bad. Speaker 1: But quiet bad? Speaker 2: No. I was - I did some - mischievous. Let's put it like that. I wasn't bad. I was mischievous. We didn't have any bad kids in those days. But I did stuff, stupid stuff. My mother used to say, "I don't know about Jesse." They were - she was the - when I was nine years old, I accepted Christ. She was elated. She thought this is going to be changed in this kid, you know. I was still bad. Speaker 1: Share at least some episodes after you accepted Christ. _____________ those before - Speaker 2: Well, I was, you know, nine years old so - I mean I just did stupid stuff, you know? I mean I was - when I was a kid, we used to have - we didn't have refrigerators, we had the ice boxes. And the ice man would come down the street and you'd buy twenty-five pounds of ice, and he'd load it off the wagon and come sit it over on the top of the ice box because that's what kept your food cold. And he delivered it in a horse and wagon, you know, so it was a horse, it wasn't - so we got horse wagon coming up and down the street. And the first time that I saw a horse come down the street, he eliminated right on the street, and I went out and picked it up and put it in a little basket and was bringing it in the house. Okay, that's enough of that. Or the time I found my Daddy's auger, you know, because they didn't have the electric drills in those days, so you had the hand drill. And I found it and I sat down on the kitchen floor and I started boring a hole right in the middle of the kitchen floor. And Daddy walked in the house and said, "Jesse, what are you doing?" I told the truth. I said, "I'm boring a hole." I can't tell you what he proposed to do with that auger. It's just stupid stuff, you know? Halloween we would turn garbage cans over on the neighbor's front porch and - Speaker 1: So you were just a bad child. You made it to middle school when you got a little better or a little worse? Speaker 2: Well, I got a little more daring. Like riding around with my partner in the car, you know, he would get his brother's car so when we were about to run out of gas, we would pull up next to another car and syphon the gas out of that into - stupid stuff. Speaker 1: The Jesse Madison that I know - Speaker 2: Stealing gas, you know. We were at a conference not too long ago up in Rockford, and we were talking about the kids and stuff they do now and I was saying that we got to understand these kids are just kids and they're going to do stuff and what we got to do is try to train them up and everything. And they were talking about all the dumb things that kids do now. So, I just said, but for the grace of God, I would have had a record because I - but I found out early on that I established a belief in the 11th Commandment, which is if you break all the other 10, the 11th Commandment is Thou Shall Not Get Caught. The only reason I didn't go to jail as a kid is because I never got caught. I did some of the same - I didn't, you know, I didn't do any armed robberies kind of stuff, but stealing gas out of another car is a felony. Not to mention that the poor guy who catches you who owns the car, if he catches you stealing it, it might be a death sentence. Story_ID: 47906 Speaker 1: And where did you go to high school? Speaker 2: In Memphis [Tennessee]. Speaker 1: What was the name of it? Speaker 2: Manassas. Manassas High School. Speaker 1: Spell it. Speaker 2: M-A-N-A-S-S-A-S. Speaker 1: And how was life at Manassas? Speaker 2: Oh, it was great. High school was fantastic, you know, because the girls then - Speaker 1: Tell me about your first kiss. Speaker 2: My first kiss was when I was in the fifth grade. I mean the first meaningful kiss. Elveen MacLamore. I fell in love in the fifth grade. We were playing - they were playing some game called spin the bottle or something and I don't know and it pointed at me or something, and she came over and gave me a kiss on the mouth. I never forgot that. But high school was fantastic. You know grammar school was pretty good because I was kind of active. In the sixth grade I had a part in the school play. It was 'A Christmas Carol' and I was Tiny Tim, and I had one line which was God Bless Us Every One. I practiced that line. I was ready. The problem was I was practicing it in the auditorium before chairs and in the play I had my back to the audience and then I had to turn around to the audience and say God Bless Us Everyone, and I was so excited. I had my mother, my brothers all at the school play. And when the curtains opened, my back was to the audience. And you know the lines proceeded for 10, 15 minutes into the play and it was time for me to say my line and I turned around and I didn't see empty chairs. I saw an auditorium full of people, and I fainted. I passed out. My claim to fame on the stage was that - Speaker 1: Not a future. Speaker 2: No, not at all. Of course, kids can be very cruel, you know. My buddies, "Jesse fainted. Passed out in school." That was traumatic. Having to go to school the next day was horrible. But high school was different. High school I got into sports. I ran track. I played football, at least until I got my collar bone broke. I was the smallest guy on the team. I weighed about a 120 pounds soaken wet. But I was fast. I was absolutely fast. So, naturally I - Story_ID: 47907 Speaker 1: So you were very athletic in high school and active. Speaker 2: Yeah and pretty, and pretty good grade wise too. My senior year I was voted the most studious boy. Speaker 1: What were your favorite subjects? Speaker 2: Math. Speaker 1: Favorite teacher? Speaker 2: Mrs. Turner. Speaker 1: What did she teach? Speaker 2: She taught math, and she was my division teacher in-and that year that I went to high school, the school system in Memphis [Tennessee] tried something new where you're-we didn't call them division teachers, they was your homeroom teacher. And your homeroom teacher will usually change every year when you go up to the next grade. Well, they tried a situation where you're homeroom teacher would follow you through the whole four years. So, I had Mrs. Turner as my homeroom, or division, teacher for four years. She also taught math. She taught algebra. And she was--I guess the toughest part of high school for me was living up to Madison example. You know when you've got brothers and sisters before you and they've done well, you were expected to do well because after all you're a Madison. And so I couldn't do a lot of the fun things and stupid things I wanted to do because I had to hold up the family tradition. My childhood you didn't let down the family tradition. So it means that I had to work hard because I had to--I wanted to participate in sports, but I also wanted to have good grades, and I was able to accomplish them. But I was on the track team. I was on the football team. I was on the boxing team. I was a little too short to play basketball, but I wanted to. Story_ID: 47908 Speaker 1: How did you do in civics? Speaker 2: I'm kind of a history buff. So I did okay in civics. I guess my worst subjects were literature, especially English literature. I couldn't get into Shakespeare to save my life, you know? And then so having to write those God awful papers on what he said and what he meant in 'Othello' and 'Hamlet' and 'Romeo and Juliet'. I mean the only quote I remember of Shakespeare was "Out Damned Spot" [Macbeth] and that was because, you know, the word damn was in it and as kids, you know, it was kind of cool if you could say damn, you couldn't say anything else. But I did okay. I was scholarly enough that I actually got a scholarship to go to Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia], a three or four year scholarship from the eleventh grade. I could skip my senior year in high school and go right into Morehouse. I didn't want to skip my senior year. I mean that was the year. Girls. You know, dates and proms and I was off the football team by then because I had broken my collar bone and I couldn't play anymore football that year, but I still had my football jacket. And then there were the girls. And my mother didn't want me to--she wanted me to finish high school. She didn't finish. My father didn't finish. My oldest brother didn't finish. My brother Walter and my brother Gene and my older sister, Elsie, they all finished high school and so there was something important to my mother about all of us finishing high school. And she really didn't understand that, you know, skipping your twelfth, your senior year and going on into college was a good thing. It kind of meant something. She didn't quite get that. But since I didn't want to skip it anyway, I agreed with her. I--you know, mom's right. That's a terrible thing. Story_ID: 47909 Speaker 1: So I finished--didn't get to participate--and I had a part in the graduation exercises. I had a lead part in the graduation exercises, but I didn't get to participate because of a traumatic experience that I had. Well, as I said, it was the segregated South. Bus system was segregated. The schools were segregated. We had to walk or ride the bus from my house about three miles to my school. And when we walked, we walked right by Humes High, which incidentally was the high school that Elvis Presley attended and graduated from. Elvis and I used to play football together, touch football, on the waterworks. He would bring some of his guys over from Humes and we would bring some of our guys over from Manassas and we'd play football in the waterworks together, but at any rate. So this particular day, it was about two weeks from graduation and I boarded the bus, and as I said the buses were segregated. And the Memphis rule was that the blacks had to sit in the back--they didn't have a cordoned off portion of the bus, but blacks couldn't sit in front of whites. So if you got on a bus and it was--where the blacks were sitting was crowded and a white person was sitting there and there was seats empty, you'd ask the white person if they would move up so you could sit down. And it was just your kind of accepted practice that everybody accepted, but I was kind of a maverick, I guess, before the Civil Rights movement actually started and I wanted to do, you know, what was right. My Daddy used to say, "Son, do what's right. You'll stay alive that way." So I got on this bus and there was this young man sitting about middle - about midway the bus and behind him all the seats were filled up because all these kids were on their way to school. So when I got on the bus I asked him if he would move up. And he ignored me. He just sit there looking out the window. So I said it again, "Would you move up please." And he ignored me again. So, I sat down beside him. Now that was a no--no. It was the only worse than sitting in front of white people, was sitting beside them. So he got really angry and pushed me out of the seat out into the--well having been on the boxing team and scoring a few knock outs I felt a little macho. So, I got up off the floor and I grabbed him, and I grabbed him and yanked him up out of the seat and he came up with a knife, a switchblade knife and when he started I grabbed him like this and he turned that knife down. I still got that mark right there. 1956 where he brought that knife down and just came right up my arm with it. Story_ID: 47910 Speaker 1: Now, you just not supposed to do that, especially if you're white, you know. Black people had the reputation for cutting folks, but and so I hit him as hard as I could right in the nose and blood flew everywhere and he--I knocked him out. And by then the bus driver had pulled over the bus and was coming back toward me. Well, my buddies in the back, along about that time they got a little courage so when he started to the back, they started toward the front. And he saw this group of black guys coming toward him so he decided that discretion was the better part of valor. And he got off the bus and my buddies said, "Now, you know he's going to call the police. And the police get here, they going to kill you. So you better get off this bus and go on to school." We were about half way to school, about a mile and a half left, so--and I got off the bus and I ran all the way to school and I told Mrs. Turner what had happened. And Mrs. Turner said, "Well, you know you're two weeks from graduation. You've passed all your exams. You don't need to do anything else. You'll graduate. We'll bring you your diploma, but you won't be able to participate in the graduation exercises. But I recommend that you forget about the graduation exercise and just go home. I will call your mother before you get there and I'll tell her what happened." Well, of course when I got home my mother was crying, because she just knew they were going to find me. I graduated from school, Mannasas, when I graduated had a total student body of about nine hundred kids. It was seven through twelfth grade, okay? And at that time I was vice president of the senior class. And, you know, so everybody in the school knew me, okay? All the teachers, all the students. When the police did come over looking for me and they described me to a tee, nobody knew me. Nobody goes to school. That was one day that I was really proud because I knew somebody was going to say yeah, but 900 kids and nobody had ever seen anybody that looked like me. So I was supposed to have worked that summer and left to come to Chicago to go to college that September, but I left right after I got my diploma and came here because my daddy was insisting that they weren't going to stop looking for me because what I had done was a terrible deed. So I didn't go back to Memphis until about, this if '56 [1956], I didn't go back to Memphis 'til about '65 [1965]. So I was a bad boy. I was a scholarly kid, but even in a segregated South, I didn't take anything off of anybody. I just couldn't. It didn't matter what color you were or, you know-- Story_ID: 47911 Speaker 1: You came to Chicago [Illinois] to go to what school? Speaker 2: Well, initially I was planning before I left Memphis [Tennessee] I was planning to go to Illinois Institute of Technology. I had applied for the engineering school and had been accepted, but I needed scholarship money, and so they were going to give me a scholarship exam by proctor and Mrs. Turner was going to be my proctor and they sent her the exam and everything. Here I am a math major going into engineering school and the scholarship exam they gave me was a fine arts exam. Now I already told you how I felt about Shakespeare. It was obviously deliberate. It was obviously deliberate. So suffice to say I didn't get a scholarship to IT [Illinois Institute of Technology]. Speaker 1: You couldn't have her turn it back as a mistake? Speaker 2: Well, I--she wondered about it and she called to find out, you know, because I hadn't seen it. She said she called to find out and they told her that's the exam that he's got to take if he wants a scholarship from the school. So I took it and interestingly enough, I passed it but I just barely past it so I certainly didn't get enough of a grade in order to qualify for the scholarship money. I mean I crammed for a week and Mrs. Turner got with Mrs. Hopson who was my English teacher and they formulated for me a study guide that basically dealt with all kinds of stuff that would be aesthetic things of life. Tried to get me ready for this exam. The only painting that I recognized was, I forgot the name of it now. The mother holding the child. So I had to try not to defy all of these paintings. I didn't know who Picasso was. But I passed it by about three or four points above the-- Story_ID: 47912 Speaker 1: So what did you do about college? Speaker 2: So then I enrolled in Wilson Junior College because I had already made all my plans. So I enrolled in Wilson Junior College, and I went there for two years. And then I transferred to Roosevelt [University, Chicago, Illinois]. And by the time I transferred to Roosevelt, I was also getting married. Speaker 1: I was about to ask because those girls were really getting interesting by that time. Speaker 2: Well, and I was supposed to leave Memphis [Tennessee], go to Chicago [Illinois], get a degree and then move back to Memphis and marry my high school sweetheart. That was the plan. But forty years later I'm still in Chicago and I didn't marry my high school sweetheart. But the girl that I did marry was born in Memphis, so, you know, it was close. Speaker 1: So you got married before you left college? Speaker 2: Yeah, because I had transferred, you know, like I said I came here in '56 [1956] after I didn't--I was saying I went to Wilson from 1957 to 1959 and then transferred to--I actually skipped a year and I transferred to Roosevelt in 1960. Well I had just gotten married in December '59 [1959] and so those last two years of college took my eight years to complete because I was married and now I got to work which means I got to go to school part time. And some summers I took classes, some summers I didn't. So from 1960 to 1968 I went to Roosevelt and I finally graduated in 1968. Speaker 1: And what did you major in? Speaker 2: Well, no actually I switched my major at Wilson [Junior College] because I took a pre-engineering curriculum at Wilson and one of the requirements for engineering majors was that you take a course in accounting, one course, Accounting 101. So this one particular semester I was looking around to fill up my class load and I saw this requirement and I said well, I might as well take this stupid accounting course and get it out of the way. And I took it and I liked it. So then I took [Accounting] 102. I liked that too. And then just on and on from there. So I switched my major from well ostensibly math in junior college. I wasn't actually taking any engineering courses, I was just taking math class. And I ended up with twenty-one hours in math and so I was told I was the only accountant that graduated with twenty-one hours in math. Most accountants are terrible mathematicians. So I switched to accounting. And then so when I went to Roosevelt, I had already made the switch and so I been at the accounting program there in the business administration. That's where I finished. And then I also did some graduate work at Roosevelt, but got involved in politics and so I wasn't able to complete my Master's degree. Story_ID: 47913 Speaker 1: Okay. So that was going to be my next question. At what point did you first enter the political ring and how did you make that entry? Speaker 2: Do you know a woman by the name of Brenetta Howell? Okay. Brenetta Howell who is now Brenetta Howell Barrett. Brenetta Howell was an activist on the West side of Chicago [Illinois]. My first entry into politics was the year I got married because I moved into an apartment in the 27th Ward on the West Side [Chicago], my wife and I. And the very next election after I got married I went to vote and the precinct captain, I didn't know, saw me coming out of the polls and asked me had I voted and I said yes. And he said, "Would you like to vote again?" And I said, "Can I do that?" He said, "Sure." I said, "How can I do that?" He said, "Well, you know I just about know who's coming from the polls and who's not so I will give you the names of two people that are not coming, and you can go back in two more times and vote in their name." And I said, "I don't think so." I said, "Besides I don't like your candidate anyway. I'm not voting for Harry Sain." Harry Sain was an absentee alderman who was alderman of the 27th Ward on the West Side, but he lived up on the North Side. He has an apartment, you know, that he used for an address, but I said, "I don't like Sain anyway." And he said to me, "You better be careful. Saying things like that you could be found in the trunk of a car." After a few expletives deleted, I left and came home and was talking to my wife about it. I just thought that was the most disgusting thing I heard, but then I began in later and later years I began to understand the old adage related to Chicago about vote early and often. And so the next election, I got involved in because a friend of mine, Carter Jones, was going to run against Sain. And so I got involved in that election. And I found out about dirty tricks politically in Chicago. So I kind of let politics alone. That was in 1963. I left it alone after then until 1969 when Fred Hampton and Mark Clark were killed. That year Brenetta--no, let me back up a minute. In '64 [1964] Brenetta Howell decided she was going to run for Congress in what was then the old 6th congressional district. It's now the 7th where Danny Davis--but she decided she was going to run against Ronan and asked me to help her. And I said, fine. We set out to help her run for Congress. And three days before the election, Dan Ronan died. So we've been putting out all these position papers and slogans and all that. We changed everything. We only had one bit of information, he's dead. You know that dead white man beat that live black woman ten to one. That was when I decided never again. Never again. Story_ID: 47914 Speaker 1: Problem was people were not politically educated and so that was when I joined Operation Breadbasket, then it was Breadbasket. Political education division along with--oh, I forgot the guy's name who headed that up now. And we set out to put a branch of that political education class on the West Side. And, as I said, I will never let this happen again. And so when Fred Hampton and Mark Clark was killed in 1969, the following year, 1970, State Representative, Otis Collins, had been rather big even though he was a part of the democratic machine had been pretty vigorous about fighting insurance companies about redlining because they were redlining on the West Side, in his district. And so the machine didn't support him for re-election. And we talked him into running anyway, you know, in the primary against the machine. And, of course, we lost. So in 1972 when we were looking for another candidate and we couldn't get anybody to run, I said, "Well, what the heck? I'll run." And so I ran in 1972 and we were up that night counting votes and the vote totals we had were showing my ahead by three thousand votes, but the 24th Ward hadn't come in. The 24th Ward was very notorious and it was--we waited as long as we could so I just went on to bed. When I got up the next morning I'd lost by six hundred votes. So I told my wife then, I'm starting tomorrow campaigning for two years from now and so we started and we continued that education process. So in 1974 I ran again and I bet Ike [Isaac] Sims [Carothers] who was not only the sitting State Representative, but he was the City Ward Committeeman in the 28th Ward and supposedly unbeatable. But I beat him in a district with one hundred eighteen precincts and 140,000 votes cast. I best Ike Sims [Isaac Sims Carothers] by one hundred twenty-six votes. So when people said that me and my vote doesn't count, I said I won by 126 votes in a district with 118 precincts so we have two people in each precinct, most precincts have four hundred voters. If two people in each precinct that voted for me had stayed at home, I'd have lost the election. And, of course, Ike [Sims Carothers] took me to court and all that stuff, but we prevailed in '74 [1974] and then again in '76 [1976]. Story_ID: 47915 Speaker 1: Trickery still going on to that degree today? Speaker 2: No, I don't think so. I think it's probably gotten a little more sophisticated now. Orders are more sophisticated and the systems are set up--I will not tell you that there's not some vote stealing going on, but not to the extent that it was when I was--Jim Thompson [James Robert Thompson, Jr.] put a real big dent in vote stealing in Chicago when he was the U.S. Attorney. And he went after vote fraud. Lot of my so-called friends went to jail because they were prosecuted by Thompson. I say friends, but they're acquaintances of mine who were a part of the democratic organization and whose jobs depending on them carrying the ticket so to speak. And that was during the day when patriotism was very heavy and the pride to the Shakman Decree [1972, 1979, and 1983] you could actually fire somebody for not delivering the vote. I saw a lot of guys on election day on their knees begging me to let them--you know as a poll watcher--to leave the polls and let them do some [unclear] because if they didn't, they were going to lose their jobs the next day and they had families to feed. But see we had gotten rather sophisticated as opposition and poll watching and what to watch for and what to look for and who to call and what--the U.S. Attorney would be at our beck and call if we saw something. I even had a guy offer to put three hundred votes on the machine for me if I let him--if I just left the polls because they knew I was going to win anyway, you know, and they wanted to make it look real good for me in that precinct. But if I would just leave the poll early, he guaranteed he was going to put three hundred votes on the machine for me but he was also going to put three hundred votes on the machine for his candidate who was losing who was backed by the party. And I don't know if you remember the year that Judge Burke ran for State's Attorney after they dropped [Edward Vincent] Hanrahan? Speaker 1: What year as that? Speaker 2: 1970. Speaker 1: I wasn't back in Chicago by then. Speaker 2: Okay, 1970. So, anyway they-- Story_ID: 47916 Speaker 1: Ok so after you won your first term, did you continue to have to run constantly? Tell us your terms of service. What year did it start? Speaker 2: All right. I was elected in '74 [1974] to serve in '75 [1975] and '76 [1976]. Then I was re-elected in '76 [1976] to serve in '77 [1977] and '78 [1978]. And I did not run for re-election in '78 [1978] to serve in '79 [1979] and '80 [1980]. So I served two terms. After my first--after I got elected, I spent a lot of time in the district when I wasn't in Springfield, you know, ostensibly running for re-election because the organization felt that my election was a fluke, the democratic organization. Because I ran as an independent democrat in the primary in those districts, you know if you won the primary, it was tantamount to election because there was no republican opposition to amount to anything. And so I spent a lot of time developing machinery to run for re-election and also educating voters, you know, about the election process. And but I was aware of the fact that my colleagues were worked with me were aware of the fact that they were really going to come after me in '76 [1976]. Because they had learned in '74 [1974] that they were beatable and they wanted to show the world that it was a fluke. You know it could never happen again. So they through the kitchen stove at me in '76 [1976] and in order to--they were bringing people from other districts where candidates had no opposition, or relative little opposition and to work in that district and the Senator from that district who lived in Oak Park [Illinois] was planning to bring people from Oak Park over in that district. And so we got Earlean Collins who was the estranged wife of Otis Collins who they had dumped back in the '70s [1970s], we got her to agree to run for the Senate seat against the sitting Senator to make him keep his troops at home. You know to take pressure off of me. We didn't expect--she was--nobody anticipated she would win. But she was just to run to make him keep his troops at home so he couldn't send them into Chicago. He had to keep them in Oak Park to guaranty his re-election. Well, we did so well that we both won. She beat the sitting Senator by fifty-four votes, even after the re-count and all of that stuff. She was fifty-four votes--and one reporter asked me when it was over and I had won, he said, "Well congratulations on your victory, but that was an awful close vote total. How do you feel about that?" I said, "Close? I won by twelve hundred votes. That was a land slide because my previous election was one hundred twenty-six [126] votes. So, twelve hundred votes is not close." Earlean Collins vote was close. And then the newspapers wrote an article the next day about how the Madison organization captured the West Side and all that stuff. It was funny. It was really funny. But those were some good years. Those were some interesting years. Story_ID: 47917 Speaker 1: Yeah, when I left the legislature, I went to the [Chicago] Urban League as Vice President of Finance and Administration. And I was there from the time that I left until Harold [Washington] ran for mayor. And when he decided to run--well, in the legislature, Harold and I had been seat mates. You know we sit beside each other in the House before he went to the Senate because my second term in the House was the term that he ran for the State Senate. And so he became a state senator and--but that first term of two years, I sat right beside him every session. So, if you sit beside somebody for two years, you get to know the measure of the man. And so in--well, his first try was in '77 [1977], which was the same year that [Richard J.] Daley died. Speaker 2: Can you repeat that again? Speaker 1: His first try was in '77 [1977], which was the year that old man Richie, Richard J. Daley, passed away. And he was not successful that time. But he--then he went on to Congress in '80 [1980] and was re-elected in '82 [1982]. And it was that that we started talking to him about running for mayor. And at the time I was at the Urban League, but I was a part of the Lu [Lutrella] Palmer and a whole lot of folk who were trying to convince Harold [Washington] that he ought to try it again. And Harold was saying, "You know I can probably stay in Congress for the rest of my life. I just won my second term in Congress by the largest plurality of any Congressman in the country. Why would I want to run for mayor?" And we kept saying because the people need you. By then Jane Byrne was mayor and we felt like she was insulting the black community with her appointments, you know, to the CHA [Chicago Housing Authority] and all that stuff and it was really because ostensibly black people that put her in office after the big snow. So, Harold [Washington] was saying, "You know, you got to raise some money and you got to register some voters." Said, "Well, what do you want?" He said, "I want fifty thousand registered voters, new registered voters, and $50,000 in cash." Okay. So we went out and registered 100,000 new voters and raised one hundred thousand dollars in cash. And said, "Now what do you want?" And he said, "I guess I'll run." And so that's where I was when he made the decision and he asked me to join the campaign. It was going to be kind of difficult with my responsibility at the Urban League, so I took a leave of absence from the Urban League and worked in his campaign full time and I ran the West Side operation along with Richard Barnett. A black ward on the West Side of Chicago, there were five of them, were the Wards that we were responsible for making sure that he was elected. So after we was elected, he asked to join his administration. And so I told Compton that I was not coming back to the Urban League. I was going to join Harold's [Washington] administration, and he appointed me as the Commissioner of Consumer Services for the City. And I stayed in that position for three years and then in '86 [1986] he asked me to go to the Park District, which was another strange kind of situation. Story_ID: 47918 Speaker 1: That was going to be my question, what was it like at the Park District? Speaker 2: Well, I mean the strangest thing was going the day that he decided--he called me in--well, he had Ernie [Ernest] Barefield call me at home the night before and said the mayor wants to see you in the morning. I said, "So, what's it about?" "Well, wait, wait. He'll tell you when you get here. By the way, bring your resume." So suffice to say I didn't sleep too well that--you know is he going to get rid of me? Or what have I done? So the next morning I went to his office and before I went in to see the mayor, I met with Ernie and Ernie was going over my resume and what's this mean and what's that mean? I said, "You know, Ernie, we did all of this when he appointed me Commissioner." "But I just want to make sure. Is there anything in your background that could be embarrassing to the mayor?" So then he took me in to see the mayor and the mayor said, "You know for a long time I've been wanting to take control of the Park District, and I've got--actually been able to appoint two Commissioners which was Walter Nesh and Margaret Burrows. But all the rest of my appointments have been stalled in the City Council up until now. But I think I'd like you to take over Park District for me." And I thought he meant as a Commissioner. You know, appoint me to--wait a minute, if that's what you want to do, but I don't know if I can be at the Park District and run Consumer Services at the same time." He said, "I want you to give up Consumer Services." Well, now I knew that the Commissioners at the Park District were not paid positions (laughs). They got reimbursement for reasonable expenses, but I said, "Mr. Mayor, how am I supposed to live?" He said, "I don't mean as a Commissioner. I mean I want you to replace Ed [Edmund] Kelly." "Replace Ed Kelly? You can't replace Ed Kelly, you only got two votes over there and there are five Commissioners. The other three, you know." He said, "No, I got one of them too." I said, "Okay." I said, "Well, I need to think about it. I need to talk to my wife, you know. How much time do I have?" He said, "You got ten minutes." I said, "Can I use your phone?" So I called--I went back into the library, which is right behind his office and I tried to call my wife at work and I couldn't reach her. She had gone to lunch. And I said, "Oh, Lord, what to do? What to do?" So I came back into his office and I said, "Mr. Mayor, I could not reach my wife. She's obviously gone to lunch." He said, "Your time is up." I said, "I'll take it." And that was it. Story_ID: 47919 Speaker 1: How long did you stay at the [Chicago] Park District? Speaker 2: Four years. Through his death and through Gene [Eugene] Sawyer's term and part of Richie's [Richard J. Daley] term. Rich Daley was elected in '89 [1989]. Well, Gene Sawyer was appointed in '87 [1987] when the mayor died, and then Rich was elected in April of '89 [1989], and I served until April of '90 when I made the decision to give it up because I was being asked to do some things that went against the grain for me. So I made the decision and my contract was up in April of 1990. So in December I announced to the press that when my contract was up, I would not seek a renewal of that contract. Speaker 1: Were these budgetary commitments? Speaker 2: Well, to put it bluntly, they wanted me to do some finagling with the slips in the harbors, and I told them that the last three harbor directors were still in jail. And I had changed the system when I went over there to make sure that there was no finagling and people could see their names on the list waiting for slips and they could see themselves move up the list as slips became available. And I wasn't about to tamper with that system. I didn't care how many judges had just bought boats. And so without calling any names I was told that the mayor would probably be interested in a change of administration. And I said fine. And so that occurred in November and so in December I made the announcement that I was not going to seek renewal of my contract. The ending was futile. I mean they were going to find an excuse so and I had watched a Manfred Byrd struggle to keep his job at the Board of Education and to see that man emasculated--I was not about to let that happen to me. It was too easy to walk away with my head up. Story_ID: 47920 Speaker 1: Take us back to your terms in the House [Illinois General Assembly] and tell us what that was like for you and what you feel your greatest strength was during those two terms and what do you feel best about what you accomplished? Speaker 2: Well, I guess my greatest--well, what I feel great about, in my first term, was learning the process. You know, learning the rules, understanding the legislative process and I was able without getting one bill passed that first term the IVI IPO [Independent Voters of Illinois Independent Precinct Organization] gave me its 1976 best legislator award. Primarily because of my activities in committee, understanding the committee process and the committee structure and really doing the grunch [sic. grunt] work in committee and helping others get bills passed. I mean I put a few bills in, but as a freshman you don't really expect--that seniority system is really kind of ironclad. And when you're a freshman, you're just there to learn, okay? Unless somebody blesses you. And since I was an independent democrat I didn't have nobody in power to bless me, you know. So, I spent my time learning the process and understanding it. I guess I'm most proud of the stand that we took--well of several stands we took. The ERA [Equal Rights Amendment] piece. The probation system that was re- completely done. I'll tell you a peculiar kind of situation. I was a part of the movement in 1975 toward the deinstitutionalization where we were moving people out of the state operated facilities that were mentally ill because they were just being warehoused. And we were asking organization to establish community settings for people who had an ability to live independently with support. Most of those had to be people whose mental retardation levels were mild and moderate because those that were severe and profound, that there was really no--the state operated facilities were probably the best place for them. But those who- whose level was mild and moderate ought to be put in community settings. And little did I know that twenty-five years later I'd be running the organization serving that population of people who had an ability to survive in a community setting with some kind of support, whether that support was full time or part time. So that was one thing that I really, I really was kind of proud of. The second term I--the Governor asked me to carry the public aid appropriations bill, you know, and I carried that and I got that bill passed. They were just starting some of the funding at that time for--that was earmarked for kids. And some of the youth organizations like Chicago Area Project and a few others that were heavy into youth development were trying to get that program funded and I assisted in helping get that done. The adult education bill, which was in jeopardy, I carried that bill to make sure that funding for those schools who ran adult education programs didn't go down the tube. I lost some battles too, you know, but we put up some, put up some major fights. Story_ID: 47921 Speaker 1: What was your biggest loss? Speaker 2: Biggest loss--you know when you lose, all of them are big. I have to say my biggest loss occurred in my second term when I was leading the charge to get Public Aid recipients an increase in their allocation in 1977. And I tore that bill apart and I went through amendment by amendment showing where there was waste there that could be used if they were to eliminate the waste. I worked hard on that, but the votes were not there. A hospital association was against me because the bulk of the Public Aid dollars don't go to the recipients. They go to third party payers, the medical industry. And so all the medical industries were against me because I was talking about taking some of their money and giving it as direct grants to the recipients. No, we want those recipients to have green cards. So we can--so when they come in for a pair of eye glasses, we can prescribe them twelve pair. And I mean this kind of stuff went on. And I even had people testify and all that. They'd gone to get a pair of eye glasses and they were given twelve pair. They had to have one in every room. So, you know, when they moved around in the house, they didn't have to carry their glasses with them. A pair of glasses in the bathroom, in the bedroom, in the living room. Or you go get a prescription for 30 pills and they give you three hundred. I mean it was that kind of stuff that was going in the medical end of it, and I had the statistics to show where a 1% cut in the medical, one percent cut in the medical appropriation for Public Aid could fund a five percent increase in the direct allocation system to Public Aid recipients. And at that time, they hadn't had an increase for five years. So, a five percent increase would have represented one percent per year. And I lost. That one hurt. But by then [Daniel] Walker was no longer Governor and Jim Thompson, who was the fighter for justice at elections, was now the fighter for the hospital association to keep their grants. So that, yeah, that was one I lost. I guess the other one I lost was the fight to try and make check cashing available to senior citizens without them having to go to currency exchanges because in my district we had multiple reports of senior citizens who had left their homes, to walk a block to the currency exchange and to get mugged on the way back to their house because they were taking their check. And so I wanted the mobile check cashiers to be able to pull up in front of the senior citizens complex and have the senior citizens come down, cash their checks and go right back upstairs. But the currency exchange law would have had to been altered in order to let that happen because the stationary currency exchanges really had to biggest lobby over the mobile check cashers. And so mobile check cashers were really like fill-ins and people like--they were really restricted, tremendously restricted in where they could take those mobile exchanges. And so I fought for the seniors and I lost. Story_ID: 47922 Speaker 1: There is a known--over the history of politics, in Illinois state wide and citywide, periods when African American politicians were divided into categories that said something like period of hacks, the period of independents, and then the hacks being the ones being controlled by the machine and so on. Some of this you earlier spoke about. Give us your take on those different categories and since you represent the independent one, you were there at the changing of the guards, so to speak. Can you comment on that? Speaker 2: Right. Well, it was definitely a reality in terms of those African Americans that were - Speaker 1: Excuse me. Can you say what it is--just start it that-- Speaker 2: Okay. All right. Yeah, the reality is that in the legislative process there were camps and even within the black caucus, which was kind of started when I got there, there were camps. There were the blacks who were called machine blacks or hacks or whatever. And then there were those of us who were independent, which were not very many, myself, Harold Washington, Lou [Lewis A. H.] Caldwell and Wyvetter Younge from East St. Louis, were the four blacks in the House. And Charlie [Charles Ellis] Gaines who was at that time a black republican. And that was out of fifteen black legislators in the House and then there were another five in the Senate. They actually had what was known as an idiot sheet, what we called an idiot sheet. Because you didn't vote every day. You know you heard a lot of debate some days and you did amendments some days. But then there were days when you actually voted on what is called third reading, which was the final passage of the bill. There were idiot sheets that would be passed out. They wouldn't just be passed out to the blacks, but to all the members who were in the fold so to speak. God, what we dubbed idiot sheets were stole on what bills were coming up and which way they were supposed to vote. A couple of times they made a mistake and given one to me. I told them what to do with it. But it was--I saw my role as trying to heal that breach because we were all black and so while there were some of us who were saying, you know, don't have anything to do with Emil Jones because he's machine, I was saying he's a black legislator, you know? And I'm in a unique position where I can in a lot of instances speak for them. I can say things that they can't say because there's no brick on my tongue. And those guys really appreciated the fact that I never once criticized them about positions they took on certain issues because I understood. And I never asked them to do things or take positions or to cast votes that I knew would be their own doing. It didn't make sense. And in return they told me what they really felt, and I was able to say it because they couldn't. And so I earned the respect of the so-called machine hacks because I didn't criticize them and I didn't ask them to do things they couldn't do. And I was kind of their secret spokesman on issues they felt deeply about but didn't feel like they could say. And I'm glad that Emil [Jones] survived because look at him now, you know? And so we've come to a point where--and Emil Jones who was identified as a machine democrat rose through he ranks and then Art [Arthur L.] Turner who replaced me and was identified as an independent democrat rose through the ranks and Emil is minority leader in the Senate and Art Turner is Assistant Majority Leader in the House [Illinois General Assembly]. That couldn't have happened twenty-five years ago. Couldn't have happened. Story_ID: 47923 Speaker 1: How much--so the African American legislators [unclear] wherever they need to participate politically. How much of what is called hackery is really astute or less than astute politics? Speaker 2: I'm not sure that hackery is an appropriate word now. I think that most of the African American politicians in today in Chicago and Illinois don't carry that yolk. The system has changed. Patronage is no longer rule of the day. The precinct captain now is that one-eyed monster that sits in your living room. And the Shakman Decree [1972, 1979, and 1983] did away with political firings and the Civil Service Act has been strengthened and then there are public union contracts. So that people don't have that job hammer over folks head. I mean when I was there, certain black politicians couldn't say certain things or couldn't do certain things because their mama worked in the sewer department and if they didn't tow the line, not only would they not be re-elected the next time, but their mama would be fired the next day. Well, you can't do that anymore. I mean there are ways you can do certain things, but you can't be blatant with it anymore. And so the landscape has really changed in terms of how you hold people to the fire. Story_ID: 47924 Speaker 1: With the many changes as far as legal in the Shakman Decree [1972, 1979, and 1983] and you know the minor changes in its structure and how the so called 'hack camp' - Speaker 2: Let me put it this way. Anybody who is a hack today, wants to be. It's not because they have to be. The politicians understand and I've talked to, you know, black politicians who've said, "Mr. Mayor, I can't go with you on this one. It affects my community negatively." 1975 you couldn't have found one black politician whose owed their election to the democratic organization who was able to say that except Harold Washington. That was it. Because Harold was like my Daddy. He was crazy. So, you know, they bought it from him. They don't bother Harold, he's crazy. Story_ID: 47925 Speaker 1: Tell me about your professional life since you left the [Chicago] Park District. Speaker 2: Well, since I left the [Chicago] Park District, my professional life has been spent running Abraham Lincoln Center which is a social service agency that's ninety-five years old. It was founded in 1905 by the Reverend Jenkin Lloyd Jones who was a Unitarian minister and he was pastor of the All Souls Church, which was a Unitarian Church in the Grand Boulevard community. In the days when Abraham Lincoln Center was created, it was basically designed to help people coming over from the old country, settle into this "new western culture." And so Abraham Lincoln Center did socialization. They did culturation. They provided, they even provided temporary housing. So in the Jane Addams tradition of Hull House, Abraham Lincoln Center was truly a settlement house. Then as the years went by and the neighborhood went from all white to mixed to all black, Abraham Lincoln Center remained there providing services to an indigenous population and changing its service mix to meet the needs of what was ostensibly a changing population. Then the 1970s came - well, the mid-'60s [1960s] with the war on poverty and then the model cities program of the '70s [1970s]. And Abraham Lincoln Center, like so many other community organizations, funding focus went from funding raising, church support, bizarre, a little foundation money, to public funds. And most organizations, like Abraham Lincoln Center grew tremendously during that period. In 1970, Abraham Lincoln's budget went from about a half million dollars to four and a half million dollars when I walked in the door in 1990, which was a phenomenal growth and the growth has continued because it was a four and a half million dollar budget in 1990. Today it's a thirteen million dollar budget. It had ninety-four employees when I came. We now have three hundred full-time employees. It operated from twelve sites. It now operates from thirty-one sites. So it's been a tremendous growth over these last ten years, but what we try to do is make it program growth because some of the growth that they experienced in the earlier years was causing these tremendous financial problems. I mean my predecessor, Othello Ellis, who I think you might have known, was a tremendous social worker, but he didn't quite make it with the numbers. I think that's probably why Abraham Lincoln Center hired me. I was not a social worker. I'm an accountant by profession and a manager. I run stuff, you know? And Abraham Lincoln Center's growth had been to the point where they needed a manager. They needed an administrator. Some of the basic rudimentary business practices were not in place when I got there. They were not automated. You know most of the systems and procedures were done manually. When I went there and saw that the budget was four and a half million dollars and to manage that four and a half million dollars they had eight employees in the accounting department. Today, we've got thirteen and a half million dollar budget, three hundred employees, thirty-two sites and eight employees in the business office because automation was able to solve that growth without increasing the number of bean counters so to speak. And my job was to bring Abraham Lincoln Center administratively into the Twentieth Century, into the Twenty-first Century principally through automation, but also through just, like I said, basic business practices that needed to be put in place. And that's what I've attempted to do. And so when I walked in the door we had these practices and we were struggling to meet payroll. Ten years later, we're automated, we have good systems and procedures and we're struggling to meet payroll (laughs). I guess some things just don't change. Story_ID: 47926 Speaker 1: What would you like for your legacy to be? Speaker 2: I don't know if I really thought about legacies, you know? I want my posterity to be my legacy. I want my kids and my grandkids to be my legacy. I'd like to think that I am who I am because of my father. And I'd like for my kids to be who they are because of me and for their kids to be who they are because of them. And that Madison lineage continue onward and hopefully upward. And if that happens, then I don't need any monuments built to me, you know? Story_ID: 47927 Speaker 1: How many kids do you have? Speaker 2: I've got two girls. My youngest daughter - Speaker 1: And their names? Speaker 2: ...is Tracy, and she was thirty-eight last week. My oldest daughter is Lynn Chatlin and she'll be forty next month. Speaker 1: How many grandkids? Speaker 2: Two. Lynn is the one that's married, and she's got two children. Tracy is single and thirty-eight and not thinking about getting married (laughs). Story_ID: 47928 Speaker 1: What would you say to young people to interest them in the political arena and so that they can gain more control over their social and political environment? Speaker 2: Well, I think I would probably say what you just said. That you not only have a responsibility, but you have an obligation to take control of your political environment. And that you can do it. And if I'm talking to black kids, I'm saying you have an obligation to do it. I mean there's a need to do it. As a race of people, we don't have any individual power basis, what we've got is a collective power basis. And we don't use it in that fashion. It's not to say that we'll be monolithic, I mean we all think differently. We feel differently. But our actions can be in concert when it's appropriate and there are times when it is literally appropriate for us to act in concert. I try to encourage then, and I do even when I'm talking to young people whether it's standing on the corner or in groups at a school, I try to encourage them to stay in school, but I try to emphasize more than just stay in school, but make school meaningful. You can go to school every day and leave school as a dummy. And it's going to be up to you to make that a meaningful experience and nobody can do it any better than you. Obviously there are teachers who are motivational. There are other parents, relatives an aunt, an uncle a cousin, the guy that owns the store down the street. There are all kind of motivational images that we can have, but we have to seize those. We have to identify them and we have to seize them. And we have to make them useful for our lives and we have to make them applicable to our lives and so that we understand that all that theory that we gain in school has a practical application. And above all, I tell them that our race survived the worst holocaust that any race of people have ever experienced because we had a spiritual base. And that our connectedness to that spirituality is absolutely essential if we're going to work our way out of the quagmire, because there's stuff that we go through as a race of people that - We didn't have this. It is possible to live in a poor community and not have it be a slum. I know because I lived in a poor community where we weren't breaking any people's houses and doing all this other nefarious stuff. We had a genuine love for each other and that held us together and we were able to overcome a lot of obstacles because we had a spiritual connectedness. And I fear that we're losing that. That's my sermon for today. Story_ID: 47929 Speaker 1: Okay. Is there anything that I should have asked you that I didn't? Like your most memorable experience in the House [Illinois General Assembly]? Speaker 2: No, you shouldn't ask me that. So there's nothing that you should have asked me that you didn't (laughs). Speaker 1: [Unclear] It's over? Speaker 2: My most memorable experience in the House. You mean in the legislature House, not at home? Speaker 1: Yeah. Right. Speaker 2: Okay. I guess my most memorable experience in the House was the day that the ERA [Equal Rights Ammendment] legislation came up and I got an opportunity to speak on it, and I talked about - I guess my subject was counted, but not included. I talked about going all the way back to the days of Jim Crow [pre-1965] when our numbers were counted in terms of determining what congressional districts looked like, but we couldn't vote. So we were counted, but we weren't included. And I talked about, even in those days with the Title I funds that were coming from the Federal Government going to the school districts, and those Title I funds were determined by the number of kids in the school district who were disadvantaged and primarily that was us. But the school systems were taking those dollars and spending them on school that were not us. We were counted, but we weren't included. And I use that as a background because what was happening during the ERA was that some white politicians and lobbyists were trying to negotiate the passage of ERA, and they were trying to broker them through Jim [James C.] Taylor who was a black legislator there. We weren't even - the rest of us weren't even included in the discussion. So my position was that the ERA people, although I was very much supportive of ERA, the ERA people were trying to negotiate the passage of the ERA using black votes to pass it, but not including black legislators in the negotiations. Counted, but not included. And interestingly enough, that speech was picked up in the Japanese newspapers. Some friends of mine who were in Japan during that period mailed to me the Japanese newspaper because they printed it in Japanese and they printed it in English. And I understand it was picked up, you know, pretty much because most of the country then was watching Illinois in terms of what it was going to do with ERA. Speaker 1: What year was that? Speaker 2: 1970 - it was either '77 [1977] or '78 [1978]. I think it was '78 [1978], yeah. So that was - yeah, that was really a memorable occasion for me...