 Story_ID: 66553 Speaker 1: I'm the interviewer today for the HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: My name is Curtis R. McClinton, C-U-R-T-I-S, R-E-A-L-I-O-U-S, M-C-C-L-I-N-T-O-N. Speaker 1: Can you tell us your middle name again? Speaker 2: Realious Speaker 1: Orealious or Realious? Speaker 2: Realious Speaker 1: Okay where did that come from, do you know? Speaker 2: Well my mother gave me that middle name because she didn't like the name Curtis. Speaker 1: Okay Speaker 2: And because we never used it, just continued to use Curtis. Speaker 1: Okay, so she wanted a name that she liked, I guess. Okay when were you born? Speaker 2: I was born March 20, 1913. Speaker 1: Okay and now where were you born? Speaker 2: I was born in Braggs, Oklahoma. Speaker 1: What is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm a retired--now retired real estate broker at present. Speaker 1: Okay and what else, there is something else? Speaker 2: Well just mostly handle real estate now. Speaker 1: Okay but you were a state senator. Speaker 2: Yeah I was a state senator. That was in '60 [1960]. Speaker 1: Okay so you were a state senator here in Kansas, right? Speaker 2: Yeah I was the first black state senator in Kansas. There was another senator running but our count was ending before his and that made me the first. Speaker 1: Okay and what is today's date? Speaker 2: February--I beg your pardon August 28, 2002. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: Wichita, Kansas, 1201 East 12th Street. Story_ID: 66554 Speaker 1: Alright now before I go into depth there are five People Magazine-ish type questions that we always ask people. The first one is what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: Food, vegetables and fruit and nuts. Speaker 1: Okay what is your favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue Speaker 1: What is your favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: I have no favorite, I enjoy each day as it comes; cold, hot, snow, rain, shine, storm it's just fascinating. Just see the marvelous, magnificent scenes of nature. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Oh I can have a vacation anywhere; look at the trees, listen to birds, cars, people. Speaker 1: Okay do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Perhaps I have several, things could be worse than they are; I think it could be better and you have to be a part of the action to make the change. Story_ID: 66555 Speaker 1: Okay, alright let's talk about your family and your beginnings. You were born in Braggs, Oklahoma, right? Speaker 2: Yeah Speaker 1: Can you give us the names of your mother and your father and the dates of their birth? Speaker 2: My father was named Waymon McClinton and I think he was born in 1889. Speaker 1: How did he spell Waymon? Speaker 2: W-A-Y-M-O-N McClinton and my mother I don't know what her date of birth was but she was fifty years old when she died. Speaker 1: [OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION] Speaker 2: You were telling me about your father. Your father was born in 1889, you said? Speaker 1: I'm not sure. Speaker 2: Well that's okay, if it's close. Speaker 1: Well he was 88 years old when he died and I think he died in '88 [1988] or '89 [1989], I'm not sure; don't have a record on that. Speaker 2: Okay and your mother you said that she died when she was age 50 but weren't sure of the year she was born. Speaker 1: No she was fifty years old when she died and he was 88 when he died. Speaker 2: Okay and your--where was your father born? Speaker 1: Evansville, South Carolina. Speaker 2: Can you spell that for us? Speaker 1: I'm not sure; I think it's E-V-I-S-V-I-L-L-E. Speaker 2: Okay, Evisville? Speaker 1: Evisville, South Carolina [sic] Speaker 2: Okay Speaker 1: It's where the confederate broke away from the union there in that courthouse in Evansville. Speaker 2: No you've been there, right? Speaker 1: Yes it was my privilege to go there about a couple of years ago. Speaker 2: How did you find the place, I mean what did you think of it? Speaker 1: Oh I thought it was a typical southern town but the people there were very warm. When you went into the courthouse and one of the elected officials there was a lady and she just hugged us and cried--cried and hugged us, very unusually warm toward us. She showed us where the chamber of commerce was and she helped us looked up some documents under the McClintons there. And of course we met several of the people that lived there. One thing that impressed me was I met a young man. He was about forty-three, between forty or fifty and we were talking about how things were and he said that when he was a boy they had a whipping post there where they would catch a black and everybody in the community would give him a lick. He cut in a Caucasian--a white lady's yard and he went to the front door and she bawled him out and told him to go to the back door and to knock and he went to the back door he said and knocked and it was a long time before she came and she bawled him out about coming to the front door. You are supposed to always come to the back door and wait until she gets there, don't be knocking. He told his mother and his mother whipped him and he said that was the worst whipping he ever got. She told him to always go to the back door. But we went through the town that was burned out; it was in the newspaper that it was a thriving, small community. But there seemed to be a revival of spirit, we didn't run into any mistreatment, abuse. They were kind and warm and gentle. They told us where the lake was, tried to get us to stay in one of the golf course buildings but we decided we were going on further. Story_ID: 66556 Speaker 1: Okay did your father have any stories about his ancestors in Evansville [South Carolina] or anywhere else? Speaker 2: No, he never talked about it. Speaker 1: Okay so you never talked about it. Speaker 2: Never talked about it at all. The only time I heard him talk was when I was in the fifth grade studying history of the capitals of the various states and when we got to South Carolina he said, boy that's where I was born, Evansville, South Carolina. That's the only thing I ever heard him say about where he came from, he never talked about it. Speaker 1: Did you ever meet your grandparents on your father's side? Speaker 2: Both of my grandparents were dead when I was born. Speaker 1: Okay now what about your mother, did she--what about her ancestors, did she talk about them or her grandparents? Speaker 2: Not too much, both of them were dead when I was born. I think her father died when she was a child and she was raised by one of the nieces, Irene Hines in Muskogee, Oklahoma. She married early, fifteen years old, dad was seventeen and they had seven children. Speaker 1: Did they meet in Muskogee [Oklahoma]? Speaker 2: Yeah I think they met in Muskogee, yeah. I used to watch my dad work. Speaker 1: Okay, now--you okay? So did your father have a story about how he got to Muskogee from Evansville? Speaker 2: No he never talked about it. He never talked about it. Speaker 1: Okay yeah I know Muskogee is in--(simultaneous) (unclear)? Speaker 2: Muskogee is in Oklahoma. Speaker 1: They have a lot of blacks and Indians in Muskogee [Oklahoma]. Speaker 2: Well yes there were blacks and Indians there. Speaker 1: Right close to Tulsa [Oklahoma], right? Speaker 2: Yes Muskogee was established before Tulsa. Speaker 1: Okay Speaker 2: And before Oklahoma City [Oklahoma] they began to outgrow Muskogee. Speaker 1: Were they living in Muskogee [Oklahoma] when--did they ever talk about the riot in Tulsa [Oklahoma] in 1921? Speaker 2: Well they talked about it some, we were just south of the border, just heard that in the riot there were a lot of people killed, yeah and how it came about. They indicated that a black man or something pushed a white girl or something on the elevator which turned out not to be true. They had a lot of businesses there and it was called Wall Street of Oklahoma. I think at that time--I think the Indians couldn't own land and a lot of the blacks bought land. They had banks and things in Greenwood [Tulsa, Oklahoma]. Story_ID: 66557 Speaker 1: --Okay. So your parents didn't tell you how they met but they met in Muskogee [Oklahoma]? Speaker 2: Yes they met in Muskogee [Oklahoma] and my cousin Irene when I was a kid I heard her talk since she was a little girl; she lost her mother and father when she was pretty young. She said her daddy just married when she was a kid. Speaker 1: Okay now how many brothers and sisters do you have? Speaker 2: Now? Speaker 1: No originally, how many? Speaker 2: Originally I had seven, there were two girls, one girl was stillborn and one lived to be three years old and then we had three other sisters, Deborah, Electa, and Thelma. Deborah went to school in Poteau and then in Barnesville, Oklahoma so did Thelma and Electa. Then they came to Wichita State [University] and they went to Washington D.C., they went to Howard University. My baby sister took a job in the State Department and the second sister had a job at the State Department, the other was an architect and they both died at fifty, the same year of my mother. Thelma was married to a minister. Speaker 1: And where are you in terms of the seven, which--(simultaneous) (unclear)? Speaker 2: I was first born. Speaker 1: First born, so you are the oldest? Speaker 2: Yeah, oldest of the group. Story_ID: 66558 Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now you were born in--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: Braggs, Oklahoma. Speaker 1: Braggs, Oklahoma you traveled a lot, right? Speaker 2: Well, no they didn't do a lot of traveling, they travelled early. I think I left Braggs when I was about two months old, went to Fort Smith, I don't know how long we stayed there but as far as I can remember, I imagine I was about three years old when we were in Poteau, Oklahoma. There is a lady named Laurie Grayson she picked me up and she was talking to mama and told me bye bye and I remember waving so I must have been small for her to do that. So I went to grade school there in Poteau. Speaker 1: Can you spell Poteau for us? Speaker 2: P-O-T-E-A-U, Oklahoma that's in Floyd County, County seat of the Floyd County. Speaker 1: And you went to grade school there? Speaker 2: I went to grade school up to the eighth grade, there wasn't any high school for blacks and of course my father--there was a gentleman who was, he was a lawyer, I think he was a judge and he liked to drink and every time election come, he'd get around his drinking buddies, (unclear) and my dad went to him and he told him there was a statute that if you didn't have a school in your county, you could go--that county would have to pay the county where there was a school for you to go. So I went to Muskogee High School, finished high school and went to Langston University [Langston, Oklahoma]. Story_ID: 66559 Speaker 1: Can you think back and tell us about some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up in Poteau? What was it like, what was the community like? Speaker 2: Well there was about ten, fifteen families of blacks and about 1500 whites. It was just a typical country town. We would hunt rabbits, squirrels, fish. When we were small, mama would take all five of us to the woods and teach us the different kinds of bugs and there was a bird--several birds and one bird sang and she said that bird said Realious. It sounds jult like to me realious and I was a pretty good size before I realized that that bird was not saying Realious. And she liked to fish and they liked church. Speaker 1: That's a sweet story; your mother told you that the bird was saying your middle name, right? Speaker 2: Yeah and then there was another bird there called a dove and she said the bird was saying dove, dove, dove and it sounds like it. You was asking me about vacation, I could listen at those doves because I have several trees in the backyard and those same birds sound like Realious. I don't know what kind of bird it was. Just enjoy life as it is, could be better, could be worse. We played hop scotch on the ground, we'd have picnics on the 4th of July and the next county that I was in, there was an unusual amount of blacks in Spiro [Oklahoma] about fifteen miles away and Fort Coffee, Braden and Peno. Some white gentleman owned most of the land down there and they chopped cotton, pick up potatoes. I remember picking up potatoes, thirty cents a basket. They wouldn't pay you any money, they would give you a ticket and you take the ticket to the general store and buy groceries. But in all general the people were warm; my dad got a job at the Jenkins Hotel. He was making ten dollars a day, I mean a week. He was a chef cook there and there was another elderly lady, Miss Howe that had a hotel and she was gonna give it to my father to run it and he got his pans and things together and went down there. I don't know what happened but I think the white people run him off. They wouldn't let him operate--he never would tell me what happened, I was a little boy. He was an entrepreneur; he bought a hundred head of hogs one time. Yeah a hundred head of hogs and they all got cholera except one and he sold him and he didn't know he had cholera and they came back and said--the boss came back and said Waymon you're going to have to give that man his money back, that hog was sick and he gave him his money back. He operated a small store; he put me in that little store when I was eight years old. There was a fellow there named Joe Alexander, he liked brown mule tobacco. He came in and gave me a quarter and I gave him thirty five cents back, I think. So he gave the money back to me and took time out to show me how make change. They were very nice people, of course there were the youngsters you know, they'd steal if you didn't watch them, some of them would. There were two little churches, Baptist and Methodist--no there was three a Holiness [church]. But overall it was a good little community. Story_ID: 66560 Speaker 1: I remember once--dad would always take me to political meetings and we went to a political meeting and a fellow was running for governor and he said something derogatory about the Ku Klux Klan and the lights went out immediately--went out everywhere and when I got back home I ask dad, I said daddy why did they turn the lights out, he never said nothing, he never said anything to this day about why the lights were turned out. Speaker 2: There was a lot of Klan activity around then? Speaker 1: Well a little, when it gets to politics yeah and when you get to--well the Klan was kind of like in that neighborhood it was kind of like the FBI. If you did something out of line, they would probably take you out and whip you or something. But that never happened, to my knowledge in Poteau [Oklahoma]. I know one time there was a boy named Jack, young man I guess he was in his twenties and he was downtown and some young kids, Caucasians asked him for an item I guess, they said they were going to lynch him. So he went home and a whole gang of them passed by the store. They were kids mostly and when they got close to his house Jack went out behind the house and shot two shot gun shells up in the air and they all ran, that was the end of that. Of course there was prejudice but unless you know you got too familiar with them you got along fine. Speaker 2: What kind of things--what kind of prejudice did they have in terms of--(simultaneous) (unclear)? Speaker 1: Well just that you were black. But we didn't have any problems, they were nice. Speaker 2: Now did you have separate schools? Speaker 1: Oh yeah there were separate schools. Speaker 2: Separate movie theaters? Speaker 1: Well yeah, you could go to the movie but you'd have to sit up in the--they had a high place in the back that you could sit, (unclear) those kinds of things. Schools were separate. I know we had--my teacher gave me a seventy I think for building a table and she asked me to go down--we had to go down to the white school to get papers and things and I went down there and they had saws and hammers, everything you needed but we didn't have anything. So long as you realized that you were black and what they say, stay in your place, you didn't have any trouble in that town, pretty nice little town. And my dad was well known, they all liked him. Story_ID: 66561 Speaker 1: Now what about school did you--what kind of school--did you go to the segregated school? Speaker 2: Yeah there was a separate school. I went to school in the church house down on a little branch of creek. We had one teacher, she taught us our lessons. In those days it would be if you didn't get your lesson and if the kids told it when you got home, you'd get another whipping so you always tried to get your lesson. Speaker 1: Okay so all the children went to the same teacher, one teacher for all the children? Speaker 2: One teacher and then of course just as I was getting ready to go to high school it was enough students to have two teachers and then my dad tried to get a high school in Poteau but then they got with the people in Spiro, Peono and Bradenton and so on. But they indicated that they didn't have enough students there so they did put a high school there after I left there in Spiro and they bussed them in from various farms and things to go to school. Speaker 1: So your father seemed to be pretty active? Speaker 2: Oh he was very active; he was very active in everything. I remember hobos would come through there, didn't have anything to eat and he'd always feed them and one time he got a check for twenty five dollars. Some fellow went through there and he got a job at Ford and sent him a check back. He said you don't remember me but you fed me when I was a hobo and here's your money. So some fellows were shooting craps one time, a bunch of them were shooting for nickels and dimes and some fellow had a ten dollar bill and gave it to a fellow to go down to the station and get change and he went down to the station and caught a freight (laughs) and took off. Story_ID: 66562 Speaker 1: --No, but there was - there were a lot of good white people and I guess if it wasn't, we wouldn't be around. Speaker 2: So you're saying there were a lot of good white people in Poteau, Oklahoma? Speaker 1: Well seemingly everywhere you go if--of course there is a certain element of us--it's just like anything else, there is a certain element that are some rabble rousers and there is some cultural--there is some intellectuals. Speaker 2: Now did you have a--were you inspired by any particular people in Poteau? I mean I know your parents were probably an inspiration too. Your father seemed to be very active. Speaker 1: Yeah he really wanted--both of them, they really wanted you to get your education. I don't think he could write anything but his name but I've been to college and I was trying to figure out the percentage to charge on food and he said well son if anything costs fifty cents, you add a dime to it, that's twenty percent. He just made it easy and simple and he didn't--he couldn't figure too much. All and all, most of it was done in his head. Speaker 2: Go ahead. Speaker 1: That's about all I've got to say. Speaker 2: Okay, what about your mother? What kind of person was she? Speaker 1: Oh she was very warm, very warm. She would tell jokes, everybody liked her. They would get together and sing with people in the neighborhood. They would go to different churches and sing. She loved to fish. I remember one time it was raining and I hate to go to the hen house when it would rain and she was washing clothes and she said son go the hen house and get together the eggs and I was kind of slow and she said if you don't want to go, just tell me. I said no mama, I don't want to go, pow she slapped me. We had a high porch and I had to jump off the porch to keep from falling off the porch but she was good. Preachers used to come to our house and they would eat up everything and we would eat the chicken foot. Mostly you threw the chicken foot away, we would eat the chicken foot and gravy. She would say eat everything that's on your plate son, don't throw away nothing, eat all you want but don't throw away nothing. I remember one time she was in the closet and she was crying and I asked her, mama what you crying about. She said I'm so happy son, I'm so happy. But we didn't have nothing to eat, we didn't have anything to eat. Speaker 2: So she was an upbeat most of the time? Speaker 1: Oh yeah, she was upbeat, she was positive and happy. You never know when there was a problem; they would take it all to themselves, all to themselves, very, very nice, very nice. Story_ID: 66563 Speaker 1: Okay now did you like school? Speaker 2: Yeah I liked school. I was a slow reader. There was a young man by the name of--I forget his name, now I think it was--Frank was his name and he was teaching me how to read. I'd get my D's confused with the A's and the B's. No I would get D confused with B. One turns one way and one was turned the other way, teach us how to read, yep very interesting. Speaker 1: What kind of young man were you? Were you--(simultaneous) (unclear)? Speaker 2: Very quiet, very quiet. My dad was very quiet; of course he could read you, you know. He would see a person standing on the corner waiting on the bus, head down and worried and he'd say--he could tell that you were and he'd say something to him, he'd say morning, it's a beautiful day and they would say yes it sure is a beautiful day. Take their mind off of what they were doing. I met a man up here at the center and he said when I was a young man I came in your dad's store there, I was just rushing and going on and he said your dad didn't know him but he said you need to slow down and the gentleman said--his is--I can't think of his name now but anyway he said that was good for him because he was rushing, he was rushing. Speaker 1: But you were quiet? Speaker 2: Yeah I was very quiet. Speaker 1: Could you read people like that? Did you learn how to read people and their personalities? Speaker 2: Well in the old days I did as I became an adult. Speaker 1: Did you think that--at the time did you make an effort to cheer people up too? Speaker 2: No not too much, I was very shy, very shy. Story_ID: 66564 Speaker 1: Did you like to--now you said you had a hard time reading but what were some of the things that you liked to do when you were younger? Speaker 2: Oh I liked to hunt, fish, and we played baseball. We'd go to the different counties on picnics. Days like the 4th of July and Juneteenth and one country town play another. I remember we went to, I think its Huntsville, I don't know some little town in Arkansas and we had a pretty good team. So they fed us, they just fed us real heavy and we ate and ate and they didn't eat much and we got out there and got beat real good. I remember one time--(simultaneous). Speaker 1: So they fattened you up so you couldn't play. Speaker 2: Yeah I played centerfield and they knocked the ball out to centerfield and I got it just as it hit the ground, kind of a scoop you know and they said did you catch that ball and I said yeah I caught that ball. One fellow said sure was a whole lot of grass falling and ever since then I realized that it didn't pay to lie. I caught it but I didn't catch it in the air. Speaker 1: That's a pretty good story. Speaker 2: That's true. Speaker 1: Now what was Juneteenth, can you tell us what Juneteenth was? Speaker 2: Well Juneteenth-[Abraham] Lincoln issues the Emancipation Proclamation for January and Texas was one of the last states to abide by it. They told them that they wanted to wait until they laid the crops--until they got the crops planted for that year and I understand that some soldiers went down there and they issued the proclamation that they could go free out of Texas that's why they call it Juneteenth, they still celebrate it now. Sometime they celebrate it out at the park, Juneteenth. Speaker 1: So it's not just celebrated in Texas now, it's celebrated in other places? Speaker 2: Well most blacks--African Americans--I won't say most but those that participate in that type of thing go and celebrate Juneteenth. Speaker 1: You know it's not celebrated that much in the east. Speaker 2: It isn't? Speaker 1: No, it's just starting to get to the east; the word is getting to the east, people are asking about it a lot, where it came from. Speaker 2: But yeah that's where it came from. Story_ID: 66565 Speaker 1: Okay. So, how did you do in school? Were you pretty popular or were you--(simultaneous) (unclear)? Speaker 2: I was--yeah in a way I was a little slow in high school. I made B's and C's but I guess one of the reasons I was kind of shy and a lot of times I would know but didn't speak out. I remember once in class it was a story about in a camp somewhere and a child was born you know and I don't remember the name of that book but anyway in English class he asked us what did they feed the baby and the lady that had the child died. I knew but I was just afraid to say and then finally I said they fed him horse meal and that was right. And then I got inspired by that and then I started answering questions, made a good grade in that. I liked music, one thing that I liked about it the teacher. Radio had just come out in high school and I think the teacher's name was Ms. Jones and she would turn the radio high enough for you to hear it and when you would get loud, she would turn it just a little lower and if you keep on talking, she'd turn it just a little lower and it finally got where the children wouldn't talk, they wanted to hear the music and ever since then it would become a part of me. I liked the music to be soft, low. Speaker 1: So you were very much interested in music. In your high school did you--(simultaneous) (unclear)? Speaker 2: Well no I didn't--I couldn't sing, I couldn't carry a tune in a sack. They put me out of every choir from my high school through college. When I was a little boy, they wouldn't let me sing in the Christmas program, they would have me to help Santa Claus. I didn't know but it was because I couldn't sing, I was glad to help Santa Claus. And then when I went to high school, I liked to talk and I got on the debating team and made good grades there. Speaker 1: Okay so you went from being quiet in grade school to being on the debating team in high school. Speaker 2: And then there was a debating team in college and I liked history and I liked political movements. Speaker 1: Where did you go to high school and who were some of your teachers in high school? Speaker 2: Well I went to high school at Manuel Training in Muskogee. One of the English teachers, Ms. Riley. Speaker 1: What was the name again? Speaker 2: Riley Speaker 1: No the school? Speaker 2: Manuel Training High School and the English teacher was Ms. Riley, my math teacher was--I don't mean math, the science teacher Hodges I think it was. Fascinating thing, he had some magnets and an (unclear] and rode around and he put the (unclear) between those magnets and start to move, that really fascinated me. But the other kids, they'd had it and they understood it and I didn't go too much for that. I mostly took the English and psychology, math and I liked science but I wasn't very smart in it. When I went to college, I studied it, made low grades but we didn't have it in high school (Unclear). Story_ID: 66566 Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous)--Now how did you get the idea of going to college? Did your-because your parents didn't go (simultaneous) (unclear)? Speaker 2: Oh my dad, he said get your education, get your education. Speaker 1: So he encouraged you to go to college? Speaker 2: Yeah I went to college. Speaker 1: Did you--he had never been to college before. Did some teachers or some people in the community help you find the college to go to? Speaker 2: Well it wasn't but one college that was Langston Hughes University [Langston, Oklahoma]. I went out there and I didn't have a dime. Speaker 1: Now where is Langston? Speaker 2: Langston is right outside of Guthrie, Oklahoma about twelve miles from Guthrie, Oklahoma. Speaker 1: What kind of a school is that? Is it run by a church or something? Speaker 2: No, Langston was a state school, separate state school at that time, yeah, and I talked to the dean. I got a job in the shop giving out tools and then we started--he taught us how to lay brick in the building out there and I studied for a degree in teaching. Got that and came out and started teaching school. Speaker 1: Now tell me something about Langston. When you were in high school, did you know what you wanted to do with yourself when you went to college? Did you know what you wanted to major in? Speaker 2: Well I always wanted to be a doctor. I always wanted to be a doctor. I took psychology, sociology and that type of thing but I was fascinated by the--and then they had a debating team and I liked it. I'd read the congressional record, congressional journal and I liked running off at the mouth. Speaker 1: You would read the congressional record and then practice the speeches? Speaker 2: Yeah and then we would go to Tulsa [Oklahoma] and debate, we won most all of them. Very fascinating, T.H. Mayberry (splg.), he was on that team, he got to be the speaker of the House at Missouri. Speaker 1: Who was that--what was his name? Speaker 2: T.H. Mayberry Speaker 1: T.H. Mayberry? Speaker 2: Yeah he was on my debating team and he got to be speaker of the House. I went to the House of Representatives, the other fellows passed on. Speaker 1: So you said at Langston they had a football team? Speaker 2: Yeah they had a football team. They played Bishop, that was another black college in Texas and they played Grambling, a black college in Louisiana. We didn't have much of a football team. Amazing thing, I was talking to one of my students in college and every time a play was made the coach would throw his hat down and stomp and turn around and spin. I asked him, I said, "Why do they do all of that?" I think his name was Frank, he said, "Oh Curtis neither one of them have a team so they have to do something to entertain the public." (Laughs). Story_ID: 66567 Speaker 1: What other kind of activities--what was your social life like at Langston [University, Oklahoma]? Speaker 2: Oh it was fair, I didn't have much social life, I didn't belong to any of the--didn't have enough money to get into those sororities--fraternities. Most of it was just study and work, study and work. Make enough to get your meal ticket they'd serve down on the campus, yeah. Not too much social life. Speaker 1: So what were your prospects of--well what teachers at Langston were memorable, I mean which ones do you really remember? Speaker 2: Oh I remember the dean, Dean Seabrook. He was a fellow about my size, yeah he told us--he said now don't you fellows get excited when you--it's going to be a whole lot of you in the ditch with your degrees sticking in your hip pocket. And it actually turned out to be that way until you got started and then--Mack T. Williams was another one, he was a social teacher. He and this Dean debated and they were very interesting and of course I worked in plays some but most of the time I worked. Speaker 1: You were in some plays? Speaker 2: Yeah Speaker 1: Can you remember which ones or what you did? Speaker 2: No I just act as a symbol, you know, in a play. It was a young person growing old, you know. No I wasn't very active in that but I liked to look at the plays. Speaker 1: Did you meet any famous black people? At Langston did any of them come to campus to speak or anything? Speaker 2: No we didn't have too much speaking there; they didn't have too much speaking there. I don't know any person that really came there and spoke. Of course, in Muskogee [Oklahoma] at the fairgrounds, I think I went to hear--maybe it was--was that Booker T. Washington, yeah it was Booker T. Washington. Speaker 1: You heard Booker T. Washington? Speaker 2: Yeah Speaker 1: In Muskogee? Speaker 2: Yeah Speaker 1: You were in high school then? Speaker 2: I don't know but I remember hearing him. I don't if I was in high school or out of high school or whether I was just a kid up there visiting my kin folks. Speaker 1: I think you had to be a kid, Booker T. Washington died in 1915. Speaker 2: 1915? Speaker 1: Maybe it was somebody that worked with him? Speaker 2: No, you're right. I guess I didn't hear him. I guess it was in a statement that fascinated me. He came out of the stand and a fellow asked do you think anybody got anything out of that speech and Booker T. Washington said well I don't know but if just one person got something out of that speech it was worth the while. No I guess perhaps I was fascinated, I was thinking that I heard him but if he died in 1915 I didn't because I was born in '13 [1913]. Speaker 1: Okay so it seems like there would be somebody to have come through there. Was there much talk about black history and who were the heroes in those days to the college students who went to Langston? Who were the black heroes? Speaker 2: I guess band leaders. Speaker 1: The band leaders? Speaker 2: Yeah band leaders were the heroes and--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 1: Which band leaders? Speaker 2: Oh I don't remember; they were all pretty famous during that time. I don't remember--Earl 'Fatha' Hines and Count Basie, Cab Calloway. Story_ID: 66568 Speaker 1: Okay, so what happened after college, what did you do after college? Speaker 2: Well I took a little job in a town called Tuskahoma, Oklahoma that was in Pushmataha County. There was a high school teacher there, it went through the kindergarten through the--I don't know whether it did or not, I can't remember. Speaker 1: Did it go through the twelfth grade? Speaker 2: That's what I'm trying to think. I don't think it did, I think it went through the eighth grade. I taught there for a couple of years and down there the superintendent would run on the ballot and I chose a superintendent and campaigned for him and he lost so I lost. So I came back and went to Boggsville [Colorado] where my dad was and there was a little store out in the brickyard and I opened up--it was a house out in the brickyard and I rented it and bought three sacks of Bull Durham tobacco and sold those and then bought three boxes of ten cent snuff, I sold those and then I bought a sack of Bull Durham, they would sell Bull Durham during those times and I sold it and I bought a half a dozen sardines and a salesman came by and he said McClinton if I let you have some groceries would you pay me and I said yes I sure would. He let me have fifty dollars worth of groceries and I just moved on from there. Then I left there and went to Smoky Hill Air Base in Salina [Kansas] and worked as a carpenter there. Speaker 1: During the war? Speaker 2: Yeah it was during the war. I was deferred because of pre Pearl Harbor father, I think it was and I didn't belong to the union, I couldn't keep up with my hammer. So I finally came back to Boggsville and ran the store and then we left there and came to Wichita and opened up this store over here and it did real well. We bought it from a fellow named Leo Gottsteiner. He was very nice, he told us about the customers and how to run it. Story_ID: 66569 Speaker 1: Now were you married by then? Speaker 2: Yeah I married in 1930--Curtis was born in '37 [1937], I married in 1936 in Muskogee, Oklahoma. Speaker 1: How did you meet your wife? Speaker 2: I met her in high school. She came from Texas and stayed with her auntie, I think. I met her at church and I carried she and her sister to high school--well I didn't carry them, I walked them to high school. They lived below us and then she was the queen of--football queen for one year and I taught one year by myself and then the next year I married her after she finished high school. Then she went to--she came here and we ran the store and she went to Friends University [Wichita, Kansas] and I got into politics. Speaker 1: Now kind of go back to--so Curtis was born. That was your first child? Speaker 2: Yeah first and only child. He was born in Muskogee, Oklahoma. He was born June 20, 1937, one year after we got married. Speaker 1: How did you end up coming to Wichita [Kansas]? Speaker 2: Well my father came to Wichita--my brother first came to Wichita and said how booming it was and then my dad came to Wichita and he brought his girls and he opened up an Oklahoma cafe on Main Street. He had a cafe on Ninth Street and he finally opened up a business--he owned a cafe and grocery on Tenth Street--Tenth and Cleveland. They went to Wichita State [University] and I was over here. He in his place of business came up and he called down to Boggsville and told everybody--told me to come up and look at it and I liked it and we bought it, it went from there. Speaker 1: So you came here with a business already? Speaker 2: Yeah I had a little business that I had started--I had told you about it in Boggsville. Yeah and then he took ill, my father did from his business in--no that was here in Wichita [Kansas]. Story_ID: 66570 Speaker 1: Did you say you moved to Wichita [Kansas] in 1943? Speaker 2: 1943, yeah and we opened up this store here at 1201 E. (unclear). We had a fairly fluid business. We sold--not a big business but for a small store we sold cosmetics and beauty supplies and food. Speaker 1: How did you get started, had you saved the money up from the place that you lived? Speaker 2: Well I first rented a store building and the house here and I never did rent very much so I went to the fellow and asked would he sell and he told me he would sell it and business was of the nature that I can buy it and I bought it. And we moved over here and they had an old PA, I think at that time whereas you couldn't charge more than what the rent was before the war or something like that. I didn't know that so we rented this place out and the lady turned us in. Speaker 1: You were charging too much. Speaker 2: Yeah I think she spent fifty dollars a month or something like that. So we just moved over here and then I went and took my real estate course and passed and got into real estate. So we handled real estate rentals and the store. Story_ID: 66571 Speaker 1: And of course while there I became the president of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and became vice president of the state NAACP. I ran for the school board and I lost that position. I guess my dad didn't think I was smart enough, mama would support me but dad supported that Dr. Simms, I think it was. Dr. Simms was elected, he made a fine school board member and there was another fellow here named Shepherd Fontaine and he asked me to go to a democrat meeting. We went to a democrat meeting, segregation was pretty bad here and Shepherd came in and asked me would you run for state representative, I was cutting meat and I said yeah I would run for state representative. But if I run, I'm going to run to win, I'm not going to run as a token position. So I went down and filed and began to campaign and I think my opponent was Attorney John Madden. The interesting thing in doing that campaign, a lady came and asked me do you think that he would support the Civil Rights Movement and I said I don't know, you go over there and ask him and she went over there. I don't know what he told her but anyway he must have told her no and she came back and began to work on the campaign. I won that election and went to the House. Speaker 2: When was this, what year was this? Speaker 1: 1955, the fall of 1955. I was elected and took the seat in 1956. Story_ID: 66572 Speaker 1: Now you said before that you became the head of the NAACP in Wichita [Kansas]? Speaker 2: Yeah, president of the NAACP and then this fellow out of Kansas City was the state president and I was the vice president--state vice president for awhile. Speaker 1: Had you been involved in the NAACP back in Muskogee [Oklahoma] or anyplace else that you lived? Speaker 2: Well no more than membership and I went to the meetings and I don't know whether I was in--I must have been here, I guess. I went to Chicago [Illinois] and then the national convention and Thurgood Marshall was there and he just listened at him and listened at him and when they said something wrong--illegal he would jump straight up and say now listen, it's not like that so and so and he would calm them down. Yeah I was involved in that way when I was in grade school--even when I was in grade school and in the country we were involved in the NAACP. Speaker 1: Did you read the 'Crisis'? Speaker 2: Yeah we read the 'Crisis' and when I was a little boy in Oklahoma--Poteau I sold The Chicago Defender. Yeah the first time I sold--I think I sold about fifty papers and it just began to come down. They were all--well I would sell two or three among blacks and the rest of them would be among the whites. But the whites finally got so they didn't want that paper at all. Speaker 1: White people were buying more papers than the blacks? Speaker 2: Yeah then and there because the blacks didn't have the money. Well a lot of them but they didn't want to spend that dime. But anyway--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 1: Why did the whites buy it? Speaker 2: Well I guess they wanted to know what it was all about. But finally it got down to the place where none of them would buy it. That kind of goes back, yeah and then I told you about me going to the legislature. Story_ID: 66573 Speaker 1: Right so you were active in the NAACP at the state level. Then you got involved in democratic politics in Wichita [Kansas] going to the democratic meetings and you were drafted to run for state legislature. Speaker 2: Yeah he asked me to run. Speaker 1: And you actually won in 1955, right? Speaker 2: Yeah and I took the seat in 1956. Speaker 1: Okay did you feel at the time that you were really prepared to do that when you took it? Speaker 2: What do you mean when you say prepared? Speaker 1: Well prepared, you say that you were ready with all the other activities you had been involved in. Speaker 2: Oh yeah I was ready; I was always interested in civil rights. I know when I was in Boggsville, I asked a state representative, a white state representative, do you ever think it would be possible for a black man to become a state representative and he said no, never, never. And I said right there and I was going to try and things were so bad here why they were really ready to support you and I got quite a few--I think I got more Caucasian votes as I did blacks because there were more Caucasians--in the democrat world if you weren't a democrat, you couldn't get a job. Even cleaning spittoons at the courthouse and the children's home down here if you weren't a republican--if you weren't a republican, you couldn't get a job cleaning spittoons. And there you couldn't work in the children's home if you weren't republican. You couldn't teach school if you weren't republican, they would find some way to keep you out. So they were just pinned down. How I got to be a democrat was back when I was a boy. There is a fellow from Mississippi, his name was W.D. Cooper. He worked around the bank, he would clean up the bank and check the bank out and go get horses and things when the bank would foreclose they would give him a horse or two and I got old enough to vote. I told him I wanted to be a republican, Lincoln was a republican and I could be a republican. My daddy was a republican, he said the republicans they just have everything. Now if you really want to help somebody, you get to be a democrat. Democrats, they don't have anything and they will do anything to get elected. So I went with him and started running for the legislature and his boy was appointed over this Boley, Oklahoma school for, I think illiterate--something about being illiterate well they call it the crazy house but--some of them are insane but anyway he got that position-just running for that. That encouraged me to support the democrats and then after studying the platform of democrats they seemed to be the party of the smaller people. The stock market fell and so on then [Franklin D.] Roosevelt came in. A lot of things they said he did were non-constitutional. We finally got that stock market straightened out. I'll tell you one thing that woke us up was that--when they crashed those planes into those Twin Towers. Speaker 1: Oh on last September 11. Speaker 2: Yeah that was amazing. We were so proud and arrogant in many instances, of course all of us weren't but some of them I know are. And that just makes all of us be more American, more American. Story_ID: 66574 Speaker 1: Now were you the first black elected to the legislature here in Kansas? Speaker 2: Yes, technically speaking and votes were counted here before they were finished counting in Kansas City so I got to be first by a hair. Speaker 1: Okay so somebody else was elected in Kansas City? Speaker 2: Yeah that was [George] Haley. Haley was elected to the senate the same year that I was elected to the senate. Speaker 1: But they counted your vote--that was the first--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: Yeah, we didn't have many votes here and they had came out before they finished counting the votes there. Speaker 1: Let me get this straight. You were in '55 [1955] you were elected as a state rep or a senator? Speaker 2: State representative Speaker 1: State representative, you were the first black state representative? Speaker 2: No that was a state representative from Kansas City. I can't think of his name now but there was one from Kansas City. Speaker 1: Okay but you were the first--(simultaneous) (unclear)? Speaker 2: Davis, yeah he was a representative of Kansas City. Speaker 1: Can you remember his first name? Speaker 2: No Speaker 1: Okay Davis Speaker 2: Davis, he was there when I was there and then they had a--they had two more after that but I can't remember their names now. Speaker 1: Well tell me about your first day as a state representative. Do you remember what happened that first day or what it was like going in there for the first time? Speaker 2: Well that was very, very fascinating. It was kind of like going to school, they would tell you things that you are supposed to do, assign you a seat and so on. Tell you about the speaker and that type of thing and then you would write--if you wanted something you would have to write your bills and get it early. Story_ID: 66575 Speaker 1: So I wrote up this bill on Civil Rights early and met the fellow there, kind of advisor I guess, Gulick [ph.] I think his name was and he said yeah it looks alright; it's all legal and everything. I introduced it in the early legislature. Speaker 2: What happened to it? Speaker 1: Well it was a long story, it was a long story. I introduced it and I was challenged on it and that was that forty five minute speech that I was telling you about. Speaker 2: Okay well tell us again because we want to hear it on camera. You made a forty five minute speech in the state legislature Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, it was on House Bill 54. Speaker 2: What did you say basically, what is the essence of what you said? Speaker 1: Well it would take about forty five minutes--I started out by telling what my bill was. Mr. Speaker, members of the legislature before you, of course they have to call you first, your bill has to come up. I'm before you to present House Bill 54. It has to do with public accommodations, has to do with those businesses that are open to the public and they shall not deny services to any person because of race, color, creed or previous condition of servitude. Then I started to give Lincoln's Gettysburg Address and by the time I got to the second sentence, a fellow challenged me and then I spent the rest of the time answering his questions. Speaker 2: Okay so what happened, did it pass? Speaker 1: Well yes it passed, it passed and, of course it has to come up for second reading and they just kept running up and down the calendar, running up and down the calendar and they asked me to go and make a speech for public relations at a school and when I was out there making that speech for public relations, they passed over my bill. It's hard to get a bill back up you know because there are so many other bills. So they just kept running it up and down the calendar and finally it--yeah it passed the first time and then they ran it up and down the calendar the second time and when it came to the third reading it passed. And they sent it to the House and at that time we had just one senator (unclear) as to where the farmers had it. It didn't make any difference how many people we had in the country, you only had one senator. So he introduced legislation and sent a resolution to congress and then they finally had a court case and they finally had to give us more senators. But anyway, to make a long story short, you asked me did it pass, yes it passed the House and sent to the senate and Donald Schreiber [ph.] pigeon holed it. Speaker 2: It went to who? Speaker 1: Donald Schreiber he was this senator from Sedgwick County and he didn't introduce it. So the next year he was defeated and I reintroduced the bill and it went up and down the calendar and finally passed and in that picture I showed you, the governor signed it. It become law in 1960 Speaker 2: 1960 so something you started working on in 1956, is that true? Speaker 1: Yeah Speaker 2: It took like four years to get--to become law. Speaker 1: No it took--let's see it passed the House in 1956 and it went to the senate, come out in--because we have short sessions, mostly business sessions in '57 [1957] and in '58 [1958] when it became law. It went in in '56 [1956], they pigeon hold it in '56 [1956]. In '57 [1957] then they had short sessions, they just took up business bills and in '58 [1958] was a full House session again. So it passed in '58 [1958]. The Governor signed it in '58 [1958] and it became law in '58 [1958]. Governor [Richard] Dawkins was the governor at that time. Story_ID: 66576 Speaker 1: But, um, tell me now 1954, the year before you were elected was a date that the Supreme Court ruled on Brown v. The Board of Education of Topeka, Kansas. Speaker 2: I don't know what year that was but--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 1: It was '54 [1954]. Speaker 2: Okay Speaker 1: That's the year before you were elected. I mean, did you, was all that affecting you--what did you think about that at the time? Speaker 2: Well I thought it was a good move; it was a very good move. Any move to remove the bonds of segregation was good. Speaker 1: Okay was there a lot of discussion about it here in Wichita [Kansas]? Speaker 2: Not too much, people were mostly busy going about their own activities. They were more interested in having to sit in the back of the bus and not being able to move where they wanted to go and not being able to have to go to the back in there. Speaker 1: Okay now did your--(simultaneous) (unclear)? Speaker 2: In the cafes, excuse me. Speaker 1: I'm sorry Speaker 2: And they also didn't like going up in the buzzard roof they called that in the theaters. This fellow Chester Lewis was talking about it and the NAACP, they sued him and I think that he got several thousands of dollars; the person was ejected from the theater from that suit. Speaker 1: Okay now did your bill, House Bill 54, did that address those issues like sitting on the back of the bus? Speaker 2: House Bill 54 was--it was those businesses that provide that those businesses that were open to the public, any business that was opened to the public shall not deny service to any person because of race, creed, color, previous condition of servitude or peculiarity of birth. Speaker 1: Okay Speaker 2: If you had a business, if it's open to the public, you could not deny service that's what it provided for. Speaker 1: Okay now how was that bill received by people? Did people really--were they excited that such a thing was passed here and did it change things right away? Speaker 2: No not right away because a lot of people didn't read it in the paper and they didn't know it and many of the businesses didn't know it. So the legislature provided a civil rights commission and they would go around to those people that refused and they would give them a warning and tell them what was. If they did it again, then they would fine them. Speaker 1: Okay so they faced a fine if they discriminate so that did start to change some things--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: Yeah that changed and the bus--and a lot of them didn't know it, they really didn't begin--it took about '60 [1960] before they began to take effect--before they--the general public really knew--really executed it. And when it was violated, this commission would call them and let them know what the law was and that type of thing. That straightened them up to keep them from having to pay that fine. Speaker 1: Can you tell what the biggest change was after this Bill was passed? What change was the most dramatic for people? Speaker 2: Well they had the right to do it whether they did it or not. But so many of the--in many instances they didn't execute it because it was just word of mouth that you don't have to do this anymore, it's fine to do it, etcetera, even the businesses. It came out in the paper but a lot of people didn't see it, you know. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 66577 Speaker 1: What was some of the other highlights of your career in the state legislature? Speaker 2: That was the biggest thing that I worked on in the state legislature, that Civil Rights Bill. Of course, when I went to the senate I worked on several bills for the city. We got city of Wichita [Kansas], city of first class could make their own laws so long as it didn't conflict with the laws of the state and the government--the national government. I introduced legislation to the senate to bring about a state board of education whereas the members of the congressional district would meet and discuss the problems of the state and would elect their own president and make recommendations to the state for the action to--of the school district. At that time the banks was not paying any interest on money that the state and different government entities had and moved that they pay interest on that passed. So they had to start paying interest on it. Story_ID: 66578 Speaker 1: So how did you decide to run for state senator from being a state legislature? Speaker 2: Well you know you get egotistical, you get egotistic and I think--well now I'm sorry some of these bills as I was telling you about--well the banks that was in the legislature but the state board of education was in the senate. Speaker 1: Okay Speaker 2: Yeah state board of education was in the senate. The major legislation that I introduced in the House was civil rights on public accommodations. Speaker 1: Okay so when did you-when did you run for state senator? Speaker 2: I was in the House two years and I ran for state senator in '60 [1960]. Speaker 1: Okay did you win in '60 [1960]? Speaker 2: Yeah I won in '60 [1960]. Speaker 1: Now who were your constituents, who lived there, who voted for you? Speaker 2: That was the senatorial district. Speaker 1: Yeah but was this mostly black people? Speaker 2: No they were mostly white, mostly white. When I was in the House, I made a lot of friends. The Mennonites, they got into trouble. They had a rule whereas you have to go to--every person has to go to high school. Well of the Mennonites--someone in their clan, their girls they didn't go to high school. They would teach them how to cook and sew and how to take care of a house, that type of thing. And they came to my committee and they wanted to force them to do that. I said well that should be a gradual deal. I said you don't see a Mennonite kid getting into trouble and the jails and this type of thing and you can't say that about the schools that we do. So they kind of gave them a few more years to consider it and that type of thing and they didn't--they relaxed the penalty on them. They didn't execute the penalty that was provided there for them. Speaker 1: So you had a lot of Mennonites living in this senatorial district? Speaker 2: No, I don't think so. They came from other places, there are some Mennonites here. They came from some other places. People didn't necessarily look at it from the district; they looked at the principle of the thing. How would it help the people? Speaker 1: I was asking you who our constituents were. Who wanted you to be in the senate? What kind of people were voting for you and why did they want you in the senate? Speaker 2: Well I guess it was because of my performance in the House and then they weren't clear on this living where you wanted to live, restricted covenance. Now of course, they promised [George] Haley --they promised him that they were going to give that to him. He stayed quiet on this other civil rights movement and he did stay quiet on it. But they didn't give it to him. The amazing thing about that is a fellow named--can't think of his name now-he came from Mexico, he couldn't speak English-Caseros [ph.] was his name and he got elected to the legislature and you know he was against that civil rights bill. He voted against it, it's just amazing. And of course, to have fun, I introduced legislation that a person that did not live in this country so on and so on could not vote on certain things. I just did it as a prank but nobody supported it. But anyway I just wanted to show you how some of them felt about it, I guess it was just because of the custom and then a lot of times people wanted to do right about things in my opinion but they just go along with the gang, just go along with the gang. And then those that want to do right irrespective to what the situations are they will support those people that they'd think was fair minded and good for the benefit of the state, that's my opinion on that. Story_ID: 66579 Speaker 1: Just asking who specifically supported you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Okay it was the unions, the churches, the blacks and the democrats and then I'll tell you another thing, when I ran for the House [of Representatives], Eastborough [Kansas] that was an aristocratic area and mostly all Caucasians and Attorney Madden had done something, I don't know. A fellow called up asked me for the sign and I asked him where he lived and he said he lived in Eastborough, put a sign out here and I didn't go out there. He called me back again and said you ought to put a sign out there and I said I will have a sign on your front door in the morning. So I went out there and put a sign in his yard about 2:00 in the morning it was there and I put some signs on the street corners, of course the police took those up. So I would say the unions, the black population, the churches and they liked that about the schools, teachers. Speaker 1: Were the republicans in before you got in? Speaker 2: Yeah, there wasn't nobody. Attorney Madden was a republican. Okay. Story_ID: 66580 Speaker 1: He was--and the odd thing about it--the reason why we had such poor legislation, nobody wanted to make the sacrifice. They just paid $3.00 a day when you was in the House of Representatives. Speaker 2: You were paid $3.00 a day? Speaker 1: $3.00 a day when you went to the House of Representatives and those lawyers they'd just go up there and take cases, you know. That's all they were doing taking cases, they weren't answering no legislation. See what he could get through those or deals. I know an oil lobbyist came by and put a pamphlet on our desk talking about what they were feeding us and if we didn't vote a certain way, we're going to miss those meals or something. Of course the average politician wouldn't fool with it but that's just right down my alley. I hit the floor and I said we're putting ourselves in a precarious position where we have to jump every time the lobbyist crack their whip and all the legislators like that but they didn't--just a little lift start from down here that's saying that. But they had to live with those lobbyists and that type of thing and what they all supported it because this lobbyist got fired. Speaker 2: So making so little money in the state legislature how were you able to afford to stay in office? Speaker 1: Well I stay in office, it didn't take money, I guess it was just the popularity because I sure didn't have any campaign funds. I took my own money and (unclear). Now one time I think the democrat party gave a little money, $20.00 or $30.00 to the campaign and you were just mostly on your own. Then in many instances, a lot of people just don't vote. Speaker 2: Okay so if you have--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 1: And then by being the first African American, by being a democrat and by executing some bills I just won popularity and I guess after you get in there and get popularity that can far exceed you in finance and that type of thing. But you can't get elected because you just got clout. Your other legislatures would support you and you support them and they will have their friends vote for you and you have your friends to vote for them. You run into a lot of people who are better qualified and then the average person didn't want to sacrifice their job. To come up to making $3.00 a day, of course they finally raised it to $3.00 a day and then $10.00 expense when I was in the House. Then they raised it again when I was at the senate. A lot of those boys are getting about $6,000 a year. Speaker 2: That's what they get now? Speaker 1: I think so, something like that. I'm not sure, that isn't on the tape? Speaker 2: Yeah Speaker 1: Oh well I think they get about that, I'm not sure. Story_ID: 66581 Speaker 1: So what was the highlight of your senate career? Speaker 2: I don't know if I had any highlights other than we got one man, one vote and mostly any bills that were passed were for the benefit of Sedgwick County and as I indicated on the one man, one vote and the state board of education and a series of other things like that. I can't remember them all but the highlight--there was no major highlight. Speaker 1: Okay you were fairly popular though in the senate, I guess from what I read. People say that you have a sense of humor, a commitment to civil rights. Speaker 2: Yeah that was the way you actually got legislation through with a sense of humor. Now this legislature one fellow after I introduced myself and told him what I wanted, he said building are being burned, women are being raped, Martin Luther King is a communist, we got a lot of hay down, let's get on with more important business. My brain cells exploded when he said that, of course that was in the House. I guess the House was my major--the major thing that I really appreciate having being accomplished. The other one was just taking care of business of the state and of the country from which you came. Speaker 1: How long did you serve in the state senate. Speaker 2: Two terms, that's eight years and then they did not get together, they had to redistrict and the state did not get together on redistricting, you had to run countywide all over the country instead of out of their district and I lost by a few votes and I didn't run the next time. I tried to run another term and I got beat out by Senator Dansen [ph.] I tried to run again and I got beat out by Dukes who is the senator now. But they are beginning to take money to run; yeah it takes big money to get up there now unless you are unusually popular or follow somebody else in. Speaker 1: So what did you do after the state senate? Speaker 2: I just drifted for a while. I went up to Kansas City [Missouri] and worked in (unclear) appliance store with my son and I sold cosmetics in Kansas City and then I came back to Wichita [Kansas] and started selling real estate and closed down the little store building, yeah. Story_ID: 66582 Speaker 1: Now your son's career--he was a major football player. Speaker 2: Yeah, he played with the Kansas City Chiefs. He first began with the--well not first began but major football with the Dallas Texans and they left there and came to Kansas City and named themselves the Kansas City Chiefs. Speaker 1: That was in the American Football League, right? But they used to call them American Football League. Speaker 2: Yeah, AFL, American Football League and there he was very good. I think--I forget the quarterback's name--Len Dawson I think. They had several good players. I got the chance to go to the Super Bowl Speaker 1: Was that the one-the super bowl of 1970? Speaker 2: I don't know. Speaker 1: I think it was '70 [1970] with Len Dawson and your son and Otis Taylor--. Speaker 2: Yeah Otis Taylor was good. Speaker 1: Gloster Richardson, Frank Pitts and Buck Buchanan, Curley Culp, Aaron Brown, yeah a lot of guys on the team. Very popular team with the black community because most of all of them were black and of course the quarterback was white but the team had a lot of black players. A lot of the black players were from small colleges and that's why we watched them intently in those days because we wanted to see them win. We were really rooting for them. Speaker 2: That is a--sports is a fascinating thing for minorities. You could play sports and some of them give donations to colleges and then they interact in the community with charity and those types of things. Helping youngsters have an image. As I said they give donations to colleges and things and in the scripture it says bread casts upon the water returns a hundredfold. I think we probably have our priorities kind of backward, these long time jail cells that we are educating them in the jail instead of educating them in school it cost you sixty, seventy and eighty dollars a day to keep a person in prison all of their lives. If you educate them in the schools--put that money in the schools they could make a contribution to society and you wouldn't need so many jails. Really the jails--air condition our schools and not air condition brand new jails and run down schools. Boilers blowing up--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 1: Yeah that seems to be the case these days. Speaker 2: Yeah they are putting emphasis in the wrong place. Give them that education. Story_ID: 66583 Speaker 1: Now tell me about your son's development as a football player. You're a fairly small man, he's a fullback, he's a big guy. Speaker 2: Yeah that's very true. He says that my dad runs a grocery store and my mama was a good cook. Well sometimes it goes back to a third and fourth generation. My mother was small, my daddy was not much larger than I am but he had some brothers that were tall. Now on my mother's side her brother is tall and big like Curtis and her daddy is tall, big like Curtis. Now you take Curtis has a daughter, my granddaughter she was small like my mother and both of them are tall--I mean Curtis and his wife both of them are tall and stocky built. Yeah Curtis his mother kind of spoiled him, I'd try and make him clean up his room and she say no let him go play football, I'll clean up his room. He forgot to take out these pop bottles and she say I'll take out and I said pop bottles (unclear) around the store let him play and I think that was good. She went to all of them. I missed a lot of them, I was in the legislature and if you leave there for anything, that would really mess you up or if you've got any legislation coming up, you just have to stick around. Speaker 1: So did you go to the Super Bowl celebration and all that? Speaker 2: No I was in the legislature and I didn't go to the Super Bowl. I went to several of his games, yeah I did go to one Super Bowl but he lost at that Super Bowl. Speaker 1: That was the first one, right? Speaker 2: Yeah that was the first, I went to the first Super Bowl and they lost that one. But the one in Green Bay [Wisconsin], I didn't go to that one, couldn't get away. It wasn't wise to get away; I'll put it like that. Speaker 1: Too much pending legislation and that sort of thing. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Story_ID: 66584 Speaker 1: Now, now you sell real estate too, right? Speaker 2: Yeah Speaker 1: And you also are a musician, there was a picture of you playing a saxophone. Speaker 2: Well I played saxophone for about maybe a year/eighteen months. The seniors that were at Morgan had a band and I joined it. I tried to play music in college--tried to play a trumpet, I never learned how to play a trumpet and I had it for about two months and I couldn't feel it and the fellow said I'm going to let this--in college I'm going to let this fellow play it. I kind of hesitant about music, I didn't think I could learn it. But he gave me a mouth piece. After I bought a saxophone he kept it--I mean he kept it and just gave me the mouth piece and I didn't like that at all. He said just blow on this mouth piece; he showed me how to blow on it. I was blowing for about two weeks and he finally gave me my saxophone, put the mouth piece on it and taught me how to run the scales. I guess I would give myself a D minus in saxophone music but I enjoyed it, I liked the tenor tone. We would go around at Christmas time and play for the senior citizens and at different churches and also where they have the sick, you know. We were very popular doing that and he was a good musician, we lost him and I was getting too far behind. I had gotten to the place that I didn't want to do that, blow that saxophone. I had to put it down. Story_ID: 66585 Speaker 1: Now did your father live to see you become a success in the legislature? Speaker 2: Yes he did, I surely wish my--I went in one year after my mother died. She would have really, really enjoyed that. I know when I went for the board of education, my dad supported the doctor. I think he just wanted to be sure he got somebody in there that was African American and mama supported me but the doctor won and that's one reason why I would have just liked to have seen--liked for her to have been able to see that; that's one of my greatest regrets, certainly was. Speaker 1: But when you look back on everything, what do you see as your legacy? Speaker 2: You mean what I enjoyed? Speaker 1: No, your legacy, what do you think you left behind for other people? Speaker 2: Well public accommodation was left behind for other people. I think that's one of the greatest things, sense of humor. Speaker 1: Why is that important to have a sense of humor? Speaker 2: Well most people--so many people seem to be very down with problems saying that they can't do anything with and if you have a sense of humor you can break that tension that they have. And then sometime you can use humor kind of like philosophy. Story_ID: 66586 Speaker 1: Go back to Civil Rights legislation when this fellow said women are being raped and let's get on with more important business, I quoted the constitution as saying that the constitution provides that all men are created equal with certain unalienable rights and endowed by God among these life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness. And I said that this gentleman--I indicated that he was opposed to this bill. Well anyway the speaker asked me to sit down for some things that I said but what I said was true and I indicated that now this gentleman was the [et post se magnos maximum est quod non]in his community. That means the greatest of the great in Latin and there is none greater. Speaker 2: Say that again. Speaker 1: He is [et post se magnos maximum est quod non] that is the greatest of the greats and after him there is none greater. I said he was the alpha and the omega, the beginning and the ending in his district. And I indicated that he was e.pluribus unum, one among many. He is the magna cum laude, the most learned, the most intelligent representative of the echelon of culture in our American democratic society. I said that because he was saying let's get on with more important business and I said he was elected to the legislature and he swore to his constituents to uphold the constitution of the United States and that said that one of the writers of the constitution said equal justice to all, especially privileged and none. That brought in the human saying, you don't have to have a Ph.D. and be a corporate, Philadelphia lawyer to understand that part of the constitution. Because you could be little black sambo and the first reader and the rabbit and the tar baby and the second reader, you can understand that part of the constitution. Now what we've done brother is laid the constitution in the hay, start doing like the rabbit butting, kicking and hitting that tar baby. I said now that tar baby said that's done more for this nation than any other nationality people on the face of the globe. Black mammies breast fed white babies and raised them to be teenagers and adults and in many instances they were mistresses to the daddies. You know that's because they made the reference of rape back then. Story_ID: 66587 Speaker 1: I said the black man--and then I said while the white man created wealth on the backs of the black man. I went on to say that the shot that was fired, that was heard around the world, the continental minute men met the British army out there in Boston commons and the first man to fall was a black man. He wasn't brown skinned, mixed up from slavery like me, he was black; his name was Crispus Attucks, first man to fall to save the union was a black man. Lincoln sent him out to raise the flag and they shot him down and the black man has fought in every war that this nation had. Humiliated, segregated, ridiculed, abused and any other phraseology that you wish to put together. To abase--debase any other place in the English language, you've done it to the American black. In 1917 April 8th war was declared in the United States, we'll go to Washington, [D.C.], we'll go to Washington [D.C]. They met in Washington [D.C.], face to face and said we'll go to Germany to settle this case, make the world safe for democracy. John J. Pearce was the commander in chief at that time of the allied forces. Many of the black soldiers had to train with sticks on this side of the ocean. When they got on the other side of the ocean they gave them a quick training with the rifles on how to clean them and how to shoot. Without air cover, without bombardment they sent them against those machine guns, hub to hub, mile after mile shooting 300 bullets a minute. There is more of the raw recruits dying like flies and he spoke about, hey--when he was rebutting me and he said pile them up like bales of hay. And I could imagine John J. Pearce in his mind's eye saying that's one way to get rid of some of those tar babies. After the war was over the white soldiers went around telling those foreign girls that black soldiers had tails and they were going around getting pillows for them to sit on. When it got back to the states the white German prisoners rode in the front part of the court, the black soldiers who helped win the war they ride in the back part of the court. And some of those soldiers had gotten their uniforms--(unclear) uniforms in suits, tried to eat in the motels, stand in the cafes and they hung them for treason. The United States Congress--the United States of America, the land of the free and the home of the brave, the cradle of democracy did not see fit to issue--uno, monon, one congressional medal of honor. Of course, that was in the debate but you didn't have time to listen to that. So those were the characteristics of it. Speaker 2: That's a taste of it, right? Speaker 1: Yeah Speaker 2: That's a good taste of it. Story_ID: 66588 Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: As a good man, sense of humor, being introduced as a--introducing civil rights in the state of Kansas six-eight, ten years before the nation. I guess that would be the major thing, a sense of humor. Speaker 1: Alright thank you very much. Speaker 2: Appreciate it, the pleasure is all mine. Story_ID: 66589 Speaker 1: Oh, that's when I was having a picture taken to go in the bulletin of Calvary Church. Speaker 2: About what year was that? Speaker 1: I imagine it was about 1998. I think that's--is my granddaughter on there? Yeah that's when she graduated from Spelman College in [Atlanta] Georgia and that was--you can look on that picture and see the year by the door. Yeah it will be on that picture at the bottom by the door. I think that is 1998, the year is 1998. Speaker 2: May 11, 1998 Speaker 1: The first one in red that is my son's wife's cousin. The girl in the red is one of Margo's friends. That's me standing in the front and behind me is my son and in the middle is Margo my granddaughter and--. Speaker 2: The guy standing behind her? Speaker 1: I don't know him, that's one of her friends. This gray haired lady is her auntie. That's her mother's--that's her auntie and the girl on the extreme left is her first cousin and the gentleman with her is her uncle. The other one, I can't recognize. The gentleman--that was also taken in Georgia at that graduation by the car. That's Curtis' wife on the left, Curtis the gentleman and the girl in the shorts is Margo my granddaughter and that looks like Joe Blow on the end. That was after election showing the people--a list of the people that voted for me. Speaker 2: This is when you won the senate or the legislature? Speaker 1: That's the senate. Speaker 2: Okay that's 1960? Speaker 1: I went to the senate in 1960, yeah. That is at the--that was when I got the award from a sorority for services to the community and I'm receiving it at Golden Eagle that's back there in Indiana. That was my escort when I received the award at Golden Eagle. You were supposed to have an escort and she operated a string of beauty shops she had in Wichita. I can't think of her name and on the left is my son and that's me in the center. That was when I was in Louisiana a lady of the Mike Allen Golden Ages had some--went to visit some people in Louisiana and I went down there with her and got on this horse in Louisiana, can't think of the name of the town. Speaker 2: This was about when? Speaker 1: Oh that was about four, five, six years ago. That is the same place in Louisiana. I had my picture taken with that donkey and I use it as a democrat symbol. Somebody said that donkey looks better than I did. That was receiving a--honoring me at the University--I forget the name of the award, it's similar--that's a representative award for my services from years past. I can't think of the name of the representative. The fellow that is standing behind the podium is Senator Gucci [ph.]He's the present senator and standing next to him, I think, is myself and on the extreme left is Curtis, Jr. The other gentleman has past and I think of his name. This was legislative recognition of my services to the state. That was Christmas last year. That's my son in red and that's me holding his grand baby and that is Margo, Curtis' daughter at Christmas time in Kansas City, Missouri. That's my brother and his wife, she is recently deceased, Wynsel McClinton (splg.) and Esther McClinton. Now that's Esther McClinton his wife. That's Curtis McClinton and Governor Dawkin signing the legislation on civil rights making it law. That's Senator McClinton teaching legislative matters to a couple of students from Kansas City, Missouri. That's campaign material when I was running for the senate the last time. Speaker 2: What year would this have been? Speaker 1: I think that was in--oh boy, let's see I think that was in--oh boy. Gucci had been there two years, that's about twelve, fourteen years ago-twelve, sixteen years ago. Same thing there, that's campaign material. That's Curtis, Jr. with the Kansas City Chiefs taking a picture for publicity. (Unclear) was taken when I was in the senate. To the right is Curtis--to the left is Curtis McClinton, Sr. and his wife, next is the representative for Kansas City and his wife. I don't recognize the other two. Speaker 2: Their names are at the bottom. Speaker 1: Oh Speaker 2: We actually can read that. Speaker 1: That was taken by--I think that's the Voice, they wrote an article on me during Black History Week, Curtis McClinton. That was Curtis McClinton on the left and his son on the right. He made the commencement speech at North High, he's a (unclear) North High here at Wichita, Kansas and that was about 4 or five years ago. Now that's Curtis McClinton when he was in the House of Representatives and he was in the senate long, long years ago. Speaker 2: My father had the same kind of moustache. Speaker 1: That is my wife Mary Ella McClinton, she is now deceased. Speaker 2: That photo was taken about when? Speaker 1: Oh I imagine thirty maybe thirty-five years ago. That's W.M. McClinton, Waymon McClinton, that's my father. Speaker 2: Can you guess at a date on this photo? Speaker 1: I imagine it would have been in the '70s [1970s]. Speaker 2: The cut of the jacket looks closer to the '50s [1950s] maybe? Speaker 1: It could have been. That was taken--I was running for the senate the last time so that would have been about like in the '80s [1980s]/ '90s [1990s], I don't know; that's twelve to sixteen years ago. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: That was an editorial written about two/four years ago from the Wichita Eagle...