 Story_ID: 640383 Speaker 1: --All right, let's get started for this, with this HistoryMakers [The HistoryMakers] interview. I am Cheryl Butler, I'll be conducting the interview today. We're also joined by Matthew Hickey, who is the videographer. Please state your full name. Speaker 2: My name is Eugene Ethelbert Miller [HistoryMaker E. Ethelbert Miller]. Speaker 1: Spell it, please. Speaker 2: E-U-G-E-N-E, E-T-H-E-L-B-E-R-T, M-I-L-L-E-R. Speaker 1: When were you born and where? Speaker 2: I was born on November 20, 1950. I was born in New York City [New York], and I grew up in the South Bronx [Bronx, New York]. Speaker 1: What is today's date? Speaker 2: That's a good question. I believe today is July 27, 2007. Speaker 1: And where are we holding this interview today? Speaker 2: We're holding this interview in my home, 1411 Underwood Street, N.W., Washington, D.C. Story_ID: 640384 Speaker 1: Some fun questions for you. What is your favorite food? Speaker 2: That sounds like an Oprah [Oprah Winfrey] question. (Laughter) What is my favorite food? I don't really think I have a favorite food, you know. I think my wife [Denise King-Miller] is a very good cook and I think she makes very good Mexican food. I think over the last maybe couple of weeks I've enjoyed sushi, you know. But I don't think I have a really favorite food. I go through these little food binges and stuff. So there was a period, for example, I was eating a lot of catfish, you know, or sometime I'm looking for good jambalaya. I do know that I like sweets and I really have a good taste--I can taste a really good--I understand when a cookie is presented in my hand. I know what a good cookie looks like and what a good cookie tastes like. So like in terms of that, I'm a cookie expert. And I'll tell you about that, seriously. What used to happen, when I was growing up in the South Bronx [Bronx, New York], my whole introduction to what a bra is was because my mother [Enid Marshall Miller] hid the cookies. Because she felt like, okay, if I leave the cookies out, when your father [Egberto Miller] gets home--who doesn't like cookies--when your father gets home there'll be no cookies for your father. So, she would hide the cookies in the bedroom. So, here I am a little boy going through these things, I don't know what they are, looking for the cookies. I discovered that they were bras. Later on as I grew older, I realized I preferred what was inside the bra to cookies. But that's another story (laughter). Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: I think my favorite color is probably blue, yeah, probably blue. Speaker 1: What about a favorite season? Speaker 2: Oh, definitely the summer, you know, definitely the summer. I'm the person, you know, when people talk about leaving D.C. [Washington, D.C.] in August, I love it, you know. I really don't like the winter. I hate snow, I hate snow especially when it turns to ice. It's summertime for me. In fact, I notice myself getting slightly depressed when you get that little cooler air in late August when you know Labor Day's coming. And then all of a sudden, you know, summer's coming to an end. I'm a summer person, yeah. Speaker 1: Do you take a lot of vacations? Do you do a lot of--do you have a favorite spot (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I travel a lot, you know. When I look at my schedule, I travel quite a bit. So, you know, I guess the joke is I like to vacation, you know, when I'm in my own home (laughter). You know, I look at--probably in this house it's been a number of years, and I really haven't been here by myself. And then when you look at the hassles in terms of traveling and being stuck in airports and stuff, I'd rather be stuck in my living room or bedroom, as opposed to the terminal. And so, for me to relax, you know, it's pretty much staying home. Speaker 1: Staying home is your favorite (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: And if you had to choose one spot to find reprieve out in the world somewhere, is there a favorite country or city? Speaker 2: Well, I think there's favorite cities in the U.S. I don't drive, so it's those cities that I can get around on by foot. I love Seattle [Washington]. Seattle is at the top of my list. The other cities that I really like, I like Minneapolis [Minnesota], and I also like San Francisco [California]. And I like Boston, you know, I like Boston [Massachusetts]. Overseas, one city that I've just fallen in love with is Oslo in Norway, which I am going back there in a couple of weeks. I like Norway; you know, I really got a real sense that this is a nice city. Speaker 1: As a writer and a poet, you must have a favorite expression or quote. Speaker 2: I don't know if I have a special quote. I mean, words are very important to me. I don't think I have that. People make fun of me in terms of maybe how I talk, but not in terms of an expression that people would associate me with. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite author? Speaker 2: I think that when I look at my favorite authors, as a writer I love August Wilson, you know. I felt that I was living in a time when I know people would talk to me about Toni Morrison. But I felt that August Wilson was one of the best writers. And probably we would not really hear someone say that, because he's writing for the theater and he's not a novelist. But you know, I think that he would be number one. The person that was probably special to me in terms of shaping me as a man and also as a writer, would be June Jordan. So, those would be the two that would be very highly listed. But you know, being around writers, I can go through so many lists of writers, of people who were models for me. Story_ID: 640385 Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit about your family. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Who are your parents? Speaker 2: My parents are Egberto Miller, who's deceased, and my mother Enid Miller [Enid Marshall Miller], who's eighty-eight now and living in Tribeca [New York, New York]. Speaker 1: Can you spell their names for me? Speaker 2: Okay. Egberto, E-G-B-E-R-T-O, Egberto Miller. And my mother is Enid Miller, E-N-I-D. My family, we were like sociologists. My family was, well, first of all, West Indian. You know, you have to say that. My father actually was born in Panama. Both sides of my family can be traced back to Barbados, so we were Bajans. And the reason why I probably have no accent is because we were the only part of the family, you know, that lived outside of Brooklyn [New York], you know. So growing up, we were like, "Oh, we got to go to Brooklyn," you know. And my brother and myself, we'd be dragged to Brooklyn. And we'd be sitting around on like a Sunday, you know, and listening to people and we didn't know what they were saying. "You want some food?" We'd be like, "What? These are our cousins? They don't talk like us," (laughter). And then, you know, some of the elders were so strict. I remember for example my [maternal] grandfather's [Edgerton Marshall] brother, Mr. Marshall; I never found out the guy's first name ever. But he would discipline, you know, our parents. He would look--like if we were messing up and doing something, or just being kids on a Sunday, "Edith, look." And all of a sudden they would give my mother a look, and my mother would look at us, or my father would look at us like we were embarrassing them. And it would be a long ride back to the Bronx [New York], you know, because here we were in public, see. I always joke about how I could pick out West Indian kids on a Sunday. Because what happened, it would be like in a park, and a West Indian kid would come back from church and he's either sitting like this on the bench because they can't dirty their clothes (laughter). Or, they can't move, you see, you know. (Laughter) And I think that that probably saved my brother, my sister, and I, because we were not permitted to quote, run the streets. So, we would look out our window at other kids. I guess it's like The Jackson 5, you know. (Laughter) I mean we would look at other kids having fun, and we just were not permitted to run the streets. Speaker 1: What are your brother and sisters' names? Speaker 2: My brother, who's deceased, was Richard Miller. And my sister is Marie Miller [Marie Miller Hunter]. Speaker 1: And when were they born? Speaker 2: My sister would be born in 1947, and my brother would be born in 1945. Speaker 1: What about your parents? When and where were they born? Speaker 2: My mother was born here, well, around let's say 1914. I wrote the dates down, I can get those later. I'm bad at dates. My father was actually born in Panama. He came here when he was a little boy. Speaker 1: And your mom was born in D.C. [Washington, D.C.]? Speaker 2: No, my mother was born in New York, yeah, my mother was born in New York [New York]. Story_ID: 640386 Speaker 1: Have they told you stories about their parents? Did you know your grandparents? Speaker 2: No. Well, I knew my mother's father. So when somebody says, "Who's your grandfather," I knew there was one person I didn't know. My father's father actually stayed in Panama, so he didn't grow up with his father. But, you know, my grandfather was my mother's father. Speaker 1: So tell me your grandparents' names and approximate years (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My grandfather's name was Edgerton Marshall. He was, you know, he was very strict, but very nice. He would always, he would always give us dollars when he left, you know. We were always like, "Well Grandpa was here, you know." But, you know, these were individuals that it wasn't until I was much older that I get a sense of their life, you know. Because, you know, what I really wasn't aware of was that I was witnessing the migration of black people, you know, from the West Indies to the States. And so, the whole thing like the work ethic; the whole thing of getting like a brownstone; the whole thing of, you know, taking care of your family; you know, there were certain values that were instilled, you know. I mean I was around a number of people who really worked hard. Story_ID: 640387 Speaker 1: You know, I tell people, for example, my father [Egberto Miller], who at one time was a maintenance man and then eventually worked at the post office. I would always tell people I never worked as hard as my father worked, you know. And I remember one incident where I was in New York [New York], this was right before my father passed away. I had a reading that my father came to. My father must have only came to maybe two of my poetry readings in his life. And this one happened to be in Chinatown [New York, New York], so it wasn't far from where they lived. My father sat there, you know, listening to my reading and stuff like that. And my friend, Linda Scott, sat next to him. And then at the end she said, "Your father has no idea what you do (laughter). He thought he was in church. He said, 'Didn't my son preach a good sermon?'" (Laughter) But what happened that evening is I went out with friends after the reading. So I gave my bag I was carrying to my father, okay, because he was going back to the apartment. When I got home later that evening, I asked my father where was my case? He said, "I put your case around here somewhere." I said, "Well, that case has my money in it." He said, "Money?" I said, "Yeah, well, they paid me for my reading." And he looked at me, and he said, "How much did they pay you?" And what happened, I couldn't look at my father and tell how much they paid me; it was just out of respect. I could not stand in front of him and say, okay, for twenty-five or thirty minutes of poetry, I got paid what would have taken him maybe two weeks to earn in terms of his work. And that was just me looking at my father and saying there's no way I would do that. I respect my father so much that his work, or being able to put a roof over my head when I was growing up, you know, that took a lot, you know. I feel grateful in terms of where I have arrived, in terms of on his back. But in terms of turning to him now, I wouldn't, I would not mention that. Speaker 2: And so he was a hard worker (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Very much so. Speaker 2: He came from Panama? Speaker 1: Right. Story_ID: 640388 Speaker 1: So, his parents, what kind of work were they doing in Panama? Speaker 2: Well, what happened is my father [Egberto Miller] came in here to the country with sort of like his stepbrothers and stuff. You know, he came in with his grandmother. And so what happened, he was like the baby, and-- Speaker 1: Around what year did they come? Speaker 2: This is in the '20s [1920s] when he was a little boy. And then what happens is that you're dealing with a family, a large family, coming through the Depression [Great Depression]. And so what happens is--my sister is a better storyteller. She knows the family stories better than I do, because I'm the baby of the family. So as I tell many people, I thought my name was Shhh, you know, when they see you, "Shhh," you know. So, I was never told like what was happening in the family. But my sister knows all the stories, and she really talks about how it was very difficult for my father growing up, because he was not part of the core family. So, you know, food was not left out for him. He never got the education. He really was on his own. And then also his mother [Marie Miller], you know, wound up having another child while she was here. So what happens is that my father had a stepbrother, you know, and you could see that there was always this animosity between the two of them. Because my sister would say, okay, my Uncle Roy [ph.], he got all the attention, all the love, as opposed to my father. And so, you know, as people grow older they see that. And one of the things that my father took pride in is that even though he never got the education, and things never worked out the way he wanted it, he took pride in his children. And when I looked at, you know, my brother's [Richard Miller], you know, ability to develop, my sister and myself--and at the same time when you can look at other members of the families who had more but did not make the best out of their lives, my father took a lot of pride in how he raised us. Speaker 1: Did he tell you about his parents, their names, and-- Speaker 2: Well, you know, what happened is that my--we are named after--like for example my sister is Marie, who's named after his mother, you know. So-- Speaker 1: Marie Miller? Speaker 2: Marie Miller, yeah, Marie Miller [Marie Miller Hunter] is my sister's name. She got married and became Marie Hunter. But a lot of the family history--and this is why I sat down and wrote a memoir--is not really clear in my mind. And that has a lot to do with--in terms of how I see some of these families raising their children. And maybe this might be something that's special within the West Indian households--is that you don't get a full sense of what your parents might do. Are they going to work? Where? What do they do? Just like, for example, early today before you came I was talking to my mother [Enid Marshall Miller], you know, on the phone. She said, "I'm getting ready for Monday." "Mom, what's going to happen Monday?" "Well, I can't talk about it. Monday I've got to get myself together." Maybe she's got some legal documents or something, but she doesn't want to talk about it over the phone. So here I am, my mother's living in Tribeca [New York, New York], and I think Monday maybe there's another warning that they're flying planes into the New York Trade Center [World Trade Center, New York, New York]. "Mom, what's going on?" But what happened is the secret way of raising children and that sort of thing, you don't know your family history, your roots. I look at the fact that, in terms of gender, my mother is much more comfortable talking to my sister. You know, my sister probably learned a lot getting her hair braided, you know, being in the kitchen. And I didn't really get that, okay. And the time I spent with my father--my father was a very quiet man. So what happens is, well, maybe he was angry that you got a little history. Story_ID: 640389 Speaker 1: Do you know when the Marshalls came here from--they came here from Barbados? Speaker 2: They came here, the Marshalls came here from Barbados. You'd have to figure that out. Then the Millers who came--you know, I mean it's just a whole connection. I mean my great-uncle, Walter Miller [Walter A. Miller], was the founder of the Carver Savings and Loan Bank [Carver Federal Savings and Loan Association] in Manhattan [New York, New York], in Harlem [New York, New York]. And he was responsible for bringing many of the family from the Canal Zone [Panama Canal Zone] into the States. Because he came, being one of the older ones of that family, he came to the country early. He got involved in real estate and came, and that's how people were brought to this country (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And this was which side of your family? Speaker 2: This was my father's [Egberto Miller] side. See, and what happened, what makes it very confusing in some of these households, is that first of all they were large families. Then people got married several times, you know. And what happens is you grow up, and so and so--we call her Aunt Mabel, but she's not really your Aunt Mabel, you know. I mean, you know, you get all these things. And you're a young, I'm a young kid. And so what happens is that a lot of stuff I don't know, okay. And what's happening now, because I'm a successful writer, sometimes--well, this happened just--this happened a couple of months ago. There was somebody who called me who lives not far from here who, they were having some sort of family reunion. This is on my father's side. "Did you call your cousin, Jean [Jean Miller]?" This guy calls me up, and I don't know who the hell he is (laughter). He doesn't know who I am, and he lives a few blocks away. He's my cousin, okay. I don't know the DNA thing or whatever, but I say this because as a writer, you know, that this is where stories begin. Things you don't know, you go and search to try to find meaning and come to a better understanding in terms of who you are. And so, I still wrestle with that, you know. Speaker 1: Well, you said something that was very interesting. One of your uncles, Walter Miller, started a bank. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: In New York [New York]. Was that a big part of the family (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No-- Speaker 1: --folklore or pride? Or-- Speaker 2: Well, it was pride. But keep in mind that that was a certain part of the family, you see. So you know, you knew about these people, but they would not impact on our lives, you know. And this has a lot to do with my father growing up where he was the smallest of the first child of his grandmother--of his mother [Marie Miller], who would have another child. And so, his real father stayed back in Panama. And so what happens, it's just like how people reinvent themselves as they come to this new country. Well, now he's not part of--there's some people older than he is, okay. He knows them, they go on to become very successful. But for him, because he's coming through the '30s [1930s] and the '40s [1940s], he really didn't get the good education; he really didn't get the support. So that's the thing where it gets passed down to me, in terms of things I just didn't know about. Story_ID: 640390 Speaker 1: Well, you were talking a little bit about your childhood. You were born in the South Bronx [Bronx, New York]? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: What's your earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: (Laughter) My, one of my earliest childhood memories is definitely standing on the corner of Longwood Avenue, and not crossing the street because my father [Egberto Miller] told me not to cross the street. I was standing on the street corner maybe from three to five o'clock, you know (laughter). And I do remember my father, you know, waking up and stumbling across the street and, you know, yanking me off the corner. I do remember that very clearly (laughter). I say that in terms of how I was raised, you know. My folks were strict and, you know, when they told you to do something, you did it. So I would stand out there until my father came and got me (laughter). I do remember that. Story_ID: 640391 Speaker 1: I do have really good memories of growing up in the South Bronx [Bronx, New York] and going to elementary school. I went to P.S. 39 [Bronx, New York], the same elementary school I believe Colin Powell [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] went to (laughter), you know what I mean. So you get those sort of, those sort of little stories and stuff. You know, and at that time P.S. 39--and I would not understand this until I grow older and move away. But it was probably, in my lifetime, probably the most diverse educational experience that I had. I remember for a number of years from like fourth to sixth grade, my girlfriend Judy was Chinese. Many of my friends were like Polish, you know. Then I think around sixth grade, this guy George [ph.] came from the South, and George was black. I mean George was, I mean George was black. And what happened, George was always picked on and stuff. But George had a real love for baseball, just like me. And I remember we would go out in the park, you know, and you would imagine yourself being baseball players and stuff. And looking back, what I realize is that George, every time he was being--he was going to be a Major League baseball player. He was always like [HistoryMaker] Hank Aaron and all these black baseball players, you know, that were very important. Here's me trying to be Mickey Mantle (laughter), you know, all these other guys. And I say that because it stays in my mind back then as I would go on to become a, you know, student of African American studies. Here I was meeting a young kid, George, who definitely came out of quote, an Afrocentric environment, you know, and who probably because of his darkness and being black, really took pride in it, you know. Now we're picking on him and stuff, but this was a guy, when I look back then who had a real center of who he was. And I never forgot that, the same way when I got to Junior High School 120 [Paul Laurence Dunbar J.H.S. 120; Paul L. Dunbar M.S. 301, New York, New York], which was another experience. It was also Paul Laurence Dunbar Junior High School. Right around maybe the seventh or eighth grade, some woman who must have been a transfer student showed up. I think she was African, and she came to school in a long African dress and a short Afro. I'm like, "Hello, who are you?" You know, and we had no way of making sense out of her, you know. And that stayed in my mind. And I'm saying all that because these little early memories would add to me eventually going to Howard University [Washington, D.C.], you know, an entirely black environment. I wasn't getting that growing up in the South Bronx; I was getting these little bits of things. Story_ID: 640392 Speaker 1: Because people assume in the 1950s--they hear about segregation for sure in the Deep South, and certainly parts of the North. Illinois-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: Jim Crow is alive and well in southern Illinois (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But, see-- Speaker 1: And in New York [New York], it's a different story. Speaker 2: And it was a different story in my household. Because my mother [Enid Marshall Miller] and father [Egberto Miller], first of all, did not subscribe to the black publications, okay. My mother kept Jet magazine--she said it was trash; she kept that out of the house. You know, we might have seen Ebony maybe in somebody else's living room, but we didn't grow up with those publications, okay. We didn't grow up in terms of discussing the Civil Rights Movement. Now, I do remember Elliott Skinner, he's a famous anthropologist. His father, Mr. Skinner, lived upstairs from us in the South Bronx [Bronx, New York], and he was a Garvey-ite, okay. So, I do recall very clearly when Malcolm [Malcolm X] was assassinated, because Mr. Skinner came in and talked about what was going on in Harlem [New York, New York]. And I was young boy, and I remember that discussion. I would have been like fifteen. Speaker 1: What did he say? Speaker 2: Well, just the whole thing. He said, you know, he was upset that they shot Malcolm. And there was this whole thing--and you might recall if you go back to that period. Everybody thought that Harlem would explode, in terms of riots, because you didn't know who had killed him or anything of that sort. So it was that sense of tenseness in terms of that. And Malcolm had been associated with, you know, quote violence or whatever. But that filtered in through my household. So even, for example, for me as a young kid going to Junior High School 120 [Paul Laurence Dunbar J.H.S. 120; Paul L. Dunbar M.S. 301, New York, New York], which was named after Paul Laurence Dunbar, I never got a sense of Dunbar as a poet. No one ever taught me any Dunbar poems, okay. I mean I really didn't get a sense of African American history and culture until I came to Howard University [Washington, D.C.]. But I say that, going back and looking at my childhood in New York. It's a very interesting childhood, because my values were shaped, okay. I don't have to wait for trends like multi-culturalism to come in, you know. As I said, you know, I grew up with people who were Chinese. Story_ID: 640393 Speaker 1: When we moved from Longwood Avenue into the St. Mary's housing project [St. Mary's Park Houses, Bronx, New York], it was like, you know, the younger family in, you know, 'Raisin In the Sun' ['A Raisin In the Sun,' Lorraine Hansberry] you know, making it out, you know (laughter). I mean that was a big move. And my mother [Enid Marshall Miller] being very secretive, and me being a child, I didn't know we were moving. Speaker 2: So, Longwood-- Speaker 1: Longwood Avenue, it's in the South Bronx [Bronx, New York]. Speaker 2: And that-- Speaker 1: That was probably my early years, up until about the time I'm like maybe thirteen or fourteen. Speaker 2: And these were the housing projects? Speaker 1: Yes. We moved into the St. Mary's housing project, and that was a big move upward. See, St. Mary's, that's like you're moving into like the working class, middle class. And you know, you're talking about the housing projects--you're talking about the elevator. And I remember when they built the St. Mary's projects we went and looked at the model rooms and stuff. And you know, for a working class family moving into the projects, you know, this was a big move. My mother didn't want to tell the neighbors; she didn't want to tell the neighbors that we were moving. And so, my mother--thinking back this is hilarious--was like moving by pushcart, you know, (laughter) taking a few things, you know, and moving and not wanting to tell anybody. And I, and I do remember that, and I do remember what this meant, you know, for my father [Egberto Miller] in terms of, you know, providing, you know, better housing, you know, for his family. And consequently, my whole life would be structured by the fact that everyone would have a room but me (laughter). So you know, I had a little closet space. But also, the movement into the projects was now a movement up. I had really more friends. And then what also happened was we--it's really changed now. Story_ID: 640394 Speaker 1: But outside of the St. Mary's projects [St. Mary's Park Houses, New York, New York] was a Puerto Rican neighborhood, okay. And this was in, you know, the early 1960s. And one of my friends, Alberto [ph.], I remember, lived on Cauldwell Avenue, and he would come over to the projects and he would play with us. He became one of my good friends. And I say that because, you know, we knew people who were, you know, black, and who were Puerto Rican and stuff like that (unclear). And my whole understanding of race and culture, and also being different, took place when the Converse sneakers came out. Everybody had their Converse with the stars and stuff. And those were, you know, those were like the price of what a Nike [Nike, Inc.] is today. But you know, the Converse and, you know, the Pro-Keds. But you got your Converse sneakers, man, with the stars, you know, the Converse; that was a really big thing. And I remember Alberto showed up one day, you know, and he was happy because he had new sneakers. And he said, "Yeah, I got my new sneakers." And what happened, he had Converse sneakers that were cheap, and they had a star, but they didn't have the name Converse on them. And everybody in the projects, man, started laughing at him, you know. And it was so sad. And I say that because here it is many, many, many, years later, I understand the difference. I understand, you know, how it must have got home, okay, that we were black and he was Puerto Rican; you know, he was not in the projects. And it was, you know, to see what happened to him and his hurt, you know, I never forgot that. Just like there was another incident in the housing projects with Jimmy, Jimmy Lampalopolis [ph.]. I mean this guy, they had his name on the door, you know, you go ring the bell and it was like Lampalopolis, man. And like, they were Greek in an all-black housing project (laughter). We had like a couple of white people. But Lampalopolis, we would go hang out at Jimmy's house. And we would play games like Risk, you know, like you would run the world or something. And I remember we would hang out at Jimmy's, because Jimmy had all the key games and stuff. And then one day we're playing, and their parents weren't home. And Carlton [ph.], my good friend, Carlton, went into the kitchen and opened the refrigerator. Now, we, growing up, there was nothing in that refrigerator, man. (Laughter) You know, there was nothing. Like, there was no food, there was nothing. Carlton burst out laughing. And Jimmy threw us out, man, he was so embarrassed. And we were kids, and we didn't realize--you know, just say like, how my family had made it in the projects, there were other households where it was probably just enough to pay the rent, you see. And what happened, they're budgeting, and they don't have food and stuff like that. And I'm aware of these types of things in terms of--I guess maybe this is my poetic sensibility developing. I was aware of these things, because at the same time, I'm a young person trying to make sense out of my world, but the person having the strongest impact on me is my brother, Richard [Richard Miller]. And my brother really, you know, was on a spiritual path which would eventually lead him into becoming a Trappist monk. He was very sensitive to these issues of poverty and class and race. And so that was key for me in terms of learning my values from him. Story_ID: 640395 Speaker 1: Now, your father [Egberto Miller] grew up in Panama at least his early years (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) As a young boy, yeah. Speaker 1: Did he speak Spanish? Speaker 2: No. My, my, my, you know, it's interesting. My mother [Enid Marshall Miller] would say when he came to the country, he spoke Spanish. What I find interesting, and I wrote about this, is that my father's birth certificate is in Spanish. And what I spoke about is how his, his birth certificate, he can't read it, you know. So I thought that, as a writer, I thought that was a very interesting thing in terms of this distance, the same way I also wrote about how my father, you know, grew up without his father and how, when he would take us to the beach. We would go out to like Far Rockaway [Queens, New York] and places like that. My father could never learn how to swim. He'd just jump in the water, and he'd let the waves knock him down. And I said, you know, this attempt at swimming was, you know, I saw that as an attempt to getting back to reach his father, you know, that whole thing of re-connecting, how he's separated by this body of water. And that always became an image for me as a writer, in terms of how I saw my father. Story_ID: 640396 Speaker 1: Do you remember holidays in your house with your mother [Enid Marshall Miller] and father [Egberto Miller] and your brother [Richard Miller] and sister [Marie Miller Hunter]? Speaker 2: Holidays, I remember, I guess this must have been like Juneteenth or something like that. I remember what happened is there came a point in our lives, and maybe this passed by some sort of secret court--I was a baby, and apparently I didn't know. There came a point in our lives where we were permitted to open our Christmas presents the night, like the night before Christmas, you know. And that was one of the things. Like, we would go--well, not really the night before Christmas. We would go to like Midnight Mass at St. Margaret's Church [St. Margaret's Episcopal Church, Bronx, New York], which was around the corner from Longwood Avenue. We would go to Midnight Mass, and what happens is that as opposed to waking up, you know, actually on Christmas Day, after Midnight Mass we would wait for my father to come home. And when my father came home, we could open our presents, you know. And that was always a nice time, you know, in terms of it would be like two o'clock in the morning and we're up. And, you know, my father would be there for a little while and then he would fall back to sleep, you know. But it was--and then we would wake up like six, seven, or eight, and play with our new games and toys. But I always remember there was one Christmas Eve, we're in the church. And my mother, who had this--she should be hired by the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation]. My mother had a way of knowing danger. So what happened is that we were in the church, and we hear these fire engines go by the church, you know, we're still in Mass. And she goes, "Um-hm, they're stopping by our house." You know, and keep in mind, the church is several blocks away, but she just figured it out, you know. You know, this is before satellite surveillance, and my mother figured out that the fire engine had stopped at our house. (Laughter) And I remember, you know, the Mass ends at midnight, and we leave the church. She sends my brother, who, he used to run really fast, ahead as a scout. You know, "Go find out if it's our house." And I remember, my brother takes off, and I wanted to run with him. But he takes off, you know, he runs about a block and a half, and he comes back and he's like joyful, "It's our house, it's our house!" He's like really happy, like, "Our house is burning!" (Laughter) I've never (laughter), I never--he's whooping it up like he discovered fire for the first time, you know. (Laughter) So, we all now start running. And what had happened is in our apartment building, the woman who had an apartment across from us, a fire had started. Maybe it might have been an electrical fire from the storage downstairs, and the fire had come up. So it was a small fire but, you know, enough for the fire engines to come. And my brother, I always remember that, you know, my brother running like, "Yes, it's our house, it's our house," you know. And you know, and that was one of the things in terms of holidays. Story_ID: 640397 Speaker 1: I guess that Thanksgiving, to this day--some of the holidays we had to go from the Bronx [New York] to Brooklyn [New York], see, so you get this really good meal, you know. So, I remember that. Speaker 2: What kind of food did you have? Was it southern food, or (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, no. Speaker 2: Or Bajan food? Speaker 1: No southern food. You're talking about food-- Speaker 2: West Indian, huh? Speaker 1: You talk about southern food. When I got to Howard University [Washington, D.C.], man, I remember the freshmen week, you know, they get you on that meal plan. I went in the Cook Dining Hall [Cook Hall] that first time and that was the first time I saw grits, the first time I saw chitlins. I don't know what they were scooping up. (Laughter) I said, "Oh, no, this is not for me, buddy, you know." You know, I never grew up with that. For me, you know, we grew up on some things that I don't eat, you know. My mother [Enid Marshall Miller]--that oxtail stuff, unh-uh, I did not touch that stuff. Okra, I can't stand it, that stuff is slimy and messy, you know. There's certain things I stay away from. But what happened out in Brooklyn, you would get a really good turkey for like Thanksgiving and stuff like that. And sweetbread, yes, sweetbread, I love that. I mean there were certain things I really had a taste for, like really good rice and peas, you know, and there's nothing worse than a West Indian who can't make good rice and peas, you know. But you know, those are the things that when I look back now were really good times, because they were large family gatherings. And I look at how with my own kids [Jasmine-Simone Miller Morgan and Nyere-Gibran Miller], you know, we really never did that, you know. I don't like to travel over the holidays and stuff. It was like we would go to some sort of, you know, like your grandmother's house and there'd be a big spread of something like that with your cousins and stuff. So, growing up, the holidays were, they were important but not really memorable. Other than Halloween, now Halloween would scare me back then. Because on Halloween they did something--and I guess the kids have gotten away from this. When I was growing up, Halloween was the one thing--you circle that--and it terrorized us, you know, in the South Bronx [Bronx, New York]. Because what they would do on Halloween, the bad kids would get chalk, colored chalk, and put the colored chalk in socks, and crunch it up and tie it up. And now it's three o'clock, and man, somebody would just get you and hit you with your (unclear), you know, just hit you--you'd get a chalk whipping, you know. I mean, so you're running home, you know. But Halloween, I don't think they still do this, but I mean it would be three o'clock on Halloween, man, and you're trying to find out how you're going to get home. And, and what happened, it was a thing like little lynch mobs, you know, with chalk, you know, and people stopping you (laughter). And you know, you'd have your good clothes on, getting chalk out, you know, on your clothes. It's hard, you know (laughter). Story_ID: 640398 Speaker 1: Did you have ethnic neighborhoods? Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was there a West Indian neighborhood, a Chinese neighborhood? Speaker 2: Well, in the South Bronx [Bronx, New York], you know, as I've said, you know, growing up at that time in the early '50s [1950s], it was very integrated. And what you would look at would be the movement of black people, okay. If you go back to like I guess with my folks' [Enid Marshall Miller and Egberto Miller] time, you know, like if somebody hit the number, they'd say "Okay, we got some money, we're going to move to the Bronx [New York]." The Bronx was like, you know, the suburbs or something like that. And at one time, historically, the Bronx was like country. So, you know, there were not many people in, black people, in the Bronx. So on my block, you know, where we grew up it was very well integrated--blacks, Puerto Ricans, Jews, you know, all these-- Speaker 1: All immigrants? Speaker 2: All immigrants, right, stayed there in the Bronx. The Bronx now, as I was coming of age in my teens, was moving into becoming Puerto Rican. Say, like when you go to the Bronx right now, Dominicans and Haitians are the dominant groups. But where I lived, it was predominantly--it was a good mixture. Then when we moved into the housing project, that's when the projects were pretty much all-black with the surrounding area, and then the neighborhood would change. Story_ID: 640399 Speaker 1: What were your favorite sights, smells, and sounds of childhood? Speaker 2: Sights and smells and sounds? I guess some of the things coming home. And you know, keep in mind that my mother [Enid Marshall Miller] pretty much, she was not a working mother, she's home. So, you know, the whole thing. You come home from school and there's food and whatever it is, you know, and the house has that sort of, of that smell, and that's good. I guess also in terms of smell, I liked how my brother [Richard Miller] smelled. He had a nice smell about him. And we used to pull his ears. He had such warm, soft--I used to call them butter ears, you know. And I liked how, I loved how my brother smelled. And I knew as he got older, he (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did he smell like soap? Or-- Speaker 2: No, he just smelled, it was just like, just a good smell. He had like a really nice scent. And then you know later on in his life, you know--oh, I know the smell associated with my brother. My brother was an altar boy--frankincense and myrrh, you know. My brother, oh, man, he could really get a good smoking going. Man, you know, we were little sinners, and he would like give us a little--you know (laughter). But the frankincense and myrrh, I mean that was a smell that I would remember from being in church, you know; I associate it with my brother. Even today, I'm always--like when I go out for like incense and oil, I'm always looking to try to get that smell that was in St. Margaret's Church [St. Margaret's Episcopal Church, Bronx, New York] that I really also associate with my brother. Speaker 1: Now this church-- Speaker 2: Episcopalian. Speaker 1: Who, who attended the church? Speaker 2: The church was, St. Margaret's is an Episcopalian church. And this is another thing growing up. My family is--my lack of knowledge, okay. I grew up and went to an Episcopalian church; I went to St. Margaret's. Speaker 1: And racially mixed? Speaker 2: Yeah, pretty much. Father Kruger was white, you know. Father Kruger was white, and at that time the congregation might have been mixed. Story_ID: 640400 Speaker 1: Were there any racial tensions that you remember? Speaker 2: The only tensions, racial tensions that I remember--and I think it's documented in a film that came out. Right around the time in the early '60s [1960s]--and maybe this is like 'West Side Story,' you know. The Crowns [Seven Crowns], okay, somebody's doing a history of the South Bronx [Bronx, New York]. The Crowns back then must have been like the Crips of L.A. [Los Angeles, California]--the Crowns, man. And I remember there was, right around the early '60s there must have been like a gang war broke out, a serious gang war broke out. And I know that terrified us, and-- Speaker 1: Between the Crowns, who were (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, the Crowns-- Speaker 1: Which group? Who did they represent? Speaker 2: The Crowns were Puerto Rican. The Crowns were Puerto Rican, you know, but there might have been even a mixture there. But I just know at that time in the neighborhood--and then I saw a documentary. Because keep in mind, if you fast forward a little bit, that neighborhood that I grew up in would get the name Fort Apache, see, in terms of films. So, okay, that would become--we look at the decline of the South Bronx where everybody, you know, discovers like hip-hop and everything. This is the neighborhood that it's coming out of. It's coming out of the South Bronx, see. So as we moved into the projects [St. Mary's Park Houses, Bronx, New York], what would happen around those projects would be the various fires that would just begin to wipe out, you know, that neighborhood, and wouldn't be rebuilt until like today. Story_ID: 640401 Speaker 1: Were you influenced by Elliott Skin, who lived upstairs? Speaker 2: Elliott Skinner. Speaker 1: Skinner. Speaker 2: No, I grew up with Robert Skinner. You know, it, he hates it when we call him Dinky. Robert Skinner, okay, is the half-brother of Elliott Skinner, the famous anthropologist who just passed actually this year. And so the Skinners, which is a really important West Indian family, you know, there's an overlap between the Skinners and my household. And so we grew up with Elliott Skinner's father, you know. Speaker 1: Were you influenced by his principles? He was a Garvey-ite kind of radical. Speaker 2: Well, I was closer to Robert, who was his son. And Robert and I, you know, growing up we were best of friends, you know, we saw each other every single day. We did baseball together. And Robert, who's at UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] right now, was very, very, very, very, smart. And he was extremely smart in terms of math and science, like a whiz kid in math and science. And I say that because through our friendship, you know, he sort of really shaped my years around sixth or seventh grade. And then also, he was also responsible in terms of me going to the high school I went to. Because he got accepted to Christopher Columbus High School [Bronx, New York], which after The Bronx High School of Science in Stuyvesant [sic. Bronx, New York] was one of the leading academic schools. And he did very well there in terms of physics and math. And then this is right around the time of integration, and they decided that they would take a hundred--they would take a few kids from the junior high school I went to, which was 120 [Paul Laurence Dunbar J.H.S. 120; Paul L. Dunbar M.S. 301, New York, New York], which was really in the South Bronx [Bronx, New York]. And I wouldn't realize all of this--this is around like '65 [1965] that Columbus took a couple of black kids in, and I happened to be one of them, you know. And Robert had already been there, and so what happened is that made the transition a little smoother for me. But I was around -- Story_ID: 640402 Speaker 1: Were you aware of Brown v. Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no. Speaker 1: Civil rights? Speaker 2: No. Brown, you know what happened--when people talk about that, you know, no, not at all. I, I, can recall exactly, 1967, exactly; it was the only time I saw Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]. And what happens is that, you know, I went down to a protest, I think it was around the UN [United Nations]. And I saw Martin Luther King, but I don't really see that as a key moment, because at that time as I was making my way through the crowd I bumped, I actually bumped into the person who I had the utmost admiration for. So when somebody said, "Did you see Martin Luther King," I said, "No, I bumped into Paul Simon of Simon and Garfunkel, you know," (laughter). And what happened, I mean for me at that time in high school, you know, I was just getting into, I went to a predominantly Jewish and Italian high school [Christopher Columbus High School, Bronx, New York]. And so this is where, you know, we were just--especially since one of my friends were Jewish, we were going down to Greenwich Village [New York, New York] on the weekends, you know. We were getting into 'War,' you know, I was getting into folk music and stuff like that. So you know, I was listening to, you know, like Simon and Garfunkel. And to bump into Paul Simon, I forgot all about, you know, Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture] and Martin Luther King, who happened to be at that rally in '67 [1967]. Now, I realize they were speaking out against the Vietnam War. Wow, I didn't know that, you know. I just was not involved in that. Story_ID: 640403 Speaker 1: Were you considered, I mean how were you conceived by other black kids? Were you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Black kids? Speaker 1: Were you an Uncle Tom or an Oreo? Or-- Speaker 2: Black kids (laughter)? Okay, let's take for example, at Columbus High School [Christopher Columbus High School, Bronx, New York] there weren't that many black kids. Speaker 1: But in your neighborhood, there were some. Speaker 2: They were in the housing projects, okay. So if I looked at my friend Carlton [ph.], who was one of my best friends in the housing projects [St. Mary's Park Houses, New York, New York], he was extremely smart, he went to Stuyvesant High School [New York, New York]. You know, these guys were really, we must have been a strange bunch. You know what I've figured out now? We must have been strange, because we were going to like hockey games. We'd be the only black people down there at Madison Square Garden [New York, New York], you know what I mean. (Laughter) You know, we went to hockey games, you know. I mean, we were doing a lot of things. We would go to the boat show. So I mean we were--and what happened in this case, we had growing up, maybe instilled by my mother [Enid Marshall Miller], we had a fear of going to Harlem [New York, New York]. We didn't go to Harlem. So, I would go from the South Bronx [Bronx, New York] to, like to MacDougal Street or someplace in the Village [Greenwich Village, New York, New York], you know. And what happened, I got introduced--now this is how the whole race comes in. I got introduced to Harlem to Mr. Michaux [Lewis H. Michaux], who ran a bookstore, the National Memorial Bookstore [African National Memorial Bookstore, New York, New York] on 125th Street [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Boulevard] where Malcolm X and everybody would be. And how I came into contact with Mr. Michaux would be that I graduated from high school, Columbus High School, around 19--early, January of '68 [1968]. And I took a job at a place called Bookazine [Bookazine Company, Inc.], a wholesale book company, before I would actually go off to college [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]. And so, this is a place where people would come to get their books. And I was doing the little invoices and putting the boxes of books on little carts for the drivers to deliver them. So I met Mr. Michaux, who would be coming down from 125th Street to get his books. And I discovered something, you know, that since I was doing the inventory, I'd tell him, I'd say, "Wow, you know, you're getting a different discount than all the other bookstores." Duh. (Laughter) You know, and that's when we really began to bond, because you know, he didn't really know that. And he was an older guy, and so I had to help him with his box of books and stuff. And I didn't know that this was my first introduction to a real race man, okay. And it wasn't until he said, "Oh, you know, if you're not doing anything, come to my store." And I would go to his store on the weekends and go down, go to Harlem; I had a destination now. And so Mr. Michaux, who, as I would learn later as I got more into African American history and culture, you know, was a legend, you know. Speaker 1: Can you for the record give us his full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Oh, his name? I just know him as Mr. Michaux, you know, M-I-C-H-A-U-X. I know him as Mr. Michaux who runs a bookstore. Now, whether or not he's tied into the Micheaux family with the filmmakers, I never did all that research. Story_ID: 640404 Speaker 1: Now, what books were you reading at the bookstore [African National Memorial Bookstore, New York, New York]? Speaker 2: Oh, what happened, because of Robert [Robert Skinner] and I, we were really pulled into the sciences, okay. I can tell you the books that left memorable impressions. 'Profile of the Future' ['Profile of the Future: An Inquiry into the Limits of the Possible'] by Arthur C. Clarke; that left--even today you can go back and get a copy of 'Profiles of the Future.' And Arthur C. Clarke, a noted science fiction writer, in that one book he had on the back this little chronology, plus a little chart. And he was making his projections of, you know, what would take place like in 2025 and stuff like that. You know, if you look at that book today, Arthur C. Clarke--when you look at it--this is 2007--Arthur C. Clark has almost predicted everything. You see, with the whole thing--we're into robotics right now. Right, and you know, we got the cell phones now and stuff like that, so we're past 'Dick Tracy.' What happens, the only thing that you would see right near the end of--I think it went up to 2050--would be extraterrestrial contact. But everything else--cyborgs, all this other stuff--he was--I mean and we're reading this, and in your mind, well, we're fearful of 1984. Because this is like '65 [1965], you know, like we're reading this. That was one book that had a big impact. Then because of Robert I got really introduced, before I came off to college I got into Marshall McLuhan; I got into Marshall McLuhan, yeah. I got into Marshall McLuhan and I got into Herman Kahn, you know, because we were think tanks, thinking about the unthinkable, the nuclear war. I was into those books. And keep in mind I'm mentioning all these authors, and I wasn't reading any black books, you know. You know, I didn't, I wouldn't read like the Langston Hughes and Richard Wright until I came to Howard University [Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 1: And now in school, were you reading the classics? Were you reading Shakespeare [William Shakespeare]? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Were you reading the American classics like 'Moby Dick' [Herman Melville]? Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, no. I go back to elementary school [P.S. 39, Bronx, New York], and I go to like fifth or sixth grade with Miss Fontana [ph.] and Miss Springfield [ph.]. The fifth grade and sixth was where I really began to excel in terms of knowledge of history, okay. So, if you would ask me back then things about the American Revolution, the civil war, I became very much interested in history. Then as I went to junior high school, Junior High School 120 [Paul Laurence Dunbar J.H.S. 120; Paul L. Dunbar M.S. 301, New York, New York], I had, I would consider one of my first mentors Mr. Snyder [ph.]. And Mr. Snyder was just, he decided to offer like after three o'clock, you know, just like a special social studies session where we read The New York Times. But we didn't just sit and read The New York Times. He showed me like how to fold The New York Times, like if you were on the subway. You know, I mean I can do that with one hand right now. But what happened, he really helped me in terms of opening up the whole world. And he was the teacher that put in the recommendation for me to go to Columbus High School [Christopher Columbus High School, Bronx, New York]. Because I didn't have the best academic record and stuff like that, but I was one of those students that people liked. And then I think there was some sort of Iowa exam that they gave out, and I scored maybe tops in the city. I must have scored like maybe in the 98 percentile or something like that, in terms of like libraries and books like that. So that's where, you know, I sort of got my little meal ticket out. But I was reading a lot of books dealing with the sciences, and a lot of biographies, you know, which I loved. And that was shaping me. Story_ID: 640405 Speaker 1: Now, so you were going up to Harlem [New York, New York] to this bookstore [African National Memorial Bookstore, New York, New York]. Were you seeing--you mentioned that Malcolm X and people like that hung out there. Were you seeing black Muslims (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, no. Well, I would see, I would see--the Muslims always had a presence, you know. But I really wouldn't interact with the Muslims until I can recall me and my roommate from Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], Reggie Hudgins, we went up to Harlem. This must have been around maybe 1969 or '70 [1970]. And Reggie's from Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], you know, Reggie taught me a lot. Reggie, Reggie's from Philly. And we're in Harlem, and a brother sold me a paper. And Reggie's all confrontational because he's from Philly. Like, "How come you all shot Malcolm?" (Laughter) I said, "Reggie, come on man, this is not Howard, you know what I'm saying." (Laughter) And what happened, I remember so clearly one of the Muslim brothers saying, "Brother, we've got a person that will make you forget about Malcolm X." You know, and this is the first time I would ever hear the name Farrakhan [HistoryMaker Minister Louis Farrakhan], you know. And this person was talking about Louis Farrakhan, and I had never heard of that name. But that was the first time I really interacted with somebody from the Nation of Islam. Now, if I fast forward a little bit, some of the--I got some letters from Farrakhan, and there's a couple of programs where at Cramton Auditorium [Washington, D.C.] I opened up the program for us reading poetry, and Farrakhan followed. So, you know, it was always that type of thing like around in the 1970s when, you know, he's just moving out of that Sweet Lou period, you know. Speaker 1: What was Farrakhan like? Speaker 2: Oh, now, you can document--if you want to know what Farrakhan was like back then, go and get a copy of, I think it's called 'Minister for Black Souls,' [ph.], produced by Tony Brown, okay. And in there, you know, he's talking about Louis Farrakhan, and Farrakhan's speaking at some high school graduation or something in New York [New York]. But near the end of the show, Tony Brown and Farrakhan are walking through the streets of Harlem, you know, while they're filming, and they're talking. And if you look at the footage maybe twice or three times. If you look behind Tony Brown and Farrakhan, there is a young black guy maybe just like seventeen or eighteen. When it begins, the camera picks up, and he doesn't have a shirt or anything; he's just walking around the camera or something like that. And as Farrakhan is talking, he's like listening. You see this guy begin to put his shirt and on stuff. You begin to see Farrakhan's aura and charisma. Now, I'm a young guy at Howard. I can mention three people who walked across the campus of Howard who've impacted me, and I've been there a long time--early Farrakhan, in terms of just the warmth, you know. I mean, Farrakhan had a certain humility. And so, you know, where you would hear the fiery Louis Farrakhan--now Farrakhan, like I said, was not fiery. Farrakhan was smooth like [HistoryMaker] Smokey Robinson, you know, I mean it was that type of thing. And he was funny, but he was, he was smooth. That's why that--that Sweet, you saw that. Later on, at some of these other speeches as he began to become more well-known, his speaking style changes. Now, he's always eloquent, but you know, the anger, it was never there, you know. Speaker 1: So, you met Farrakhan at Howard? Speaker 2: Yeah-- Story_ID: 640406 Speaker 1: What year did you graduate from high school [Christopher Columbus High School, Bronx, New York]? Speaker 2: I got out of high school in '68 [1968], January of 1968. Speaker 1: So the year-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I was seventeen at that time. Speaker 1: --the year Martin [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was shot (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, right. And what happened is I remember in terms of Martin's assassination, Martin's assassination comes through to me through the television of Robert Kennedy's [Robert F. Kennedy] memorial talking about--that comes--I remember seeing that. I mean, I'm seeing that for the first time that was aired. I saw that, you know. And so when I look at King's assassination, it comes through that, okay, it comes through that. And I'm saying that I'm not part of the Civil Rights Movement, I'm not that. So, that sort of came through. But then that year, the one I clearly remember because I was staying up with the--I was in the bed with a radio--Robert Kennedy's assassination. And I woke up, because I was waiting to see who had won the California primary. And when I turned the radio on, they were talking about he's been shot. And I went into my mother [Enid Marshall Miller] and father's [Egberto Miller] bedroom to tell them. And I remember my mother saying, "Oh, that family," you know, this whole thing in terms of, you know, another loss. So that's clear, you know. Story_ID: 640407 Speaker 1: And I say this because, you know, now when I go out and I'm talking about African American history and I'm talking about African American culture, people take too much for granted, you know. And I look at the fact that I didn't come out of one of these black middle class families. I mean I didn't know what a cotillion was, you know. I didn't know that stuff, Jack and Jill [Jack and Jill of America, Inc.] stuff; I still don't know what it is (laughter). I didn't come out of that. And even here, where I live here in Washington [D.C.], you know, and I interact with the proper Washingtonians, you know, like, what is that? You know, I mean, because I didn't grow up with that, you see. And so, what happens is that my knowledge of African American culture--things that I learned, okay. And I do recall for example in the early '70s, it must have been around seventy--I had graduated [from Christopher Columbus High School, Bronx, New York]. It must have been around '73 [1973], '74 [1974], and I'm still on campus because I'm working at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]. And I'm a single guy. And there was a nice, there was a nice sister, oh, she was so sweet. She was working in the administration building, she was nice. So I finally had the courage to ask her out, you know. She was nice, and she said, "Oh, would you like to come to my church?" (Laughter) I had thought a movie or whatever, but she was nice. I go to this woman's church. It must have been over Northeast [Washington, D.C.] or somewhere, and it was my first experience in a Pentecostal church. Where people were foaming at the mouth and stuff like that. And I felt like I was like a cultural anthropologist, like, oh, this is what people were talking about, getting the spirit, and stuff like this (laughter). And what happened, I was like, I was really like stunned. And what happened, everybody is--everybody is going, the music is going. And they realized as they looked at me that I wasn't getting it. And then things stopped, and they took me into like a back room and sat me down. And they began to ask me various questions about the Bible and faith. And so, you know, immediately I'm like listening to this, and I realize that they saw me as, that I was not saved and stuff. So I'm getting all of this, and then it clicked on me when I got this. Because, you don't know who you're talking to. You know, I'm like, you know, I'm influenced by my brother [Richard Miller] who's a Trappist monk. "You want to talk about the Bible?" (Laughter) You know, so immediately they said, "Oh, no." Speaker 2: At that point, your brother was a monk already? Speaker 1: At that time my brother was out of the monastery, which is another story. But what happened is, you know, growing up in the '60s [1960s], you know, this being my older brother, and this being, you know, the person I really admired--you know, my brother was training to become a monk, you know. So what happens, you know, my brother is speaking fluent Latin, you know. My brother knows, you know, he knows Christianity, you know. Speaker 2: What year is this? Speaker 1: This is the early '60s [1960s]. You know, this is like, you know, '61 [1961], '62 [1962], '63 [1963]. So what happens is that, you know, my sense of the Civil Rights Movement comes through my brother going off to Genesee monastery [Abbey of the Genesee, Piffard, New York] in Upstate New York and being, quote, like the first black monk, to integrate you know. (Laughter) I mean what happened, I think they still remember my brother showing up at the monastery. That's where they make the bread and everything. And they say they saw him, and it's like here comes the slave labor or whatever. But you know, I probably learned a lot about that in terms of race and stuff, and having my conscious raised in terms of these small little movements. Because where someone can go back and say, okay, here's the bus rides, the civil rights marches, and you know, stuff like that--here's my brother going to Upstate New York, and what does he encounter? So, that's another story, you know, for another tape. Story_ID: 640408 Speaker 1: So, how long did your brother [Richard Miller] stay at the monastery [Abbey of the Genesee, Piffard, New York]? Speaker 2: I would have to go back. I don't know, I have no sense of time. I don't know if my brother stayed there a year or a year and a half or less. You know, I do recall he was gone, and it had a tremendous impact on the household, you know. I recall, for example, and I've written about this in terms of--I was so excited, you know, in terms of my brother, you know, going somewhere. Because we went, we went out to LaGuardia [LaGuardia Airport, New York, New York], you know. And for young black people, we never went to the airport. So I sort of remember, you know, how you could go out there and you could--I still can see my brother's little head in the window when he left, "Oh, we see him, we see him. He's gone." And then what happened, I remember we came back home and my sister [Marie Miller Hunter] told me to be quiet. And what had happened, my father [Egberto Miller] had come home and he changed clothes and went to work. My mother [Enid Marshall Miller] was in the bathroom and she was crying. And obviously, I didn't know, you know. My sister told me to shut up, you know. And so I, I, I, I look at that. Now years later, you know, especially when I have children [Jasmine-Simone Miller Morgan and Nyere-Gibran Miller], I understood that being the baby of the family, I didn't have access to the decision-making. It had to be a tremendous discussion for them to allow my brother to go into the monastery, you know. I mean, this must have been an unbelievable discussion, and, you know my mother--because you know when anybody goes into the monastery you never see anybody again. You know, and I never had a sense of that, you know. And the same way, years later I was working on a project. I was at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] working on a project, and I interviewed my brother. This would have been probably around '70 [1970], '71 [1971]. He was interviewing for--probably like I was doing a paper or something. And I was like, "You know, who influenced you, you know, to become a monk?" or something like that. And I knew he was reading like Thomas Merton, and so I always thought it was that. And then he surprised me and said, "Oh, the person who influenced me was our father." "Dad?" You know, I never saw my father as a spiritual person. And what I learned from that is--and I tell anybody--if you have a household with several kids, each child has a different relationship with that parent. If you're the oldest, then you arrive at a time which your parents are young. Maybe your father throws you in the air and catches you. By the time I come along, your father might drop you, and that's why your SAT scores are low, but that's another thing (laughter). What happens is that you see your parents differently. So, it was obvious that my brother saw the real spiritual side of my father. Speaker 1: Who worked quite a bit. Speaker 2: Right. Now I thought as a writer, I really thought later on, I really thought that my father was illiterate. I mean-- Speaker 1: You thought he-- Speaker 2: That he was illiterate. I never saw my father read or anything like that, you know, books, you know. And what happened, it wasn't until after my father died, when my mother would say, "Well, is there anything you want of your father's?" that I went to the dresser and I went to get his cross, the crucifix that he kept in the bible. I took that out. It was always there. And I went through his bibles, and he read one book. He was like a divinity student, you know. Then I also found out that my father would disappear on Sundays. My father would go to different churches, okay. And then as I was interviewing my brother, I said, "Well, was there a problem in terms with you changing your religion and becoming Catholic?" And he said something to me, "Well, what do you think your father--your parents--?" I never realized that Catholicism was there, you know. And my father was Catholic, and we were raised Episcopalian (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) From Panama. Speaker 2: Right, right, and we were being raised Episcopalian, see. And then what would happen, like my sister today followed my brother. My sister is Catholic, okay. So you begin to see this sort of change. But you know, through my household, I look at my mother and father and my sister and my brother and myself, and there was a level of spirituality that I feel really helped me get through the 1960s and early '70s [1970s]-- Story_ID: 640409 Speaker 1: And I say that in terms of the advice my mother [Enid Marshall Miller] gave me when I went off to college. You know, this is the advice my mother gave me: "Don't let anyone tell you it's yours." Okay, I'm like Mookie in the movie ['Do the Right Thing']. Okay, I got it, you know. What happened, years later--it took me--that was my sex education, you know. She had this thing that you go on the hunt, and some young woman will be pregnant and will snatch you. And she was right. Some little woman from Newport News [Virginia] would snatch me up or something like that, and I would have--you know, I'd be someplace in North Carolina or Virginia with five kids (Laughter). Speaker 2: She said, "Remember, it's not yours." Speaker 1: Right, right. (Laughter) And then I found this amazing that a mother would give that advice to a son, okay. Now, the other thing that we heard in terms of, like I was saying, "You don't follow the crowd. You don't follow the crowd, you know." Now, that saved me, because right around '69 [1969] with the takeovers at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]--what's his name [Reggie Hudgins] from Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]? We were taking over the university, you know, we were taking over the university. And I remember this idiot, Michael called. He said, "Brother Miller [HistoryMaker E. Ethelbert Miller], are you ready to go?" You know, and he had a gun. He said, "Brother, brother, brother, you ready?" I said, "Man, I just want a course in dissertation (laughter). I don't want to kill anybody for it," you know. But I realized as I'm standing here in the dorm in the midst of the takeover and stuff, Unh-uh, this is running with the wrong crowd, you see. The same way like I tell people when I go back and look at pictures of Little Rock [Arkansas] or some civil rights pictures coming out of Birmingham [Alabama], I've never been in a situation where I felt that out of me would come such anger and hatred towards another human being because of the color of their skin, or they got a little yamaka on their head. I could never see being--I wasn't raised that way, okay. So when all the stuff about being black and multiculturalism came in, I was raised by my mother and father [Egberto Miller]--you judge good people, see. Story_ID: 640410 Speaker 1: So you, how did you end up at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]? I mean so you're telling me about all these influences. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: How did you get to Howard in all of these protests (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I only got to Howard one way, you know. If you look at the schools I applied to, I come out of Columbus High School [Christopher Columbus High School, Bronx, New York]. It was Hartwick College [Oneonta, New York], because they had a nice campus upstate on Iona Island [sic.] in New York. I liked that, Iona Island, New York, you know. And Columbia University [New York, New York], because my friend Robert [Robert Skinner] was going there. And then Howard. Howard--because at Columbus High School--Robert, Dinky, as we called him at that time--his favorite teacher was, there was one black teacher at Columbus High School. I forget the guy's name, but he was a graduate of Howard. He was a physics teacher and he was a good friend of Robert. And he had recommended Howard to Robert, but Robert wound up going to Columbia University. But what happens is that me, you know, following Robert, because Robert is a little older than me. And I, that's how I found out about Howard, and I also applied to Howard and I got into Howard. Now keep in mind, you know, my ignorance--I get to Howard not knowing at that time, right up to the point that I was admitted, that at Howard, ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] was mandatory. See, you know, so you know, you look up--I come in '68 [1968]. The freshman class, they had just abolished ROTC. That was what the protests was about in '68 [1968], you see, you know, because of the Vietnam War and all that stuff. So the protests started in '67 [1967] and carried over to '68 [1968]. So by the fall of '68 [1968] when I showed up, this change at Howard University had taken place, and I-- Speaker 1: And also the riots after King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] death. Speaker 2: Right, right. So what happened, I'm coming to D.C. [Washington, D.C.] after the riots. And I recall in the fall of '68 [1968] there was another little disturbance that happened on 14th Street, and a riot broke out. And keep in mind, for people like myself coming to Howard back then, you'd get your little packet, and it would say things like, "If you're going to walk in the city, walk in small groups," you know. (Laughter) And so if you wanted a hamburger or whatever, you'd get everybody up, you know, to go get your thing. And you were terrorized in terms of going off into the community. So I was on Howard's campus for several months, and I never even went downtown. And I remember one day I went down--it was a group of guys, and I had on a little Howard beanie. And all of a sudden I get down to like maybe H [Street] or F Street, and it's like white people were--you know, for the first time it was like whoa. Because I was really on that campus, and not going anywhere else. So, when this riot thing broke out on like 14th Street, whoa right, you know. And what happened is that some of us at Howard decided, "Well, we're going to have to develop some sort of sanctuary for Howard, you know, for the community; the community people would come to Howard, right. So, that was our thinking right there. Buddy [ph.], what's Buddy's last name, I forget. Buddy, as we were in the dorm organizing and what not that night, he said, "Oh, well, while you're talking about that, there are all these--," There were some white kids on a bus, and they were looking at a, they were looking at a play in the Ira Aldridge Theater [Washington, D.C.]. There were a couple of busloads of white kids; I don't know, maybe from Maryland or somewhere. So Buddy's like in this Frederick Douglass role, you know, like, "There are white people, you know, on the campus, you know. This is supposed to be our sanctuary." (Laughter) I still to this day remember. It's not funny. Buddy comes over. There's a group of us from Howard, and we're walking behind Buddy. And Buddy comes through the side door, and walks out--I don't know what was playing on the stage. He walks out and disrupts the play (laughter). "The play is over." (Laughter) He went, "You have to leave." (Laughter) You know, we were kind of--and I'm like, "Yeah." (Laughter) So stupid. Anyway, so all the white people began to file out of the auditorium. They're like, "What's this?" You know, they don't know what's going on on 14th Street; they don't know what--they were just having a nice play, you know. Speaker 1: So in the meanwhile, on 14th Street (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) A riot was going on. Speaker 1: --people were looting and-- Speaker 2: Well, I don't think it was--it wasn't that serious. Something had broken out, it might have been a police incident or something like that. Because this wasn't a real big riot like after King's assassination. It was just something that had happened again in the fall. So what happened, all the white people began to get back on their buses, right. Out of nowhere, it might have been Buddy, somebody threw a rock at the bus, you know, threw a rock at the bus. All I remember is that the rock went at the bus, and then out of nowhere came the police. I mean the police--like the rock hit the bus, and the police showed up, man. And we took off running, and that was my introduction to teargas. Man, you know, like teargas, they just tear-gassed the dorm, man. And to this day I remember some future doctors just running, you know (laughter). You know, Cook Hall is shaped like in an H. So somebody ran through the first courtyard and went through the second one, and then over the fence and just kept on going, you know. But that was the thing, in terms of just being caught up in a protest. You know, keep in mind, I'm new to this whole thing. Story_ID: 640411 Speaker 1: --Were you active in these various protests--the anti-war protests, civil rights, black power? Speaker 2: No, I will say this. Going back to high school [Christopher Columbus High School, Bronx, New York], because most of my friends at that time were Jewish, I got pulled--and through Robert [Robert Skinner]--I got pulled into the war movement, the anti-war movement. But I pretty much got pulled in it through, how would I say, the counter-culture. I got brought into it-- like Dylan [Bob Dylan]; the music, you know. Speaker 1: So you were listening to rock and roll? Speaker 2: No. What happened, in our household everyone had their music. So, if you were to come into my household, say, when we were talking about smell--if you came into my house in the South Bronx [Bronx, New York], say, on Longwood Avenue, you heard the battle of the music. Classical--because my brother [Richard Miller] is, he pretty much played the piano and was dominant in terms of music, you know. What happened is, you heard my brother first, the music. My father [Egberto Miller] loved jazz, okay, so jazz came in. Then my sister [Marie Miller Hunter] was into like Sam Cooke, so she pretty much had--she was like the early--because she liked to party, okay. So you had the rock and roll and that type of stuff, you know, and classical and jazz. For me, it became the folk music, see. And I was trying to play the little guitar and stuff like that, you know, getting into Dylan, you know. I still remember when Robert was at Columbia University [New York, New York]. I went over to see him in his dorm, and those guys, they were listening to Jimi Hendrix, 'Hey Joe,' you know, I got into that. And that was the music. So, when I arrived at Howard University [Washington, D.C.], an historically black school [HBCU], when people came in my room they were like, "What are you listening to?" you know. I'm listening to Buffy Sainte-Marie, you know, or something like that, you know (laughter). Speaker 1: Was that culture shock for you? Speaker 2: It was a culture shock for them, you know. And then I remember, oh, at Howard they invited--they got really radical one year, and they invited The Chambers Brothers. And what I knew about The Chambers Brothers was we grew up on The Chambers Brothers. But, you know, that was the music that was made. And then-- Story_ID: 640412 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Were you hearing the poetry in the music? Speaker 2: No, I was hearing the music, you know. I mean I started writing poetry pretty much imitating like Paul Simon and Bob Dylan. You know, that's what I was--you know, Memphis Blues. I was writing, I was writing Dylan, you know, type of stuff. And I mention that because many of my peers said, "Oh, I was reading Langston Hughes, I was reading Countee Cullen." No, unh-uh, I was into Paul Simon and, you know, Buffy Sainte-Marie, Tim Hardin, and other people like that. And so my background, in terms of what shaped me in terms of my ear as a writer, is that. That's what I knew, that's what it came from. And Donovan, you know. Speaker 1: Were you an English major? Speaker 2: No, no. I, when I came to Howard University [Washington, D.C.], coming after the protests, when I arrived on the campus I was a history major. Because my thing was, you know, in terms of my folks [Enid Marshall Miller and Egberto Miller], you know, history--maybe go on to law school and become a politician. But what happened is that coming after the protests, along with the abolishment of ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps], it was also Howard looking into developing an African American studies department. So, I majored in African American studies, you see. And that, I felt was key. Speaker 1: And African American studies is also inter-disciplinary. Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: So you had history, you had literature (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And history, right, right. And then I also had people in the English department, Mr. Thomas [Bill Thomas], and also at that time Jennifer Jordan, who were key teachers who mentored me. I mean Jennifer Jordan in the English department, I think it might have been her first year teaching. She had went to Howard and, you know, she was just a young teacher and she was--you know, you fall in love with Jennifer Jordan. And what happened is that's how I was introduced to African American writers. And then-- Speaker 1: Who do remember? Which writers? Speaker 2: Oh, well, I remember very clearly, I remember Sterling Brown [Sterling A. Brown], who was on campus. Because someone grabbed me one day and took me over to one of the halls where Sterling Brown was reading poetry. That's the first time I heard, that I went to a poetry reading. So I got into poetry that way. Speaker 1: And what was, what did you witness? Speaker 2: Oh, I witnessed a person--I love, I love, I loved Sterling Brown's voice, you know, "They don't come by ones, they don't come by twos, they come by ten" ['Old Lem,' Sterling Brown]. You know, I mean I just, you know, he was real--you loved the stories that he told in-between his poems. Speaker 1: What stories? Speaker 2: Well, just the whole thing in terms of--Sterling Brown was a race man. And so what happened, the whole experience, you know, of people that he knew and stuff like that, you know. Story_ID: 640413 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did he [Sterling A. Brown] send a message to you? Because this is during your awakening period, your sort of black consciousness period. Speaker 2: Well, this is, you know, my conscious was raised. I would go back to when I was out of high school [Christopher Columbus High School, Bronx, New York], and I take this job down at Bookazine [Bookazine Company, Inc.] and I meet Mr. Michaux [Lewis H. Michaux]. But I also meet some young men. At that time I did not know who they were. But these were Charlie Cobb [Charles E. Cobb, Jr.], Courtland Cox, Tony Gittens [Anthony Gittens]. These were young people who were in SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee]. These were young people who were in the student movement at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]. These were young people who were part of the Drum and Spear Bookstore here in Washington, D.C. And when I look at these people now, they were race men. I mean, I love Charlie Cobb, you know what I mean. I didn't really get a real full sense of Charlie Cobb's importance in like SNCC and the Civil Rights Movement until, you know, much later. Speaker 1: Were you involved in SNCC at all? Speaker 2: No, I mean because of my age, you know. See, keep in mind, if I was maybe two to three years older, I'd wind up in Vietnam, you know. I mean that's--one or two years makes a big difference. Speaker 1: Now, the Black Panther Movement [Black Panther Party] though, was still gaining some momentum. Speaker 2: The Black Panther Movement in '69 [1969] was gaining momentum. But keep in mind, coming out of the South Bronx [Bronx, New York], like what I've been describing, and the advice that my mother [Enid Marshall Miller] has given to me in terms of you know, how I was raised--I couldn't get caught up in that, okay. I couldn't get caught up in that. I recall for example my first, maybe second week on college campus. There was a meeting in the student center for Ujamaa. Ujamaa was the group that led the student protests; those were the militants, you know. And many of them would become my friends, you know, Joe Mo [ph.], Michael Harris, all these guys, because they had hung out in the dorm. And at the Ujamaa gathering, you know, all the militant students who want to get down, they were all there. And you know, different speakers spoke. And then they said, "We're going to have a sister from the community speak to you guys." And all of a sudden, you know, this sister gets up to speak at the Ujamaa meeting. And I slipped down in my seat. It's Judy Howell [Judith Howell] from (unclear) in the Bronx [New York], who stole my basement glove when I was growing up. Here she was now, intimidating Howard students (laughter). I was like, "Whoa, what's happening here?" And that was so funny, because here she was, and it was a perfect example of my mother saying, "See, I told you. You don't hang out with the wrong crowd." (Laughter) But you know, Judy would become a good friend, because I hadn't seen her since, you know, the South Bronx. But I say that in terms of all these movements are taking place, you know, the Black Panthers and riots and things of that sort. But I'm not a participant, but I'm a witness to it, okay-- Story_ID: 640414 Speaker 1: And the thing that changed-- Speaker 2: Go ahead. Speaker 1: --the thing that really changed me was--the only thing I can compare this to is taking a writer, like [HistoryMaker] Terry McMillan, right, and realize that Terry's development--that's before she writes 'Mama,' coincides with the fact that Terry McMillan mastered the word processor. And Terry could type extremely fast, and would get work from law firms. So, she had a technical skill, she could type very fast. And I think that had a lot to do with--like I said, Terry can knock out a novel very quickly. I mean she types--but she mastered the word processor. For me, what happened in the early '70s [1970s] is I began to videotape people when videotape was brand new. And what happened with my department, the African American studies department, which was a new department, we had what other departments did not have. We had video equipment. And all of a sudden we decide we were going to document everything that took place at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], okay, through interviews and all these types of things. So, even years later, you know, as I became, you know, a successful writer, I had to reintroduce myself to people who said, "Oh, you don't remember me, do you? I was the guy--." "Oh, you're the guy with the camera," you know. Because people, you know, they didn't know who I was, but I'm learning a lot of history. I mean, the first person that me and my friends wound up taping was in the dorm of Cook Hall. I was next door to my friend Steve Jones [Steven Jones] from Chicago [Illinois]. Steve worked for [HistoryMaker] Margaret Burroughs, okay. You know, he was in school. And what happened, Margaret Burroughs had said, "Okay, Steve, you're in D.C. [Washington, D.C.]. Can you get something from Sterling Brown [Sterling A. Brown]?" Well, like get his pipe or something, and put it in the DuSable Museum [DuSable Museum of African American History, Chicago, Illinois]. So what happened is that Steve was going to go over to Sterling Brown, and I said, "Oh, can I come? I have a camera I can take." So we went over, and Steve was interviewing Mr. B., and I wound up videotaping it. Mr. B. had such fun, he said, "Well, can you all come back?" So, we started--you know, now that we had an oral history project we just started taping, and he just started putting his life on tape. And that became a key thing in terms of me at Howard. And then there would be structures like the Institute for Arts and Humanities [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] under Stephen Henderson [Stephen E. Henderson] that we developed. Speaker 2: Wait say that slowly. Who was that? Speaker 1: There would be around '73 [1973], the creation at Howard University of the Institute for Arts and Humanities, okay, under the leadership of Stephen Henderson, who was another mentor. Story_ID: 640415 Speaker 1: Tell me about Stephen Henderson [Stephen E. Henderson]. Speaker 2: Stephen Henderson, you know, was probably one of my best teachers, friend, mentor. I look back and I think Henderson was one of the finest African American critics, you know, of African American poetry. I always tell people Henderson taught me how to read. You know, he taught me how to read. And this is a guy who would give a lecture on like one line of a poem, you know. This was a person that if you gave them a book, he'd flip to the back, you know, and he's looking at, you know, the document tape--if no new documents, you know, there's nothing new, that critical eye. And keep in mind, this little guy that we would call Stevie Wonder with the thick glasses and stuff, when I would find out how important he was, okay, especially not just to me, but to the entire African American literary movement. Here was a guy when he was at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] in the English department, he pretty much took his reputation, okay, and said to a whole generation of new African American writers, "This is literature, this is poetry." This is not filled with hate the way--people like Saunders [George Saunders] and Reynolds [Reynolds Price] and some of the other old school writers could not embrace it, see. So he gave his credentials, and gave validity to a movement. See, I never forgot that, because what I was seeing there was the role of a scholar, on how they bridge a community, see, and society. Story_ID: 640416 Speaker 1: And so, what drew you more? The spoken word of poetry, or was it the critical-- Speaker 2: No. What happened (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) position? Speaker 2: What happened, what motivates me, first of all in terms of poetry itself--and I told this to, I told this on the radio, WHUR radio [WHUR-FM, Washington, D.C.] one night. It was just a few years ago, actually. I did a program with my first wife, Michelle Calhoun [Michelle Calhoun Greene]. And I said when we were on the air, I said, "Well, you know, I probably would have never become a poet if it wasn't for her. Because all my first poems were love poems to her." And she was the one, coming from Chicago [Illinois], who introduced me to Don Lee [HistoryMaker Haki Madhubuti], you know. She was the one I believe, I think her cousin is [HistoryMaker] Smokey Robinson. I mean, she came out of a whole sort of tradition in terms of reading and poetry and stuff like that, and I got pulled into that. And so-- Speaker 1: What year is this? Speaker 2: This is, this is, we met, it would be '69 [1969], '70 [1970]. Speaker 1: Where did you meet your first wife? Speaker 2: Oh, I met, I had seen her--I had seen her from a distance, you know. In fact, people joke about it. When Michelle Calhoun arrived on Howard's [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] campus, you knew about it. Because Michelle, she was gorgeous. She was gorgeous, she was voluptuous. (Laughter) She was voluptuous. I mean she, I mean, I mean, I look at that and I tell one story about her being voluptuous. And it saved my life in terms of--right around that time, a number of us became very much interested in Islam and going out to the community mosque and stuff. And so, you know, me and Mickey, you know, we were like inseparable. So I'm reading all my little Islam stuff, and I go down to the community mosque and I bring Mickey with me. Well, Mickey had on a see-through blouse, if you stared. But two of the brothers--so this is the walk through the Mosque, and it's like, "Sister, you going to have to cover up," (laughter). Mickey did her Sojourner Truth. She said, "You brothers supposed to be so holy, you shouldn't even be looking at my breasts," (laughter). And she did a little--"I'm not covering up," (laughter). And then they took me, the little brothers, they took me into the next little room like, "Where did you find this woman, Brother?" (Laughter) You know. Story_ID: 640417 Speaker 1: What happened, I look back at it, she [Miller's first wife, Michelle Calhoun Greene] saved me from being pulled into this group. Because going back to my brother [Richard Miller], we were all, I guess, were on a spiritual path searching for things. And so one of the things that really influenced me at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] in '69 [1969] and '70 [1970], I became, along with being introduced to African American literature, I got into this Islam. And I say that in terms of not going through Malcolm X and things of that sort. But to be on a college campus and have no knowledge of a major world religion--that was a major world religion, okay. And for me, what became of real interest to me was Islam, but specifically Sufism, the mystical side of Islam. You know, there was a joke about how the Sufis at one time, you know, they were the people who would sit outside the mosque and laugh at people going in, because they said Allah is out here with us, you know. And I was really concerned about Islam through spiritual development, and not really what I saw around me here in Washington, D.C., and that was people who were moving into Islam who wanted to be Arabs, you know. Or what happened, they wanted to build a community in terms of like, you know, if you were a woman and you came down to the mosque, they'd say, "Brother, you know, marriage is half the faith," you know, this and that. And they wanted, you know, they wanted to build a community. I wasn't about that. I was really about, you know, embracing a religion that would sort of lead me to a better understanding of myself and other people. So, all of this was happening at the same time. Speaker 2: Now, were you affiliated with the black Muslims? Speaker 1: No. This was, this was, this was, this was Orthodox Islam, you know, that Sunni Islam, that I was really, you know, reading and following and studying. Speaker 2: But at the mosque, who was there? Were-- Speaker 1: Oh, they were, they were Orthodox Muslims, okay; they were Orthodox Muslims. Now, because I'm at Howard, I also began to meet other people who just happened to be present on the Howard campus--Lonnie Shabazz [Lonnie Cross; Abdulalim A. Shabazz], who would be head of a mosque here in D.C., very nice. I think Lonnie Shabazz at that time was a known mathematician. He might have been from Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], but he was the head of the mosque here. We got to meet him, me and my roommate Reggie [Reggie Hudgins], we got to know him. And my roommate, see, Reggie at this time was sort of going through the same thing my brother was going through. Reggie was out of Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], you know, one grade above me, you know, the Philly type of thing. But he got interested very much into mysticism and Christianity, and Merton [Thomas Merton]. He came back from a break one day with a little, you know, a little flute and some incense and Buddha. We thought he had definitely gone wrong (laughter). But that's another--I'll end on that note (laughter). Story_ID: 640418 Speaker 1: Well, first of all, tell me about some of the people who went to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] with you. I think there were some famous people, at least they're famous now. Speaker 2: Yeah, I go back, and my dorm clerk was Debbie Allen. You know, we called her Thunder Thighs, you know she was gorgeous. We knew that she was going to make it. Speaker 1: What was she like at school? Was she a dancer back then? Speaker 2: She was a dancer, you know. She was a dancer, and she was one of the students really mentored by Vera Katz [Vera J. Katz], you know. I say that because Vera Katz was, I think a mentor to a lot of black actors and actresses. And this was a time in which the Black Arts Movement was taking place. And Vera Katz, you know, being Jewish and white, you know, she hung in there. You know, she hung in there. I still remember my friend, Rocky Jones [ph.], who now is a famous filmmaker and stuff. But Rocky at that time was a theater student, and their job was, the assignment was to write a play. And Rocky wrote this little one-act play in which he got his girlfriend, who was a really talented actress, right, a student, and she could really mimic Vera Katz, right, you know. So what happened is in this little one-act play that Rocky put on that we all sat around looking at, Rocky played himself. And so what happens is that, you know, there's this whole thing that Rocky can't write, you know. And so Vera Katz was like, "Well, Rocky, you have to turn in this assignment. What's preventing you from writing?" And Rocky said, "It's you. You're preventing me from writing." (Laughter) And what happened, he killed her, he killed her. He killed her on the stage with Vera Katz sitting--and Vera Katz ran out and she was crying. Man, and this is where I got introduced to black art. It divided the student body, man. The students were divided in half. Like, "Rocky, that was some bad shit you did. You shouldn't do that, man." (Laughter) Vera Katz is crying and stuff, and then the other people were saying, "Yeah, brother, you got to tell it like it is." (Laughter) And what happened is, you're seeing all that now. And I'm saying that, too, because at that time in the '70s [1970s], there were really talented students and also a really talented faculty that was there at that time. And so when you look at, you know, some of the people who were coming through there--Clay Goss, you know, I mean writing his plays. John Killens [John Oliver Killens] would arrive on the campus, Don Lee [HistoryMaker Haki Madhubuti] would arrive on the campus. It's just amazing stuff happening there. Stephen Henderson [Stephen E. Henderson] would arrive. Story_ID: 640419 Speaker 1: Was there a strong literary community? Speaker 2: Well, see, I'll tell you what happens. And this is key, in terms of Howard University [Washington, D.C.] history. And a lot of people have not analyzed it. We were student activists, okay. And I come into Howard University right after the major student movement. And pretty much what the students had done at that time along with issuing their demands--one, they were battling President Nabrit [James Nabrit, Jr.]. And pretty much Nabrit, who had a distinguished civil rights career, at that time people felt that Nabrit had become out of touch with the students, okay. So, when you look at what happened in 1970, Howard's board of trustees, in looking at the protests, goes out and selects a new president. But they have a criteria that they're trying to fill. And what happened, they identified the new president, James Cheek [James E. Cheek], from Shaw University [Raleigh, North Carolina]. Now, Cheek, if I'm not mistaken was in his thirties, you know. When he hit the campus, you know, he had little sunglasses, you know. I mean, he had all the things that you would associate with a really new progressive president. Now, if you look at the thing that happened, it was Cheek who was brought in to sort of cool things out, you know, and bring the students back together. As 1970 hit, when Kent State [Kent State University, Kent Ohio] and all the other stuff hits, okay-- Speaker 1: The Vietnam [Vietnam War] protests. Speaker 2: All this stuff was going on, okay, all this stuff was going on. And what happened is that--especially after Kent State--what happened is that we, in sympathy, closed down, see. It's been only--to my awareness and knowledge, Howard University has only closed down once in terms of the administration closing down, not the students, but the administration closing it down, and Cheek was responsible. And what he did, without even consulting the faculty, it sounds like something the Bush [President George Walker Bush] administration would do with the National Homeland Security [Homeland Security Act of 2002]. What happened, he closed down--see, the university was going to close to discuss various issues, and then everybody would pass and get the grade that they got, right. Now, in '70 [1970] when all this stuff was going on, there's a big rally at the Cramton Auditorium [Washington, D.C.] house campus. Cheek is the key speaker. He comes down, you know, sunglasses, and gets to the podium and he says the magic words. He comes down and says, "Brothers and sisters." We went, "What?" We had never heard that. Now-- Speaker 1: From a president? Speaker 2: From the president of our university. Everybody was whooping up, and stuff like that. Me and Reggie [Reggie Hudgins]--I was going out with Michelle [Michelle Calhoun Greene], I forgot who he was going out with. Afterwards everybody leaves the Cramton and they're all high and stuff like that. Me and Reggie, because we're analyzing stuff, like, "Oh, nah, man, he didn't say nothing. And this is just co-opting the movement (laughter)." And so what happened, we wrote a piece where we're comparing Cheek to the silent majority, sort of like Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] and Agnew [Spiro Agnew]. What happened, he was co-opting the student movement, okay. And the students really couldn't see it, okay. In fact when Cheek came in, one of the first things that happened, coming after the protests, Cheek increased the budget for student government. Now a lot of those little Negroes, I don't know where they are today, ran off with a lot of money and bought cars and stuff. But you talk about a tactic. So, a lot of money that the students--they invited some of the students up to the office and eat well or stuff like that--they basically sold out the movement, okay. So somebody goes back and looks at that. Story_ID: 640420 Speaker 1: Let's look at Cheek [James E. Cheek], and this is very important. One thing that Cheek did as a new president of Howard University [Washington, D.C.] is something that when I go back and look at it in a historical context, it makes no sense, but it is really revolutionary. Cheek hires the sociologist, Andrew Billingsley to be the vice president of academic affairs. Okay, if you today go to the library and pull anything by Andrew Billingsley, like about the black family, you'll say, "Whoa, this is some radical stuff, you know." This is a guy who is part of the black world, you know; this guy--wow. Now, what did Billingsley do? When Billingsley took over as the vice president of academic affairs, it's like Henry Kissinger being the national security advisor for the secretary of state. Billingsley, even though he may not have articulated it, some of the things that the radical students wanted to do in terms of Howard University being a black university, Billingsley decided to set that in motion. And so, what does Billingsley do? Billingsley does what you would see Henry Louis Gates [HistoryMaker Henry Louis "Skip" Gates, Jr.] doing today. Billingsley did this as vice president of academic affairs. If you were anywhere as a top scholar, you would be at Howard. So, you look at what Billingsley did. Robert Staples, [HistoryMaker] Joyce Ladner, Stephen Henderson [Stephen E. Henderson], John Killens [John Oliver Killens]--he brought all these people to Howard. Now, he came up with a very radical idea. He brings all these great people together, but he realized that, okay, they're going to be in departments. Departments have limitations, okay. So what Billingsley did, he created in between these departments these various like think tanks, one issued for arts and humanities. He saw these units as being able to bring the various departments together, and also have a community outreach, you see. That is so far out, so radical, that he could get all these people here, okay. Now, he created the Institute for Arts and Humanities [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]. Now, who do we look at who's high on the list to become head of the Institute of Arts and Humanities? Houston Baker [Houston A. Baker, Jr.], who is one of the people I mentioned. Because what happened, they needed to have this sort of radical new unit. And keep in mind this unit, the Institute of Arts and Humanities, got big funding for the Mellon Foundation [Andrew W. Mellon Foundation, New York, New York]. See, this is the early '70s [1970s]. And what happens is that here now we have a unit created to really document and preserve African American culture at Howard. Who's going to be in charge of that? See, the national institute--I mean we've seen those various battles. So, out of this, you look at people like Houston Baker, people who could bridge the community. And-- Speaker 2: And Houston Baker, who's coming out of UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] with his Ph.D. went to Howard undergrad? Speaker 1: Right, right. He had--right, so it's not difficult to pull people back, okay. But what happened, we find out that in terms of the president, people were happy with was Stephen Henderson, who also had been brought from, out of Atlanta [Georgia], okay. And keep in mind what's important there is that Henderson and also the historian, [HistoryMaker] Vincent Harding, okay, were key in terms of two intellectuals, really intellectuals, who asked themselves a very important question after 1968. And that is, here is King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] assassination. How do we keep his life and his--what he's doing--alive? You see, how do we institutionalize this? And so they raised some serious, serious questions as black intellectuals in 1968. Now, some people will say when you look at the Institute of the Black World [Atlanta, Georgia], it's extremely radical. Some of those people got run out of Atlanta, you know (laughter). Because I mean the Institute of the Black World, the people coming through there would be people like [HistoryMaker] Howard Dodson at the Schomburg [Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, New York, New York]; Walter Rodney would come through there; C.L.R. James, all these fascinating names, okay. And so when you see Billingsley coming to Howard, and now he has an institution behind him, he pretty much recreates the Institute for the Black World on Howard's campus. Story_ID: 640421 Speaker 1: So what kinds of things would you do under the leadership of Stephen Henderson [Stephen E. Henderson]? Speaker 2: Oh, well, let's look at this. One of the first programs--see, Henderson is a bluesman, okay. Henderson comes in and he's with--my teacher my last year at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], this is in '72 [1972]. By taking over--well, just before he became head of the Institute for Arts and Humanities [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], he was in my department, the Afro-American studies department. He had a grant, okay. He had a big grant, and he had money where he could bring various writers to Howard and interview them, because he was thinking about working on a book. Me, as the cameraman, began to do the videotaping for him. And then he was the person who really saw what Steve Jones [Steven Jones] and I were doing, and that we had gone over to Sterling Brown's [Sterling A. Brown] house and did this documentation. This is very, very, valuable stuff. It would be Stephen Henderson, who, once he assumed the leadership of the Institute of Arts and Humanities in '73 [1973] would coax Sterling Brown out of retirement, see. So, all these things began to take place. The other person who becomes a very close person--Sterling Brown would be close to Stephen Henderson. But the person that Henderson was even closer to, who also happens to be on the campus of Howard University at this time, is Leon Damas. Now, Leon Damas is one of the founding fathers of the Negritude movement. I mean you have Cesaire [Aime Cesaire], you have Damas, you have Senghor [Leopold Sedar Senghor]. You see, so you can begin to see at this particular time on Howard's campus, it's international. C.L.R. James, the great Pan-Africanist is teaching on Howard's campus. See, all these people are there. Story_ID: 640422 Speaker 1: --Now, did you take courses with C.L.R. James (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, but see, let me tell you about C.L.R. See, that's another--. Now, C.L.R., I got into C.L.R. because Reggie [Reggie Hudgins], my roommate, was taking a class. And C.L.R.'s classes meet--actually it's at my research center [African American Resource Center, Howard University, Washington, D.C.], where it is right now on the third floor of the Founders Library [Washington, D.C.]. He had his class, he was teaching a class on Pan-Africanism. And my first introduction--because Reggie pulled me along because, you know, I didn't really know who C.L.R. was. He was sitting in there, and Reggie's a very emotional guy. And it got in that day about--Reggie said something about the police, you know, how come the police don't do this and that. And C.L.R. James was just unbelievable. "Mr. Hudgins, please inform the class about the role of police in society." You know, he was just running this thing down. And so what happens, James would say, "No, we'll just you, you know, exactly how the police are here to protect private property." You know, he would just show you things. Now I am really stunned as I begin to find out who C.L.R. James is. Because C.L.R., I could never say--this man used to hang out with Trotsky [Leon Trotsky], you know what I'm saying (laughter). I mean, you know, this guy hung out with Trotsky, man. Or, or, you know, and C.L.R. James had a way of talking that history came through him. So, he would say like, "Yes, I remember I was in England and Martin [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] came to see me. And I told him that he had to go back," you know, like off into the Civil Rights Movement, you know. But what happened is, I would, in the '70s [1970s] when C.L.R. James was living on 16th Street, I would be the person bringing him books, you know. And I mean C.L.R. James at that time, you know, he was an older man. He would always be in bed with the TV going, some soap opera, and just piles of books around him, right. And he would-- Speaker 1: And he was writing at the time? Speaker 2: Writing and giving lectures. And then we wound up going over there with a videotape camera and interviewing him. But C.L.R. James had one of the most remarkable minds I've ever, ever encountered. You know, he would tell you that, "Oh, this happened--no, this happened in 1937." He was very, very specific. If he came out and said, "I'm going to speak for twenty minutes," he spoke for exactly twenty minutes. Speaker 1: So, you had a real sense of the Diaspora-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: The African Diaspora. Speaker 2: Right. And see, this is what's happening now as a student who's majoring in Afro-American studies, okay. I'm out of school now, I really have a sense of who these individuals are-- Story_ID: 640423 Speaker 1: Now, what year did you graduate? Speaker 2: I graduated in 1972. And see, what happens is that from videotaping, from reading, from preparing--I got a real sense--I'm going back and realizing that these guys, Courtland Cox and Charlie Cobb [Charles E. Cobb Jr.], you know, these are key people in the Civil Rights Movement, you see. So now when you sit and talk to these people, you have more that you try to get out of it, you see. And when I look, even now when I go back and look at what Andrew Billingsley was trying to do at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], you know, it makes me study. Because I can guarantee you that if somebody was to write the history of Howard, they wouldn't see the significance of Billingsley's coming to the university, or even where he came from, see, and all these things. And I tell people if you talk about the golden era of Howard University, it takes place in the 1970s, and it surpasses even the Harlem Renaissance. It surpasses the Harlem Renaissance, because you're not going to find that many great people. And keep in mind, I didn't even mention Owen Dodson, you see. I mean there are so many names that are coming across, you know, at this particular time. Speaker 1: So, were you conscious of the Black Arts Movement? Speaker 2: Oh, very much so. Speaker 1: In process? Speaker 2: Oh sure. Because, see, what happened, by the time Henderson [Stephen E. Henderson] had assumed the leadership of the Institute for Arts and Humanities [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] and I would be named as a junior research associate starting out with a senior research associate--by us now being institutionalized--and this is in '73 [1973]. When Killens [John Oliver Killens] put forth the whole need for having a writers' conference, what happens now is the first writers' conference was held in 1974, and this is what makes this conference unique. It was the only place you could really go and analyze the documents now of people who were active in the Black Arts Movement, looking at what they're trying to do. Speaker 1: So, at some point you came in contact with some of these people (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, with all of them, all of them. Speaker 1: Amiri Baraka, and Don Lee-- Speaker 2: Oh, right-- Speaker 1: --who became [HistoryMaker] Haki Madhubuti. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So, tell me about meeting some of those key players. Speaker 2: Well, you know, these are all individuals that we began to invite--the first, for example, the first program of the Institute for Arts and Humanities took place in 1973. It was a week-long, I think a two-week tribute to Gwendolyn Brooks and Amiri Baraka. What did it consist of? It consisted of bringing together scholars, noted scholars, to analyze, you know, for like three days of Gwendolyn Brooks' work, and then those scholars to analyze Baraka's work, with those individuals being there, you see. And what happens is that this was, you know, really for me videotaping--this is how I was getting to know these individuals, you know. And at the same time, I'm getting like a graduate school lesson in terms of all those analyses, okay. Plus, one person who I didn't mention who was another mentor is my friend, Bob Stokes, who back in the 1960s, the late 1960s, was one of the key people developing black theater in the city along with people like [HistoryMaker] Robert Hooks, you know. And what happened is that Bob Stokes sort of took me under his wing, and what he did is that he gave me at one point his entire library, okay, which was key of books in terms of the Black Arts Movement. Speaker 1: Now, did he give you access to his library, or (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, he gave me-- Speaker 1: He gave you all of his books? Speaker 2: He gave me all--yeah. Speaker 1: How many books? Speaker 2: Oh, he gave me--he gave me books, he gave me a lot. He gave me books, he gave me records, he gave me magazines. And what happened, he had what you would call some of these magazines that only came out with like one issue. Like for example, Amiri Baraka put out a small magazine called Cricket [The Cricket: Black Music in Evolution]. I have a copy of Cricket. [HistoryMaker] A.B. Spellman, who was, you know, is still living, I have like the first copy of his book. Story_ID: 640424 Speaker 1: And did you have a strong sense of--you mentioned your mentor-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --Stephen Henderson [Stephen E. Henderson], and the notion of the black aesthetic-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and the influence of jazz. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Were you part of that creating-- Speaker 2: No, I was-- Speaker 1: --the principles of the black aesthetic? Speaker 2: No. Keep in mind, what happens is that I'm with Henderson when his key book, groundbreaking book, 'Understanding the New Black Poetry' ['Understanding the New Black Poetry: Black Speech and Black Music as Poetic References,' Stephen Henderson], comes out, okay. So when you look at the whole debate and discussion about the black aesthetic and the Black Arts Movement, Henderson is key to that, okay. Also, Henderson's work, as you begin to look at what he was trying to do in 'Understanding the New Black Poetry,' he was trying to have a theoretical way of looking at African American poetry theoretically. A lot of people weren't doing that. As he began to look at blackness, or what makes a poem black, it led him to looking at structure, okay. What's a black form, okay? You know, how do you really say, okay, this is black. What it led him back to was the blues, okay. The blues has a specific structure. What happens now is that by drawing upon those individuals who had done a lot of research on the blues--primarily Sterling Brown [Sterling A. Brown], Ellison [Ralph Ellison], okay--all these individuals began--they were doing a lot of stuff. Henderson begins to pull all that stuff together, okay, and that begins to lay the foundation for the future work of Houston Baker [Houston A. Baker Jr.], Gates [HistoryMaker Henry Louis "Skip" Gates, Jr.], and others. They were not looking at the blues, you see, in terms of all of a sudden looking at what would now begin to merge as the blues aesthetic, you see. And Shirley Anne Williams, I mean some of them pretty much lifted, you know, Henderson's work. Now, what I still have in my possession is a lot of Henderson's unpublished manuscripts, so you can see exactly where his work was going. But no literary scholar today has really built on some of the probes, I would call them, that Henderson was making. And I look at my life and my career, and I really benefitted from being around a person who was trying to put forth some of the theoretical framework. So, if for example we fast forward to today where we see this debate about rap and hip-hop and stuff, there's a certain way I totally dismiss it. Because I can go back to things that I was taught by Henderson, where you say, oh, no, there's something wrong here, fundamentally wrong, you see, fundamentally wrong. And nobody, no critic or scholar really wants to come out and say that. See, just like for example, if you look at African American culture historically, okay, you look at, even say black music, okay. There is nowhere you will find our music at such a low point. That's it. And I'm not going to go like, "Maybe you can link something back, okay." It's at a low point, okay. So, if we take hip-hop and we put it up against the spirituals, it doesn't hold up. If you take hip-hop and hold it up against the blues and realize the blues is survival music, it doesn't hold up, you see. In fact, hip-hop doesn't even hold up against early rap, you know, where you see the form (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Where there is narrative. Speaker 2: And there's a protest; it's protest music, you know. So what happened is that when you look at what has happened to our culture, okay, what's missing? Right now, we have no critics; we have no critics. So what happens, we are in a position right now where we can't advance the culture. Story_ID: 640425 Speaker 1: So, you're saying from the arts, the Black Arts Movement came protest literature? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: For example, people were critical of the dominant culture. Speaker 2: And what happened, we also produced critics. I'll give you a case in point. One key person who is a theoretician--see, a theoretician of the Black Arts Movement more so than Baraka [Amiri Baraka], is Larry Neal. Larry Neal is a theoretician. See, Larry Neal is a theoretician. Baraka, you know, if you look at even some of his last essays, Larry Neal is theoretical. Henderson [Stephen E. Henderson] is theoretical, okay. And what happened? When we look at some people who say they're critics today, they're not theoretical. They're not, they have no vision. The only person I can hold up--and she doesn't package herself as a critic, she's still a poet. But her criticism she has done is visionary. That's the poet, Harryette Mullen. When you read Harryette Mullen's stuff, Harryette Mullen's work is moving in a direction that Henderson was doing. Because what happened? Harryette Mullen begins to sort of throw out certain ways of looking at things. A case in point--oral written tradition. Harryette Mullen will give you this. She says, you take Nat Turner, right. Well, Nat Turner decided that tonight is the night we're going to have a, you know, a rebellion. He looks up at the stars and he does what? He reads the stars, you see what I'm saying. So, you know, if he's reading the stars--so the concept--see, it's like visionary literature that she's looking at. And you can say okay, what's the equivalent of that today, you see? So, even what I hear in terms of jazz, right. Can you go out here right now and find a jazz artist who's doing something on the level of Sun Ra? If you went out here and said, "Who's the major jazz musician?" Really, it's probably, say Wynton Marsalis. But he's a custodian, see, and that's important, the same way, you know, Booker T. Washington is a custodian, see. Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois] is a visionary, okay. So you're looking for a certain person like Du Bois. Story_ID: 640426 Speaker 1: So are you, at this stage in the early to mid-'70s [1970s], are you seeing the reverberations of Du Bois' [W.E.B. Du Bois] theories, and Ralph Ellison, some of the dominant African American literary voices? Speaker 2: What we're seeing, if you put this back, it seems interesting. If you look at the 1970s, okay, there's language and words that are coming out in the 1970s. One is survival, you know. People are like, "We won't even make it to 1984." See, all of these sort of words are sort of happening in terms of the mode of thinking, you see. And so people could see back then that there was something happening. I just pulled out an old book from 1970, 'Who Needs the Negro?' [Sidney M. Willhelm] see, this whole thing of obsolescence. It's fascinating now when you skip over it and come to 2007, with the robotics and everything else. You can raise this question, who needs the Negro? Or, for example I can go down right now and take that book and speak in front of the city council of New Orleans [Louisiana]. You want to redevelop and you're talking about bringing back, who needs the Negro? Speaker 1: But there also was a sudden embracing of, you know, black is beautiful, embracing the dialect, embracing things that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure. Well, yeah, you know, if you go back to the Black Arts Movement, okay, what you have to ask yourself is when does the movement begin and when does it end? See, a lot of people, a lot of books are coming out, and they're backwards, you see. Because what happens is there's no beginning date and there's no cut-off date. Speaker 1: What would you say? Speaker 2: Okay, I used to think you begin with 1965, begin with Malcolm's [Malcolm X] assassination and begin with the Watts riot [Los Angeles, California], and you begin to see people talk about black art coming out of Watts and stuff like that. The Watts Writers Workshop, see, all that stuff is taking place. Baraka [Amiri Baraka] said something very interesting when Jimmy Baldwin [James Baldwin] died. Now keep in mind, people were associating Baraka with the father of the Black Arts Movement. And Baraka, at James Baldwin's funeral said the Black Arts Movement begins with 'Blues for Mr. Charlie' [James Baldwin]. So he looks at Baldwin, and I say wow, if you begin to look at Baldwin, there's 'Blues for Mr. Charlie,' 'The Fire Next Time.' And what happened? See, right after '64 [1964], Baldwin is talking to Elijah Muhammad. Elijah Muhammad said, "Jimmy, you sound like a Muslim." It's very interesting, okay. Also, Baldwin, when we look at the Black Arts Movement, a movement that will be stereotyped in terms of black hatred and things of that sort, you have to wipe it out. Because now, if Baldwin is seen as the key person in the beginning of it--you know, Baldwin always talked about love, okay. And Baldwin now, when you situate him now in the Black Arts Movement, you see that here was a person who was in between King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and Malcolm, see. But now all of a sudden, you've got '64 [1964] happening. Now, you bring in the other person who was the key to the Black Arts Movement, who's also a poet, Muhammad Ali, who's actually talking about Sonny Liston's too ugly to be heavyweight champion of the world. He is really the embodiment of black beauty, and he pushed forth that even to a point where black people said, "When is somebody going to shut him up?" Okay, that's '64 [1964] now, so you see these seeds are being given. But let's fast forward it. When does it end? Seventy-four [1974]. (Unclear) from [U.S.] Congress into our (unclear). We began to see black people, especially from the American delegation, caught between their nationalism and the issues of class. So, you would have at the key speech a person who doesn't make it to (unclear), but gives a recorded speech (unclear). And he says a thing where he says, "The key thing is not that we're black; that's an accident by birth. The question is are we comrades? Do we believe in the same future and the way of seeing the future, and key things happening there?" Story_ID: 640427 Speaker 1: So, tell me how you met James Baldwin, a little bit about him as a person. Speaker 2: Well, I met Baldwin, I think I saw Baldwin the first time at one of the African American writers' conferences. I believe he might have been invited by Killens [John Oliver Killens]. So that's the first time I really saw Baldwin for the first time. Speaker 1: At Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]? Speaker 2: At Howard University. And then in, oh, it must have been the early '80s [1980s], we did a program together at the law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.], and I got a chance to be, you know, on the program with Baldwin. And that was just really amazing in terms of, I'd always heard and read about him as like the (unclear) preacher, and stuff like that. And you know, here I am reading my little poems first. And then, you know, Baldwin spoke extemporaneously, he didn't have any prepared remarks. But he was very eloquent, you know, and you got a sense in terms of what it means to be a writer. And for me, later looking back now at James Baldwin and Owen Dodson and Sterling Brown [Sterling A. Brown], at this particular point in my life, I really know what it means to be an elder. You know, I remember for example on Howard's campus, you know, the Black Collegian magazine had come out. And you know, I was selling them on campus, and I went up to Mr. B.'s office in the library. And Sterling Brown bought like four or five copies, you know. And what it was, it was a thing where he was supporting me, you know, and I learned that, you know. And sometimes what happened is you'd go somewhere and someone gives you something because you are the elder. And so what happens, you do bestow a gift. You know, it's not just writing a letter of recommendation, but a thing that you do spiritually. Story_ID: 640428 Speaker 1: So tell me about that, and tell me about your first book. How did that come to be? Speaker 2: Wow (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What was it, when was it published, and how did it come to be? Speaker 2: My really first book is a Washington Writers' Publishing House [Washington, D.C.] book, 'Migrant Worker' [E. Ethelbert Miller]. And I think that that was probably people like Grace Cavalieri and others who were with the Washington Writers' Publishing House. And keep in mind, one person who would also have a strong impact on my life who passed away just a couple of years ago, was the writer Ahmos Zu-Bolton, who would come here and be one of the first people who would say he's a publisher. You know, he at that time was in his seventies, and he was publishing Hoodoo magazine. But, you know, we're talking about another guy who was very much ahead of things, and this guy was writing what you call hoodoo poetry; he was writing science fiction poetry. He introduced me to a lot of writers who, you know, are well-known names now--you know, Lorenzo Thomas, who passed away, and Wanda Coleman, The Poet I [ph.], and Dolores Kendrick. And he also published May Miller, and was a real advocate of May Miller. I'm here in Washington, D.C., and I don't know who May Miller is, okay. Ahmos was like, "You don't know who May Miller is?" You know Ahmos came here because he relocated from Louisiana, and he had been publishing May Miller when he was in California. Well, May Miller, as I would be introduced to, was the daughter of Kelly Miller, okay. And once I met May Miller, that would be another sort of chapter opening up, because you know, May would sit and tell you about, you know, when Paul Laurence Dunbar lived at the house and stuff like that. So, you really got a sense it was May Miller who invited Zora Neale Hurston to come to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], you know what I mean. So you really got a sense of this sort of tremendous history, you know. And May Miller was one of those writers, you know, that was overlooked in the 1920s like a lot of other women. But you know, to be around her, who was a very, very proud woman, who I remember when she came up on campus and we did a reading together, because Ahmos had put it together. And my chairman of my department, Dr. Adams [HistoryMaker Russell Adams], asked her about, "Oh, Kelly Miller, you're Kelly Miller's daughter," you know. Speaker 1: Speaking about African American women writers, a woman who was just getting started and had done, had spent some time at Howard was Toni Morrison. Did you cross paths ever? Speaker 2: Yeah. Now, you know, Toni Morrison is before me at Howard, you know. She went to school with like Baraka [Amiri Baraka] and others. But-- Speaker 1: But she taught there probably in the early '60s [1960s]. Speaker 2: Sixties [1960s], yeah, before me. What happened with Toni Morrison was I called up Quincy Troupe. (Unclear) Quincy wasn't at home and somebody answered the phone-- Story_ID: 640429 Speaker 1: You were talking about Toni Morrison. Speaker 2: Um-hm, right. I remember I called Quincy Troupe up and, you know, he wasn't there, and I was talking to this woman on the phone. And I think maybe when I did reach him, he said, you know, I said, "Oh, a woman was there." And it actually was Toni Morrison, and I didn't realize that's who it was. But I remember Ahmos Zu-Bolton and I went up to New York [New York]. This is around '74 [1974], '75 [1975], to a book party. They were releasing the work of Henry Dumas, and Ahmos was pretty excited, because this was his first time going to New York. And so, you know, it was just, we were young writers, you know. We went to New York in a van. And so we get to the reception where the book party's going to be, and we're there early you know. We look around, and this woman comes in and says, tells us to start moving chairs and stuff. We got pissed off, man. We were like, "What do you mean, move the chairs? We're here for the book party." It was Toni Morrison, you know. (Laughter) We didn't know. But she's got us working and stuff. You know, because we felt, you know, we were writers, and then we show up early and now we're like, you know, we might as well be serving drinks and stuff. So, we were highly insulted. But, you know-- Speaker 1: What year is this? Speaker 2: This was whenever the play, 'Play Ebony, Play Ivory' [Henry Dumas] was you know, because Toni Morrison has a lot to do with the reprinting of Henry Dumas's work. So it must have been like around '74 [1974] or '75 [1975]. And so, you know, we're young writers up in New York and stuff. And I'll always remember that. That was my first time I met Toni Morrison. And also at that time, at that book party for Henry Dumas's work, if somebody had dropped a bomb on that building, it would wiped out African American culture. I mean, I mean anyone that you could think of--and see, me and Ahmos, we got there early. So as people came in, you know, we were like--oh, there was [HistoryMaker] Melvin Van Peebles, Sun Ra, [HistoryMaker] Angela Davis, Giovanni [HistoryMaker Nikki Giovanni]. I mean everybody was there, you know. And then what made it very memorable for me is that prior to me coming to New York, Dr. Henderson [Stephen E. Henderson] became fascinated, you know, by this poetry of this particular woman at that time. And I was reading the poetry, and I don't get it, you know. But Henderson said, "This is the real stuff." It's June Jordan. And so I remember at that book party, you know, I saw her from across the room. So I went across the room, and introduced myself, you know. And like that, then we were invited to Washington [D.C.] a little later after that. But it was the first time I had met her. And so, you know, what happened years later, Toni Morrison would be June's editor for the book, 'Things I do in the Dark,' [June Jordan]. And I remember us battling over that, because you know, Toni Morrison was the key editor at Random House [Random House Inc.; Penguin Random House]. But June's book, 'Things I do in the Dark,' if you look at the copy that came out, it had, you know, a dark cover, and you had this hand reaching out, you know, against this nude body, you know, 'Things I do in the Dark.' And that's what Random House did to her book. But what June meant about 'Things I do in the Dark,' was when she would wake up in the middle of the night to write. And you know how you grope for your glasses, like things I do in the dark? So it had that sort of searching, sort of--a completely different understandings. So, we sort of laughed at that. Story_ID: 640430 Speaker 1: Tell me about your own creative process. Because around this time as well, I mean, you were publishing. You were a young man (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, sure, yeah. Speaker 1: But already publishing books? Speaker 2: Sure. I was in my early twenties, yeah. Speaker 1: So, what was your creative process? Were you--? Speaker 2: Well, I was very, I was very blessed. Because, see what happened, I could write a poem--okay, this is my early work--and I would show it to Dr. Henderson [Stephen E. Henderson], see. So I had one of the best critics looking at some of my early work. So, that was always good. Speaker 1: Were you sort of groping around in the dark, or did it come to you? Speaker 2: No, I never groped around in the dark. I mean I think for me in my early work, I sort of avoided the militancy of the 1960s, you know, coming after the riots and stuff like that. And coming through Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] in the particular period I did, I would say, you know, my work--as I look back at it, it had that sort of Delfonics [The Delfonics]--you know, had sort of a Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] groove sound, you know. I had a much more lyrical--I mean I wrote a lot of love poems and stuff, and that was my real focus, you know, for my early work. Speaker 1: Were you following traditional poetic-- Speaker 2: Well, yeah. Speaker 1: --rhyme schemes and different patterns (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, yeah, I had a writer--I mean the first writer that I admired--you know, this is when I was in my dorm, and these are some of the books that, you know, you're introduced to. Norman Jordan, who was published by I think the Fillmore Press [ph.] from Cleveland [Ohio], I was impressed by him because he wrote short poems, and I wrote short poems when I first started out. And Baraka [Amiri Baraka], because you know, I just loved Baraka. And Baraka is still one of the best readers of this work, and I would see him on campus. Don Lee, because Lee, when you look at his early work before he became much more political-- Speaker 1: Before he became [HistoryMaker] Haki Madhubuti? Speaker 2: Before he became Haki Madhubuti, his work was very short, books like 'Think Black' [Haki R. Madhubuti], 'Black Pride' [Don L. Lee/Haki Madhubuti]. You know, I sort of liked that. You know, those were the type of poems that got you interested in poetry, and it sort of resonated with me. Story_ID: 640431 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Tell me about your publications in 1974. Speaker 2: Well, you know, in '74 [1974], you know, those were early works in terms of the poems I had; you know, poems that I had pretty much tried out at readings. Speaker 1: What were the names of your books? Speaker 2: Well, I think the only ones I had were like 'Andromeda' [E. Ethelbert Miller], and I had the 'Migrant Worker' [E. Ethelbert Miller]. Then we had 'Season of Hungry/Cry of Rain.' May Miller had a lot to do with that, because that was a Lotus Press [Broadside Lotus Press] book. And Lotus Press was started by Naomi Madgett [HistoryMaker Naomi Long Madgett]. You know, I have to give a lot of credit to Naomi, because that's where many of the Black Arts Movement writers of the late '60s [1960s] and early '70s [1970s] were published by Dudley Randall at Broadside Press, and even some of Haki [HistoryMaker Haki Madhubuti]. When you look at especially the late '70s [1970s] and early '80s [1980s], and especially into the '90s [1990s], a lot of those books are Lotus Press books, and so another generation gets that opportunity to be published. And I was able to get my collection 'Season of Hunger/Cry of Rain' published because Lotus Press had just did May Miller's book, and May Miller was a good friend of Naomi Madgett. And so she said, "Oh, yes, I know a young guy here in Washington, D.C." So she opened the door, you know, for the publication of that work. Story_ID: 640432 Speaker 1: So you were moving back and forth between being a creator, an artist, and being a critic? Speaker 2: Well, not really a critic, but more I would say--and I use the term now literary activist, because I was, I was an extension of Stephen Henderson [Stephen E. Henderson]. I was working with the Institute for Arts and Humanities [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] up to '74 [1974], and then my friend Ahmos Zu-Bolton took my job. So, I moved up as the director of the African American research center [African American Studies Resource Center, Howard University, Washington, D.C.]. Ahmos was my assistant, and he became active with the Institute for Arts and Humanities. And so, you know, all these people are coming together. And you know, I mean, some are deceased now. When you began to see who they were, it was just a tremendous amount of history, you know. Ahmos Zu-Bolton would start writing, you know, when he was in the service, and he would be influenced by a sergeant. There was a sergeant in the [U.S.] military who was very strict. She caught him not doing his work one evening, and gave him--because he was writing poems while he was in the service. And she said, "Oh, you know, my brother's a poet." And so she gave him, she would give him a copy of her brother's book, and her brother was Etheridge Knight. So, we began to see that Ahmos had this connection to Etheridge Knight. Speaker 1: Were you affected by what was going on outside of you? So, you were creating this art, black art, black poetry. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: But around you, you were living in Washington, D.C.-- Speaker 2: I was living in D.C., you know. And what happened, I was living in Washington, D.C., and I was still on Howard's [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] campus. And I was on Howard's campus at a time when all these other writers were taking place. And then I was key in terms of helping organize the writers' conferences, okay. So when you talk about, you know, writers talking about writing and putting together who's going to be on the panel, or what the panel should be about--I'm fortunate because I'm in the room. See, see, now what happens is some books come out, and we start talking about the Black Arts Movement. And I'll talk about some of these conferences at Howard. But they don't understand the battles that went behind the conference developing them. I'll give you a case in point. Maybe back in the early '80s [1980s], at maybe about the fifth African American writers' conference, there's a woman's panel, okay. Now that panel is key because Barbara Smith, okay, a noted black literary critic, is on campus. Now, Barbara Smith probably would never have gotten an invitation to even come to Howard if it wasn't for people like myself pushing for Barbara Smith to come. Story_ID: 640433 Speaker 1: So, when you're at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] at this time in the mid-to late-'70s [1970s] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, '70s [1970s] all the way into the late '80s [1980s], yeah. Speaker 1: --the feminist movement-- Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: --is really starting to take off. Speaker 2: Well, the feminist movement has taken off. But what happens is that it's something that--you look at how being a part of the nationalist camp is not central, okay. Keep in mind, I'm around [HistoryMaker] Haki Madhubuti, and these people are still working out their ways with women, okay. But for me, I get pulled into my arrangement with June Jordan, okay. So now I'm going out with June Jordan. I mean at that time Alice Walker was around the corner. I mean, and these women were just getting into, you know, writing for Ms. Magazine and things of that sort. So, at that time, I was one of the few men who was close to quote the feminists. I mean I saved the letter, because I edited it in an anthology, called 'Women Surviving Massacres and Men.' And I saved the letter from [HistoryMaker] Ishmael Reed at that time, "What are you, a massacre or a man?" (Laughter) But you know, here I was, back then putting out a woman's, a feminist anthology. You know it was small, but a feminist anthology. I mean I saved the letters that I got from Adrienne Rich, you know. I mean what happens is that it was groundbreaking for African American men to be doing those type of things. And then I was also interacting, especially with June, and with key feminists who were working out ideas, okay. So you take for example one of June's well-known poems, 'Poem About my Rights,' you know, which is a signature poem, you know. I mean, I edited that for her, you know. I mean I changed some of the ending lines. And so what happens is that you know, we had that type of relationship, you know. But that was the thing that, you know, when people talk about June, you know, I could say okay, here was the process of what she was going through. And, you know, I saved all the letters and documentation, so people will see that, you know, it was a lot of give and take in terms of her analyzing my work and me analyzing her work. Story_ID: 640434 Speaker 1: So these women, these strong, black women--June Jordan, Alice Walker, Toni Morrison, [HistoryMaker] Sonia Sanchez, Toni Cade Bambara--strong women in their writing, in their public persona. What were they like in their private world? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, that's a funny question to ask. Because, you know, my relationship with June is different from the others, because we did have a private world, you know. Speaker 1: Well, what about June? Speaker 2: Well, what happened, I think with June, I always look at June as being the key writer out of that period, because June was most political, you see. June was sort of really, you know, not part of the real group, you know. Speaker 1: So, what was she like as a person? Speaker 2: Oh, June was, June was phenomenal. I mean, you know, when you look at a person who was very passionate about issues, you know, she was. I remember, for example, and it's left a memory on me. We were at a conference in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. This was in the '80s [1980s], in the '80s [1980s]. And she was sharing on a, she was sharing a panel. There were a number of writers, well-known writers. I think Omar Tyree, Lawrence Cary [ph.], there were a whole bunch of them on that panel. And afterwards, what happened, we were leaving the auditorium and then June came up and she said, "Did you, did you notice anything?" You know, I really didn't, you know, nothing jumped out or anything, nothing jumped out at me. But she pointed out the fact that here were all of these writers, maybe about eight of them, and they said nothing political. Their work really wasn't connected to anything other than themselves, maybe getting published and this and that. Story_ID: 640435 Speaker 1: And I look at that today, 2007, because now we have things like (unclear), we have--there's a Wright Foundation [Hurston/Wright Foundation]. We are systematically--we've built institutions in which writers now can pass through, okay. We also at this particular time in 2007, we have African American writers who are changing the landscape, changing the landscape of American literature. And what are we saying? We have African American writers now, who around the country, are teaching creative writing. They're not teaching African American lit, they're teaching creative writing, okay. They have now moved into key creative writing programs where some of their students are white students, okay. But they have changed the landscape, okay. And what happened, when you bring the Kevin Youngs, the A. Van Jordans, the Terrance Hayes--these guys have mastered form. They mastered form, but when you look at the big picture, you know, they're Wynton Marsalis--see, they're Wynton Marsalis. Right, I mean, I love listening to Wynton Marsalis explain jazz. Now, where's it going, see? So, now what happens we have all these really great artists who have mastered the craft and technique, but it's not going anywhere, you see. They're not embracing some of the big issues. They're not Langston, just hopping on a boat and going somewhere, okay. They're not even dealing with the war, see, you know. Speaker 2: Now were these black writers dealing with the war [Vietnam War]? I mean at this point of course, the war is over with Vietnam. But (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well-- Speaker 2: --were they? Speaker 1: Well, when you look at African American literature and, see, we were studying it. We would see like, say for example, in the '70s [1970s] what takes place is what I call the feminization of African American literature. So if you want to say, okay, where is the real heartbeat, then you begin to look at your Gayl Jones, or you look at women writers who have been pretty much not been a key part of the Black Arts Movement other than maybe Sonia [HistoryMaker Sonia Sanchez] or Sarah Webster Fabio, you know, or a little bit of Jayne Cortez. But as the '70s [1970s] unfold, these African American women have moved to the point that they become really key. Now when we extend it, we begin to see something--a group of writers--that if we're not careful will get overlooked because of what happens with the commercialization of African American literature, and what we call the [HistoryMaker] Terry McMillian phenomenon. One thing that the women's movement does, it produces a body of writers, male, African American male writers, who really begin to develop fascinating women's images and characters, August Wilson's (unclear). I can go through Charles Johnson's [Charles R. Johnson] 'Faith And The Good Thing', some of Clarence Major's works. All of a sudden you begin to see some of these serious writers really writing work that you can see that they drew upon the women's movement. They're not going to produce a book like Richard Wright or Ralph Ellison, see, you know, with somebody being shoved down a shaft or something like that. They're going to develop these characters, and that's very, very important. But what happened, some of these books now are not even taught in the classroom because we have a book on the black woman novelist, see. So what happens is a number of other African American male writers, very good writers, whose work, like a McCluskey [John A. McCluskey, Jr.], or a Pate [Alexs Pate] or whatever, are not part of the curriculum, see. And then we immediately look up, and we're into like hip-hop, you know, and things of that sort. Story_ID: 640436 Speaker 1: These are the kinds of things that are going on in the black literary world, and you're in D.C [Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Seventies [1970s] and '80s [1980s], a lot is going on in the political landscape in D.C. politics. Are you aware of the [HistoryMaker] Marion Barrys and the [HistoryMaker] Sharon Pratt? Speaker 2: Sure. You know, when you look at, when you look at this city culturally, one thing that Mayor Barry's contribution to this city is--Marion Barry understood the arts. Marion Barry loved Sterling Brown [Sterling A. Brown]. And then we have to look at the Marion Barry that was governing this city for a significant part of the time when he was married to Effi Barry. And I would say Effi Barry was sort of like Joan Mondale, okay. Effi Barry was--knew the arts, you know. And I remember some of the early programs that we had in terms of the city honoring, you know, Sterling Brown was because Effi and Marion Barry was behind that, you know. Speaker 1: Well, you were also honored by Marion Barry a little bit later on. Speaker 2: I was honored by Marion Barry, you know. And then also thanks to people like Larry Neal, I was, you know, pulled into the D.C. Arts Commission [D.C. Commission on the Arts and Humanities], you see. So what happens is I begin to become part of this administration, and began to look at what was happening in terms of the city culturally, okay. Now for me, the city culture would have a real impact, as I move into the Adams Morgan [Washington, D.C.] neighborhood and begin to interact with friends of mine now who are from El Salvador and Nicaragua. And what happens is that, you know, they just change my whole focus. Because they know I'm a writer, and they know I'm a poet, and they extend an invitation for me to come to some of their programs and gatherings, and also church and other places in the city. And all of a sudden, now I'm standing on the stage looking at, you know, an audience of people who are all from El Salvador. And I have to have some poems that at least relates to them. So, consequently what happens, it began to change my writing and my work. Then I would begin also to become involved, you know, with the Institute for Policy Studies [Washington, D.C.]. I would meet the great poet and novelist, Ariel Dorfman. I would get pulled into that, and that would just move me into Chile. Speaker 1: So, Marion Barry and his wife were supportive-- Speaker 2: Oh, they supported me a lot (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) of your work in the arts? Speaker 2: They always supported the arts. Speaker 1: Do you remember one of those experiences with the Barry family? Any stories? Speaker 2: Well, I, I, I look at--I know at one time my wife, Denise [Denise King-Miller], at one time worked with Effi Barry at, I think she was working at Children's Hospital [Children's National Medical Center, Washington, D.C.] at that time. So I remember coming home, you know, and Effi Barry would be here. When everybody was looking for Effi Barry, she was here (laughter). And I got--and see, what happens, I also remember one thing that came out of that friendship is I helped organize, I was one of the persons that organized Family Day. And what happened is I was given like a tent, to organize. And so I organized, and invited Effi Barry to talk about raising a child in the public, you know, in the public view. It was fascinating, because that was what me and her were discussing. And you know, really, okay, we could have all this stuff going on in the news, but how do you raise your child, you see. And, you know, she was very eloquent, very open and stuff. And, you know, when you see people do that--you know, I always felt she had real class. I always, even today, you know, I look at Barry; Barry's a people person, you know. And I always tell people that when you look at many politicians, you can have your views about them. You could not say, okay, here's Marion Barry, and he stole from the people. You know, he may have, you know, personal problems, things like drugs and women and this type of thing, but basically, you know, those are, you know, those are, you know, human flaws and stuff. But he also guided a city through a time in which many cities were having problems in terms of financial, you know. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Story_ID: 640437 Speaker 1: Were you involved, you were involved in the race debate. Were you--and the Vietnam [Vietnam War] debate--were you involved in the debate here in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] over home rule and statehood (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know, what happens is I never was one of the individuals--and maybe because I'm not a Washingtonian. I never really got caught up in the whole battle for home rule, and things of that sort. Even though I was impressed by one person who--two people--actually Julius Hobson and Charles Cassell, who were key with Statehood Party [D.C. Statehood Green Party]. And I knew them as individuals that I really liked and admired, you know, especially Charles Cassell, whose father [Albert Cassell] built a lot of the buildings at Howard University [Washington, D.C.]. You know, I got to really know him. And statehood came through those individuals, you know. And so I knew it was very important to them, but it was never my issue. Speaker 1: You did know [HistoryMaker] Sharon Pratt? Speaker 2: Oh, sure. I mean I love Sharon Pratt. I felt that she probably couldn't have been, become a very good mayor, because she was inheriting a political machine. And so what happened was, you know, you talk about her wanting to sweep, you know, people out. So, you really can't do that. And so it wasn't until you saw the Control Board [District of Columbia Financial Control Board] come in. I mean the Control Board really--what the Control Board does is dismantle the machine and then Williams [Anthony A. Williams] pretty much inherits that. Speaker 1: When did you meet her? Speaker 2: I met Kelly when she was running for, well, she was running for mayor. I met her on the campus of UDC [University of the District of Columbia, Washington, D.C.], you know, and invited her to be my guest on my radio show. I still maintain that I probably have the best interview with her, an interview that probably no one will ever have. Because we did, we hit it off after the first interview, okay. And I said, wow, you know. I called her back maybe several weeks later, a month later or something like that. And I said, "I want to do another interview her, and this time, we're not going to talk about politics," right. And what happened was very interesting. The first question I asked her, I said, "If you were, you know, writing your memoir, where would you begin? You know, where you begin your life?" And she immediately said, "Oh, you know, I'd begin in high school," you know. So she started talking about being at Roosevelt High School [Theodore Roosevelt High School, Washington, D.C.]. And she was telling me--but I was listening to her talk, and I realized she was being a politician. "Well, you know, when you're young," this and that. So, you know how you slip somebody a mickey, you know. What happened, right at the beginning of this interview, when I heard she was going to do this sort of--still be the politician--I asked her a question, which was, "Your mother [Mildred Petticord Pratt] died at a very young age, you were very young. Do you have any memories of her?" And she went to talk, and she stopped and then she said, "I don't have any memories of my mother?" That's when our interview began, and she became a completely different person. And then what happened, I was asking her about would she get remarried? I was asking her about whether the city should have any input in terms of who she dates? I mean, all of these types of things. I, I, I was able through radio to take you into her house, you know. I was asking her these questions about her cooking and stuff like that, even though someone thought it was very sexist. You wouldn't ask somebody--but what people missed--I was trying to really get a sense of who she was. And she was very, very open. I don't think you would ever find a politician now--when you go back and look at how they were answering those questions, they wouldn't answer questions that freely. Speaker 1: Did you, did you help her with image at all? Did you help her--? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, you know, I was highly recommended. You know, what happened is, Sharon Pratt like doesn't wear glasses; you know, she wears contacts. If she's tired--you know, people get tired when they're running for office, and what happens is that they'll get puffy under their eyes. But what I liked about her--well, first, she's got these cool glasses. It reminded me of Gloria Steinem, who had these sort of like slightly aviator glasses. And what happened is it also was a thing in terms of--I guess it's like Marshall McLuhan--about do men wink or make passes at women who wear glasses? You know, I mean, this whole thing. But I really feel that if you go back--in fact, if you look at pictures of her now, she's just--you know, she's a very attractive woman, you know. In fact, what was it, was it her fiftieth birthday? I was at Dupont Circle [Washington, D.C.] with a friend of mine. (Unclear) And I looked at the woman, and she wasn't mayor anymore. But she was walking with like two other friends. She was all dressed up. So I ran out the restaurant, and I said, "Sharon." I said, "Boy, you look so good, you know (laughter)." And she was just basically like--you know, because it was her birthday and stuff. But I always liked her in terms of, you know, as a politician, and as a woman that you realize what the office means, okay. But the funny thing about it was her campaign manager. And I was at a function, and so this is funny. The guy says, "That's right, you don't remember me." Her campaign manager had given me, he had given me--he wrote poems and plays. And I said, do you mean this guy was writing bad poems, and now is directing someone's campaign? (Laughter) I thought it was so funny. Speaker 1: And did she start wearing those glasses? Speaker 2: Yeah, she wore those glasses. She's still got those glasses (laughter). Story_ID: 640438 Speaker 1: So, you mentioned the woman who became your first wife, Michelle Calhoun [Michelle Calhoun Greene] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 1: What year did you get married, and when did you get divorced? Speaker 2: I think we got married around 19--we got married in '73 [1973]. Because I remember what happened, we were living together on 16th Street. And Mr. Calhoun said, "If you're not going to get married, you've got to go back home," you know (laughter). I remember that. He was going to give us a little ultimatum, because we were living together. And-- Speaker 1: That was early, for living together. Speaker 2: Yeah, it was, for living together. But, you know, I think it's so important, living together, because you really get a sense in terms of being around the other person and stuff like that, you know. I would really strongly advocate that, even for like my own children [Jasmine Simone Miller Morgan and Nyere Gibran Miller]. You know, get to know somebody before you bring the legal framework in. So, that, that, was you know, a key moment in our lives, you know. And I learned a lot from her, you know. When I look back at Mickey, she was one woman that was--god, could she read. I mean she was like the first speed reader. I remember, I heard she read 'The Godfather' [Mario Puzo] in one day; you know, she read 'The Godfather' in one day. I remember that. You know, she, you know, she got into that book, and I mean she read 'The Godfather' in one day. She would devour like science fiction books and stuff like that. And then also she was, when I look back, she was one of the first like real, you know, feminists, you know. And so, the whole thing in terms of being an independent woman, and stuff like that. I really learned a lot of that from her, and then just her reading habits, you know. And, and just a lot of fun. Speaker 1: And you remained married for a couple of years? Speaker 2: A couple of years. And then, you know, we're still very good friends. I think the thing is that she's probably closer to my wife, Denise [Denise King-Miller], because they have developed a nice friendship. Speaker 1: Did you have kids with Michelle? Speaker 2: No, no. I have, my children are from Denise. Story_ID: 640439 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So tell me, where did you meet Denise [Denise King-Miller], and when? Speaker 2: (Laughter) I met--Denise came up to my job, she had a poem. She had a poem, 'Black Rose' [ph.] a 'Black Rose' poem. She had a poem, she'd written some poems. So, she showed it to me. And by coincidence, the week before, another woman had showed up some poems saying black rose and stuff. So, I remember writing to Denise and sharing the information. Because it was some poem she had written, and I think she might have been following up or whatever. But then she called me. She called me--a few months went by and she called me up and said she was getting ready to have a little party or something at her house, you know, and would I like to come. She was out in like Maryland or somewhere. I said, "I don't drive." She said, "Oh, I'll come get you," and stuff like that. I said, okay. So she came and got me, you know, and we ate and we made love, and we moved in the next day (laughter). Basically it was that, you know. And I really, like--I think Denise--when I look at Denise King-Miller, I probably would not be who I am today, you know. And I say that when I look at how each person affects your life, you know. I look at Michelle [Michelle Calhoun Greene], and I felt that that got me into writing poetry. But Denise definitely toughened me up. You know, I call her like Houdini, you know, float like a butterfly and sting like a bee. You're going to have to toughen up, I mean, because she's tough. Speaker 1: Tell me about your kids. When were they born, and what are their names? Speaker 2: Oh, my daughter was born in 1982. Her name is Jasmine-Simone Miller [Jasmine-Simone Miller Morgan], and she's a combination of my wife and me, you know. She liked, she had the name Jasmine, and I was a Nina Simone fan like my brother [Richard Miller]. My brother never got to see Nina Simone, (laughter) I always remember that. Every time she would cancel or something like that, you know. And he loved Nina Simone, and so that's where my daughter gets her name. And then my son's name--my son was born in '87 [1987], and his name is Nyere-Gibran Miller. And I combined--I was fortunate in '74 [1974], at the sixth Pan-African conference in Tanzania, I met Julius Nyerere, the first president I would meet. And oh, god, you know, I mean, you would never think this guy's a head of a country, you know, just the grace of this beautiful man. And to really, you know, really get a chance to meet him and touch him and stuff like that, it was just amazing. So, that left an impression. And so, you know how people were giving their kids African names. I sort of shortened Nyerere's name and then I, once again, was influenced by my brother, who loved the poetry of the Lebanese writer, Khalil Gibran. So, I combined the two. 'Cause at one time I thought about even naming my son after my brother who was (unclear). But I said you want to give the children their own identity. Story_ID: 640440 Speaker 1: You had mentioned the Pan-African conference. Why was that so moving? Speaker 2: Oh, it was moving because what happened is that, well, for me, it was my first time going to Africa. Also, it was a very historical occasion, in terms of the American delegation. I was traveling with many of the prominent African American leaders--Owusu Sadauki, Amiri Baraka, Haki [HistoryMaker Haki Madhubuti]--all these people were there. Speaker 1: What year is this? Speaker 2: This is 1974. And so, you know, you realize this is history, you know. And me and my friends from Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], you know, we're filming and documenting it. So really when you look at what we have in our possession, we have probably the only African American Pan-African Conference that's documented, you see. And so-- Speaker 1: You were filming? Speaker 2: We were filming, and doing video and audio and doing interviews on the side and stuff. And we really was able to really capture, you know, that history. And then to meet people was very, very important. Speaker 1: What was a big turning point experience for you at that conference? Can you think of a story? Speaker 2: Oh, sure. I can think of Queen Mother Moore, who must have talked all the way across the Atlantic [Atlantic Ocean]. (Laughter) She was non-stop. I was so amazed by that, you know. You know, Queen Mother Moore, she was always like this--I never knew what she did. She was like [HistoryMaker] Dorothy Height to me; I never knew what they did, you know. They were very--somebody always makes a reference to them. But Queen Mother Moore, she always was dressed in white. She must have been a Garveyite. But she talked to this old guy all the way to Africa. (Laughter) I always remember that. And then I remember also a group of those little Negroes snuck off to Uganda, because Idi Amin gave them dual citizenship (laughter). 'The Last King of Scotland' (laughter). But, so I remember things like that. Speaker 1: Was it a homecoming for you, a spiritual experience? Speaker 2: Well, it was a thing where I understood the Du Bois' [W.E.B. Du Bois] double conscious a little better. Because I remember we touched down in Kenya first, you know. People ran down and touched the ground and kissed the Africans, all the Pan-Africans, right. And then a little bit later, you know, after the conference, flying back to New York [New York], people were like, "Whew, I'm so happy I'm back in New York," you know (laughter). You sort of see, you know, these individuals torn between what's home? Is it Africa, or is it New York City? And so I thought that was really a wakeup thing for me. And then out of that, I wrote this long poem, 'The Land of Smiles and the Land of No Smiles' [E. Ethelbert Miller]. And I would never have written that unless I had had that experience of going to Africa and seeing the continent and then coming back, this whole thing of difference, which many of us African Americans wrestle with. Story_ID: 640441 Speaker 1: How many books have you published? Speaker 2: I don't know (laughter). I mean, I have published maybe twelve or thirteen books I guess. Each book is different. I think the two that stand out is definitely 'In Search of Color Everywhere' [ed. E. Ethelbert Miller], you know, which is a book that I was invited to do, you know, thanks to people like [HistoryMaker] Marie Brown, where I tried to put together the book I didn't have. So when you--I talk about my past, not growing up with African American literature and things of that sort. I wanted the one book, okay. And so basically what I did was 'In Search of Color Everywhere,' is I tried to get everybody's signature poem, okay. I also was conscious of putting together a book that would be a family book. So consequently, I was very much concerned about language, okay. So even, like you take someone like Baraka [Amiri Baraka], there's only maybe like one short Baraka poem in the book. And the reason for that, is the poems I like by Baraka, they were too long or they had profanity or things of that sort, and they just didn't fit. And also, what I did, and I learned this from people like Quincy Troupe and others actually did 'Giant Talk' ['Giant Talk: An Anthology of Third World Writings,' Quincy Troupe and Rainer Schulte], which I liked. What I did with 'In Search of Color Everywhere,' is I laid it out, as opposed to an anthology that's in chronological order and things of that sort. I laid it out by themes, and then what happened within each section, the poems follow each other. So you can, you know, you can read it like you would, you know, a short story or a novel. So each poem follows the next. Speaker 1: What year was that book published? Speaker 2: That might have been 1994. So, that's a special book for me. Then the other is my memoir, 'Fathering Words' ['Fathering Words: The Making of an African American Writer,' E. Ethelbert Miller], which I think is basically a gift. You know, I would not have been able to produce a book like that if it had not been, you know, if my brother [Richard Miller] and my father [Egberto Miller] had not died. I felt that here was a book where I tried to keep their memory alive, and I was able to do it with that book. Speaker 1: So, what were some of the memories you included in that collection? Speaker 2: You mean in terms of like-- Speaker 1: Your father. Speaker 2: In the memoir? Well, one is trying to find out like who we were. I think that I began to sort of hint at we're here, we're African American men who did not fulfill their dreams, you know. So I really was looking at that. I was really looking at, you know, black men who are not able to articulate certain things. Or in the case of my brother, giving up his love of being in the monastery, you know, sacrificing certain things (simultaneous). Story_ID: 640442 Speaker 1: Where did your brother [Richard Miller] end up? Speaker 2: Well, my brother, when he came out of the monastery [Abbey of the Genesee, Piffard, New York] he wound up working for Bankers Trust. He hated his job, you know. I mean, it was just the whole thing. You know, you're looking at people who are broken in spirit. And so when I wanted to become a writer, okay, and got a chance to go off to college, my brother was like, "Get as far away, you know, from home and your mother [Enid Marshall Miller] and stuff like that, so you will not be manipulated and you'll have a life." And that was basically one of the gifts. You know, my brother just, you know, he loved our parents and stuff, but he saw what had happened to him. And he really wanted to make sure it didn't happen to me. And so when I look at, you know, some of the things that I've been fortunate to do, definitely some of the places, you know, I've been fortunate to go to, I always feel my brother's presence. I mean just a couple of years ago I was in Jerusalem. And I said, oh, my brother would love to be here, you know. Speaker 1: Well, when did your brother pass away? Speaker 2: My brother died in like in the early '80s [1980s], you know. He's been deceased for a long time now. Speaker 1: And your father [Egberto Miller]? Speaker 2: My father--my brother died first. And I remember that very clearly, because I was at work and my mother called me, and she was just hysterical. And you know, I thought something had happened in the house, so I left immediately. I thought something had happened to my father, and my mother being there and not knowing what to do. And then when she said that my brother was dead, I, you know, I thought somebody had killed him or something like that. And I just, I, I, didn't know what to think. And my brother died in his sleep. He said goodbye to everybody and split, basically. But what happened is I remember, you know, you get that type of news, and I'm at work. Students asking for the reserved articles. And I just basically like told Miss Rose [ph.] I was leaving. And I walked from Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] back over to Fuller Street in Adams Morgan [Washington, D.C.]. And basically I go out to the apartment, and I went in the bedroom and I got in bed and pulled the covers over my head, you know. It's sort of like that thing where you think it's a bad dream and you wake up and everything will be better again; you know, the monster won't get you, or something like that. And then going home, you really begin to see the transformation in your life and in your world. It's completely upside down, because I come back to New York [New York] to bury my brother, actually not to bury my brother, but to be at my brother's funeral. And as soon as I arrive there, my mother and father turn to me, you know, and my sister [Marie Miller Hunter], you know. All of a sudden, you know, I was making the decisions. You know, I had to go pick out the coffin, I had to go do this, I had to write the eulogy, I had to do all these things, and get ready the stuff for the printer. And what happens is that your family looks at you, "Well, you're the writer. Like, write something." You know, you're using those skills, and at the same time, you're the baby of the family. And so what happens, you know, your older brother is supposed to be there. And so, everything's out of whack. I remember going into the bathroom. I'd been up there probably two or three days working on the funeral and everything. And I'd just aged, you know. I could just--I'd just aged, you know. My eyes and everything was never the same after that. You know, I just aged. The other thing, which is very, very sad, and this is what I saw with my father. My father, you know, is just not an educated individual, I mean. And here it is he had to go and he had to take money out of the bank and stuff like that. He didn't know; he'd never taken that much money out of the bank. And we get to the bank and I'm trying to help him fill out the forms, and the woman just throws the form at him, "Oh, just sign it," you know. And it was very sad, you know, because he's dealing with grief, you know. And for me, I never, I'd never experienced that. And I remember sitting in the limo and looking at my father, and my father was just sitting in the limo and he said, "Just go on." Story_ID: 640443 Speaker 1: And what happened, you know, when I write about it, my brother [Richard Miller] was brilliant. Speaker 2: He was? Speaker 1: Brilliant. My brother spoke fluent Latin, you know. He spoke Spanish, he spoke several languages. For my father [Egberto Miller], who didn't have an education, you know, I still maintain that my brother was probably one of the finest organists in New York City [New York, New York], you know. He had one dream he'd play the organ at St. John's the Divine [Cathedral of St. John the Divine, New York, New York], which he wound up doing. I mean that was one of things that probably pulled him into the monastery--the Gregorian chants and the music and stuff. You know, he just loved it. You know, he played Bach [Johann Sebastian Bach], and you know, he was phenomenal. I still got tapes, you know, he was just a phenomenal pianist. And you know, my father never was able to read music, you know. My brother tried to help him, you know, he had a different time with it. But he was always like stunned in terms of just how smart my brother was. And that was when I realized, you know, things I didn't know. This was his first boy, you know; this was his first born, you know. And I think that what happens is that he was like--you can't take that away from him, you know. And that's why my brother's death, that was just a hurt and pain that I just can imagine. My mother [Enid Marshall Miller] would probably have my sister [Marie Miller Hunter], see, so my mother is a lot to my sister. She wanted to become a nurse; my sister is a nurse, you know. So, I see that. But for me, at my brother's funeral, I really saw how outside of the family I was, you know. And I remember speaking at the funeral. I looked at my family, and they were just looking at me. And I really saw this distance, you know. And I feel very close to my brother's presence. I feel some of the things I've been able to do, you know, it's sort of like a guiding spirit. You know, my cat Reby, I feel it's an extension of my brother, because my brother loved cats. I would never have had a cat, but Reby like waits for me and stuff. And I feel that, and I'm able to put that into my writing. Story_ID: 640444 Speaker 1: How do you transliterate those profound experiences into word? Speaker 2: Well, what happens, the first thing is you don't think about the words. You think about how it affects you in terms of who you are--your actions in terms of who you are as a person. I always felt, for example, you should be able to know someone's a poet before they even write or recite a poem, or write a poem. There should be something there that makes them that sensitive to be able to interpret, you know, or comment on the human condition. And I feel that's what we should do; our ability to be visionary, our ability to put things into words. You know, I think the biggest challenge I remember might have been 9/11 [September 11, 2001] when I was out in west Pennsylvania with my friend, a writer, Dinty Moore [Dinty W. Moore]. And you know, we'd go into the university where his office was, and you know, and we'd look at that first image of the towers collapsing and what have you. And as I would write later, I said, "We were speechless, but we're writers, so we can't remain speechless." I said, "We have to begin to find the metaphors, and make some sense out of this. We have to speak for those people who can't speak, for those who have lost loved ones, and for those who are fearful. We have to begin to talk about that and write about that." Speaker 1: So, how do you fill the silence? Alice Walker says she turns off the lights and sits in the dark (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, you know, how you deal with the silence is you battle against forgetting, you see. You know, you become a writer of witness, you see. And so what happens--once--and Baldwin [James Baldwin] talked about that, you know. Being a witness means that you have to testify, you have to speak the truth; it means a certain amount of courage, okay. But that's what you look for in a writer, okay. And what happens, we live in a time where you go out in certain communities, you can't find a witness; nobody wants to say anything. "I didn't see anything," you know. And so what happens is that you also deal with, okay, what would you want to forget? You see, that's why the Vietnam Memorial [Vietnam Veterans Memorial, Washington, D.C.] is such a fascinating memorial. Because if you look at the Vietnam Memorial from the air, you know, that wall is actually a wound in the earth. And you know, like if you have any scar, it heals, but it leaves a mark, and you remember it. So, you forget; you want to forget, but there's also remembering. See, this is why if we're at the state department [U.S. Department of State] and we're dealing with the Iraq War, well, you're not going to knock down the great mosques of Samarra [Iraq] and think people are going to get over it, see. You can't even go in there and say let's rebuild the mosque, because people want to say like six hundred or seven hundred years from now, "Oh, no, this is what happened to this mosque. You know, the Shiites and Sunnis blew this up." And so what happens is, "No, we're not rebuilding it, because this is evidence hundreds of years from now." You see, I don't think Condoleezza [Condoleezza Rice] gets that, you know. But that's the thing that writers function as in society, in terms of memory. And as individuals, we have to balance that. Story_ID: 640445 Speaker 1: What are some of the events that have been catalysts for you? What have you witnessed? You mentioned 9/11 [September 11, 2001]. But is there a list of turning point moments that inspired your writing? Speaker 2: I think, well, for me the turning point has to be the death of my brother [Richard Miller]; that has to be a turning point in my life. The death of my father [Egberto Miller] has to be a key turning point. And I say this in terms of not just for myself, but definitely for African American men. Because when--my father asked to be cremated. That was the first time I ever--I didn't even know that was happening. And when they laid my father's little box into the earth next to my brother, I was like, you know, I cannot stand here in this cemetery and accept that my father is reduced down to a box; I have to do something. When I look at my memoir ['Fathering Words: The Making of an African American Writer,' E. Ethelbert Miller] now, which has probably since 2000 grown in terms of its success and acceptance, where it's taught in a number of schools, the fact that I know today people are reading about my father, I feel very blessed. When somebody comes up and says, "Oh, you know, there was this particular passage," I feel, you know, that that's what I was here for, to be a witness to that, okay. Now, what happens, I'm able to take that type of loss now. And I understand when I see pictures coming out of Iraq or Bosnia, I understand what happens when somebody loses a loved one. And what are we saying? This was an interview, this was right when Gore [Al Gore] was running for president, in The New Yorker. This guy was on an airplane and he did an interview with Gore. And it was really--the guy said he was fascinated by his way of thinking. But Gore was talking about race relations, and differences. He said until--you know, like, say the Palestinians and Israelis conflict. When two people are able to reach that level of realizing that your pain is my pain, like, I understand how you're feeling; I know that you're suffering. Until people reach that level, you can't move to any sort of dialogue, you see, because you haven't made--there are levels and steps, you see. So if we went out here right now and try to reach people who've lost their loved ones, they're not at a point--they're human; they're not at a point of forgiveness. I think in the last several years, what I've witnessed to was the tragedy in Pennsylvania in the Amish community, you know, where the people who lost their loved ones wound up with the family of the person who had murdered their kids with food, you know, forgiveness. That took a level of spiritual--you know, that's just not something that you talk about. But here you are, you're going to show up at somebody's door, you know, sharing and things of that sort, and a sense of compassion. Well, that's the type of thing where you really see the strength of that community. And, and, and so when you witness that--and I just say that because, you know, one can immediately go to some big event or something like that. But when you see how people respond to these small tragedies, I think it's key. Just like in this area. I look at Len Bias' mother [Lonise Bias], you know, who lost two--you know, she lost two sons, you know, to the whole violence and stuff. Not one, but two, okay. I say that because, you know, I'm a father, you know, and I'm trying to get a sense in terms of how do you raise young people, you know. But I feel, you know, I'm blessed in terms of my kids have grown up very--they're wonderful, you know. But, you know, I realize that's not the case in many households. So, I'm a witness to that. And so if I can go out and write poems or instruct people in terms of this way--in terms of raising their families and things of sort--that's really important-- Story_ID: 640446 Speaker 1: So at this stage of your life, and you're still young, but when you look back what are your greatest literary contributions? Speaker 2: Well, you know, I won't say (unclear), you know, I'm working on this other memoir called 'The 5th Inning' [E. Ethelbert Miller], and I look at the fact that my friend, Saki Sudiaki [ph.] just died. He would have been fifty-nine next month. I look at how August Wilson died when he was just sixty. I look at how many people don't get out of their fifties, you see. You know, and we can't assume that we have another ten, twenty, or whatever years. And so what happens now, I'm operating as if, you know, things are coming to an end, okay. So over the last, say, for example this year especially, I really have systematically been giving, you know, my boxes of documents to various places for archival purposes so that people can begin to look at the record. Like for example, right now all of the correspondence that June Jordan wrote to me from like the early '70s [1970s] up to the '80s [1980s], all of that you can go to the University of Minnesota [University of Minnesota Twin Cities, Minneapolis, Minnesota] and it's all, the catalogue is there. You know, I'm doing that systematically with different groups. So, I'm preparing for the future. Speaker 1: So which of your works, then, would you like people in the future to say, you know-- Speaker 2: Well, I would go back. I would hope that 'In Search of Color Everywhere' [E. Ethelbert Miller], because it's not just my work, but it's the entire tradition, you know. You know, I always would like, you know, maybe somebody would come along and reissue that book because it is out of print. It was a book of the month selection. I saw for example when I was in Oklahoma, you know, when the book was out, this guy had come to the bookstore, and I was promoting another book. He said, "Oh, you--," you know, he bought his book, and it was all worn, you know. And he thought he would never meet me. And I, I was so happy, I signed his book. Because, you know, I read from this book every night to my daughter [Jasmine-Simone Miller Morgan], you know. And I saw it and I said, wow, you know, this is how I had conceptualized this book being used. And here's a guy now, and maybe, you know, his life is changed. His daughter, you look up, and after so many years she's reading poems, you know, to her child. And that's one way you set things in motion. And so, I feel very happy for that. Story_ID: 640447 Speaker 1: I look at my career, and if I had to summarize my career it probably would begin--people would probably not begin with my career in terms of my work. People would probably look at the fact that I was a literary activist, which I feel is a term I introduced. And also when I look at from the 1970s up to the present, 1970 up to the present, I don't think there's any African American writer I have not influenced, in terms of having something to do with their career. And they may not know it, see, but I sat on a panel and they got one of them big grants. Speaker 2: Like who, name some of these. Speaker 1: Well, I'll tell you people who would have to--if you brought them in they would say Dolores Kendrick, okay. Dolores Kendrick is poet laureate, okay. I helped create the position of poet laureate. I stepped aside after Sterling Brown's [Sterling A. Brown] people were pretty much calling me the poet laureate. And I felt it was an order there. Dolores Kendrick was my senior writer. Also, she was one of those writers who I felt that because of the Black Arts Movement, she was overlooked. Dolores Kendrick was writing poetry in the early '60s [1960s], okay. She wasn't caught up in the demonstrations and things of that sort. You know, she was one of those writers who came through the '50s [1950s], and was very serious about her writing, you know. She, she, she's up at Exeter Academy [Phillips Exeter Academy, Exeter, New Hampshire], okay. And what happens is that I felt because she was from a Washingtonian family, here was a person who should be poet laureate, okay. And you would say before that, Dolores Kendrick was unknown, okay. She's done a phenomenal job as a poet laureate, and what has happened is it's given her the visibility where people now have gone back and have recognized her career. So I mean as a poet, her ending her career in a little obituary, that's not going to happen, you know. To do that, okay, I think is very important. I mean, to take people whose careers were not given the attention and do that is very important. Speaker 2: So, who else? Speaker 1: Oh, I look at A. Van Jordan, who I think is a fascinating writer. Pretty much he will tell you that I was the one who gave him his first readings. And let's say, Reuben Jackson. Wanda Coleman, I was helping her out. The list goes on. Speaker 2: Have you seen Debbie Allen since the Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] days? Speaker 1: No, I haven't seen a lot of people from the Howard days. But I do tell you, that because I've stayed at Howard since 1970--you know, in some working capacity since like 1973--when I take a lot of joy in is that many of my friends' children have come through, you know. And their fathers and say look Ethelbert [HistoryMaker E. Ethelbert Miller] up, because I'm still on the campus. So, that would be it. I would say right now since I'm still alive, the highest honor would probably be what's going to be finished in another week or so. And that's one of my poems being engraved in Dupont Circle [Washington, D.C.], next to a poem by Walt Whitman. So I feel that if I'm in Whitman's company and he's engraved, and I'm engraved in the ground, I get a bench, you know, around my poem. I feel that I, I've done some stuff. And I have another permanent poem installation going in front of the (unclear) station. And I say that for being a writer and moving to Washington, D.C., and to have my work preserved in that way was something that I feel is humbling, and it's also an honor. You know, so I'm very happy with that. So, if I can live a few more years and get through the fifth inning and maybe, you know, get to the seventh and eighth, I'll feel blessed. Story_ID: 640448 Speaker 1: You mentioned a couple of your poems will be permanently-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --inscribed here in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right. Speaker 1: Do you remember one of those poems, or one of your favorite poems from your own collection? Speaker 2: Well, you know, the poems that are inscribed were the poems that, you know, you're invited to write. And so, the ones in Dupont Circle [Washington, D.C.] are for, you know, people who are caretakers of people who died from AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome]. And so, you know, that was a very important poem for me because two writers who were my colleagues here, was one was Essex Hemphill, and also Chasen Gaver, you know, who was key. You know, and Essex had a lot to do with his career, because when I met him he was a student at the University of Maryland [University of Maryland, College Park, College Park, Maryland]. So most of all his first readings, I sponsored. You know, I was always talking about how important he was going to be, you know, so when I see him in the 'Norton Anthology' ['The Norton Anthology of African American Literature'], I say yes, you know. Speaker 1: Can you give us a couple of lines from one of your poems? Speaker 2: You know, one poem--you know, my mind is very bad. But there's one poem that is a very short poem. And when I was overseas, when I was in Saudi Arabia they found it very interesting. It's very short. It's untitled. It says, "We're all black poets at night." And what happens is that when we talk about, you know, personality, you know, it's like saying, "Okay, in the darkness, we're all black, you know." And I feel that in a sense when you go around the world, you know, and the issues of race and culture begins to hopefully--you know, sometimes divide people, you're able to say, no, this is what keeps us connected. Story_ID: 640449 Speaker 1: So, which places around the world have you been? And where have you seen--? Speaker 2: Well, places that I've been--I mean my first time out of the United States, which was a real culture shock--you know, here I am, I leave the states and I wind up in the Soviet Union [Russia] at that time. But that was real culture shock. Because you grow up, you know, this is the other super power, and you realize it might be military power. But they didn't have anything else, but-- Speaker 1: What was that experience like? Speaker 2: Well, that was really interesting. You know, we went up into Lithuania. And you know, that's when you walk down the street and the bus goes by and all the heads turn. And then I remember little kids were running around after us, and talking. And we asked our guide what they were saying. He said, "Oh, they're just little kids." And then finally he told us, he said, "Oh, they're looking for your tails." I said, okay, you know. They had not seen black people. I mean, when you go at that time and you're in Moscow [Russia] and then Leningrad [Soviet Union; Saint Petersburg, Russia], you see African students. But when you get up into certain places, you know, you're not going to see black people. And then the thing that really hit me was being there and going past places that people were rebuilding from World War II [WWII]. And you realize, you know, how long it takes for countries and cities to actually rebuild. So, you know, I take something like that and I look at D.C. [Washington, D.C.]. When you walk on U Street, well, it's taken from 1968 to 2007, in the nation's capital, for U Street to come back. How long is it going to take Baghdad [Iraq] or Beirut [Lebanon]? You know what I'm saying, you know. So you learn that. But I've been fortunate to go to Nicaragua, to go to Cuba, to go to Bahrain (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How were you received in the Latin American countries in Central America? Speaker 2: I remember in Cuba, I wrote a poem about this experience when I was in Cuba. And I walked past this woman and I said, I said something to her. She had a child, and I said hello to her. And she turned back and she spoke to me in English. I said, "Oh, you speak English." She said, "Of course. And where are you from?" I said, "I'm from the United States." She said, "Oh, an American darky," (laughter), and she kept walking. I always remember that. You know, she said, "Where are you from?" And she said, "Oh, an American darky," you know. And it was so, it was very condescending to a point. But one thing that happened is at that time, you know, somebody might think you're from Angola or from somewhere else. And that's also--like I remember being in Yemen, and the last place somebody will think you're from is from the states, you know. So, you know, being in countries like that, being in Iraq, you know, I remember being in Iraq in the early '80s. This is when Iraq was at war with Iran. In fact, I have a Saddam Hussein watch. I wonder how much I can get for that, you know (laughter). Yeah, I've been very fortunate to be in places like Israel-- Speaker 1: And were you delivering poetry? Speaker 2: Yeah. You know, in some places, you know, I was invited because I was a writer. I went to Cuba because I was invited by that time by Johnnetta Cole [Johnnetta B. Cole], who was working with the Venceremos Brigade. So she knew I was videotaping stuff, so I was invited to go down to Cuba and shoot that. And you know, just being around a lot of places. I've been very fortunate. You know, I'm getting ready to go back to Norway. I'm going to go to Oslo [Norway], which is a fascinating area. Story_ID: 640450 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Some of your experiences, especially when you were talking about Russia remind me of Nella Larsen talking about going to Europe for the first time (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure, sure. It's just like, you know, that's what I looked at last year when I went to Norway. And I'd heard, I'd read about, you know, Norway and Switzerland. I was really in a place where you really didn't feel the racial stuff. And I guess, you know, Norway is still a little distance from like England now, and France, because of the numbers. But I went to places outside of Oslo [Norway], and it was just like--there was no--you know, you--you don't walk in and like, "Well, who are you?" And I remember I went to see this Ibsen [Henrik Ibsen] play. I forget where we were; it was way outside of Oslo. And it was like, you know, an outdoor play. So it must have been like maybe five or six thousand people, and I'm like the only black guy there, you know. (Laughter) And so I'm trying to understand the play. And everybody had such a, we had such a great time, you know. And so the thing that, you know--and I was assuming there was not a lot of places you could go and have that sense of feeling. And that was a new feeling for me, you know. And then also talking to other black people who, for me, coming out in the '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s], it's hard for me, wherever I am, to walk past a black person and not nod or something. And like, you know, I'm like, "Well, why are you nodding to me? Who are you, you know?" I remember I got on the elevator in Oslo and I asked this woman like, "Where are you from?" "Where am I from?" You know, she was African. "What do you mean, where am I from? I'm from Norway." You know, and so this whole thing of culture and race becomes very interesting. And the more experience that you have, you're able to put things in a certain context. And that's a challenge I think we face as we move to the future. Speaker 1: So it brought you to that thought, that we're all black after dark? Speaker 2: Yeah, and, and, and, you know, to go places. I like going out to Utah. I like going out to places where there aren't a lot of black people, and you really--like Wyoming. And then you realize that there's certain things that you have in common with people, you know. That's what I like about parts of like West Virginia or something like that, where working class people, you know, will really sit down--and it's just like you're storytelling; you're like family, you know. It's like, you know, this is what you do, you know. And so that's something that you don't want to lose. I think the country doesn't want to lose that. Story_ID: 640451 Speaker 1: So, your greatest sort of international experience, the most profound one? Speaker 2: Probably being in Baghdad [Iraq] when the missiles were coming in (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What year? Speaker 2: This is, this is early '80s [1980s]. This was when the war between Tehran [Iran] and, you know, the battle of cities [sic. war of the cities]. Tehran was launching missiles at Baghdad, and Baghdad was launching missiles at Tehran. And what happened is I never experienced that. See, I grew up with World War II [WWII] movies (makes airplane sound). And you know, you go downstairs and the bomber drops the bomb, and then you come out, you know, and you're like, oh, something like that. I grew up on that. The missile thing, I never got used to that. You know, we're sitting here, and a missile will take you out (laughter). I mean it's like there's no warning, you know. And I mean and the last missile, I remember I was in the hotel, and it was like in the movie where you get thrown across the room. And I'm like, "What's this, you know?" And-- Speaker 1: Were you able to write about that experience? Speaker 2: No, not write about it. What happens is that you start to say to yourself, "Oh, it's not your day to die. It's not going to say 'Born in the Bronx [New York], and died in Baghdad.'" And that's the only way that you can get by. If not, you'll go crazy, you know. And I'll tell you what I'm interested in right now, which I have not seen on the news that I really find fascinating. When I was in Baghdad, there were these segments of Baghdad which were mostly Sudanese, you know, like workers. Like, if you went out to Babylon, the Sudanese were rebuilding Babylon. And I'm just very curious, in the midst of all the car bombings, whether that little community is intact or whether, like, middle class Iraqis are now hiring Sudanese to do their shopping. (Laughter) You know, like they're not going to go to the market, to miss being bombed. So all of a sudden they send like a Sudanese maid or whatever. But what happened, I was just really curious as a reporter. You know, you say, okay, here's the war that's been going on. How is it affecting the Sudanese community? Because it's a lot of them that were there. And every now and then, you see like a really dark--when they rush somebody to the hospital, you see like a really black person, you know, like, "Wait a minute, who's this guy?" And I just would think that it would be very interesting, because here are people who are caught between these, you know, Sunnis and Shiites. But what are they, you know? The same way like when I was in Israel, the thing I was really impressed by, and it's interesting, is that almost all of the police are like Ethiopian. You know, like, the police are like Ethiopian. Or like the guards who are the cafes and stuff to check people coming in, they're Ethiopians, you know. I guess because everybody else was in, you know, the national service or something, and like these other jobs opened up. But you see all of these Ethiopians, you know, in these jobs as, you know, a lower value of people or whatever. And it would be interesting stories written from their perspective, you see. Story_ID: 640452 Speaker 1: So have you moved beyond at this stage in your life? Are you becoming more of a universal voice in your writing (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I've always been a person in terms of a literary activist and writer, I've always been looking at ways to bridge communities. I mean, that's what I do. I feel very blessed that I can, you know, I look at a program I've done in this area of the city, and I can bring people who are Arabs, you know, together with people who are Israelis. Not too many people can do that, you know. And I sort of have to navigate, you know, through different communities. But I feel that at the end of the day, some of the work that I'm doing is very successful. I had some people say, "Ethelbert [HistoryMaker E. Ethelbert Miller], if you weren't here, I wouldn't be here," you know. And that's been a real challenge in terms of, you know, working with different communities and come back and look at your own. Speaker 1: What is your legacy in the world of African American literary studies when it comes to, say, the black aesthetic? Speaker 2: Well, I think that I feel to some extent is what I've tried to do is be true to my mentors, to be true to people like Stephen Henderson [Stephen E. Henderson], and to make sure that some of the things I learned from them are not forgotten, you know, how to--you know, and the key thing is this. And this is, that what we do in terms of African American culture is like a sacred trust, you know--that if we just see it as a job, you know, then we shouldn't be involved in it. This is a thing that you have to be very passionate about. The other thing we have to look at is African American culture, what it means to be black. It's radical, it's radical. It changes things. The mere presence of it, you know. Jazz changes the world, you know what I mean. Blues. We have to realize that what we do--You see, when you see Venus Williams, you know, in the little stands and clubs, you know, they're saying, "I don't like this type of tennis. You know, where's the finesse?" (Makes sounds) And what happens, they're changing tennis, you see. Just like, you know, I turn on the TV and there's this black guy--I don't know the guy, this black guy's doing the announcement for NASCAR [National Association for Stock Car Auto Racing] (laughter). I say, "Yeah, NASCAR's next," (laughter). You know, and what happens, you see black people changing it, you know. Tiger Woods is changing golf. This is what we do. And so when you look at African American poems and African American novels, you have to realize that we don't get credit for it, but we wind up changing, see, the novel. August Wilson has changed the stage. It's not just O'Neil [Eugene O'Neill]. August Wilson has changed the stage, okay, so we really have to recognize it. So it means now if you are coming up and are going to be an American playwright, August Wilson has changed--you gotta study that. Story_ID: 640453 Speaker 1: Your advice to the young people out there? Speaker 2: Well, my advice to the young people is not to think that they're young, you know. I always look at the fact that people like Fidel Castro was taking over Cuba when he was very young. Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was leading the Montgomery Bus Boycott when he was very, very, young. So, it's not like, "I'm twenty-five, what am I going to do?" (Laughter) You know, what happened is that you realize it's not about age, you see, it's not about age. It is the question in terms of what do you do with this time that you are here, see? If you wake up--and I said this at a commencement speech for a high school this year--every day you make history; that's what you do, you make history. You ain't waiting for anybody, you know, you make history. And what happens is we know that when we look at young people--just recently young people in Greensboro [North Carolina], they're not asking their mothers to sit down at a counter; they do it, you see. They, they go down South and they change--those are young people. When you look around the world, most people who are working, they're young people, see. So it's not like somebody, "Well, when I get to be thirty-five I'll think about running for--," No, they do it now, you know. And that's what we have in this city. I mean, Fenty [Adrian Fenty] is in his thirties. And when you go to his little bullpen, half of those people who run the city government are in diapers, okay. And what happens, some of them are going to make some mistakes, but some of them are going to get this experience and they're going to do something with it, you see. Why? Because you've given them responsibility that they never had, and they strive to do a good job. That's all that you can ask, okay. But the key thing--I tell the young people, yeah, you have to--first of all, you have to work hard. And this whole thing about, you know, getting by. You know, you see when you're teaching these classes, they don't even want to do their assignment. They don't want to read. No, you have to read, you see. You have to do this. A guy I was talking earlier today--a young woman, I sort of mentor her, and she said he wanted her to do an outline for a show. She didn't do no outline. She just wanted to throw some sissies in a room and turn the camera on. That's not a show. She said, "But I only have two weeks." I said, "It don't matter that you just have two weeks. This is not a show." She said, "Ethelbert [HistoryMaker E. Ethelbert Miller], I knew you were going to say--," "Yeah, you knew I was going to say that, see." And she was going to be young and get by. No, okay. And so, all you ask for is a sort of discipline, that when you look at somebody like Wynton Marsalis--discipline, okay. You know, and what happens if you are a young person and you approach whatever you do on that level like how somebody wants to train to be a jazz musician--that amount of dedication and time, then you will excel, see. And then the key thing is making decisions, see. Now, some young people think they can't make decisions because they're young. They're a lot of old people, Negroes especially, who are in a position and don't want to make a decision, oh, because they're just Negroes, you see. Now, I can find a number of young people who I think can replace Clarence Thomas on the [U.S.] Supreme Court. You can, too. Why? Because what happens, it's not about age, but about making decisions, and good decisions. Speaker 1: So discipline? Speaker 2: Discipline and the understanding, you know, in terms of how you're making history. Ignore the whole thing about age, that's the first thing. Because if you think you're too young--forget that, okay. There's no age requirement for success, there just isn't. Story_ID: 640454 Speaker 1: And should they find a role model or a mentor like you? Speaker 2: No. I throw out--I think that role models and mentors are the wrong terms. One term that you don't hear a lot about and it needs to be brought back into our vocabulary, is apprenticeship, see. Now you know what an apprenticeship is. When you show up, sometimes there's only room for one, okay. And what happens with apprenticeship, you wind up really working on something with a person who is doing something. What happens, you might be building a wall together, or doing--that's your apprenticeship, you see. This is why in certain places, certain skills are dying out, see. You can't find anybody to do that type of work. So just like you'd go down here on U Street and there'd be an old black man who was doing shoe repair, okay. Nobody wants to be an apprenticeship to him. You know, they don't want no shoe repair apprenticeship, you see. So what happens, nobody knows how to make shoes, see. It's like saying Booker T. Washington was right. But what happens? If you're talking about apprenticeship, you're talking a real close now relationship with the person, because you're doing the same thing together, see. It's not like I'm over here. No, we are doing--and what happens, I can do what? I can correct you and take your hand and say, "No, you don't do it this way," you see. It's a whole different relationship as opposed to the role model who's all the way over there, and something like that. No, it's the apprenticeship. And what happens, if you--come on, you saw what's his name, with the little show ['The Apprentice']--what happens is you're competing, and there's only room for one. Remember when the black guy won, and Trump [President Donald John Trump] says, "Well, you know, I could have hired both of you?" And he said, "Well, would you hire--do you think both--," He said, "No, it's for one person. It's the apprenticeship, for one." All of a sudden you're going to change the rules? No, it's one. That's why everybody was competing. Now, what would that do? That would mean that the quality would go up, you see, we just raised the standard. Story_ID: 640455 Speaker 1: See, the problem with 'American Idol' is 'American Idol' wants everybody to win. And what happens? We will never, ever, hear a great voice on 'American Idol,' see. You will hear a mediocre voice. You will hear a voice that when you first listen to it you say, "I can go down in my basement right now and sing and be on 'American Idol.'" You're right, that's what they want you to believe in. So, it's not going to be any great voice, see. You'll never hear it. They sell you mediocrity and they sell you a dream that you can be on 'American Idol.' And that's why--you're crying and--they can't sing, you see. You can't put them up against Aretha [Aretha Franklin]. And then another thing, if you really want to be subtle--and I saw this on the bus. I'm going to end on this note. I was on the bus, and these were girls, you know, about fifteen. And they were singing, you know, and they really couldn't sing. And then when I looked at them (unclear), I say I realized what happened. They've never probably even been to church, so they never had to sing with a choir behind them. They never had to fill up. They're singing like little singers down in the basement and stuff, with one of them little iPods or something. They never had to belt out--like, you know, you got to sing, girl. You better sing or you sit down. And they never had that, and they want to be singing. They didn't even come out of the church. They didn't even come out of the church. So they can't sing, okay. And what happens, we accept mediocrity in music. Like, who's this other woman from--Brianna, from Barbados, from the West Indies? Speaker 2: Rihanna. Speaker 1: (Laughter) I said, "Boy, do I need an umbrella to close my ears?" I mean what happened, it's just really bad stuff, it's really bad. And I'm like, how can you sign off on this? How can somebody say this is a summer song? No, it's awful, you see. And what happens--I'm going full circle. If you don't make the critical statements--if you don't begin to say that, see, then what happens is everything falls apart, see. And we know as a collective group things are wrong, but we don't want to say that. See, we don't want to have somebody hurt. Or, we want everybody to play. See, that's why soccer is so, is a game that's taking off now. See, everybody can touch the ball, you see. Everybody can play. No. I don't want everybody to touch the ball unless you can play, you see. And what happens is that someone can look at the influence of soccer in the United States as being very interesting, as opposed to baseball being the American pastime, which is more individuals. You know, it's just you out there. You strike out and go home, or pitch a strike. But the individual holds that ball, okay. And that has something to do with American methodology. That's everybody; that's Babe Ruth, or whatever. And what happens it's a whole different tally, that when you use it, it can be very uplifting for people to excel. You see, you have to push that. I mean that's the drive. And what happens, sometimes you don't make it, but you know, you pick yourself up and you strive hard if you want to succeed. Remember the joke about King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]? He's a new minister in Montgomery [Alabama], and I think it's E.D. Nixon making a call to organize a march, you know, the protests. And what happens is that he calls Martin Luther King up, and King says, "Well, I don't know." Because he was new in town, a new minister, "I don't know." So E.D. said, "I'll call you back." So he calls King back later on. And he said, "Well, are you going to be in with the boycott?" He said, "Yeah, I think I'll go along with it." And Nixon said, "Yeah, that's good, because the meeting's at your church." (Laughter) You see, just moving him along, you see. And that's, that's needed in terms of, okay, I mean he was reluctant, but people saw something in him; not about age or anything. You know, "We put it in your church." Now that's an elder knowing how to mentor. Story_ID: 640456 Speaker 1: So, if you had to sum it up? Speaker 2: If I had to sum it up, I wouldn't sum it up. Because I think that just like history is unfolding and you want to get the most of history--what happens is that you want to make sure that--this is the way I live my life--that my son [Nyere-Gibran Miller] and daughter [Jasmine-Simone Miller Morgan] will make contributions that will build on things I do. I tell my son and daughter, "I have not left you the money and things of that sort, but I have left you a network, you know, of things that hopefully you will value, and you'll be able to go places and a door will open up because I've given you that." And I-- Speaker 1: And you built the Institute [Institute for the Arts and Humanities] at Howard? Speaker 2: Well, I won't say that, because I think what I've done, I feel I'm an extension of Howard University [Washington, D.C.], okay. I'm not in the so--the mucka mucks, see, I'm not there. I'm sort of tied to Howard, I'm a little barnacle, or something like that. I'm very critical of the university. I never stopped that, that's why I stayed there. Now, we're supposed to get a new president to come in. Now, we're blogging. I decided I would just go for it. So I said, hey, I can run this place on a poem and a prayer, you know (laughter). And I outlined my plan, you know. Because what happens is that it's not my age or things of that sort, it's about making decisions, see. And I've seen people not wanting to do that, see. Now what happens, if you were to become the new president of Howard University, you will have to fire some people. I can name eighteen right now, see. Like I tell somebody, if you don't do chemo, if you don't chemo and get these little cells here--the university's not going anywhere. Story_ID: 640457 Speaker 1: So at Howard University [Washington, D.C.]--and this will be my last question (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 1: Your legacy, what would you like it to be at Howard? Speaker 2: Well, I, I, I, I feel that if Howard got around to giving me an honorary degree, I'd be shocked, you know. But I had told my mother [Enid Marshall Miller] that that would be something that I--while she's still living, that I would like to obtain. (Unclear) says that people feel that your life meant something, you see. And when I look at Howard--I'll just give you this one example of where I feel I've made a difference. You can walk into Howard University right now, and go in the Moorland-Spingarn Center [Moorland-Spingarn Research Center, Washington, D.C.]. And in there--somebody might not think it's that great a contribution, but Kwame Nkrumah's letter are there, his stuff is there. I arranged that, you know, through a lot of opposition, okay. And the university could have even had more, okay. The university could have had the copyright to every book by Kwame Nkrumah, but they missed the opportunity, see. And I became so angry at the university around that, that I said, "Oh, no, I see why people couldn't make decisions," see. I see the potential of the institution, but I'm very critical if this institution is going to survive or live up to its greatness. That me as a poet, okay, I have to be a witness, okay. And there have been times in the past when at the university there was a crisis, and I was one of the few people quoted in The Post [The Washington Post]. People would say, "I have no comment." Well, I have a comment, see. And, you know, the comment I heard before I even got to Howard--and this is during the takeover years--it was a documentary, 'The Color is Black' [ph]. And in 'The Color is Black,' they interviewed individuals who went to Howard. A famous writer, Claude Brown, who did 'Manchild in the Promised Land,' in the documentary they asked Claude Brown about Howard University. And he said, it was a very prophetic statement. He said, "I don't know about Howard. Well, maybe they should, you know, maybe if Howard don't come around, maybe they should burn it down to the ground and plant cotton, and at least it will have some economical value." (Laughter) I always remembered that. And I think he's right. And he was saying this, that in the midst of--if it doesn't come around--and what are we talking about? We're talking about Howard realizing or understanding that it's going to be, or can be, a black university, okay, a black university. They wrestle with that, see. But there's a need for that to happen. It goes back to Andrew Billingsley's dreams, and things of that sort. And not global, but specifically, a black university that resonates that way. Now, to some extent it does that, but it's not really the thing that we really highlight, because we don't want to exclude so and so. But I feel now that the term black is that embracing, you see. And you will have somebody from--just like in England--somebody from Pakistan or India, not afraid to come to a black university, because they realize it doesn't exclude, but it is universal, you see. And maybe we need to have some little space programs, so people will know when they look out into space, it's all black (laughter). Speaker 1: Colonel Gregory [HistoryMaker Colonel Frederick Drew Gregory] said a similar thing. He says from outer space, you can't see ethnicity on the earth (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah. So maybe that's happening. He's been up there, I haven't (laughter). Story_ID: 640458 Speaker 1: Okay, this picture was taken in my backyard by my friend, Mark Cohen, who has a cable TV show called 'The Takoma Coffee House' [The Coffee House]. And we needed, we took that picture because I think he needed it for his show. But I used it for a number of promotional pieces. Speaker 2: And what year is this around? Speaker 1: This would probably be in the 2000s, like 2002 or 2003, something like that. Speaker 2: This is a classic picture. These are the three women, on bicycles. The woman on the right is my mom, Enid Miller [Enid Marshall Miller]. The woman in the middle is my Aunt Winnie [Winifred Marshall]. And then the woman on the left is my Aunt Evelyn [Evelyn Marshall]. Evelyn, Winnie, and Enid, three sisters. As my father [Egberto Miller] said, "The three stooges." (Laughter). Late teens, I guess, wow. Speaker 1: This here is my father. And I don't really have a lot of pictures of my father. And this picture was actually taken by the photographer, Harlee Little. And this picture was taken on Capitol Hill [Washington, D.C.] at one of my book parties. And what happened is Harley had taken this picture of my father. And then when my father died, I was looking for a good photo for the obituary to put in the funeral program, and so I got a copy of this picture from Harley that I could use. Because I didn't have good-- Speaker 2: Yeah, here they are. Yes, definitely I wasn't born yet, because there's a seven year difference and a five year difference-- Speaker 1: Who's that on the picture? Speaker 2: On the left is my sister, Marie [Marie Miller Hunter], and on the right is my brother Richard [Richard Miller]. And I wasn't born then. You can see how their heads are shaped. It's just us two. Speaker 1: And that's in the '40s [1940s]? Speaker 2: No, that's in the '50s [1950s]. This would probably be-- Speaker 1: But you weren't born? Speaker 2: Oh, I could be born and I'm not there, you know. Yeah, maybe it's '49 [1949] or maybe it's '50 [1950]. Maybe everybody's at the hospital and-- Speaker 1: This is me, and this is in the '50s [1950s]. And this is probably somewhere in the South Bronx [Bronx, New York]. I remember growing up with these little hats that had the little, they covered your ears that way. And also, you can see here in this picture that this is a very good baby carriage, you know, where you really feel protected. You know, I really don't like those strollers that don't give the child any support. But this is-- Speaker 2: This is from 1952? Speaker 1: Yeah, this must be like '52 [1952]. Speaker 2: You know, I don't know where this is; I don't know what year this is. But this is, I like this picture in terms of this is my and my mother. As you can see, I'm looking in the opposite direction (laughter). But I like it in terms of, you know, being the baby of the family. In this picture I feel it's nice to have my mother all to myself. It's not one of those things where she's in the middle with my brother and sister around her. Speaker 1: That looks like a young, I look like a young Wynton Marsalis. Maybe I'm a member of the Modern Jazz Quartet (laughter). But you know, this is very interesting. Because if you look at--this is '56 [1956], '57 [1957], so you know, I'm between six and seven years old. And what's interesting here, you know, we were in school, and I wasn't in a private school, but you know, you had to wear your tie, you know. And as you can see here, the collar thing and the little kerchief, man, you know. Now I wonder, if we could really look carefully, I wouldn't be surprised that if in that kerchief I had my initials, you know, like E.M. or something like that on there. That's a nice picture. Speaker 2: Oh, now let's look at this here. Look at this picture. This picture was taken in the St. Mary's Projects [St. Mary's Park Houses, Bronx, New York]. And I'm trying to think whether this was taken when we're living on the seventh floor or the seventeenth floor. I look like a dork in this picture, you know, with the glasses. You notice the drink of choice sort of looks like a Coca-Cola. My brother's on the left, and there's my mother, as you can see, definitely looking surprised and shocked. Since we're not dressed up--in fact if you look closely--oh, I look--I think I'm wearing a shirt that might even say Columbus High School [Christopher Columbus High School, Bronx, New York] on it. So that's dating it, you know. And that table, which my mother still sits at to this day, was actually I think a wedding gift. But it's interesting. I would assume, looking at this picture, that maybe my sister took this picture. Because see, we're not dressed up, so it's obvious no family--and the only other person that would be there would be my father, and he's not-- Speaker 1: Ethelbert Miller [HistoryMaker E. Ethelbert Miller] in front of Cook Hall, Howard University [Washington, D.C.], 1972. It's a very hot day. In fact, I remember being out there. My graduation was on the football field. Vernon Jordan [HistoryMaker Vernon E. Jordan, Jr.] was the speaker. And I remember when Vernon Jordan said in his speech, "What do black people want?" We said, "Some shade" (laughter). I remember that clearly. Yeah, that's me in front of Cook Hall dorm after graduation, holding my degree. And what would happen shortly after this picture, I would take that degree and I would hand it to my mother, and she would say, "It's finished." She had wanted to put one child through college, and that was her dream. And so, that diploma sits in her bedroom in Manhattan [New York, New York]. Speaker 2: Look at these eyes. Now, if you look closely at this picture, this here is on--they surprised me on this day. This is actually E. Ethelbert Miller Day, and they surprised me. All of these people snuck in and surprised me. And there is June, June Jordan. Oh, let me look. It's June Jordan on the left. That might be Eric Abrahamson in the middle. That's probably--let me picked this up. This is Eric Abrahamson, who actually ran for lieutenant governor of South Dakota just one or two years ago (laughter). Barbara Burman is on the right side here. Barbara Berman and I would form a publishing company together called Anemone Press, and we published together. In fact, the person who used to hang out with us when we were all young, Taylor Branch, we were all hanging out. And then let me see carefully--oh, that's Kervin Simms. That's Kervin. Kervin now is a big-time lawyer who would be behind some of these bad movies like 'Drop Squad.' (Laughter) Oh man, that must be '78 [1978]. Speaker 1: You know what's crazy. You have my two literary mentors together right next to each other. Speaker 2: (Unclear) and Houston Baker [Houston A. Baker, Jr.] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) My mother and my father. Speaker 2: Which means I must have--I know her. Because I think I wrote Gloria Gail's [ph.] book blurb, and then-- Speaker 1: --Nineteen eighty-two [1982]. That's Denise King-Miller, and that is Rankin Chapel [Andrew Rankin Memorial Chapel] on the campus of Howard University. That's where we got married. We look stunning. Speaker 2: What year is it? Speaker 1: That's 1982, September. Yeah, man. And see what happened here, we had been living together. So what happens is I say okay, we're living together so we walk into the church together. So that's how we did it. We walked into 'When a Man Loves a Woman' that's what we came into the church on. Speaker 2: Oh, look at that Donny Hathaway hat. Oh, man. Oh, this is me, this is interesting. This is me, and this probably might be '89 [1989]. This is my house, my apartment, on Rhode Island Avenue. And I'm holding in my hand what I just won at the Mayor's Arts Award. Look at those plastic bookcases, that's from my wife's apartment (laughter). And above my head is a devil mask from South America (laughter). Whoa, And I was saving buttons back at that time. Story_ID: 640459 Speaker 1: This is a nice family picture. I like this. This might have been taken out in Iowa, I think in Iowa. Because I think my wife's [Denise King-Miller] family wanted to make a family picture. So we had a picture, like the whole family, and then we posed for this one. And I think my daughter [Jasmine-Simone Miller Morgan] there is, okay, she was born in '82 [1982], so this must be like 1984. That's a nice, that's a nice family picture with the first-born, very cute kid. Speaker 2: Okay, next. Speaker 1: Okay. This here is my wife's fortieth birthday celebration. And my wife is in the blue, in the corner on the right, talking to I think the artist Pat Buck [Patricia Buck]. And the three people here--myself on the left, and I'm talking to my cousin Kenny Elan [Kenneth Elan] in the middle. Kenny lives in Florida now. And I'm talking to my father-in-law, Robert King [Robert King, Sr.]. This is all at a hotel in Maryland, and a special birthday celebration of my wife's birthday. And it's one of the few times where like all, both of our families, you know, came together. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Okay, this is me speaking at a place I've spoken at quite a number of times, The Folger Shakespeare Library [Washington, D.C.]. And over the years I have coordinated quite a number of programs at Folger Shakespeare Library--my own readings and I've read there. I don't know exactly what the occasion this was at, in terms of what ceremony. Speaker 1: Around what year is this picture? Speaker 2: Let's see, it had to be in the 1990s. I can tell by the suit-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and I was still wearing the beard. Speaker 1: Oh, I like this picture. I was crying here, I was crying. This is at the Jewish synagogue. This is my daughter graduating from Edmund Burke School [Washington, D.C.], this is her finishing up high school. And I was the commencement speaker for her graduation, and so I was talking about her and then I really got choked up. Because I realized, you know, my daughter is leaving the house. And then she came up and gave me a hug and kiss. You know, when I look at special moments, I think that is definitely a special moment in my life. Speaker 2: All right, one more. Speaker 1: Let's see. Oh, okay, yeah. There we all are, the Millers. We don't have a theme song yet. But this was taken when my daughter had graduated from high school. And we had a, you know, celebration at the house. My wife Denise is on the left. Jasmine is in the middle, and that's me there in middle, and my son Nyere [Nyere-Gibran Miller]. And that was very nice, it's in front of the house. And it's amazing how everybody's grown so much now. Speaker 2: Okay. And this here, an approximate date? Speaker 1: Oh, this would be well probably--okay, my daughter was born in '87 [1987]. And she probably, in this picture she must be seventeen or eighteen. So if we do the math, it must be in the 1990s--..