 Story_ID: 475823 Speaker 1: I'm Denise Gines, the interviewer for The HistoryMakers. Scott Stearns is the videographer. Would you please state your name and spell it for me? Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Myra McDaniel, M-Y-R-A, M-C, capital D-A-N-I-E-L. Speaker 1: Your date of birth? Speaker 2: December the 13th, 1932. Speaker 1: And the place of birth? Speaker 2: Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Speaker 1: And what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm an attorney. Speaker 1: And what is the location of this interview? Speaker 2: Austin, Texas (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. And today's date? Speaker 2: February the 6th, 2007. Story_ID: 475824 Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask you what I call five People magazine-ish type questions. Okay? Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: What is your favorite color? Speaker 2: Black (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Chocolate (laughter). Dark chocolate. Speaker 1: And what about your favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Probably Christmas, Speaker 1: And when you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Although spring is a close second. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what about when you go on vacation? Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: No, I don't. Speaker 1: Okay. And what about a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: I don't think I have one, but I'm sure my children [Diane McDaniel Rhodes and Reuben McDaniel III] will tell you I have one, I just don't know what it is (laughter). Speaker 1: What it is. Okay. Story_ID: 475825 Speaker 1: Let's start by talking about your mother. Tell me her name and when she was born and where she was born. Speaker 2: Her name was Eva Lucinda Yores Atwell [Eva Yores Atwell]. Could you stop for a minute (cough)? Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION) Speaker 2: Wait, wait, one second. Speaker 1: Oh, I'm sorry. Speaker 2: And you need to spell that for me. Speaker 1: Okay. Eva, E-V-A, her married name was Yores, Y-O-R-E-S, and her maiden name--her married name was Atwell, A-T-W-E-L-L. Speaker 2: And you said Lucinda? Speaker 1: Yes, her name as a child was Eva Lucinda Yores. Speaker 2: Okay. Spell Lucinda for me, please. Speaker 1: L-U-C-I-N-D-A. Speaker 2: Okay. All right. And where was she born? Speaker 1: She was born in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. Speaker 2: And do you know when? Speaker 1: Yes. She was born October the 18th, 1909. Speaker 2: Okay. Now, tell me her mother and father's name. Speaker 1: Her mother's name was Mary Virginia Moore Yores [Mary Moore Yores]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: M-A-R-Y, Virginia, V-I-R-G-I-N-I-A, Moore, M-O-O-R-E, Yores, Y-O-R-E-S. Speaker 2: Okay. And her father was? Speaker 1: Edward Yores. Speaker 2: Okay. Do you know when they were born? Speaker 1: They were both born in 1877. Speaker 2: Okay. In Philadelphia? Speaker 1: Can you hand me that thing where I can tell you where they were born. Speaker 2: That's fine. Speaker 1: No, neither one of them was born in Philadelphia. My grandfather was born in Reedsville, South Carolina [sic. Reidville, South Carolina], and my grandmother was born in Winchester, Virginia. Speaker 2: Okay. Are there any stories about your grandmother and grandfather? Did you know them? Speaker 1: I knew both of them, yes. One of my favorite stories about my grandfather, my grandfather worked for the railroad, he was the secretary for the union, and so he always wore a suit to work; and whenever he knew we were going to be there, he would bring us gingerbread, and so the gingerbread would be smashed flat inside this wax paper, and we just loved it. We would peel the wax paper off and eat the gingerbread, just--that was just great. He was not a man of many words, but he always said that I was his little Eleanor, speaking of Eleanor Roosevelt, and that I would be somebody when I grew up, and so those are the kind of memories I have of my grandfather. Speaker 2: Okay. What about your grandmother? Speaker 1: My grandmother was one of my favorite people in the world when I was growing up 'til her death; and, you know, I can remember so many things about her, but I can't remember things that my cousins remember, things like she jumped rope. Well, the grandmother I knew never jumped rope on the one hand. On the other hand, she was always a very good listener and was able to respond to me in such a way that she could change the way I was thinking about something without actually telling me what I was thinking was wrong, so I can remember once when I was a young teenager, I had been to church, and the minister had been--before communion was just telling us how unworthy all of us were to take communion, and so I came home ranting and raving that my serving was not unworthy, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera, because, you know, when you're thirteen, you really haven't done much actually, that you regret (laughter). And so she listened to me very quietly for a while, and she just said very calmly, "Well, you know, before I take communion, this is the little prayer that I say," so that she gave me time to vent and she gave me a much more appropriate approach to taking communion than the one that I was using without ever saying, you know, "Well, at your age, how would you know?" or any of the kinds of things that one might say. Speaker 2: Did your grandparents own the property that they lived on? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: And where did they live, together? Speaker 1: In Philadelphia. Speaker 2: They lived in Philadelphia. Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: Okay. And what about their education? Speaker 1: I don't know anything about my grandmother's education. I know my grandfather graduated from college somewhere in South Carolina. I don't know where. Speaker 2: (Unclear). Okay. Speaker 1: That he--he had gotten a degree to teach and then decided shortly after that that he didn't want to do that, and so he did a number of different things before he came to Philadelphia. Story_ID: 475826 Speaker 1: Tell me about your mother [Eva Yores Atwell]. Speaker 2: Okay. My mother was a very shy person who would lay down her life for her children. I mean, anything that she thought we could possibly need, if she could provide it, she did. On the other hand, she was always very concerned that somehow we were going to get too big for our britches and we were going to become conceited, so she always wanted to kind of temper anything she was doing with some, you know, little saying to kind of keep you humble (laughter). Speaker 1: Did she share any stories about growing up? Speaker 2: She did, a couple, sure, yeah, and I can't think of any of them-- Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay. Speaker 2: --at the moment. She had two sisters, and so the three of them did things together. I know when they were quite young, the teenage group, they were in plays at church. I know they did that. I know they used to watch the Sousa [John Philip Sousa] band practice on Broad Street [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. Apparently, the band would stop along the way, they used to practice there, and they would go over to watch that. So those are kinds of--oh, yes, then there's the story about her aunt, who was my grandmother's [Mary Moore Yores] sister's child--if I got that right--no, she was my grandmother's aunt, and then so she made a--my--she was my grandmother's aunt, but any rate, she lived to be 112, apparently, but she would go and say--she would say to the children, "Well, you know, we need some candy," and she would sit on the front step, and she'd just kind of sit there and smile, and little kids would kind of dance around and sooner or later a gentleman would walk down the street and slip something in her hand, and say, "There you are, ma'am," you know, and she would sent the children down the street to buy candy with it (laughter). That was one of the stories of her childhood that she told. But she was very active in church, my mother was very active in church, she led several kind of youth groups, those kind of things. Speaker 1: What church did they belong to? Speaker 2: They belonged to the Baptist church, Zion Baptist. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. What stories can you tell about your personal relationship with your mother? What is a lesson or a couple lessons that were learned from her for you? Speaker 2: My mother and I were such different people. It was--my personality is so very different from her personality. She was always very concerned somehow that my feelings were gonna be hurt, because she--she had lived in a very middle-class family until the Depression [Great Depression], so when I say middle-class, I mean, you know, they had somebody who came in and helped clean, all those kind of things. So during the Depression, obviously, some of those things disappeared, and she was very, very concerned that I was going to feel somehow that I was--I was poor and that I would be embarrassed by that. Of course, I never was, but she always was (laughter), and so one of the lessons I learned from her was it really doesn't matter what you have, that that's not important. It's who you are that matters. And certainly I learned of that from her in a very interesting kind of way, okay (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. And what about your mother's education? Speaker 2: She finished high school. Speaker 1: Okay. And what-- Speaker 2: And refused to go any further (laughter). Speaker 1: So did she work outside the home? Speaker 2: After my father [Toronto Atwell, Jr.]--my parents separated when I was twelve, and after that she did work and did a couple different things. For the longest period of time, she was a clerk in the liquor stores. In Pennsylvania [Pennsylvania], the liquor stores are regulated by the state, so she actually worked for the state. Story_ID: 475827 Speaker 1: Because your [maternal] grandparents [Mary Moore Yores and Edward Yores] were born in 1877, was there any talk about their parents being in slavery? Speaker 2: My grandfather's father was in slavery. His mother was not. My grandmother's mother and sister came to the United States from France, and they were dancers and interpreters and they were not slaves, and her mother married a blacksmith who was not a slave, either, so-- Speaker 1: Okay. All right. And we haven't talked about your father [Toronto Atwell, Jr.] yet. You said your father's father, your father's--well, your grandfather's father was a slave? Is that right? Speaker 2: Yes, uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. We'll get to them. All right. So your grandmother, do you know any stories about your grandmother? You said her mother was a dancer and an interpreter. Do you know any stories about that? Speaker 2: I don't know any stories about them other than they came from France, right outside of Paris, apparently. Speaker 1: Okay. Were they black or white? Speaker 2: They were black. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My grandfather's mother was white. Speaker 1: Grandfather on your mother's [Eva Yores Atwell] side or your father's side? Speaker 2: On my mother's side. Speaker 1: Okay. Grandfather's mother. Story_ID: 475828 Speaker 1: Let's go to your father's side of the family. Speaker 2: Okay. I don't know as much about them as I do about my mother's [Eva Yores Atwell] side of the family (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 2: --'cause they were separated. My father's name was Toronto Canada Atwell, Jr. [Toronto Atwell, Jr.], Toronto, T-O-R-O-N-T-O, Canada, C-A-N-A-D-A, Atwell, A-T-W-E-L-L, Jr. And he was born in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] also. Speaker 1: Do you know when? Speaker 2: January the 4th, 1911. Speaker 1: All right. And his mother and father's name? Speaker 2: His mother's name was Pearl Johnson Atwell, P-E-A-R-L, J-O-H-N-S-O-N, A-T-W-E-L-L. And his father's name was Toronto Canada Atwell [Toronto Atwell, Sr.]. Speaker 1: Senior. Speaker 2: Senior. Yes. Speaker 1: And do you know any information about them? Speaker 2: Hold on just a second. Can you hand me that piece of paper down there? I have written where they were from, so I do have that, because my mother, bless her heart, wrote all that down before she died. Speaker 1: That was great, because there are so many people don't have that information. Speaker 2: Well (laughter). Speaker 1: Well, really, they can't even go back as far as their grandparents. Speaker 2: I know. Well, we're actually, my grandfather--my grandmother's father's niece, she has two nieces who are still alive that we went to see last summer. Okay. My grand--all righty. I'm ready. Speaker 1: Okay. Wait one second. Let me put my microphone on. Okay. Wait one second. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, you got it. Speaker 1: My grandfather was born in Chester, Pennsylvania, and my grandmother was born in Wilmington, Delaware. Speaker 2: And do you know what year? Speaker 1: I do not. Speaker 2: Okay. Well, tell me what you remember about them. Speaker 1: I actually remember very little about them. I did go to see them a couple of times. My father was the eldest of twelve children, and so I always felt when I went to their house after coming from our house, we had so few relatives, and there were just people everywhere (laughter). And there are stories about that family are--the other story about the sailor who left Australia and went to Canada and married an Indian [Native American] princess, 'cause apparently you didn't marry Indians who were not princesses or chiefs, you know. You never wrote home and told mother that you just married a regular Indian. I'm not sure she actually was a princess. And that was on his father's side of the family. I know that both parents of my grandmother on that side of the family were slaves. I know that there was--one of my grandfather's brother was a lawyer, but as I say, I never got to meet him, but--and then I got to know some of my aunts on that side of the family as time went by, my father--one of my father's sister was Aunt Bessie [Bessie Atwell] and Aunt Doris [Doris Atwell], and I got to see them and go to things with them, visited them relatively recently when they were in nursing homes when they were all still very sharp in mind, doing quite well. The boys in that family, however, did--were not long-lived. They all died relatively young, whereas the women on that side of the family lived very--fairly long (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Really? Story_ID: 475829 Speaker 1: Well, tell me about your father [Toronto Atwell, Jr.]. Speaker 2: I know very little about my father. He was certainly a very charismatic man, very, very bright, he was a professional gambler, which embarrassed my mother [Eva Yores Atwell] dreadfully. She didn't want anyone to know that. How surprised she would be that now being a professional gambler is something everybody aspires to (laughter). I can remember things from my dad, like he took us to our first football game and taught us how that was played, to our first baseball game, of course, when you live in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], you have major baseball and football teams. At that time when--of course this was back before we had all the technology we have now, when you went to the grocery store, they would write down the price of everything on a bag, on a paper bag, and then add it up, and he could add it up in his head while they were writing it down, so--and he kind of worked with us with math kinds of things, because, of course, we were all very impressed with this, you know, when you're talking about something as long as my forearm that somebody could add up, fall, and people are writing it down, and come up with the right answer, it's kind of impressive, especially to children, so-- Speaker 1: Yeah. All right. Is there anything else you remember about him? Speaker 2: Not really, no (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No? Okay. Story_ID: 475830 Speaker 1: Now, tell me about your siblings. Speaker 2: Okay. I had a brother who was two and a half years younger than me, and his name was Toronto Canada Atwell III [Toronto Atwell III]. And I have a sister who is Virginia Cobina Atwell Braxton [Virginia Atwell Braxton], Virginia, V-I-R-G-I-N-I-A, Cobina, C-O-B-I-N-A, Atwell, A-T-W-E-L-L, Braxton, B-R-A-X-T-O-N. Speaker 1: Wow. Okay. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: My brother is no longer alive. He died in 2001. He worked his entire lifetime, except for a short time when he was in the [U.S] Army, for the federal government at the naval aviation supply department [Naval Aviation Supply Office, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], and was able to sing just marvelously. He had an incredibly neat bass voice, and so he spent lots of time singing in churches and at various events, concerts, those kinds of things. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: When he was a teenager, he and his buddies used to stand on the corner and sing, and they had a little group of five of them. Someone asked would they come and, you know, could they take them to the equivalent of Motown? Whatever that was back then. Those guys said, no, no, no, they were not going to sing any popular music, they were only going to sing church music, so--and they never went anywhere with that (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. And your sister? Speaker 2: My sister is nine years younger than I am. She taught school for a while, taught in the inner city right after she graduated from college, and then stayed home, was a stay-at-home mom for a while, and then went back, worked in those regional service centers for a little bit, and then taught kindergarten for many years, and she's retired now. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 475831 Speaker 1: Now, let's talk about when you were a little girl. If I asked you about sounds, smells, or sights in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] when you were in elementary school, what would you think about? Speaker 2: When I was in elementary school? Speaker 1: Um-hm. About the neighborhood or your home or-- Speaker 2: Okay. My earliest memories are of wanting to be an ash man when I grew up. I was a tiny thing, and I had a little rocking thing, you'd climb to the middle of it, you have horses on each side and you sat on the porch, and I would pretend I was throwing the ash can and throwing the ashes back, so that's one of my earliest sounds of that. We also had horses that delivered everything, and so another sound that comes to me from early days is the sound of horses coming, 'cause they would stop and deliver your milk. Sights, in the wintertime, the milk would freeze at the top and push the stopper out of the bottle, 'cause they had little paper stoppers in the--they were glass bottles. Also, in Philadelphia, they had gas lights actually until the mid-'60s [1960s] or so, and when I was a kid, they actually still went around and lit them every night, and I would watch with my nose pressed against the glass, watch the guy lighting the street lights, which those are gone today. In school we, of course, played recess. At that time we did have recess for real, and jumped rope, and so that's a sound that comes to mind. Skates come to mind, the sound of skates on slate, because we had some slate sidewalks we were--always skated on, and at recess time, the pretzel man came by, that they still sell in the Northeast pretzels in carts, and they would come to the school, and they were, I guess, two cents apiece, and you'd get two of them for three cents, something like that (laughter). Story_ID: 475832 Speaker 1: Tell me about the neighborhood in which you grew up. Who lived in the neighborhood? Speaker 2: Just regular people, I guess (laughter). Families lived in the neighborhood. Speaker 1: What type of jobs were your neighbors--don't remember (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I really don't remember much about what kind of jobs the neighbors had. You know, when you're young, it's just not something you pay much attention to. Speaker 1: Well, you know, if you knew your neighbors might have been teachers at your school or someone at--you know, the post office. Speaker 2: Well, some of--people I knew better were people at my church, which was in my neighborhood. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Speaker 2: Okay. And some of them taught school, some of them worked for the post office, some of them worked for, like, the parks and recreation department, recreation leaders. They had those kind of jobs. Speaker 1: What business do you-- Speaker 2: They were also--had lawyers and doctors that, you know, went to my church. Speaker 1: Now, what is the name of the church that you attended as a child? Speaker 2: Jones Tabernacle A.M.E. [Jones Tabernacle A.M.E. Church, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. Speaker 1: All right. And do you remember who the pastor was? Speaker 2: For most of the time when I was growing up, it was the Reverend Seymour, S-E-Y-M-O-U-R, Barker, B-A-R-K-E-R [Seymour Barker]. Speaker 1: Okay. And what do you remember about times there at church? Speaker 2: Well, we had a wonderful church, which is where--when I was growing up, African Americans kind of had all of their social life kind of revolved around things that were going on in the church. It also was where we learned history about African Americans, because certainly that was not being taught in the schools. It was also a place where--oh, we had oratorical contests that people taught you how to speak, would learn how to sing, we learned to play a piano, I mean, all of those kinds of things revolved around the church, and my brother [Toronto Atwell III] and I were very, very active in the church, and we went to represent the church at--when you'd have various conferences, you know, there would always be a youth portion of the conference, and we would go and represent our church at that, so that church gave us very many opportunities to mature both gracefully as well as knowledgably. Speaker 1: You learned to play the piano. Speaker 2: Yes. My [maternal] grandmother [Mary Moore Yores] had a piano (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you learn that your grandmother taught--? Speaker 2: My grandmother had a piano, a baby grand. Speaker 1: So she taught you how to play? Speaker 2: No, I took lessons from Miss Burlock [ph.], didn't live very far from us. Speaker 1: Okay. And did you sing like your brother? Speaker 2: No. I love to sing, and I can stay on key, and that's the most you can say for my voice (laughter). Speaker 1: All right. What were some of the other activities at the church? Speaker 2: Well, in the summertime we always had something called the junior drams, and every summer we would put on two plays, so we would spend most of the summer getting our little comedies together and making the sets and getting all of our costumes put together, and then at--toward the end of the summer we'd actually put the plays on at our church, and occasionally we'd take them, put them on at other churches, too. That was the kind of an activity we had at--my church was a huge church. Just let me start off by saying that when I was at--when I got to college [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], I worked at the church as a secretary for a while, and at that point we had about 1200 members, so I mean, we're really talking about a big church. Of course, they obviously didn't all come every Sunday, but at that point it was a really large church, so there were lots of kinds of activities, so we actually had a recreation leader who came every afternoon after school, and boys went in and did all different kinds of things, so we had--you name it, our church had it. We had choirs that were just excellent. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: For every age. And they let me sing on the church choir (laughter). And I taught Sunday school for years and years. Story_ID: 475833 Speaker 1: Tell me the name of the elementary school that you went to. Speaker 2: I went to about seven or eight different elementary schools. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We moved around a bit (laughter), to say the least, and I don't remember their names. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you remember the last one before going to--did you go to middle school or did you go straight to high school? Speaker 2: I went to junior high, I went to two different junior highs. And I went to high school at the Philadelphia High School for Girls [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. Speaker 1: Well, tell me why your family moved a lot. (Pause) I mean, is there a reason? I mean, you know, do you know why, you know, why they moved? Speaker 2: I'm sure there was (laughter). Speaker 1: Do you know why they moved? Speaker 2: Okay. My [maternal] grandparents [Mary Moore Yores and Edward Yores] owned three different houses that I know of when I was growing up, and the last one they owned is still in the family. My grandfather always bought houses, I don't know why he moved, but he did, okay? He always owned whatever it was, wherever it was. My parents [Eva Yores Atwell and Toronto Atwell, Jr.] moved--we lived in a--like a large one-room efficiency apartment for a while, we rented a house for a while. I don't know-- Speaker 1: Okay. All right (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) how we came to move to the different places, but we did. Speaker 1: Okay. You had such great descriptions of things that were going on in the neighborhood, like the horses bringing the milk. Are there any other sights that you can remember about that era, or that time? Speaker 2: Oh, my mother was always very concerned that we would not be well-rounded educationally, so both she and my father--I mean, she was not alone in that, but--so every Sunday we would go to a museum, we'd go to a park, we'd go to whatever the city was doing, so for example, the Philadelphia Orchestra, if you went during the w- during the season, kids could get in for a dollar, we used to do that. In the summer they put on free programs in the park, so one of my fond memories is of listening to in the afternoon with the sun setting behind the bandstand, pretty neat. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: We went to see fireworks over the Schuykill River. Story_ID: 475834 Speaker 1: You were telling me about your fond mem- fond memories. Speaker 2: Yes. Other kinds of things I remember from my childhood and growing up was the radio because, of course, there was no television when I was growing up, and we used to have all our favorite shows, and as parents now are concerned that their children will not be able to get their homework done because they're watching television, well, my mother [Eva Yores Atwell] was very concerned that we would be listening to stories on the radio and not get our homework done, and we kept trying to assure her that just having it there in the background, we would still be able to do our work, but she was never quite convinced of that. We listened to the fireside chats, because of course, Roosevelt [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt] was president, as far as I can remember until I was in high school [Philadelphia High School for Girls, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. I was very much aware of the war when that started. One of the memories I have is my father [Toronto Atwell, Jr.], my brother [Toronto Atwell III] and I were at the movies, and we came home, you know, kind of late afternoon, and my mother said the war [World War II, WWII] had started. And I did things at school, you had to sign up for rationing tickets, you know, got a little rationing thing. Well, you wouldn't know. Okay. Speaker 1: Well, tell me about it. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I want to know about it. Speaker 2: Lots of things were rationed. What they did was give each family little tokens and chips for your allotment to buy butter or sugar or whatever, and so at school I was one of the people who helped people sign up for those, and I was very proud of myself for being selected to do that. I remember Eleanor Roosevelt, the various things that she was doing, and of course I remember the Rosie the Riveter, the kinds of things, 'cause of course at that point women took the place of men at home, so it never occurred to me that women could not do all of the things that women can do because when I was growing up, women did those things. My [maternal] grandfather [Edward Yores] was always very sure that you should understand what was going on in the world, that you should know--you should vote at your earliest opportunity, that you should always read the newspaper so you always knew what was going on with the news, that you listen to the fireside chats, and I remember sitting to listening to them, I can't remember thinking anything about them while I sat (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: But it makes a big impression on you. I think you get a very different view of the world if you have a family that feels those kinds of things are very important, that--that you do exist in a community that is much larger than your family and larger than your church and that you need to know about it even if you're not actively engaged in it. Story_ID: 475835 Speaker 1: You said that you took piano lessons. What was that like for you? Did you enjoy taking them (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Very much, yes. No, long before I was given piano lessons, I picked out pieces on the piano and put them into song and so forth, but I'm not very creative, so I never made up any music (laughter). Speaker 1: All right. And you would go to your teacher's home to learn? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So when you go to high school and you go to the Philadelphia High School for Girls [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], tell me about your experience in high school. Speaker 2: It was excellent. It was--I mean, you may not know much about the school, the school is highly selective, it still is, relatively elite place to go although it's a public school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so the first time everybody there was at the top of every class they had ever been in, so competition was very different than it had been in other places that you'd been, you know. We--nobody ever cut you any slack because you were a girl, so that your approach to the world was very different than it would be if you had been in classes with boys, because nobody ever thought, even subliminally, that you could not do math. If you came in and weren't doing something, you know, the teachers looked at you and said, "You need to go home and do your homework (laughter). We know you can do this, just go do it," you know. So it was a very different approach, and of course, we got to be the leaders in everything, you know. We--I was--worked on the newspaper and was co-editor of that and helped, you know, different kinds of positions in the class and we all--we all ran everything. So your viewpoint growing up as to what kinds of things women could do was very different, and so I used to get into very interesting, heated conversations with people about what women could do. My mother [Eva Yores Atwell] was very concerned about that, because my mother always thought that what you should be when you grew up was a lady, who kind of stayed home, made a home for her children and her husband, that all the kinds of things that we were doing were just, you know, not kind of directed toward being a nesting kind of person, so (laughter). Story_ID: 475836 Speaker 1: Your mother [Eva Yores Atwell] had--and father [Toronto Atwell, Jr.] were separated by this time. Was there a big change at home for you? You know, your mother as a now--was she a single parent at this point? Speaker 2: She was a single parent, and we went to live with my [maternal] grandparents [Mary Moore Yores and Edward Yores], so (laughter). Speaker 1: Oh, okay. So you had that support (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So we had a father figure in the home and, you know, we went to church [Jones Tabernacle A.M.E. Church, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] every Sunday, I mean, you know, it's no--really wasn't any different actually (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Speaker 2: Fathers, when I was growing up, didn't spend a lot of time with your children, so (laughter) you didn't have the kind of sharing of the raising and rearing that you have now. Fathers went off to work and, you know, occasionally they would do something with you on the weekend, yeah. Story_ID: 475837 Speaker 1: Were there any teachers at your high school [Philadelphia High School for Girls, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] that you can remember might have encouraged you? Speaker 2: Teachers from the time I started school encouraged me. Speaker 1: Can you remember any of them by name? Speaker 2: No, not by name. Speaker 1: Okay. What was your favorite subject in high school? Speaker 2: English. And I majored in English in college [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], English literature (laughter). Speaker 1: What books were you reading then? Speaker 2: I was reading--at home I was reading Dickens [Charles Dickens] by the time I was twelve. At that time the library would let you take out--I think it was like fourteen books at a time was the most you could take out, and you could keep them for two weeks, and my mother [Eva Yores Atwell] felt that you should not go back and get them, like if you finished them in a week, you should--you know, no, you have to wait your whole two weeks, because obviously you'd spent enough time with your nose in a book, so I started reading bigger, fatter, thicker books, something that was going to last for the whole two weeks. So I was reading those and on the side I was reading murder mysteries, because everybody in my family read murder mysteries, so I read murder mysteries, Agatha Christie and all those old time folks who kind of classic-type murder mysteries, read all those. Rex Stout, those kind (laughter). Speaker 1: That's good. So tell me, what type of student were you? Speaker 2: I was a very good student, obviously (laughter). I say obviously, but you didn't get into that high school unless you were a good student, and you don't get to where I am if you weren't a good student. Story_ID: 475838 Speaker 1: When did you start thinking about what you would do after high school? Was it a given that you would go to college? Speaker 2: It was not. We didn't have any money, to start off with, so it was not like, well, obviously, you can do this, and as I say, my mother [Eva Yores Atwell] wasn't too sure a girl should go to college. Back when you're talking in the '40s [1940s] people didn't go to college. It wasn't until after the war [World War II, WWII] was over and you had the G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944] that you had the large groups of people going to college. Before that, people generally did not go to college, so that was not an expectation. On the other hand, at my high school, practically everybody went to college. That was kind of anticipated that you were indeed going to go to college if you went there. And, certainly, I was encouraged by example and by teachers who say, yes, you know, you should go to college. So I applied for a scholarship at the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and got it. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: The University of Pennsylvania is on land that the City of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] deeded to them back in the 1700s, I guess, back when Ben Franklin [Benjamin Franklin] was there, in any event, and in return for that, the university gave them scholarships, and about twenty of them come every year, and so you had to be relatively poor and relatively bright in order to get one, and I kind to fit all the categories. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Going back to your high school, let's talk just a little bit more about the Philadelphia High School for Girls [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. You said it was an elitist school. Was there an application that you had to fill out to go to that school or did teachers recommend you? How did you get to go to that school? Speaker 2: You had to apply, and I don't know whether my mother filled an application out. I don't know that. I know that you had to have an IQ of over 120 and be in the top of your class wherever you were to get in. My mother went to that school, by the way, my mother and her sisters all went to that school. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. All right. So the University of Pennsylvania. Now, what year did you graduate from high school? Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty [1950]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's what makes it difficult to remember teachers' names, for example, like (laughter). Speaker 1: And that's fine. That's fine. Speaker 2: Back there in the haze. Speaker 1: All right. Because Philadelphia is in the North where it snows, were there any activities, extracurricular activities, that you participated in that had to do with, you know, snow, like ice skating or any of those things? Speaker 2: Well, it is not in the North, like Chicago [Illinois], where you actually have that kind of thing. Philadelphia is in a relatively a moderate zone, and although occasionally it snows and sometimes it snows quite a bit, at the moment it's pretty cold up there, but no, we did not have like ponds or things that froze over, no (laughter), and we did not have snow activities. I--it was rare it actually snowed at Christmastime, for example, I can remember wishing it would snow, and it rarely happened (laughter). Speaker 1: All right. Story_ID: 475839 Speaker 1: Tell me about your transition to college [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. Speaker 2: My--I had a girlfriend whom I'd met and did not go to the same high school [Philadelphia High School for Girls, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] I did, but who I had met when I was in high school, and we were both gonna live at home, but we decided that we were going to make every effort to do everything else everybody in college did, so except for sororities, which we--neither of us joined any sororities. There were not that many African Americans in our college, you have to understand that. We went to everything. We went to the football games, we went to the dances, we--I was on the--I worked on the newspaper there for a while. I also worked after school in order to kind of pay for some of the expenses, because they covered your tuition, but you had to pay your own fees and buy your own books. Speaker 1: So where did you work? Speaker 2: For a while I worked for Philadelphia library [Free Library of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], and then I worked for the church [Jones Tabernacle A.M.E. Church, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. Speaker 1: Okay. How were your teachers? Speaker 2: Excellent. Just excellent, yes. Fortunately, after having been at the high school I was at, I was very well-prepared to take the kind of coursework that I took. It was not any more pressure than I had had when I was in high school, because in high school you actually have higher classes every day and in college you really don't have them all every day, so although you might have five courses, you have got some days where you weren't doing that, but I am so organized it just makes people ill (laughter). I would at the beginning of semester, you know, say, okay, you're gonna have to turn in a term paper and et cetera, et cetera, well, I would start on mine almost immediately. I would get myself some little 3 X 5 cards, and I'd start taking books out of the library and I would read the--I traveled back and forth on trolleys to--and subway to get to college, and I would make notes on my little 3 X 5, and I would stash them all up, and when I had enough there for the paper, I'd go ahead and write the paper long before it was due, so (laughter) that kind of organization permits you to have a social life and do other kinds of things, because I was never at the end, kind of doing studying all night or any of those kinds of things. I never did--never pulled all-nighters, I would have a notebook for each course. In the front I would take notes, and of course, and from the back I'd take notes from the textbook we had, so at the end of semester I could review things pretty easily. Speaker 1: Wow. So what did you do in your spare time (laughter)? Speaker 2: I did all kinds of things that you do at home still, because, you know, I still did my share of the cleaning and the cooking and those kinds of things at home. I worked in the church, as I say, I took a job in the church, but I also taught Sunday school for the church and went to various kinds of things that were going on in the church, went to parties, like everybody else in college (laughter). Speaker 1: Did you not pledge because there--was there a sorority there that you could have pledged to? Speaker 2: There was not a sorority there at the college, no, there was not (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. All right. Story_ID: 475840 Speaker 1: Tell me, what were holidays like at your home? Speaker 2: Food, lots of food. Well, let's take--well, take almost any holiday. My mother [Eva Yores Atwell] celebrated every holiday, so if--I mean, think of a minor holiday, you know, that you don't think of as a holiday. Speaker 1: St. Patrick's Day? Speaker 2: St. Patrick's--okay. St. Patrick's Day. For St. Patrick's Day my mother always went out and bought--there were little candies that looked like little stones, she always did that, did a little decorating, so we celebrated St. Patrick's Day (laughter) with stones. We celebrated every holiday in my home. We had Valentine's Day candy. At Christmas we always bought our tree, like, on Christmas Eve and we didn't decorate it 'til late Christmas Eve, and we'd put the tree up, and we made eggnog when I was older, of course. When we were little, we went to bed in hopes that Santa [Santa Claus] was coming, but when we got older we got to help decorate the tree. I still have some of the Christmas tree balls that my mother had during the war [World War II, WWII], because you couldn't use metal. We have some balls that have little cardboard things that you hang them by, and I can remember we used pipe cleaners to--sometimes when we ran out of hooks, 'cause you couldn't go buy hooks to put on the tree. Big, big meals. My [maternal] grandmother [Mary Moore Yores] always had a huge Thanksgiving and Christmas, and the whole family would celebrate together, and we'd bring in all kinds of friends. There were always people coming from everywhere who we only saw once or twice a year but they were always there for the big holidays. As I say, my mother celebrated every possible holiday (laughter). Speaker 1: Were you in Christmas pageants? Did you have that at your church [Jones Tabernacle A.M.E. Church, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]? Speaker 2: Yes, I was in Christmas pageants, and of course, they had Christmas stuff at school. Speaker 1: Do you remember any one Christmas gift that you just can remember that was your favorite gift? Speaker 2: I got a telescope one year, well, not one of the fancy ones, but a telescope that was very, very much my favorite gift, yes. Story_ID: 475841 Speaker 1: So you graduate [from the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] with a B.A. Is that right? Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: In English. And what year was this? Speaker 2: Fifty-four [1954], 1954 (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Nineteen fifty-four [1954]. Okay. Had you decided what you were going to do after graduation? Speaker 2: I had been looking for a job in my senior year and went to work for the federal government. Speaker 1: Doing what? Speaker 2: I was a clerk in the Veterans Administration [U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs] doing claims work for veterans. Speaker 1: What was that like for you? Speaker 2: Dull. Speaker 1: Dull. Speaker 2: Well, if--okay. If you made mistakes, there were always things that you needed to do to fix them. If you had, for example, people sent their money in if you had posted it to the wrong card, 'cause all this was done by hand, you know, so I was quicker than some, and so I could get all that came in that day posted, and then I could go through the bin and check to make sure everything--fix all the ones that were wrong and check what I'd done that day to make sure I did it all right, and it got to the point where, you know, I'd have done a couple of hours' work in the morning, and I'd have a whole day left, and you couldn't get up and walk around and go talk to people, and so I would do things like make out a grocery--well, at first I would make up all the meals we'd have for the week, and I'd make out a grocery list for all the things you needed to buy for all those meals. It was just--it was very dull, and at the same time I was applying for other jobs, and I got hired at the aviation supply office [Naval Aviation Supply Office, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] where I was an analyst. We did time studies on people's jobs to tell you how fast you could get this job done and how you could eliminate various steps so that you could do work faster. I did that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: About four years or so. Speaker 1: For four years. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. That was very interesting. And you had got automatic raises, so I started with 7 [GS-7], you went 7, 9 [GS-9], 11 [GS-11], which was quite nice. Eleven's a very reasonable level of the federal government (laughter). Story_ID: 475842 Speaker 1: So tell me what happens next. Speaker 2: I--well, I had gotten married in 1955, and-- Speaker 1: Tell me how you met your husband [HistoryMaker Reuben R. McDaniel]. Speaker 2: I met him at college [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] like everybody meets their husband (laughter). I was a senior and he was a freshman, and he always teases me, before I saw any of the freshmen who came in, I was talking to my girlfriend and she said, "Oh, you know, we got a couple of new guys in, and one of them's 6'7"," and I said, "Dibs on the one who's 6'8"," because my husband was 6'8", so there was one 6'7" and one 6'8". I said, "Dibs on the one that's 6'8"" so--. He claims that he didn't stand a chance with anybody after that, which isn't true, but in any event, I met him then, and we had gotten married the next year, and then I worked at, you know, whatever, and my first child [Diane McDaniel Rhodes] was born in 1960 and I went home, and I was a stay-at-home mom. Speaker 1: Okay. So you left the aviation supply office [Naval Aviation Supply Office, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: And was a stay-at-home mom until when? Speaker 2: About 1966, I guess. Story_ID: 475843 Speaker 1: Now, 1960 starts gearing up Civil Rights Movement. Were you active in civil rights at all? Speaker 2: I was not active and my husband [HistoryMaker Reuben R. McDaniel], like, went and sat in, for example, and I didn't do that. When you have children that are, like, zero and two (laughter), you really don't get out the house much, and so--but certainly when it comes to participating in terms of not buying things from certain stores that were boycotting and keeping up with everything, I did all of that, but I was not able to go hear Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] in Washington, D.C., and you know, there's just some things you can't get to when you have small children. Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Well, what were your thoughts about that whole era when Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was killed and Bobby Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy] and even the March on Washington and all the things that happened through '63 [1963] through '68 [1968]? What were your thoughts about the different things that happened? Speaker 2: It was very exciting, and you certainly had the feeling that it's about time. Martin Luther King was such a charismatic leader, you could not--I didn't see how one could object to the approach that he was taking toward making something happen. It certainly was time that something happened. I had never--I had never been in a segregated area until after I was married because I hadn't gone south before that. When I grew up in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], it was not segregated. The schools were not segregated, the stores were not segregated, so I had not experienced any of that, although my parents [Eva Yores Atwell and Toronto Atwell, Jr.] had told me about a time when Philadelphia was that way, but by the time I became a lawyer, it wasn't, so I had not had those experiences. And we were making progress. Certainly friends of my mother's, women had been to college, been to law schools, so I mean, there were role models all around everywhere for me to follow who were all doing well. Sadie Alexander [Sadie Tanner Mossell Alexander], for example, was one of the people my mother always pointed to saying, you can make something of yourself, you know. So it was just very slow. It wasn't that I couldn't look around and see that progress was being made and that certainly African Americans were doing--or holding positions in federal jobs, but--and teaching, but not in lots of other areas, although there were--you know, as I say, you could point to people in just about every area--or area where I lived, where I grew up in the City of Philadelphia where there was an African American doing something, and being a first, of course, but it was not moving very rapidly, so you felt, wow, you know, this is wonderful. The whole world is gonna change and, you know, we will not have the difficulties any longer, because although we didn't have segregation, we certainly still were segregated, okay. Housing was still segregated in Philadelphia, but also people would not hire you for certain jobs. You could go and apply, but your chances of getting hired might be slim and none, and you recognized the reason why was because you were African American, so it wasn't the same kind of segregation that you had in the South, but certainly you knew why you were not being selected for various things. Before I got the job at the aviation supply [Naval Aviation Supply Office, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], as I say, most applied for fifty, sixty jobs, and you know everybody was very polite and the interviews went well, then they never called you back (laughter). So it was a very exciting time to live, just--(laughter). Speaker 1: Where were you living now? Speaker 2: I was living in Philadelphia with my husband (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You were still living in Philadelphia. Speaker 2: Yes, we had our own house. We had bought a house by that time. Story_ID: 475844 Speaker 1: Do you remember when Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was killed? Speaker 2: Yes, I do. Speaker 1: Do you remember where you were? Speaker 2: I was at home and heard the news there, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I remember when Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was killed. I was out bringing some laundry back from--we had a laundromat right down our--you went out the back door and went down the alley to the laundromat, and I was coming back with some clothes I had just dried, and my neighbor said to me, "They've just killed the president," and I said, "Okay, what's the punch line?" 'cause I was sure this was part of a joke, you know. And, of course, it wasn't. When Martin Luther King was killed, my husband [HistoryMaker Reuben R. McDaniel] was out giving a speech someplace, and the riots started. It was just horrible. Story_ID: 475845 Speaker 1: When do you go back to the job market? Speaker 2: We were in Ohio, my husband [HistoryMaker Reuben R. McDaniel] was there at Baldwin-Wallace College [Baldwin Wallace University, Berea, Ohio], and we had not sold our house in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], and we had had--when we left Philadelphia, someone had made earnest payment on it, and so we thought it was going to be sold, so the bank said, well, finally, you don't have to pay anything for three months, you know, until you get this house sold, and then that fell through, so we were really not in a position to pay two series of mortgage and rent on the home that we were in, and so I thought that I would have to go to work to kind of help out, and so I talked to the vice president of academic affairs [Fred Harris]. My husband spoke to him and said that I'd been thinking about maybe doing some substitute teaching, but they were having a meeting. It didn't have anything to do with the family, but, you know, the dean asked him, "Say, you know, what's going on with your family?" and he said, "Well, you know, Myra's [HistoryMaker Myra McDaniel] thinking about maybe doing some--some substitute teaching, you know, and add a little bit to her income," and he said, "Oh, well, tell her to come and talk to me because I think she could come, and I could hire her, because I need somebody part time." So I went and talked to him, I got hired part time to work at home, he hired me by the hour. I would go in every day for an hour, and he would have stacks of mail and stuff, and he'd say, "Okay, answer this one in the affirmative, answer that one in the negative, tell these people that we can have them on this date, tell these people that--," and I'd go home and write letters for him and then he'd sign them the next--I'd carry them back to his secretary and he'd sign them the next day. And then I also attended meetings for him, faculty at--the science faculty was reorganizing itself and whatnot, and he said, "Okay, you go and be my representative at the meetings. When they are doing something you think I need to know, tell me about it and if they need something you think I ought to do for them, come and tell me about that," so that was it. He didn't want regular reports or anything, I just attended the meetings and kind of (laughter) let him know what needed to be done. Another time I can recall-- Story_ID: 475846 Speaker 1: We were talking about you were in Ohio working for the vice president of academic affairs. Tell me his name. Speaker 2: His name is Fred Harris. Speaker 1: And the name of the school again? Speaker 2: Baldwin-Wallace [Baldwin-Wallace College; Baldwin Wallace University, Berea, Ohio], Baldwin, B-A-L-D-W-I-N, dash Wallace, W-A-L-L-A-C-E College. Speaker 1: And you were going to tell me another story about working there. Speaker 2: Well, the fun stories that happened was he had one of the professors who had a very large family, and this professor had not done anything to upgrade his knowledge for a number of years now, and the faculty was unhappy that the was still teaching the same thing he'd been teaching forever, so the dean called me in and he said, "Okay, now, I want you to go and talk to--," I don't remember the guy's name--, "I want you to go and talk to him and tell him that this summer instead of working somewhere for extra money that he is going to have to go and do some refreshing, what it is, and," he said, "you know I know that he's gonna be upset and all that, but I want him to talk to you first and then he can kind of pull himself together and then he'll come and talk to me and then by that time he will have settled back down, and then he and I could have a good talk." So I said, "Fine." And I went and talked to this professor, just had a very pleasant conversation with him, all these kind of things, he said he understood and it was no problem, it's fine. So a couple of weeks later the dean said to me, "Well, I'm just astonished, 'cause--" he said, "I had called this professor in," he said, "you know, he didn't come in all upset to see me, and he said, well, you know, Myra [HistoryMaker Myra McDaniels] just hadn't talked to him, obviously, or if she talked to him, he just didn't get the message." He said, "No, he got the message, he was just fine. How did you do that (laughter)?" Speaker 1: So he was impressed with your skills. Speaker 2: He was very impressed with my skills, and so I got to do lots of neat things there, that kind of thing. I went down to Philander Smith [Philander Smith College, Little Rock, Arkansas] to work on a grant. There was a combination of the two schools where Baldwin-Wallace was assisting Philander Smith, which is a historically black institution [HBCU] in Arkansas, Little Rock. And so I went down there, 'cause we were gonna work on getting a grant for them, and they didn't have anybody to do grant writing, so I went down and did that and it was kind of fun, it was--all around, it was very interesting because, of course, I had not lived the life of a college professor's wife prior to that, and so all of that was very interesting indeed. Story_ID: 475847 Speaker 1: I'd also not lived in any small towns in the Midwest, which was very interesting indeed. In Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] people thought of me being very moderate, perhaps close to being the stodgy side of the world. I found out when I got to a small town in Ohio that I was kind of exotic (laughter). They thought of me as being very liberal indeed. You asked earlier about things dealing with the Civil Rights Movement. One of the things that happened while we were at Baldwin-Wallace [Baldwin-Wallace College; Baldwin Wallace University, Berea, Ohio] was there was a group of white couples who had got together who wanted to try to better understand the Civil Rights Movement and how African Americans felt about what was going on and all those things, and so they invited us to come, they met--I don't know whether they met every other week or once a month or whatever and they would have you come and discuss various things, so that was--it was very interesting, because you would find yourself, for example, defending the Black Panthers [Black Panther Party] who had just done something that at the moment you thought was pretty far out, on the edge, and trying to explain to someone else how people got to the point that they felt that way, because this was after the Black Panthers had left their beginning roots and gone out. The folks in Los Angeles [California] were just, you know, doing the kind of things that some of us who were African American, felt were kind of on the edge, trying to describe to someone else the feelings that they had as we never told them whether we agreed or disagreed with them. What we did was say, you know, "Well, this is how somebody gets to that point." And eventually, of course, we just held up our hands, said, "Gee, we've had all the fun we can stand, we don't wanna come back anymore," and they're like, "Well, you know, that keeps happening to us, you know, we have couples come in, and they'll come for a couple of months or so." And you think, "You just don't know how intense this gets to be for us. I understand that for you it's just a conversation, but for us to have somebody throwing questions at you for an entire evening is not a very relaxing evening as far as we're concerned." And so that was a very interesting part of the Civil Rights Movement that I don't know that many people know about, but part of what happened, even if you were not actively engaged in the movement in terms of marching and being part of SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] and all those good things and down there when Maynard Jackson just raising Cain, wherever you were, you were indeed representing all of the ideas that people were milling about in their minds, and so you were always being questioned by Anglos as to why this was happening, what do you think about that, what's going on there? So you were never really not part of the movement even if you were not actively marching in the streets along with Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], you were still doing your little part out there wherever you happened to be. Speaker 2: All right. So how long did you stay at the school? Speaker 1: We were there, I guess, about four years. Speaker 2: So what year did you get there? Speaker 1: Sixty-five [1965], 1965. We left in 1969 and went to Bloomington, Indiana, where my husband [HistoryMaker Reuben R. McDaniel] started working on his doctor's degree-- Speaker 2: I asked you about (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) at the university [Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana]. Speaker 2: On his doctor's? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Story_ID: 475848 Speaker 1: I asked you off-camera about Vietnam [Vietnam War]. Tell me your response on camera. Speaker 2: (Laughter) You asked whether my husband [HistoryMaker Reuben R. McDaniel] had gone to Vietnam, and I said no, he was 4-F, because my husband is 6'8", so although he signed up for the draft and went down, they said, "Gee whiz, you're too tall; however, if you would like to buy all your own uniforms and all those things, you can certainly join up," and he said, "Gee, no, thank you, I don't think I need to do that" (laughter). But, you know, none of the cots are long enough, I mean, none of the equipment they have is good for anybody who is over 6'6", so. That may be different now, but certainly at the time he was there that was true. The only reason I think it may be different now is because now in colleges, the beds they have for kids are extra-long so that they accommodate tall kids, and you know, even my short little granddaughter had to go buy these extra-long sheets because their beds, even though they are single beds, are as long as king-size beds. Story_ID: 475849 Speaker 1: So (unclear) 1969 you go to Bloomington [Indiana]. So tell me about this town. Speaker 2: Oh, there was a conference at Baldwin-Wallace [Baldwin-Wallace College; Baldwin Wallace University, Berea, Ohio] that my husband was part of. People there are like, "Oh, you got to go get your doctor's degree." Dr. Everly [ph.] in--from Indiana [Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana] who was in the education department there, at that point my husband was director of the evening school at Baldwin-Wallace and was teaching in the department of education, and they said, "You know, you need to get your doctor's degree if you're gonna continue to work in higher education, because you just can't do anything without that." And he was thinking about possibly being president of a college, and you would need to have your doctor's degree to do those kinds of things. My husband's parents [Nannie Finney McDaniel and Reuben R. McDaniel, Sr.], both of his parents taught at Virginia State University [Virginia State College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia], so he grew up on campus and was very cognizant of what life on a college campus was like, and so he agreed that he needed to do this, and so they came in and he came home and blithely told me that I was gonna need to go to work because he was going to go back to school, and I thought, well, you could have asked me before you said you were gonna do this, because they had talked about how they were going to give him a scholarship and all these good things, so we make a trip to Bloomington where Dr. Everly had asked me to, you know, write and tell him what kinds of things I could do, and he said, "You know, I could probably get you the job as a secretary," and I told him you know, "I'm sorry, I can't be a secretary, I don't teach," so you know that's--so he said, "Well," he said, "Well," he said to Reuben [HistoryMaker Reuben R. McDaniel], "I just don't know because that's what people's wives do while they're here getting their graduate degrees. Their wives either teach and we can get them a job in the school system or they're secretaries and we get them jobs as a secretary, and your wife declined to do either of those things. I have set up some appointments for her with a couple of department chairs and, you know, we'll just see what happens." So I went and talked to these people, and it was very interesting, because I just didn't care whether I got work or not because I'm like, "Well," (gesture). In any event, I ended up with either three or four jobs offers, much to his astonishment, so I ended up making more than any of the people who were either teaching or being secretaries. I became the administrative assistant to the department chair of department of structural systems technology. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I worked with graduate students in terms of helping them put together their resumes and send them out, talking to them about doing their job searches. I also worked with a department chair working with faculty members in various things they were organizing, so I was back to attending faculty meetings and keeping track of all those things for someone (laughter). I did lots of interesting things. It was a very interesting job. Story_ID: 475850 Speaker 1: And when your husband [HistoryMaker Reuben R. McDaniel] gets his Ph.D. [from Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana], are you thinking about going back to school now? Speaker 2: Well, I wasn't. I was taking the year off, so-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --we moved to Florida, to Tallahassee [Florida], as he was gonna teach at Florida State [Florida State University, Tallahassee, Florida], and he assured me he was going to be there four or five years and, you know, you don't wanna move around too much, and I'm like, fine, and we moved to Tallahassee. And I took off a year, and I was very relaxed, and the family told me I had to either go to school or work, they didn't care what I did, but I couldn't stay home any longer (laughter). They--as my daughter [Diane McDaniel Rhodes] said much, much later to someone who said, "What was it like having your mother when you were growing up?" "Well, it was like having two mothers, the one that nurtures you we kept her at home, we sent the other one out to work." But I decorated their bedrooms, we got a guinea pig, and I taught it how to walk on the leash, and I raised our kids and I played duplicate bridge, and things were going nicely and the family's like (gestures) "Time. You need to get out of here. I don't care what you do, but just (laughter)." Also, they seemed to feel that although they certainly agreed that things that I arranged for them to do were things that they enjoyed doing and wanted to do, they just felt they would rather arrange them themselves (laughter), they didn't want to come home and have me say, "Oh, well, tonight and on Saturday you can--," and they made it really, really were not interested in having quite that much of a mother, so I knew that the two most recent jobs I'd held as administrative assistant were jobs which for me had turned out to be excellent, because the people I was working with delegated lots of interesting projects. However, because there is no job description, you can end up in a job like that doing things that aren't very interesting at all, kind of depending on who the person is that you're working with. So I thought, well, you know, I could go back to being a management analyst, but in order to do that, I'd have to go back to school, 'cause it's been so long since I've done that, and I thought, well, if you're gonna go back to school you can, you know, just sit down and figure out what you'd like to do. So I sat down and thought about different things, read books on careers and whatnot and thought, well, being a lawyer might be something that I would enjoy. I like solving complex problems and I thought, you know you could do research, writing, that could be something might be very interesting, also I thought, you know, being in the courtroom might be kind of fun, so I thought, well I'll take the LSAT, and if that doesn't work, I'm back to the drawing board. So I took the LSAT, I did very well indeed, we were there at Florida State, I applied at Florida State, they were gonna give me a fellowship there, like, "Ah, this is so wonderful." I got offers from other law schools around the country, and which, you know, are not a possibility, actually (laughter). But meanwhile, my husband got the job offer from folks here at Texas [University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas] who had interviewed him when he was in Indiana and he had not taken the job here then, but they came back after him at a conference he was at and so we came here to--for an interview, and I went over and talked to the folks at the law school [University of Texas at Austin School of Law, Austin, Texas], and they said, fine, you can go to law school here, you know. You are clearly admissible is what the dean said, and so I started law school, I went there and he went, well, you know, I'll start, and if I like it, fine. If I don't like it, I don't have to do this. I was not--there was not any pressure on me whatsoever besides the family thinking that I needed to be out the house (laughter). There was no real pressure. Meanwhile, I was doing all the kinds of things I had always done, which I've always been active in community kinds of things, so I was working with the church and doing other kinds of things, and so I really enjoyed law school. I had to keep reminding myself that I didn't need to be on the top of the class, 'cause the pressure to be at the top of the class is very strong, it's a very competitive law school, and, of course, I'd always been the top of the class in every class I'd ever been in, but if you are going to be a wife and a mother and be active in the community and go to PTA [Parent Teacher Association] and do all those kinds of things, you really cannot be at the top of the class at the same time, so--so I would go to class, and then I would Xerox all the stuff we were doing in the library and bring it home, and I'd spend the afternoon after school with the kids, working with them, and then after dinner, we all sat down, we all did our homework, and the kids just teased me about that. I could not understand what was funny about Mom doing homework when it had not been funny when Dad was doing homework. When he was getting his doctor's degree, nobody ever said, "Ha, ha, ha, Dad has to do homework," but when I had to do homework, "Ha ha ha, Mom has to do homework," and then when they were about ready to go to bed, they would tell me that I should stop studying for a while because they wanted to visit with me about something and so I would stop and do that. But I did all the kinds of things that everybody else's mother was doing, carpooled, the whole bit. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 475851 Speaker 1: What were your thoughts about people like Sandra Day O'Connor and Barbara Jordan? Speaker 2: Well, of course, are you talking about now or then, because--? Speaker 1: Had you thought about them at all? Speaker 2: Well, they weren't there. Barbara Jordan was younger than I was, let's start off here, and Sandra Day O'Connor was not on the court at that time, so back when I was in law school [University of Texas at Austin School of Law, Austin, Texas], Barbara Jordan was not doing whatever until kind of as I was getting toward the end of law school, then she started doing stuff, but she was not on my radar screen. Speaker 1: Okay. Who--well tell me, then, was there anyone on your radar screen at that time as far as black women or any women, not necessarily black, but any women in law (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, when I was young, I had role models like Sadie Alexander [Sadie Tanner Mossell Alexander] and Eleanor Roosevelt, so I-- Speaker 1: But I'm talking about the time you were-- Speaker 2: The time I was in law school? Speaker 1: Uh-huh. No, there weren't any? Speaker 2: No, unh-uh. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Speaker 2: There are always people out there that you know are doing things, like Shirley Chisholm, for example, but I was thirty-nine when I went back to law school, so by that time you've pretty much figured out who you are, and so you're not looking for role models in the sense that someone who starts law school at twenty-four is looking for a role model. Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay? Also, I had done lots of stuff, so I knew I could do stuff (laughter). Story_ID: 475852 Speaker 1: Tell me what happens next (pause) when you finish law school [University of Texas at Austin School of Law, Austin, Texas]. Speaker 2: When I finish law school--while I was in law school, I met--(unclear) back up here a little bit--while I was in law school, John Hill was the attorney general of Texas, and he was putting together a group of lawyers because he wanted the attorney general's office to look like a large Houston [Texas] law firm. So what he did was bring lawyers from Houston law firms who were very prominent to come and work in the attorney general's office for a couple of years while he was there. It's an elected position here in Texas, okay? One of those people was Joe Bill Watkins, and I had a friend at that time who was married to Liz Carpenter's son. Liz Carpenter at that time was press secretary for Lady Bird [Lady Bird Johnson], and LBJ [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] and Lady Bird were in Washington [D.C.]. He was president at that time. So anyway, Liz and Les [Les Carpenter] came home at Christmastime, were gonna have a joint party with their son and his wife, who--his wife was in law school with me, so she invited her friends, and they invited their friends. Well, their friends were all very politically connected, et cetera, so one of those people was Joe Bill Watkins, and so my friends and Joyce's friends were all--we were all standing around saying, "Well, you know, we're never gonna get hired, (laughter) doing that kind of thing, you know. We're a little older going back to school, and it's gonna be harder and whatnot," and he's like, he says to me, he says, "Why don't you come and work for us in the attorney general's office?" I said, "Well, you know, I really can't work, I have children at home." He says, "Why don't you come in the summer?" I said "Well, you know," he said, "Well, you could come and work part time." So I said no. But every time I saw him anyplace, and I would see him in various places, because, of course, since my husband [HistoryMaker Reuben R. McDaniel] was one of the associate deans at the university [University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas], we, like other college students at the law school, we were going to various affairs where people like Joe Bill would be attending events and whatnot, and he'd say, "You need to come work for us," and I'm like (gesture) "I don't need to do that." And we get to the end of my second year, and all the kids in my law school class are just dying to find jobs anywhere, clerking jobs, you know, but there aren't any, we can't find any, this is so difficult. I looked at myself and said, you know, you're being really stupid about this, you might go on over to that church office and work part time (laughter). So I went over there and worked in the mornings, because my children [Diane McDaniel Rhodes and Reuben McDaniel III] by that time, of course, were teenagers and slept in all morning, so you could go out at eight o'clock in the morning and get home and noon and they were just getting up, so you did not have to worry about any of those things, and so I really enjoyed what was going, had a neat time, did very well. And when I graduated, I thought, well, I will apply at the attorney general's office, because my kids were still in school. My husband was making his way through the academic career at that time and was putting in inordinate hours, 'cause if you're going to manage to be a college professor you need to do research, he was just starting his career, also, so somebody needed to you know be home in the evenings and not traveling and doing those kinds of things, so I won't be here in Austin [Texas] that much travel wasn't that much travel, so I went down to apply, and so they called me back and they said, well, they had talked to the head of the division that I had worked in when I was there, and he said, well, I would never hire a woman, but if I were going to hire a woman, Myra [HistoryMaker Myra McDaniel] is the only woman I've ever seen that I would hire. So they decided you couldn't get no better commendation than that (laughter). So I got hired to be an assistant attorney general, so that's where I started. Story_ID: 475853 Speaker 1: So that starts a great career. Speaker 2: Yes, it did. Speaker 1: Okay. So tell me about your first job at the attorney general's office. Speaker 2: I was very fortunate. I went into the tax division, which I did not think I was gonna like. We worked with state sales taxes and other kinds of state taxes. The attorney general is the litigation arm of the state, so anybody sues any state agency, the state attorney general's office, those are the people who go out to court to defend the lawsuits. So I had two kinds of lawsuits. I had one kind where we were suing a million people for tiny bits of tax, and the other one where major, major law firms who were hired by major, major corporations were suing the state because they felt that they were being improperly taxed. Tax is--it's a very interesting field, because what people are arguing about is whether you actually caught them in the tax, so they say, "You know, I'm an apple and you're taxing oranges, and so therefore I shouldn't be taxed." And, the state tax people come in and say, "No, no, you actually are not an apple, you're an orange. Look at that skin." The other guy says, "No, no, look at these seeds," it's like, "No, no look at the pulp," so what the litigators do is we go argue about how much you owe, everybody said he either owed this or you don't owe anything, and they'd pay the money in in order to--in order to argue about it, you have to pay your taxes first and then you get to argue. So they would pay the taxes and test and sue, and we would go to court to defend the tax, and it was just marvelous, because you--in the first place, you got to get lots of field trips to see how things got made, like diamond drum bits, because they were sure if you actually saw how they were doing this, that you'd understand why they weren't taxable (laughter). But then also most of the arguments that you had were either constitutional taxes burdening the commerce clause, so therefore, and so our arguments would go all the way to the Supreme Court of the United States, or you're arguing about definition of a couple words. Okay. You got these three words, who gets caught by them? Or, you know, you're not treating us equally with other people who are in the same group that we're in. You can tax--you can divide people into groups and tax each group separately, but you can't take a group and divide and inter-divide a group and tax one person one way and the other person the other way, so--it was a neat job. I enjoyed it enormously. It was very, very good. Story_ID: 475854 Speaker 1: What was your most memorable case that you worked on [in the tax division, Texas attorney general's office]? Speaker 2: (Sighs) There were--well, there were lots of them that were memorable for different reasons, okay? So one of them where we were suing--or no, they were suing us, I guess it was Exxon [Exxon Mobil Corporation] was suing us--they bring pipeline, big pipes in. They were made in France, and they bring them over, they code them, and they put them in the ground, and they said that these--they never did anything with them in Texas, because the minute they went into the ground, they were interstate commerce and so therefore they should not be taxed, okay? And we said, "No, there is that instant when they are in Texas when you're coding them, when you could use them for anything you wanted to, but you have not yet put them into the ground and that taxable moment," and we won that in the United States Supreme Court. That was a big case. Another very memorable case did not go that far but there were people in west Texas who did not believe they should pay taxes. You have perhaps heard of people who think the United States should still be on the gold standard and shouldn't pay taxes and that this is akin to slavery, that you have them collecting taxes for people. They're making that argument, and so we went out, we sued them, of course, to say, "No, you are gotta pay us taxes." They own stores, you know, groceries and this kind of--and so we sued them for the tax that was due, and we went out there to depose them. The people who work for the tax office, the comptroller's office said, "Well, are you bringing the DPS [Texas Department of Public Safety] with you, because these people have guns and we're very afraid for our lives, if you just come out and sit these people down (laughter) to depose them about what they're doing." So that was a very different kind of excitement that very different kind of case. It was very memorable. The courts agreed with us that they should pay taxes, by the way. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: Well, all those arguments had been made back in the '30s [1930s] when sales tax and--started in the Northeast. It was relatively new in Texas, but it wasn't new there. They didn't start collecting sales tax in Texas until the '60s [1960s], late '60s [1960s] when people other places had been collecting for years, and people had made that same argument before. And actually, the--it's not--you are forced to collect the tax, but they give you 5 percent of what you collect, so you can't say that they're forcing you to donate your time to the state, so. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Story_ID: 475855 Speaker 1: So we just finished talking about the taxation division [in the Texas attorney general's office], and you stayed there for how long? Speaker 2: I was there for about six years. I ended up as chief of the division. Speaker 1: Okay. And where did you go next? Speaker 2: I went to the Railroad Commission of Texas, which is a regulatory commission, which actually we have very few railroads in Texas, so they don't do too much of that, however, they do regulate oil and gas, which is their major reason for being, and I was special counsel there for just about a year, I guess, maybe not quite that long. And then a friend of mine who taught at the University of Texas [University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas] was working as a consultant, I guess, to some companies that were all owned by the same family. They had a company in San Antonio [Texas] that inspected pipe, and they needed--they got--they wanted to sue some people who had walked away with their trade secrets and they had not patented things that needed to be patented but at least they were trade secrets, and they wanted to sue these folks who quit their jobs and were planning to set up business for themselves, and what they thought would make some sense would be to hire an in-house lawyer to do the trial work rather than hiring a law firm, because it would be cheaper, which it really would be, and I said well, I would be willing to go and do that if they would give me the opportunity to learn how to be general counsel, because I thought that that was a direction that I would like to go at that point. Working with the state is a good--it's interesting because it's very political in that the heads of all the major agencies in Texas actually are elected, so in order to have a major position with internally you have to be kind of in-line with whoever happens to be elected at the moment. Well, you know, four years later they're gonna turn over and you kind of get started all over again, and it--that just did not seem to me to be the kind of thing I wanted as an attorney, so I thought I would enjoy being corporate counsel in-house that--that gives you a different, very different ability to assist people, solve their problems before they get to be big problems, and it was very similar to the kind of work that I had been doing at the railroad commission. So I said, you know, if you give me the opportunity to do this, so they said fine. So I went on, and for a period of time there we had a two-city, two-career family. By that time, of course, my children [Diane McDaniel Rhodes and Reuben McDaniel III] were grown and gone, and so I had a one-bedroom apartment in San Antonio, and I would drive down on Monday mornings. My husband [HistoryMaker Reuben R. McDaniel] would drive down on Tuesday evenings, and he would spend the evening and go back on Wednesday morning (laughter), and I would come home on Friday nights, which worked out very well. Quite often, I would come home on Thursday nights and do legal research here in Austin [Texas], because we had--I had much better access to legal law libraries here than I did in San Antonio. About midway through that year, the oil field business kind of tanked, so they were no longer needing to inspect oil field pipe because there was backed-up years' worth in field, so they were shutting that down and told me to come to Midland, Texas, where their major offices were. They owned paperless office company and all different kinds of things, and so I went to Midland and had a apartment out there, and the company would fly me out on Monday mornings and back home on Thursday evenings, company car, so it worked out very well. Story_ID: 475856 Speaker 1: And that November, Mark White, who had been attorney general when I left the attorney general's office, was elected governor, and he had someone call to ask if I would be willing to be general counsel to the governor. It is very difficult to tell a governor no. You can say, "Well, you know, I'm--" et cetera, et cetera, but, you know, so in any event, I came back, I did that. That started in January of '83 [1983], and by June--and I told him when I did that that I wasn't gonna stay forever, but so I did that, and by June of '84 [1984] Bickerstaff Heath [Bickerstaff Heath Smiley Pollan Keever and McDaniel; Bickerstaff Heath Delgado Acosta LLP, Austin, Texas], the law firm I'm with now, was looking for someone to come at-trial attorney to come and work with them. I had worked with many of the lawyers who were here, it was a relatively small firm, and we had been in attorney general's office together and knew each other well, so they said, "Why don't you come do this?" I said, "Great," I said goodbye to the governor (laughter), got to make the client who had a telephone company. Long-distance type companies were just starting up then. AT&T [American Telephone and Telegraph Company; AT&T Inc.] had broken apart, so there were all kinds of companies down there, and so he went down and we looked at his switch, and he told them he would teach me all these words, dealing with that business, and the governor called and said, "Well, I think you should be secretary of state," and I had heard a rumor that I was on the list, and I had told his appointment secretary, "Dwayne [ph.], you know, just take me off the list, I know a lot of people who want to do this, I don't have any interest in doing this, I just got a new job started." You know, one of the things the people at the law firm said to me, you know, "If you're going to plan do a political career--" you know, then, like, "No, no, I have no further political ambition, I'd be happy to go back to the practice of law, it seems like a good plan." So the governor then called, and we sat and we chatted, and I told him well you know, "I just started, I got a new client," and all that, and he said, "Well, do I need to talk to your partners?" et cetera, et cetera, et cetera, so and eventually once again, I was persuaded that I needed to drop what I was doing and be of service to the community, the larger community, and so I was secretary of state. Story_ID: 475857 Speaker 1: So how was that position? I mean, what was it like to be secretary of state? Speaker 2: Oh, it's better than being governor, actually (laughter). In Texas, the secretary of state is the second person after the governor. The lieutenant governor runs on a separate ticket. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And sometimes it's not even in the same party as the governor, but any event, because the lieutenant governor runs on a separate ticket and is the head of the Senate [Texas Senate], has lots of power there. And the governor's position is a very weak one in the State of Texas. The governor gets to appoint a secretary of state, who then is the person who shows up when the governor can't go, so the secretary of state gets to be part of the governor's inner circle, and all of the things that the governor is planning to do, all the crazies that come up, you're part of the team that figures out what we're gonna do next, so you always know everything about--that's going on in the state, and you get to do all the things the governor does with none of the blame (laughter). So if there is a speech that the governor's supposed to give and he can't get to, you go and you give them the speech, you--when people call and his calendar is too full, you go and do whatever it is that needs to be done, so you get to go do incredibly great receptions. Dr. Pepper was having its hundredth anniversary, so I got to go and represent the State of Texas at that thing, which was just a hoot, it really was, you get to fly around in the state plane by yourself, which is kind of neat deal and much, much nicer than going to the airport, even in those days when we didn't have all of the strip-down searches that you get with--after 9/11 [September 11, 2001], you still were able to avoid everything because when you got ready to leave, you could call the airport and say to your pilot, I'm ready to go, and you got there, the motor was running, the plane was running, you climbed up the stairs and took off. That was way cool. It was an interesting, very demanding kind of job, because you--when you're booked up a year ahead of times sometimes, you--so you cannot, like, call a friend and say, "Would you like to have lunch? I have a date tomorrow, we're in what, right now we're in February, well, my next available lunch is in December, which I have free." You know, it just sounds so arrogant so you don't do it. Fortunately, I had a few good friends who would call my secretary and sign themselves up months in advance and we'd go to lunch, but you also go to so many functions, and when you go home, you really don't want to see anybody or talk to anybody, you just feel that you've been at a breakfast meeting, you've given a speech at lunch, you've been to a reception or something in the evening, and by the time you get home you don't wanna call people, and when you get to the weekend, if you don't have anything to do, you are just very pleased (laughter). On the other hand, the opportunity to do all those things is just wonderful, and you get to meet very neat people, some of them very important, like I got to meet Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] and chat with him, which I would never have done otherwise, you know. You get to give some fairly important speeches to people, you get to spend a lot of time--I spent a lot of time going to small towns in the state, giving talks to high school kids to come out and vote and kind of did change some of their minds about that, I know, because one of them was a daughter of a friend of mine who was very--her mother was very active in politics, and she said she was so glad I had come and taught them what to do, because, you know, she would be embarrassed to go in and very shy and timid about going in to vote and not know what was gonna happen when she got there, and she certainly wasn't gonna ask her mother, (laughter) she's like of all people, you know, I would see other students who would feel perhaps their mother wouldn't know, here was someone whose mother was--(laughter) so I say very politically connected and voted all the time, no, she could not possibly plan to go with her mother, just wasn't gonna be done. So you do actually have some impact on the world that you would not have otherwise. Story_ID: 475858 Speaker 1: What presidents have you--have you met presidents of the United States? Speaker 2: I've not met presidents of the United States, no. Well, I met Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton], yes, but I mean not--well, he wasn't president when I met him. I would--what happened (laughter)--what happens is when people are out barnstorming, of course they come through Texas, and sometimes I'll go over and meet them if my friends are having something for them and sometimes I don't, but yes, I can do that. I mean, I--you know, I met John Kerry who if he had gotten to be president, I met him, yes. Well, obviously, George Bush [President George Walker Bush] (laughter) while he was governor, and while he was governor I have a picture of me with George somewhere, and you know, you get to talk to him and--it's part of being highly visible in the political arena. You do get, you know, to meet presidents. That's different from saying I went over to their house and I was in the White House [Washington, D.C.] and we had dinner with them, and things like that. I didn't get to do that, no. So that was my original reaction when you said that, because-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --partially because Bob Armstrong, who was undersecretary of--Bruce Babbitt's wife is Linda Aker [sic.], who was a partner in my law firm [Bickerstaff Heath Smiley Pollan Keever and McDaniel; Bickerstaff Heath Delgado Acosta LLP, Austin, Texas], and they were good friends with the Clintons and they did go over to the house and watch movies and have dinner. I mean, you know, they would call them up and say, you know, "Why don't you guys come on over, we're gonna have dinner tonight, you know, and we're home and we'd like some company," and they'd go over, so that's what I was thinking about and, no, I have not met presidents in that sense of the word, but have I actually been there and shaken their hands, yes, I have, did the same thing with LBJ [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] when he was president, 'cause of course we were all here. Story_ID: 475859 Speaker 1: Did your husband [HistoryMaker Reuben R. McDaniel] attend most of these affairs with you? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: No? Speaker 2: No. He was a very busy man (laughter). In his own right he is very, very well-known nationally, and we decided early on that, you know, that we would each attend some of the other's engagements. I can be the spouse when he's in Indonesia, but I'm not gonna be the spouse in Wichita Falls [Texas], I (laughter) you know. And so, yes, he went to some secretary of state of affairs with me, other ones he couldn't go. If he's teaching, for example, you can't just not teach because your wife is going to a party somewhere and so he-- Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: Yes, some we did and some of them we didn't. Speaker 1: Did you do a lot of personal traveling, like on vacations? What were some (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure. Speaker 1: --of your destinations that you would like to talk about? Speaker 2: I have been very fortunate indeed in my lifetime. I got to do my dream, dream vacations. My husband had the opportunity to teach in Indonesia and Thailand, and so I was able to add on to that trip and go to what used to be New Guinea [Papua New Guinea] and see the Stone Age tribes and sit down with them, hold their babies. It was just incredible, incredible. Speaker 1: Tell me more. Speaker 2: Okay. Well, you know, Margaret Mead wrote about these people, well, they're still there, still living the same way they have lived forever, and you don't get many--at that point, rather, it was ten, twelve years ago. You do not get very many tourists there, so there may be a thousand tourists a year at most that go. So when you go you have your own interpreter, your own driver, and you stay in a thatched hut, all of the--I don't know if you'd call it a hotel, motel, whatever, the hotel that is there consists of thatched huts, and the beds were along the wall, and although they had electricity, it was by the door and so you didn't have nightlights and you didn't have radios, and you had to have your flashlight, because when you turn the light off, you'll never be able to find your bed. And although they had running water, they didn't have hot running water, so they would say to you at nighttime, "What time would you like your hot water in the morning?" and you would go to the door and there would be this huge bucket of steaming water that you would go and mix with cold water and have your morning ablutions. But we had a delightful guide and drove over to see the tribes and all. Oh, they had cave drawings and everything. It was just marvelous. And I got to go into the men's--I guess you'd call it a cabin, it was really bigger than a hut. It's a long thatched affair the men go in, the women have their own over here, and I got to go in, which women normally didn't get to go in the men, but since I was a tourist, I got to go in and see them, and they were a very short people, as you can imagine, so they were very amused at the height of my husband and myself and we got to do a number of things there, the most peaceful place in the world, Baliem, B-A-L-I-E-M, Valley [Baliem Valley, Papua New Guinea], so we did that, and then we went to one of the tropical islands there. Story_ID: 475860 Speaker 1: We--well, we went to Jakarta [Indonesia] and Yogyakarta [Indonesia]--we went to Yogyakarta, which is old Jakarta, we went to Bali [Indonesia], we went to old tropical island where they set up a resort type thing where they do trains which my husband [HistoryMaker Reuben R. McDaniel] was doing for a living, went from there, stopped off at Singapore and then we went to Thailand, and we took a trip, jus the two of us, to northern Thailand and then came down the river in a little motor boat thing and came down. The whole thing was just marvelous. Thailand's just an amazing place. Bangkok [Thailand] is sometimes I would get sensory overload and have to go back to the hotel and sit quietly in a darkened room because it had the same kind of weather we have here [Austin, Texas]. It was like 99 degrees and 99 percent humidity, except all the buildings were brightly colored, so you have lots of color around, then you had lots of little altars where people would place food for the various monks have gone by, and you had people cooking in the streets and you had traffic that would be eight lanes of cars and in between you would have motorcycles with four or five people on, little bitty motorcycles and you have pedal carts, all kinds of conveyances crowded in between the lanes, so you'd have cars in the lane and then you'd have all these other conveyances in between riding on the lines, and there are people who were trying to sell you things, and so you bargained for everything. So when you leave the hotel, the concierge would go out and bargain with the cab driver and tell you how much you had to pay when you got there, so that was fine. I couldn't never get back home for the same price I paid to leave. And so one day I am out there, bargaining to come back, my husband's teaching class, meanwhile I'm out doing all these tourist things, and so I am there opening cab doors, talking to people, slamming the cab door, walking away, you know. Finally, I did the translation, and I was arguing about a quarter. I decided obviously I should just get in this cab and let them take me (laughter) back to the hotel. There were--they used baht as their currency, and I don't remember how many of them were to a dollar, but they were twelve, thirteen hundred to a dollar, and so you'd be arguing about X number of them, so you're arguing about four or five thousand baht, so when you translate that into our money, turned out to not be enough money to even argue about. I'm there just well into negotiating, slamming doors, marching around (laughter). So that's one of my memories of that. We also traveled--my husband taught in Helsinki in Finland, for six or eight years in the spring every year, and I went one year and spent a couple of weeks there, and we still have some good friends in Finland we get to see from time to time. When my daughter's children were twelve each, we took each of them to their first trip abroad, and we took my granddaughter to London [England] and Paris [France] was the place she wanted to go, and my grandson wanted to see old things, so we went to Rome [Italy] and London, and spent about a week in each place and had a wonderful time doing that. Been to Israel, most of the states in the United States, Canada. My husband and I took a trip across the Canada in a train, marvelous train trip in the number one train, goes across Canada, just glorious scenery and marvelous, marvelous thing to do. Story_ID: 475861 Speaker 1: You are secretary of state [for Texas] for three years? Speaker 2: Yeah, about three. Speaker 1: Okay, about three years? Speaker 2: Maybe two and a half, I guess, actually, two and a half, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Two and a half. And then you become partner at-- Speaker 2: This law firm. Speaker 1: Bickerstaff [Bickerstaff Heath Smiley Pollan Keever and McDaniel; Bickerstaff Heath Delgado Acosta LLP, Austin, Texas]. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. And how did that happen? Tell me about that, you become a partner? Speaker 2: Well, when I left become secretary of state they said, "Surely you're gonna come back here" (laughter). So once I was finishing that up, I did go and talk with other law firms and finally decided I would be most comfortable here. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I've been very fortunate because I've never been forced to make lots of money and whatever, so I could actually pick places to be and things to do where I enjoyed being rather than say, "Well, you know I have to meet this payment or do this or do that." I've never had that problem as an adult. Things were tight when I was growing up, but they worked out very nicely since then. Speaker 1: And you were the managing partner for-- Speaker 2: For a while, yes. For four years, yes. Yes, I took a term as managing partner, yes. Speaker 1: What was that like, being a managing partner? Just tell me-- Speaker 2: Well, managing lawyers is like herding cats (laughter). A managing partner gets to do several different kinds of things. One of the things you obviously get to do is look at all the kind of personnel issues that are going on in a firm, which you're always having personnel issues, whether you are saying, "We're having our twenty-fifth celebration, what kind of party shall we have?" Or whether someone needs to be corrected about something, you got to fire people, you got to hire people. Partners are always--sometimes needing encouragement if they're new. Young partners kind of have to get an idea that you do have to make rain of your partner it goes along with the job, I mean, it sounds great to say, "Well, I used to be an associate, and I just kind of burrowed down and worked away and somehow now that I'm a partner, somebody's gonna give me work to do." Well, that's not what's gonna happen, and so you have to meet with them and you gotta say, "Now, you know, you've turned a leaf, and these are the kinds of things that you need to do." So you do mentoring, you are a sounding board for people who feel like you should be running the law firm some other way. There are many ways to run law firms, and people who work in them always feel like the guys over there have a better set-up than we have, so you kind of visit with them, and sometimes the partners decide to make changes and sometimes they decide they're not going to, but you do have to make decisions. One of the things that we decided to do while I was a managing partner was open a branch in Dallas [Texas], so, I mean, that certainly was a major undertaking. I spent a lot of time spending weeks in Dallas, try to come home on the weekend and spend a week in Dallas, working with the branch that was up there, so you get to do lots of different kinds of things when you're managing partner. Story_ID: 475862 Speaker 1: Do you remember or is there a memorable trial that you--that you handled while working for the law firm [Bickerstaff Heath Smiley Pollan Keever and McDaniel; Bickerstaff Heath Delgado Acosta LLP, Austin, Texas]? Speaker 2: I had one that lasted for three months and I ended up losing. I was very unhappy about that. I'm--the person who was judge then is now representative of the United States Congress (laughter) but in any event (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, tell me about it. Speaker 2: It was a construction case. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The--we were representing the city and big construction had gone very badly and was just--it was very long, tedious kind of trial. We were positive that we had won, the jury did not agree with us, it was real funny, because the lawyers on the other side was sure we had won, and the jury did not agree with us. The jury felt, strangely enough, that there was some kind of money passing hands between the city manager and the engineer and there was something wrong, and you're like, "There was no evidence to back that anywhere." I will grant you that the city's engineer was a very literal-minded person, which made him an excellent engineer but not a great witness, so you could not get the same answer from him twice, because (laughter) if you said--if you didn't ask it exactly the same way you didn't get exactly the same answer, so of course, the lawyers on the other side had great fun with that. The city manager, unfortunately, was an alcoholic, and so in the morning he was kind of timid and in the afternoon he was kind of aggressive, because when he went out to lunch, he would come back (laughter) but there really had never been any graft, any bribery, anything of that sort going on, and somehow the jury decided that there was, so that's why we lost the case. Didn't have anything to do with any of the facts of the case that we had so laboriously put before them, so for three months (laughter). Story_ID: 475863 Speaker 1: Now in 2003 you become a non-equity partner [at Bickerstaff Heath Smiley Pollan Keever and McDaniel; Bickerstaff Heath Delgado Acosta LLP, Austin, Texas]. What does that mean? Speaker 2: Partners share both the benefits and the burdens of whatever profit the company's making, okay? So if you're not making any money, you don't have anything to share, but you also have your name on the lease, you have your name on the rolling line of credit, on any money that's being borrowed. So when we decided--I actually decided this. I decided a long time ago that most law firms run into problems when the senior partners get to be of retirement age and then don't retire. And so because they're senior, of course, they are still taking home a bigger share of the take of profits because you get prof- your profit formula is going be based somewhat on seniority. So they are still gonna always be the big dogs until you lose younger members of the firm who are rainmakers who would be very interested in coming up and it's time they took over the firm. So I said now when you get to be seventy, you just need to become of counsel and go on salary, and that's what I did. Other than that, nothing changed (laughter), so I still from time to time make suggestions about how the firm should be run or not, depending on how I feel about it. I still have my major clients that I've always had who are very happy with me and I bring their--I still have new clients from time to time. I don't particularly spend a lot of time going out looking for new clients, but I still get new clients from time to time. Story_ID: 475864 Speaker 1: You were going to tell me about the time that you spend with younger attorneys. Speaker 2: From time to time I will get a call from a younger attorney who says, "I'm just in law school, I'm just graduated, I just got my degree, do you have any suggestions on how I might find work?" for example. I get questions from students, women students, about how do you present yourself, how do you manage to succeed? I get those kind of questions both from African American students and from women in particular. You tell them lots of kinds of things. Some of the kinds of things are very personal. You have to have a lot of energy if you're going to be truly successful, so if you don't enjoy good health, high energy level, there are lots of kinds of things that you can do which you will enjoy and which will be a big contribution, but you're probably not going to be very--be as visible as I have been, because the kind of visibility I've had requires somebody who actually can work sixty, eighty hours a week and still on Monday morning get up and smile and go back and start again. Everyone can't--everyone cannot do that, not because they don't have the ambition or they don't have the talent, but physically you can't do that, then that's something that you need to know about yourself. If you are a woman or African American, you really have to learn not to take things personally. I was telling you about that three-month trial, well, one of the things that trial lawyers try to do quite often to people is kind of put them off their pace so they will say things nobody ever said to me, a little lady even patted me on the head. On the other hand, during that three-month trial, one of the very well-known lawyers in town [Austin, Texas] came up to me and said something about that he just could not believe what I was putting on, that I just didn't have any integrity. And so the young lawyer who was working with me was a young woman, well, she was just incensed. She was just (laughter). "I'm like, Sarah [ph.], you know, just don't pay them any attention." I said, "You know, if I believed what white men said to me about me, I would never get anywhere, you know." The fact is we have something we're doing here, we have to keep concentrated on what we are doing. We cannot let ourselves be thrown off our stride by somebody who says something like that, because the only reason they say it is to see if they can get you upset enough so that you're not prepared the next day, so that you're not any longer focused on what you are doing, so that's one of the kinds of things that both women and African Americans have to understand is that surely there is a time when you can go home and cry in your beer if you want to, but I found that generally by the time you get to that moment in your life, you don't care anymore, it's just too late to cry now, you know, four hours later and like, well, whatever. You really do have to always be able to just hold your head up high and know who you are and what you're doing and keep focused on it, so that's--that's one of the kinds of things I try to tell people. Story_ID: 475865 Speaker 1: You need to get some management skills somewhere along the way. You don't have to actually manage people to do that, but there's certainly lots of books on management. There are now, of course, videotapes and things on the Internet about management. If you're gonna succeed in the world, sooner or later you have to be able to manage somebody somewhere, you're not just gonna be out there doing your own thing by yourself. And if you're the least bit successful, if you're an entrepreneur, you're gonna end up with a whole company that needs to be managed. If you're a lawyer you're gonna move up in the law firm, and even if you're not the managing partner, you're gonna have paralegals who work for you, you're gonna have secretaries, you're gonna have administrative assistants, so you just need to pick up skills along that line, not just skills about your trade. You also need, if you're going to succeed, to just be better than people expect you to be, which means you have to spend a lot of time at it. You have to keep up with all the literature, you can't ever slack on things. You have to--if you're gonna be a trial lawyer, you have to say, okay, what other possible questions could the judge possibly ask? What issue is not part of this lawsuit but that if you read the case law, you might come up with? And get an answer to it so that no matter what somebody comes in there and says, you actually have the answer, so that every time you get the opportunity to address a question, you're prepared, 'cause if you're gonna succeed, you really have to be well, well-prepared, and that's just takes a lot of effort. It means that, you know, you can't spend a lot of time partying, 'cause you have to have a clear head and you have to put a lot of those hours in to stay prepared so--and you never get to the point where you don't have to do that. I've been very amused when you get to be seventy, the state bar no longer requires that you take continuing legal education. And I find that very amusing, because if you are still practicing, you need to take continuing legal education so that you're always on top of what the latest case law says, what the latest statute is that just changed, so that when you are working with your clients, you can help them find solutions to the problems that they have. So if you--you can't ever stop learning, you just have--in our world you are going to have to be a lifelong learner, you know. You really do have to learn how to work with the computer, you know, you have to be able to record things on your own video machine--tape recorder (laughter), you just have to continue to learn technology information, and it is more important to do that as the years go by, I think. Story_ID: 475866 Speaker 1: Let me ask you just a few more questions then. I'd like your thoughts about the World Trade Center bombings [September 11, 2001 (9/11)]. What are your thoughts about that? Speaker 2: And just what do you mean? Speaker 1: What did you think when it happened? What were your thoughts? What was going on in your world at the time that this happened and just what were your thoughts at that time? Speaker 2: I was horrified, of course. You see it on television-- Speaker 1: Right. Right (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) because I was actually driving to work, and I actually get to my office in time enough to see the second building get hit, and you have a great deal of sympathy for the families of people, but at the same time you have sympathy for the families of all terrorists attacks. I thought it was a terrorist attack, which is what it was, not very different from some other terrorist attacks that we have had. The other ones didn't happen to be on our soil to the same degree. But when a plane goes down because someone's aboard, that's a kind of a terrorist attack that we know about, and so I felt that our response was ill-advised. I thought so at the time. It's one thing to say, "I'm gonna find out who did this particular thing," and it's another thing to say, "I'm going to take on the whole terrorist loosely-organized group out there." Certainly in the past when we had had attacks, what we did was look for the group that had bombed this particular plane and had done whatever and went after those people, not just on kind of a wholesale, let's start a war. Having lived through several different wars, my response, I daresay, was different than other people who had not lived through a Vietnam--the Second World War [World War II, WWII] was so different from Vietnam [Vietnam War] that it went in your mind, you just kind of look at them and say, well, we've got Korea [Korean War] and Vietnam, and we have people who currently are stationed all over the world keeping the peace in various places, what are we getting into? Story_ID: 475867 Speaker 1: The same question I just want your--just your opinion or your thoughts about Hurricane Katrina and what happened in New Orleans [Louisiana]. Speaker 2: We were so ill-prepared for a major disaster, whether you're talking about the kind of hurricane that we had, although we have hurricanes in Florida on a regular basis, the fact of the matter is that we still were not prepared for a major dislocation of people, and when you were watching the lack of response, you just--I was just--it's just incredible. I was incredulous. Your heart really goes out to all of the people who were there and, of course, you have in the front of your mind that if these people had been very wealthy, we would not have this problem, and that, of course, is partly the difference between people I happen to know in Miami [Florida] who have a hurricane and people in Louisiana who had a hurricane, because there's a friend of mine is a lawyer in Miami who has a wonderful home and, yeah, you know, he had all kinds of rain damage and this, that, and the other, and he was talking about it and what trouble he was having getting contractors to come. Well, I mean, he did not have to wait around for things in terms of somebody coming to do something. He could afford to put people up in hotels, then started immediately working with contractors who some of them said, "Okay, well, what you want now is to upgrade the kind of shutters and whatnot you had, the kind of window panes that you had, and it's gonna take us a couple of months to get that." So you could manage to figure out what you're gonna do in the meantime. When you're talking about somebody who's living on the edge and is barely able to make due, and then you say, "Everything that you had is gone, and what's more, since you didn't own it, the likelihood of somebody doing something to replace it is not very good." Additionally, the culture is so different from where the people when they lived there and what they were able to do and make a living and what happened to them when they came to Texas, I don't know what happened in Minnesota, although that's such a different place, I'm sure they had problems, but certainly, they were not at all prepared, and should not have been, to come to Texas, but my daughter [Diane McDaniel Rhodes] did a lot of work with--my daughter's a social worker--she did a lot of work with the victims of Katrina and was talking about--in the first place, she actually went over and saw the devastation, but she was talking about the actual people who were here. One of the guys said, well, you know, when he was there, he was able to pick up work in the building trade, make seventeen, eighteen dollars an hour with no trouble and from time to time he'd go down and work on the docks where he was still making that kind of money. There's no job for him here doing that. The kinds of jobs that we have in the building trade, quite often, are filled by immigrants who come from Mexico who are willing to work for minimum wage or less, and he's like, "How do people live on this kind of money? 'Cause, you know, it's true I don't have a college degree, so there are kinds of things I can't do. On the other hand, I was making a good living back there, you know, and there's nothing here for me to do." So it's a very, very different kind of world. We found that the people who were displaced who were teachers, who were bus drivers, when they came, they got jobs, they got apartments, they went on about their lives, but the people who were having the real problems are the people who were the janitors, who were the busboys, but even people who had jobs and someone who, like, worked for like Entergy [Entergy Corporation], okay, some of the major companies there said to them there, "You can come back, only the husband can come, we will have a space for you, bring one suitcase 'cause, you know, we need you to do your job." And so they were leaving their families here and bunking in with a bunch of guys and a trailer kind of bunk bed situation. It has just been mind-boggling that--the displacement, 'cause you're talking about displacing a couple hundred thousand people with one fell swoop, and we did not have, and I do not believe we still have, any kind of plans for that. Story_ID: 475868 Speaker 1: You were talking to me about your daughter. Tell me her name. Speaker 2: Her name is Diane, D-I-A-N-E, McDaniel Rhodes, R-H-O-D-E-S [Diane McDaniel Rhodes]. Speaker 1: Okay. And what did you say she does? Speaker 2: She's a--she does--right now she is working with SafePlace [The SAFE Alliance, Austin, Texas], which is a shelter (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well does she--? Does she--? Speaker 2: --a very large, very well-known shelter, and she is the senior program director, I guess. Speaker 1: I see. And you have a son also? Speaker 2: I have a son, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes, who lives in Atlanta [Georgia]. Speaker 1: And what does he do? What's his name? I'm sorry. Speaker 2: His name is the same as his dad's [HistoryMaker Reuben R. McDaniel], Reuben, R-E-U-B-E-N, Roosevelt McDaniel III [Reuben McDaniel III]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He is the president and CEO of Jackson Securities [Jackson Securities LLC], which is a subsidiary of Atlanta Life [Atlanta Life Financial Group, Atlanta, Georgia]. It was an investment banking firm. It was started by Maynard Jackson, and he and Maynard shared the same birthday. Obviously, they were not the same age, but (laughter). Story_ID: 475869 Speaker 1: If you look back on your life, would you have done anything differently? Speaker 2: Sure. Who wouldn't? But in one sense if you knew then what you knew now, in another sense no, because you don't--you don't know at twenty-two what you know at sixty-two, so it's all very well to say at sixty-two, "Well, if I would have known then, I would have done X." Well, the fact is you didn't know then, there's no way you could have known then, so all in all, I think I have been exceedingly fortunate, so (laughter). Story_ID: 475870 Speaker 1: Well, you've left a lasting legacy, but what do you want people to say about you? What do you want to be remembered for, you personally? We know about your legacy, but what do you want people to remember you for? Speaker 2: That in very small ways I was able to make the world a better place, and when I say in very small ways, well, I'm talking of, you hug an old lady who needs a hug at that moment and actually notice her because there's so many people who don't notice her at ninety, so that somebody stopping by and actually saying, "Hi," you know, "Hi, big mama, how are you doing today, it's good to see you out." That is helpful for her as well as for me. When people do that for me, it is helpful for me, so I'm saying that that is very helpful, so I want to be known as someone who was able to help individuals. I don't know that one ever really helps change the world at large, and I never had any aspirations to be Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]. Well, the fact is that some people can do that kind of thing, and I'm not that kind of person. On the other hand, I have been able to put together programs that made a difference, for example, in the way the seminary, the Episcopal seminary [Seminary of the Southwest, Austin, Texas], is teaching students, because I was able to help make some real changes there in the curriculum. I have, I think, been real helpful to batches of young women athletes at the University of Texas [University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas] who were able to see an African American woman who comes to games, who will stop and talk, because there are zillions of very wealthy white people who do that, but not very many African Americans who do that, so sometimes I will go and fly on the plane with the kids and hang out a little bit when they go off to ballgames when I have some time, and we used to have them over to our house before they got to be in the NCAA [National Collegiate Athletic Association] when they were in the AIAW [Association for Intercollegiate Athletics for Women], you can invite the team over, and we used to have them over for lunch and dinner, and you would have the whole team, and they would all come. And some of them still remember. People--I think for them was very important at the time, and so those are the kinds of things that I would like to be remembered for. Story_ID: 475871 Speaker 1: You mentioned the church. You're still very active in your church. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: I think I read something about you being a lay minister; is that right? Speaker 2: Yes, I'm a lay eucharistic minister. I'm an Episcopalian at St. James' Episcopal Church [Austin, Texas]. I am the editor of the monthly newsletter, which I have been doing about the last ten, twelve years now (laughter), a thankless task (laughter). No, it's not a thankless task. I have to take that back, because several little old ladies in my church come up to me and keep saying, "You keep doing the newsletter, we need that." I started doing it because I was senior warden at one point along the way, and it was the one thing I felt was important that we needed that we were not able to get anybody to do on a regular basis. I think that in our very busy lives, people travel a great deal, people do not have the same relationship with church that they once had when I was growing up when everything kind of revolved around church and your whole active life was involved that way, and that's not true very much for people any longer. When people feel that they still know what's going on, that they know people there, that they know what's going on, if they've missed a couple of Sundays, they'll come on back, whereas if they don't have some kind of tie, they won't. And so I felt it was very important that once a month we get the newsletter out, and it has all the things you'd be interested in knowing about the church, and we always monthly do a snapshot of someone in the church, old people--for people who have been there for fifty years, people who just got there yesterday, and we'll do a column and a half on them, and talk about how they got to come to this church and what they do with their lives and all so people who haven't been there for a little bit, if you see the name tag, 'cause we wear name tags, they can say, "Oh, you're--I read about you in the newsletter, what about this?" And I say gives them some way to feel like they're still in touch, and so I think that's a very important role that I have there. I was also a co-chair of the last capital campaign, which was the first one we had, which was exceedingly successful. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Much to my surprise, and I still serve on the board of St. Edward's University [Austin, Texas]. I've been on the board since 1986, it's about twenty years now. And I was chair of the board for the past two years now, not this year, so--but I think I've made some helpful things and suggestions along the way and help make policy decisions, and I think I've been very helpful. Speaker 1: Is there anything that we have not talked about that you would like to say? Speaker 2: I think not. Speaker 1: (Laughter) All right. Well, at this point I want to thank you for taking the time to do this interview for The HistoryMakers. Your story surely is inspirational. Story_ID: 475872 Speaker 1: That's my dad, Toronta Canada Atwell, Jr. [Toronto Atwell, Jr.]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): All right, next. Speaker 1: That's a-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Go ahead. Speaker 1: Okay. That's a picture of me 1959, probably. I made that coat (laughter). Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Go ahead. Next. Speaker 1: That's a picture of me playing the piano, probably about the same time period, '58 [1958], '59 [1959]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Got it. Speaker 1: That's a picture of my dad, my mother [Eva Yores Atwell], and my niece. My niece name is Jean Atwell. That's my brother's [Toronto Atwell III] daughter back--that was way back. She's forty now, so (laughter). Speaker 2: That's a picture of my mother as she looked when I was in high school [Philadelphia High School for Girls, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: That's a picture of me when I graduated from high school. Speaker 1: That's a picture of me probably, oh, maybe '57 [1957], '56 [1956], '57 [1957], 1956, 1957. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: That's a picture of me (laughter). Oh, probably mid-'90s [1990s], I'd guess. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Good. Speaker 1: That was the former dean and president of the Episcopal Seminary of the Southwest [Austin, Texas], Durstan, D-U-R-S-T-A-N, McDonald, M-C-D-O-N-A-L-D, the Very Reverend Durstan McDonald, and I was receiving an reward which they gave to--it's a very special award they don't give out all the time that they give to trustees. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: That's a picture of my husband [HistoryMaker Reuben R. McDaniel] and I probably mid-'90s [1990s]. Who knows (laughter)? I look about the same all the time, you know, it's very difficult. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 1: Okay. That's a picture of me. I was secretary of state, obviously, that's Barbara Jordan. The person in the middle there was a young woman who worked for me who I'm still in touch with. She's in Washington [D.C] these days, Samantha [ph.]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: Oh, that picture is probably about 2004. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): All right. Speaker 1: That is Governor Mark White, who was swearing me in as secretary of state in the informal swearing in, because you actually get sworn in so you can do some work before you get around to having the big formal deal (laughter), so this was the informal deal in the governor's office. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: And that was the formal swearing in when I was secretary of state which took place sometime in September 1984. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: That was the day I was sworn in as secretary of state. Starting on the left is my--in the back is my son, Reuben McDaniel III. My mother is in the front, my daughter [Diane McDaniel Rhodes] is next to her, then me, there's my granddaughter, who was three at the time, that's my daughter's first husband, Joseph Castleberry. And you want my granddaughter's name? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Lauren Castle-. Well, now is Lauren Riley [Lauren Castleberry Riley], it was Castleberry then. Speaker 2: The picture was being taken during the time was taken for Ebony. It was in my backyard, and that's my daughter and her first husband, her daughter, me, my husband, my grandson, and my son. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Next? Speaker 2: The secretary of state of Texas opens the House of Representatives [Texas House of Representatives] at the beginning of the session until they get organized, and that's what I was doing there. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: That is a picture of me and Governor White, and we were discussing business, kind of--or that's what we were pretending to do, in any event. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): All right, next. Speaker 2: That's a picture of me when I was five years old. Speaker 1: That's a picture of my mother when I was little, so that's kind of, you know, that's kind of my idealized picture of my mother in my mind. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: That's me lately. I mean, that's--well, that's the picture that we used to, you know-- Speaker 2: That's my husband and I believe it says 1997 on that picture. He was giving a commencement speech at the University of Texas [University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas], not the big commencement, but one of the school--I think the business school commencement...