 Story_ID: 107173 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Observing is Ed Anderson. Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: All right. My name is Walter Milton Myers and I write under the name of Walter Dean Myers. Speaker 1: Okay, now I know there's a significance to the Dean, right? Speaker 2: Right. I was raised by the Dean family. I was raised in a foster home-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --by the Dean family. Speaker 1: All right. And what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: August 12th, 1937, in Martinsburg, West Virginia. Speaker 1: Okay, and sir what is your occupation? Speaker 2: Author. Speaker 1: All right. And what is today's date? Speaker 2: The 5th of August, 2005. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: Atlanta, Georgia. Speaker 1: Okay, right on Auburn Avenue. Speaker 2: Auburn Avenue. Speaker 1: Yep. Story_ID: 107174 Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth there are five People Magazine-ish type questions that I am asked to ask everyone. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: They only require a short answer. The first one is do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Have a favorite food? I like fish. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Fish is my favorite food. Speaker 1: All right, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: No. No. Speaker 1: Favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: London [England]. Speaker 1: Okay, even now? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. And do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: No. No. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Story_ID: 107175 Speaker 1: Well let me ask you about your family history. I want to ask you about your mother's side of the family and your father's side. Speaker 2: All right, now when you're talking about my family, are you talking about my foster family or are you talking about my biological family? Speaker 1: Well both. Speaker 2: I--my biological family, my father came from Baltimore, Maryland, and-- Speaker 1: Well, what was his name? Speaker 2: George Myers. Speaker 1: Okay. And can you give us his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: He was born in Baltimore in 1898. Speaker 1: Okay. And what do you know about the ancestors on your father's side? Speaker 2: I know almost nothing. I know almost nothing about them, you know. I know that his mother's name was Bessie and that's about all I know. Speaker 1: Okay. There are no stories that have passed down the family at all? Speaker 2: No, no stories. Speaker 1: And to your knowledge, was the family always around, Maryland--Baltimore, Maryland area or do they have an origin someplace else? Speaker 2: I don't know. I really don't know anything about them because I left that family at two--about two and a half. Speaker 1: Okay. You never had any contact with them? Speaker 2: I did meet my father when I was around twelve. He came, he came to New York and began to live in Harlem [New York City, New York] near where I lived and I got to meet him but it was not, you know a close relationship. Speaker 1: Okay, so did he live in Baltimore most of his life or--? Speaker 2: No he--no. He moved to West Virginia. He moved to Martinsburg, West Virginia and that's where I was born. Speaker 1: Okay. Now what did he do for a living, do you know? Speaker 2: A handyman. Handyman you know, he was a--hustled for a living, wherever he could find work. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Story_ID: 107176 Speaker 1: Let's see, can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Her name was Mary Green. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is her date of birth? Speaker 2: I don't know. I don't know her date of birth. Speaker 1: Okay. And was she born in Martinsburg or--? Speaker 2: No, she was born I believe in Virginia. Speaker 1: Okay. What do you know about her side of the family? Speaker 2: Well, I can trace her side of the family back to a plantation in Virginia. Virginia was in--the plantation was called the, the Bower, B-O-W-E-R, and that was owned by the Dandridge family. And the Bower was essentially a breeding plantation where they bred us. Speaker 1: Now this is something that people who read history know about, but people ever hardly ever talk about something like this. But this is a breeding plantation. Speaker 2: A breeding plantation. The first time I read anything about--well, first they were family stories and that my great grandmother took care of the babies and that's all we knew. And that we were told that we were part African and part Scotch so that was just the family and I could not verify this for a long time. I read--there was a book called "Swallow Barn" in which they described this plantation and the author [John Pendleton Kennedy], a guy by the name of Kennedy said that he described the "quarters" as row after row of women and children. And so when I read that I thought the men were out working the fields or what have you. But then I came to realize that there were no men, that they had women and they were somehow impregnated and I think by whites because most of the people that came off their plantation were extremely fair-skinned and then they was presumably sold south from there. So I could trace my mother's family back to that plantation. Speaker 1: Okay, so are there any stories that are passed down about that place or--? Speaker 2: No. I went, I went down to the, to the place and we actually went on--it was a very small, a small place. I had the dimensions of it which I sent to the, I think University of Kansas [Lawrence, Kansas] because I also had the crops, the crop production. And the University of Kansas said that the crops that they produced was simply enough to feed the people on the plantation. During the Civil War, Dandridge who was a southern sympathizer entertained southern troops and this is, this is a plantation up in the hills of Virginia at the time. And then of course when the war began, West Virginia broke off but they gave them two years to deal with the slaves that were there and many of the slaves were either sold south immediately or many were sent south to stay there for the duration of the war in case the South won. Speaker 1: Okay. So you're saying that after the war started they were given two years to do something--? Speaker 2: With the slaves. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Right, because they, you know, they were going to enter the Union as a free state but not for two years you know. So that gave them an opportunity to deal with the, with the slaves they had. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. That's the historical forming of West Virginia. Speaker 2: Right. That was the historical forming of West Virginia, yes. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So they were sold, many were sold south, further south? Speaker 2: Many were sold further south. Some were just sent I believe to Mississippi and Louisiana just for safe keeping. So they were you know they were hired, sort of hired out to the Deep South just to--in case the South won the war or unless the, there was a negotiation in which the sides split and what have you. Speaker 1: Yeah. [President Abraham] Lincoln didn't seem to be determined to end slavery you know-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --during most of the war anyway. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: He let border states keep their slaves. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: In fact the [Emancipation] Proclamation only freed those slaves of people who actually were fighting against the (unclear). Speaker 2: Absolutely, right. Speaker 1: Yeah. So did your, did your mother stay in Virginia or was she sold? Speaker 2: So when the-- Speaker 1: Her family I mean. Speaker 2: They stayed. They stayed in Virginia during the war and then after the war they stayed on the same plantation. I mean that's how I could trace them back because this is the first instance after that war, had them still on the plantation. So I could trace them back to the plantation. Then they I guess had no place to go really you know. Then part of the family gravitated to Harpers Ferry [West Virginia] and the other part gravitated to Martinsburg, West Virginia. Story_ID: 107177 Speaker 1: Okay. So do you know anything about how your mother [Mary Green] grew up and where she went to school and that sort of thing? Speaker 2: I don't know. I think Martinsburg [West Virginia] did not have a very prosperous black community. It had--it did not have a prosperous community of any sort, you know. West Virginia was a--was poor before poor became fashionable. They--and she grew up, I knew she grew up poor and had very little schooling, you know. They had a colored school you know, but I don't know what education she had. She died when I was about two years old. Story_ID: 107178 Speaker 1: Okay. Now is there a story that's passed down through the family about how your mother [Mary Green] and father [George Myers] met? Speaker 2: Yeah, it's a fair--it's a fairly convoluted story. My mother was the best friend--my father was previously married and my mother was that woman's friend. And my father saw her and he liked her too and that's how they met. And that sort of dissolved the first marriage which is sort of ironic because the first, first wife became my stepmother--my foster mother [Florence Brown Dean]. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. So it's one of those very strange, you know, ideas. Story_ID: 107179 Speaker 1: Okay. So when you were two and half your mother [Mary Green] died and then your father [George Myers] brought you to New York? Speaker 2: No. No, I was with the family in West Virginia and then my mother had passed away. His previous wife [Florence Brown Dean] by whom he had two children came to West Virginia to get her children. She, she had married, remarried and the, the man [Herbert Dean] that she married saw me. And we had a huge, my father had a huge family and he said let's take that one too, you know, if he were, he was willing to give me up, and apparently he was, you know. And so at about three years old I came to Harlem [New York City, New York]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: To be raised by her new husband, Mr. Dean. Speaker 1: Now what was your stepmother's name? Speaker 2: Florence. Her maiden name you mean or--? Speaker 1: Yeah, Florence--? Speaker 2: Brown. Speaker 1: Brown Dean, right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: She was born in 1904, in Chambersburg, near Chambersburg, Maryland [Chambersburg, Pennsylvania?]. She was half-German, half-American Indian. Speaker 1: Okay. And was she, I mean was she part-African at all? Speaker 2: No, no, no. Speaker 1: Just half-German, half-Indian? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. And what was your stepfather's name? Speaker 2: Herbert Dean. Speaker 1: (Unclear). And what is his date of birth? Speaker 2: Nineteen-o-four [1904]. Speaker 1: Okay. And was he born in--? Speaker 2: Maryland, Baltimore. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay, well what were they like and what was life like in--? Speaker 2: In Harlem [New York City, New York]? Speaker 1: Well, I guess, you know at three years old, I guess you-- Speaker 2: I have no memory of West Virginia at all. Harlem was just wonderful for me, you know. I mean I--my mother [Florence Brown Dean] was a very doting person, a very warm person, spoke to me you know, constantly. She went to the third grade in school. My father [Herbert Dean] had went to the third grade also but he was not literate while my mother was. She could read some, you know. And they were just warm people, you know. He worked, my father worked as a, as a janitor and he usually had more than one job. Sometimes he worked down at the docks. My mom did day's work and sometimes she worked in the factory and sometimes she was home. It just depended upon the family circumstances at the time. And they were--and I--they were warm people. They lived in Harlem. My father liked--he loved Harlem. He had, at one time had ambitions to be a musician. You know he was a friend of Chick Webb. So when Chick Webb came up to, from Baltimore [Maryland] my--and they used to tell me stories about Harlem, about (unclear). Speaker 1: What did your father play (unclear)? Speaker 2: My mother--well, there's two stories. My father said he played a little trombone. My mother said that he tortured the trombone. She didn't like the way he played. But he liked music and he thought maybe he could learn to play trombone. My mom didn't think much of it, but-- Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 107180 Speaker 1: Now when you look at--so your household consisted--and there are other children. They had-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: --other children, so-- Speaker 2: So, my mom [Florence Brown Dean] had two girls, old--they were older than I was, quite a bit older. And it was Viola and Geraldine and they were the daughters of the marriage between my foster, my foster mother and my real father [George Myers], you see. Speaker 1: Okay. So those are your sisters? Speaker 2: They're half, my half-sisters, yes, right, right. And so there were the three of us there. And I was the, I was the fav, the family favorite because I was the boy and I got away with everything so it was a good life for me. Story_ID: 107181 Speaker 1: Okay. Now when you look, you look at your parents' personalities I mean, and including your, you know of course your stepparents because they raised you-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --who do you think you take after? Speaker 2: According to me for many years, neither one of them because you know, I'm this very bookish person and my father [Herbert Dean] didn't read. My mother [Florence Brown Dean] read sparingly. But according to my son, he says I take after my foster father because I'm a very disciplined person. I'm the kind of a person that if something has to be done you know, I don't--my father offered no excuses for anything. He did not believe in accidents. He says you make your life and that's it and so--and that's my philosophy. So--and I, I guess I got it from him. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 107182 Speaker 1: Now what was Harlem [New York City, New York] like when you were growing up? And describe your neighborhood and what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: I lived on the west side of Harlem on Morningside Avenue between 121st and 122nd Street. My--on the corner was the Presbyterian Church, Church of the Master and I was raised in that church. I went to Sunday school there. I went to Monday night bible classes there. The gym, had a gym, had a--the ceiling was like twelve feet so everybody had a flat jump shot who played in that gym, went to the first dance in that gym. So my church was there, my family was there. I went to school in Harlem and this was just lovely for me. My--when I was growing up like five, four and five years old, my mom [Florence Brown Dean] would take me from a hundred and--from where we lived between 121st, 122nd up to 125th Street, which was only like three blocks and it was a big thing for us to walk across 125th Street. And it had all the shops there. You know it was really sort of very, very neat. And then you could, you know, you could meet anybody in those days because with segregation you had black people who were making it, making it in Harlem. They lived there so you might walk across the street and see Joe Louis or Sugar Ray Robinson. Sometimes Willie Mays would come and play stickball after the games 'cause Willie was kind of shy. Ray Robinson would come and box the kids on the block so it was really sort of just wonderful. I didn't know that all these people that were you know, were going to be world famous or were world famous. They were just, just people, you know. Speaker 1: You kind of took the access for granted, you know. Speaker 2: I took their access for granted, you know. I mean, if--I should have taken photographs of all of them. I didn't know that of course. And my church, of course in churches in those days were also social outlets and so if someone was a singer they would, you know--they could not get the big concert halls and they would sing in churches. And you--they would take up collections and what have you. And in my church sometimes Langston Hughes would come and read and then we'd sell his books. He would come with a suitcase full of books, you know and we'd sell his books. So it was, it, it was a wonderful experience. I, I loved Harlem. I loved going--I would go to the Apollo [Theater] at times and see live bands. And I thought this is what the world is like. I didn't know that it was not all--the whole world was not like this. But for me it was just sensational, wonderful. A place of lots of love and the people in the community looked out after the kids. I was telling someone that when I was a kid I ate orange peels and they say, well why did you eat orange peels? Because if you sat on the church steps and oranges were--cost like two cents at that time and you ate an orange. You'd better not throw those orange peels on the sidewalk in front of the church cause if you did those sisters were--from across the street would come and get you and go to your mother's house and you know. So you would eat the orange peels rather than throw them on the, on the--and then Reverend [James Herman] Robinson, Reverend Robinson was the minister who began Operation Crossroads [Africa (OCA)] sending students to Africa and from there the Peace Corps developed. But if he caught you doing something that's why he paid for it, he would give you a whack in a minute. You know he wouldn't mind laying on of hands. But it was just a wonderful experience. I mean I thought the whole world was wonderful. Story_ID: 107183 Speaker 1: There were things that were going on that I was not aware of in my life and that--I went to schools in Harlem [New York City, New York] and then in mixed schools. And when I would go to the schools, I was acquiring knowledge but also values and I wasn't aware of the values that I was acquiring. And part of those values represent--were my identity and my identity as a black person. And I never found my image in the books that I read. I never found any history of who I was except a mention of slavery and a mention of George, you know a paragraph about George Washington Carver. Frederick Douglass never made the history books when I was a kid. You know, I wasn't aware of it at the time but I was assigning myself a value that was less than the value I would have assigned myself had I not been African American. I was devaluing myself because I did not find--I knew, I knew the schools were transmitting value and everyone was telling me this is the important stuff and I wasn't in that important stuff. My people were not in that important stuff. This affected me a great deal because somewhere along the line I decided not to be, I did not want to be black. And this was no conscious decision. This was no, nothing saying that okay, I'm not going to be black, but I had somehow invested my, in the idea of being smart. I was told I was smart and that's cool. Smart people are valuable. And I was going to be smart. I was going to be an intellectual and you know I worked hard and I read a lot. And the problem with that is that it depended--well number one, the first problem was that I was devaluing who I was and the people around me. I did not want to be like my father [Herbert Dean] who was a janitor and worked in the--you know he was a good man, but that's not what I wanted to be cause that was never valued. I did not want to be--I loved my mother [Florence Brown, Dean] very much but you know, she--when she did work she worked in--she did days work or worked in a factory. My uncles and the other men that I knew were all laborers and that was not valued either. So--but then when I finished, when I decided, when I was about fourteen, fourteen and a half, fifteen that I could not go to college and when I realized that, then that was a major blow to me. That was not just an attack--that was just not the idea that I could not go to college right away. But that also meant to me that I had no value at all since I could not be the intellectual that I thought I was going to be. Story_ID: 107184 Speaker 1: Now let me back up a little bit. Speaker 2: Okay, sure. Speaker 1: Let me go back to grade school-- Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: --for a second. But, how would you describe yourself as a young kid growing up in Harlem [New York City, New York]? What were you--I've read that you-- Speaker 2: I considered myself busy. I was a busy kid. Other people thought I was--I fought a lot. I fought all the time. I have, you know I had a speech defect and kids could not understand me, teachers couldn't understand me when I spoke. And if you couldn't, you know that was very frustrating for me. And I would, since I was physical anyway, you know I would not mind hit--I fought teachers, I fought kids. Speaker 1: Now what was the nature of your speech impediment? Speaker 2: It was, I think it was something that came from my family. It was in my family background. I spoke extremely quickly and I have a tendency to live as much in my head as I do in the world. So I would understand what I was going to say but when it came out, it would--came out--I would pronounce the vowels only very often. So it was, the speech was quite bad. My brother had the same problem, so when he came to New York, he was like three years older than I am. They put him into a Spanish language class his speech was so bad. But I found--I was also busy. I was just the kind of kid--I think today I would have been on drugs because I always had something to say, you know. My hand was always up and if the teacher didn't call upon me, I'd blurt the answer out anyway you know. So I was the kind of kid that you know, I set fires in school. I, I did, you--I just, I was constantly busy in school. I was always wanting to go ahead in the books you know, and school came easily to me. I could learn anything. And it was a very, very, very easy for me. So in third grade I was you know--I remember being slapped by a teacher in the third grade and-- Story_ID: 106875 Speaker 1: So in third grade I was, I was really considered bad in school. And I was slapped around by a teacher and my mother [Florence Brown Dean] had to come to school. Fourth grade I was fighting again and--but luckily for me that year I had my, I had an emergency appendectomy. So (laughter) when I had my appendectomy, the teachers were overjoyed because I was out for the rest of the year, you know and they promoted me on to fifth grade. Again it was, it was again fighting and I wasn't that interested, that much interested in the schoolwork. It was boring to me. So in sixth grade they put me into a male teacher and, I mean you know, ex-Marine. They figured he could handle me you know, and he could because I had a fight with him the very first week you know, and he could handle me. But he was a good guy and he spent a year trying to convince me that I was as smart as I was tough. And he really worked with me that year. That was a reasonably good year for me. He also made me go to speech classes. I was going to speech classes, speech therapy once a week except until I reached the sixth grade and then he made me go one day a week. I went the entire day, I--just working on speech so I could speak clearly. And then I went to rapid advance classes, they put me in a speed, so-called, the speed classes. And when--I did seventh and eighth grade in one year and that was somewhat better for me 'cause I was, I was with a bunch of very, very bright kids. And then the ninth grade that was also good but with, that by then my family was sort of falling apart, you know. I had alcoholism in my family and that was a tremendous burden you know. I mean, you know you couldn't come home and study with that kind of things going on in the family. There was so much tension. There was so much--so many problems. My grandfather came to live with us which put an additional burden. My uncle was killed (unclear). Speaker 2: What happened to your uncle? Speaker 1: He had been in jail most of my life and my, this was my father's brother. And he came out and was out for about a year, year and a half and killed in a bar room fight which put my father [Herbert Dean] into a depression, which increased the alcoholism with my mom. So at that point my life became so tense and so upset. You know, I was in high school and I was in a good high school. I went to Stuyvesant High School [New York City, New York]. And so at the time I was fifteen, I was too upset to go to school and I had dropped out of school. Story_ID: 106876 Speaker 1: Now, tell me now where did you go to grade school? Speaker 2: I went to P.S. 125 and up until the sixth grade. And then I went to for seventh and eighth--seventh through ninth grades which was two years, I went to Junior High School 43, and then high school, I went to Stuyvesant [High School, New York City, New York]. Speaker 1: Okay. Stuyvesant's a good high school? Speaker 2: It was a good high school and I went there primarily because some guys on my basketball team were going. Speaker 1: Now that's in Brooklyn, right? Is Stuyvesant (unclear)? Speaker 2: No, no, no. Speaker 1: It's not, okay. Speaker 2: Stuyvesant is lower, on 14th, at that time it was on 14th Street and First Avenue, in between 1st and 2nd. And-- Speaker 1: Now you played a lot of basketball. I've read that you played a lot of basketball anyway but-- Speaker 2: Yes. Yeah. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: That's what I liked. Speaker 1: --did you ever play organized ball, or--? Speaker 2: Not until, not until I got into the [U.S.] Army really. In the military I played all kinds of ball. And I played like on neighborhood teams-- Speaker 1: Church teams and that sort--? Speaker 2: No, I didn't play on a church team, you know 'cause my mom [Florence Brown Dean] would not let me. You know, my mother was not an academic person but she was all over me academically, you know. And so if I--I worked and she said, I--you know, either I had to give up working or I had to give up playing on the basketball team. You know they had the church team. And I wanted to work. I needed--we needed the money and I didn't--my family didn't have the money for me. So I've been working since I was fourteen you know, part time, always working. So I--you know I played street ball all the time which I loved, loved ball you know. And then I went to, when I went to Stuyvesant, it started off okay. But my family problems were too much so I dropped out at fifteen. Speaker 1: That's about 1952, or I guess around '51 [1951]? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: Fifty-Two? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I--there was court, you know truant and what have you and put back into the school. And then I went to, I went to school for a bit longer and then I dropped out again. And dropped out at sixteen and then joined the Army on my seventeenth birthday. Speaker 1: Okay. This would be like Nineteen--? Speaker 2: Fifty-Four [1954]. Speaker 1: --Fifty-Four, okay. All right, so you--your par--your mother's trying to get you to finish right or--? Speaker 2: She was trying to get me to fin--well at that point she was just trying to keep me out of jail 'cause I was so, I was in so much trouble all the time, you know. I'd gotten involved in fighting again in gang fights and stuff like that, you know. Speaker 1: Were you a member of a gang? Speaker 2: No. No. My brother--there was a gang I fought, right? I would fight for any reason (laughter), whatsoever. There's this gang that began to fight a kid and I joined--I jumped in to fight with the kid because that was my nature. And so the gang was after me as much as it was after him and so I got involved with that. And when I dropped out of school the second time, I was hanging with this kid who was getting into some deep trouble and we got involved in some things which were sort of semi-legal or illegal. So I got into trouble with the police and when I turned seventeen, joined the Army, I was you know, thank you Jesus. You know get me out of here. Speaker 1: What did it--so did you have to get--did you have to go through court or I mean-- Speaker 2: I was-- Speaker 1: --did you have a case and--? Speaker 2: I was in court you know only for the truancy 'cause I was made a ward of the city. So and I had to report to counseling once a week and then the second time the--when I was sixteen the police came to the house a week after I had left, left home. And--but when they found that I was in the service they didn't pursue it, you know. They just didn't. Speaker 1: Okay, so you were glad to be--? Speaker 2: I was glad be. Speaker 1: And your mother at that point was glad too I guess-- Speaker 2: She was, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --you know that you were--? Speaker 2: She was definitely glad because she thought that I was going to be, you know, either in jail or killed or something. Story_ID: 106877 Speaker 1: Okay. Now you said like reading became very important in your life early. Your mother [Florence Dean Brown] would read to you-- Speaker 2: She read to me and when you know, when I was four she would read to me every day, you know that "True Romance," that's what she read you know and I picked that up very quickly and I think I picked it up. I enjoyed it not so much because of the story. I didn't like the--I didn't know what the stories were. But just the time with her you know, I mean just the time with her. She would, she--my mom was the kind of person that would clean everything in the house, everything. Her house was always spotless. And when she finished cleaning, that was our time together and sometimes we would go out for walks but sometimes she would just sit and read and that was--so after a while I picked up enough reading so that I could, I could read to her, you know. By the time I was six or seven, I could read at the level she was reading on. And since I, I had these speech difficulties that my social life, you know--I mean I was outside of the house, I was either playing ball you know, or I'd be home. And if I was home, I was reading, so reading became very important to me. Reading you know, that was my other life you know and that was a very important part of my life. But it's also sort of a secret part of my life because you know, other kids didn't read as much as I did and they weren't reading the kinds of things that I was reading either. So-- Speaker 1: What kind of books were you reading and at what ages? I mean, you discover the library at one point and-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --I read there was a big deal. Speaker 2: Right, that was a big deal. And I would just read. First I started off with sports books, anything about sports, I would read. I liked fiction but then I very quickly went to short stories. And by the time I was twelve or thirteen I was reading [William] Shakespeare and reading European literature. And then when I went to Stuyvesant [High School, New York City, New York], they had an excellent English department there and you know they assigned me [Honore de] Balzac and Anatole France and Pierre Loti, all the Thomas Mann. And I begin to get into really, into good literature and that was to me just wonderful. There was a whole other life, an amplified life and I really enjoyed that. Story_ID: 106878 Speaker 1: Okay. Were there any teachers that were especially mentored you along the way or helped you? Speaker 2: At that--you know not that much because Stuyvesant [High School, New York City, New York] is a very competitive school. It start--it's primarily a science school. The teachers were good but my outside, my home life was breaking up to such an extent that I could not really focus on school. I couldn't really--you know things that I should have eating up easily you know, I had just so much turmoil in my life at home that I couldn't deal with it. Story_ID: 106879 Speaker 1: Did your parents stay together? Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah, they stayed together you know, and they stayed together but the--when my grandfather came to live with us it was very difficult. He was ninety percent blind. He could barely see so that was a particular burden on me then and my mother [Florence Dean Brown], you know, was an alcoholic and that's a very difficult, very difficult thing you know. I guess if your father's an alcoholic it's bad but when your mom is, it's extremely, it's extremely hard, extremely hard. And that just you know, just kept me going. And then of course the other thing was that my sense of identity, you know, now that I saw that there was no way I was going to go to college you know, without working I couldn't even keep myself in high school. So--and I was too young, see. I normally should have graduated at--from Stuyvesant at sixteen anyway and that was extremely young. I was not a mature person so it was just a very difficult period for me. Story_ID: 106880 Speaker 1: Okay. So how did you like the [U.S.] Army now and where did they send you first? Speaker 2: I went to Fort Dix, New Jersey and it was sort of a relief because I was away from home. And I, I didn't care for the Army that much, but it was three square meals a day. It was, I sort of put my mind on hold you know. I continued reading. I played ball in the service. Speaker 1: Organized ball in the service? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I ran into my first real segregation in the Army, you know. I mean I remember going to [College of] William & Mary [Williamsburg, Virginia]. We had a team you know. We had a game against William & Mary. And going down to William & Mary and we were warming up and warming up and warming up and the coach said when are we going to start this game? And the coach said, you know, I hate to tell you this, but as soon as you get him off the field, you know. And that was my first you know encounters with--because coming from Harlem [New York City, New York] you hear about segregation. Me, I didn't know anything about segregation you know except you know, I wouldn't do, I wouldn't do this, I wouldn't do that. But you know, when you're there---so I traveled. I was in Virginia and Louisiana and played ball in Virginia, played ball in Louisiana. And you know, you learn about segregation and what have you. Speaker 1: Couldn't eat with the rest of the team and that sort of thing? Or, well you're in the Army so that wasn't a factor but-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, right, right, right. But the real thing is in some places you couldn't play, you know. And if you went off--you couldn't go off post in these places without running into you know, segregation, you know signs and everything like that you know. And plus there's lots of segregation in the Army, you know. And there was, you know--you would--when I was in the army if something happened off post they would line up all the black soldiers and set some, something up and have somebody drive by in a car and they're going to pick out which soldier did this you know or something you know. And you--that was you know embarrassing and what have you. And you had at time to--mostly southern offer, southern officers who didn't, who did not hide their feelings you know, about who you were and what have you. So I didn't care for the Army you know. Speaker 1: Now did you kind of keep up with the news in those days with the Brown v. the Board [of Education] case-- Speaker 2: Yeah, right, right, right. Speaker 1: --and the Montgomery Bus Boycott? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: I think that was going on while you, when you were in the Army, I guess. Speaker 2: Yeah. And yeah, I kept up with that, you know. Then you know, when I came out of the Army in '57 [1957], I was in the army three years. Speaker 1: Did you--how far did you get in terms of rank? What did they--? Speaker 2: Oh, I made corporal you know, and they asked me to re-enlist and offered me, you know--but I--it wasn't for me. Speaker 1: Did they ever think to send you to officer's candidate school? Speaker 2: I passed the test for officer candidate school, but remember I was only seventeen and you had to be eighteen and a half to go to officer candidate school, which meant that I would have to re-enlist you know, and I said no. I'm not going to-- Speaker 1: I understand. Speaker 2: Right, right. Story_ID: 106881 Speaker 1: Okay, so when you came out, you came--did you come back to, I guess you came back to Harlem [New York City, New York], right? Speaker 2: No. No, my family had moved to New Jersey, to Morristown, New Jersey. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I came back there for a year and then I moved back to New York City again. Speaker 1: Okay, so you got out in Nineteen--? Speaker 2: Fifty-Seven [1957]. Speaker 1: Fifty-Seven, okay. Okay so then you moved back to Harlem? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, so what did you do for a living when you got out? Speaker 2: Well, I had no skills and--that I knew about you know. I had nothing to do and I worked in a factory. Speaker 1: Now you had had some experience writing in high school, right? Did--I mean you wrote some in high school. Speaker 2: I wrote in high school but--and there's a teacher told, that told me that I could write, you know. But I came out looking for a job, couldn't find anything that-- Speaker 1: Did you think of using the G.I. Bill to go school or-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --could you? Speaker 2: No, no I didn't because I hadn't finished high school, you see. So I was going to have to find a way of finishing high school first, right? And as I said--I thought about once I get myself established, maybe I'll do the whole thing. And, but then I couldn't find a decent job. I worked as a messenger. I worked as a you know--at one time I remember--what got me back to the writing again was I was tearing down the interior of a building and I was sitting on the curb at lunch time you know, had been tearing down this building all day. And the--some girls came by and one of the guys made some kind of a stupid comment you know. And they looked at us with such distain you know. I said, oh god, you know, I know they're right too, you know. So I said I need to do something with my life and I thought about this teacher saying that I could write. And I began writing, trying to just--I wasn't trying to make a living at it. I was trying to do something to bring myself to a different--to think of myself in a different way. And I began to think of myself as a writer you know, part-time. I would send out my stories and what have you. And they weren't very successful but once in a while I got something published and that was you know--that allowed me to think of myself in a different sort of way. Speaker 1: Let me--well-- Story_ID: 106882 Speaker 1: Do you remember your first time you had something published and who published it? Speaker 2: The first time I had something published, I think it was--well I had sent out some poetry and you know I got married, you know I'm married now. Speaker 1: Now that's a big step. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Now where did you meet your wife? Speaker 2: I worked in the post office for a while and I worked in the post office, I was out looking for a job and a guy said he was going to take the post office test. Now I can, I can--I'm a test taker. Some people can't take tests. I can take any test you know. And so I took this test. I got a call from the post office. I worked there and I met this girl in the post office you know and then I lost that job, you know, again. Speaker 1: What happened? Speaker 2: Fighting on the job (laughter), fighting. I had a quick temper. And then I was on probation in the post office, but then they put me--they changed my job and from loading and unloading trucks to boxing up mail and I could not do that. I can't do that. I can't sit still for that amount of time, you know eight hours a day. And so I stopped, you know I was going, not going, going for a few days and then I got fired from the post office which is not easy to do when you get fired. So I was working this other job, a couple of other jobs I was working on. I was working on as a messenger and tearing down buildings. And then I got into the thing--but the first thing I got published--I sent--I was sending stuff off, it would come back you know, and I expected it to come back you know. But-- Speaker 1: Now how did you know where to send work, I mean where--? Speaker 2: I looked in Writer's Market, pick out something at random. See what they, they'd say oh, we're looking for poetry, nine lines. So I'd do something you know. Speaker 1: So you kind of did your own independent research-- Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: --to find out where to send materials? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then I sent out some, some poems and then about four months later, five months later I got the envelope back. You know you send a self-addressed stamped envelope. It came back and I just said okay I'll send it out someplace else. And when I went to send it someplace else, I opened it up and it was not my manuscript back but it had been published. And that was my first publication. Speaker 1: Well what year was that? Speaker 2: Nineteen Sixty-Two [1962]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, and I was absolutely delighted with that. And then I--a guy named Dan Watts had a magazine called the Liberator. And the Liberator was a small black magazine and he was a very cool guy. He published this magazine, I sent him material and he took a short story. What I had going for me was I wrote all the time. I could--I would write every day, all the time. You know two, three hours a day no matter what else I was doing and I would send out you know volumes of stuff. Occasionally something would get published you know, maybe sometimes three or four times a year, sometimes five times a year. But that was enough to sustain me, not economically 'cause sometimes I would get paid in copies, but the idea that I'm seeing my name in print, you know. I was--I could think of myself as somebody who had something going on. Speaker 1: That--what was the first publication that your poem appeared in? I should have asked that. Speaker 2: It was called the Delta Review and it was a Canadian magazine. Speaker 1: Adulter? Speaker 2: Delta. Speaker 1: The Delta? The Delta Review, okay. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Story_ID: 106883 Speaker 1: Okay, so that, that's--that takes a lot of discipline, you're writing like three hours a day? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You know, you were really determined though it seems. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Did you have any role models for this? I mean, I know you met Langston Hughes early on-- Speaker 2: No, no, no. Speaker 1: --at that point, but-- Speaker 2: No, I had no role models. I did meet--I did read a piece that was by Jimmy Baldwin [James Baldwin] in a thing called Partisan Review, I believe. It was called "Sonny's Blues." And that was the first time I had ever read anything that was very, very serious about Harlem [New York City, New York], you know. I had read some things that Langston had--but you know Langston had this sort of light touch to his stories and then I-- Speaker 1: Right, his ones are simple and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: -- (unclear) things, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, but Jimmy wrote this--I knew--he wrote about streets that I knew about and was a very serious story and I--you know and I was a serious author at the time. So-- Speaker 1: What kind of things were you writing about when you started, I mean--? Speaker 2: I just wrote about life around me. I wrote about the people that I saw, you know, writing about Harlem life. Speaker 1: Okay, and so you were writing--was Sonny's Blues similar to what you were writing? Speaker 2: Yes, yeah. But then I, but then I switched to--all that stuff was being rejected. All my black stuff was being rejected and then I began writing sports and all my sports stuff was being--not all of my, but a lot of my sports stuff was being published. So I wrote about kickboxing, I wrote about basketball, I wrote about bullfighting you know. I had to write about sports. I didn't--I'd have to read book about how to play the game but you know I already played this game. You know who--what's bullfighting about, you know? And--but I could write sports. I could write sports. I could write almost anything, you know I just found that this is what I can do. I can do this thing. Story_ID: 106884 Speaker 1: So you were writing a sports--? Speaker 2: I write sports stuff, then I did some short fiction for men's magazines. Speaker 1: Like Argosy and that kind of thing? Speaker 2: Yeah, right, right, right, right. And, but then I got thought the men's magazines were--I was going to stick with the men's magazines. But then they became girlie magazines, right. Now I wasn't that--I wasn't making enough money to be interested in the money, but I wanted to be able to have these magazines that the publication--what I published made me feel good about myself. And when they became girlie magazines, that wasn't cutting it, you know. So then I began to--I was home and my--I was home one day and looking through a magazine and there was a contest for children's book writers. And I said uh, you know I'll give that a shot, you know. It was for black children's book writers but it was advertised in a white magazine. So I said, I don't know any black people who would read this magazine so that I means I've got a shot, you know. So I sent, I sent off a story there and it was published. I mean it, it won the prize. It was a contest. Speaker 1: And what magazine--what was it, a--? Speaker 2: It was in the Writer's Digest, you know. And black people who wrote--who read the Writer's Digest, any black writers who read that. And I hadn't seen it in any of the black publications. Story_ID: 106885 Speaker 1: And I had met a guy at that time who told me he could get me into college for $7.00. So I said, I didn't believe him but--'cause I had to finish high school you know and that's why I was so hesitant. And he said, no, no I can get you into college. If you can pass the SAT, I can get you into college for $7.00. So I said, well what are you going to do? He said, give me $7.00 first. So the guy, he collected cans, cans and bottles and stuff like this, mostly bottles I think it was at that point. You know he went around the streets and collected stuff and so he didn't look like much to me. So he told me he could get me into college and I had nothing to lose. So I came up with the $7.00, and then so he told me to take the SAT and wait until the last minute and--I needed two courses to graduate from high school. He said wait until the last minute and register at City College [of New York, New York City, New York] as a qualifying non-matriculated student. I says--so I didn't know--I've never heard of such a thing but apparently you could, if you registered late you could register and then they would check your credentials and what have you, you know. He says by the time they get through checking your credentials, if you passed the courses you know, you'll be in. So I, so I needed math and English I think, so I took that you know. So I registered and gave him my $7.00 that was due and they called me down after about four months into the course and said, you can't come to college because you haven't finished high school. You need these two courses. And I pulled out my grades from the first semester--I mean first-- Speaker 2: Quarter or--? Speaker 1: Quarter, yeah, and I had gotten an A in one and B in the other and so they let me stay in college and that's how I got into college without finishing high school. Speaker 2: Okay, what year is this when you get back in college? Speaker 1: Oh, god it was about '60--I've forgotten now, '64 [1964], six--mid-sixties you know. So--and that was really you know a big step for me. And I stayed in--I'm not a, not a, not a school person so I stayed in--went to school at night. I had to work in the day time, went to school at night. And I stayed there for about a year, year and a half and then I, I just sort of dropped out again. Eventually I found a school that I didn't have to go to classes at all which was Empire State College, State University of New York [SUNY Empire State College, New York City, New York] which was really--that's for adult learners. You, you get credit for what you've done in life and any courses you have to take, they will tell you what you need to learn, you get to go out and learn it and come back and prove that you learned it, you know. Story_ID: 106886 Speaker 1: But as far as the writing is concerned, when I entered this contest, I wrote a picture book and won the contest and then they published it. You know Parents Magazine Press published the book. Speaker 2: Now did they have to choose the artist for it or did you--? Speaker 1: Yeah, they chose the artist, Leo Carty and that was my first book. And again, I wasn't trying to make a living at this business at the time. Speaker 2: Well what was it about? What was the first book about? Speaker 1: It was a picture book about a father who takes his children and some other kids out to a park and he says--one of the kids says--asks him where does the day go at night? And so he's--he asks them, well where do you think it goes? And each kid comes up with an answer. And it was a, you know I guess it was a cute book, but they published it and that was my first published book. And that was, what it meant to me was, okay now I'm writing, I'm still writing and I had two children at the time. And, so I could bring, I could show them the book that was really cool, you know, 'cause there were very--so, so few books for black children at that time. And then I just began writing. I wrote more picture books. I wrote more, you know just, again I just write all the time, you know just, this is what I do. Story_ID: 106887 Speaker 1: Okay. So once you, you were in at this point once you published this book? (unclear) Speaker 2: Well I, you know I, I was--you know I published a book and then I published two more books and I was still looking at it as sort of a peripheral thing, and then I met John [Oliver] Killens. Now John-- Speaker 1: When did you meet him, John Killens? Speaker 2: Oh god, that was 1968, around that period. John--someone had asked John to run the masters of fine arts program at Columbia [University, New York City, New York] and John said that he would run it if he could bring in some writers who were not college graduates but who were interested in writing from the community, and they said yes. So he put an ad in the black newspaper, the [New York] Amsterdam News, and when I saw that you know, it was at, you know, Columbia University and this, this program. And I said well gee, I would like to try that and I applied and he accepted me. Speaker 1: Now John O. Killens, he use to run the Harlem Writers Guild. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: Was this pre-Harlem Writers Guild or--? Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, no, no, no. Actually Harlem Writers Guild, I think it was started in the '50s [1950s]. But I had never, I didn't know about the Harlem Writers Guild. And so John was running this program at Columbia and so when I met John, John sort of took me under his wing, you know and he convinced me that I could do a lot more than I thought I could do. And John liked me because I always wrote. You know some of the people would come to the workshop and they would--or they don't have anything this week or they didn't have anything these two weeks. I always had something, you know. And John would always say, he was not looking for someone to write a book. He was looking for long distance runners. And so I went to the workshop and then John came to me one time and said there was an opening for an editor at a major publishing house [Bobbs-Merrill Company]. I said, oh John, I can't, no. No, my education is not that, that tough you know. I can't--he says go down there and--and I said, I really can't do it because I--at that time I was working for the State, the State of New York and I'd been fired from the post office, right? And I knew (unclear) I, you know I didn't, you know I didn't want to leave a state job you know. So John said--he insisted that I go down and I felt so bad. He embarrassed me into going down to, to applying for the job. I went down and the man offered me the job. It gave me such a headache. You know my head was like splitting open because you know I never--I have one--about this time I have one year of college and I've been fired from the post office. Now if I lose, if I give up this state job you know where else am I going to get--you know? But I took the job 'cause I didn't want to have to face John and have you know John said you know--quite frankly he said you know, you give a nigger an opportunity, he still won't, he still won't go for it. So I went down and I started working in the publishing industry. Now when I started working in the publishing industry I had completely different idea of what the whole business was about. Story_ID: 106888 Speaker 1: Now who were you working for at that point? Speaker 2: Bobbs-Merrill Company. Speaker 1: Bobbs-Merrill, okay. Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: They do mostly educational materials? Speaker 2: They were doing--they have a trade division but they did mostly educational stuff as you said. I was working for the trade division. But now I'm, I'm learning a comp, completely--getting a completely different idea of what publishing was about. You know prior to that, I thought that publishing was about all these fabulous writers and you're picking the creme de la creme, you know and selecting a few people to publish. And now I'm seeing it as a business. These people are desperately out there looking for something to publish. This is--they want to publish you because they want to make money. So I, I learned the business from the inside at that point. I worked there for seven years and that was an Indiana-based company. And then finally they decided to, to let me go and-- Speaker 1: Well, did it have anything to do with their location or--? Speaker 2: Yeah. You know they, they had some--I had some conflicts with them, with the pres--vice president. He had wanted me to--the advertising department asked could I do a piece--they published "Raggedy Ann & Andy" and they, they were doing a movie on Raggedy Ann and Andy. The company was sponsoring this movie. And they wanted someone to try to place a piece in a major magazine. And I said well maybe I could do that. So I did it but they wanted you know through--the vice president said you know, send it to me first. I want to approve it. I said no, I don't send--if I write something I don't send it to you or anybody else. So I got into the doghouse with them and I was a little combative I guess. Then I published something on Josephine [Baker?]--I was publishing a lot of black stuff and they felt that they wanted to go in, in a different direction. Speaker 1: You were actually choosing manuscripts to be published. Speaker 2: Right. I-- Speaker 1: That was your job. Speaker 2: I was choosing manu--I was an acquisitions editor, you know. And-- Speaker 1: You were basically choosing black, from the black writers? Speaker 2: Right, right. I was trying, you know I was looking for as many black authors as I could, which is not easy you know. People are not writing--not that many people were writing, you know and not that many people who were writing were good enough to be published, you know. So they--I was let go 1977, and so by that time I, I had been divorced, remarried and I've been writing ever since on the regular basis you know. Again what I've got going for me is discipline. You know, I write all the time. Story_ID: 106889 Speaker 1: I write--I love what I do, you know it's, you know--one time my dad [Herbert Dean] said to me, my dad--my foster dad passed away and my mom [Florence Brown Dean]. But they said to me, what is it exactly that you do again? This is a man who couldn't read or write, you know. And I said, I write stories you know for a living. And he said, that's what you did as a kid. You know you're a man now. Shouldn't you be doing something--you know? And then--and, and he told me his fears. And you know I mean the man, I didn't know he couldn't read or write by the way, until after he died. You know he never read--he never praised me about anything that I had written and I thought he didn't like it you know. But he said to me, you know--and this is from his perspective of course. This is a man who worked hard all of his life. He said to me, you know white people pay you to do this, you know. He said it's not serious stuff you know. These are stories man. He says you know they, they can get tired of the stories. You need to find a job that's going to be steady, you know. And that was from his perspective, I understood that. And--but from my point of view it's, you know I've been writing stories all my life, fiction, non-fiction and it's, it's been a wonderful life. Story_ID: 106890 Speaker 1: Now when did you reach a point--now you're, as an editor at Bobbs-Merrill you still had to have a job doing something-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --that's other than writing. When did you get to the point that you could sustain yourself with writing only? Speaker 2: Well when I left, when I left Bobbs-Merrill [Company] in 1977, I was making $10,000 a year part-time. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Now, I could--I was writing you know, I could come home every, every night and write five nights a week and I was making $10,000 a year. And so--and that wasn't you know that wasn't kicking any butt in 1970, but it wasn't bad either right, especially for a part-time gig. And then by the next ten years, you know my--it slowly went up and I was you know, incrementally. And until about 19--when my younger son went off to college, I used to hang out with him, you know play ball with him all the time. When he went off to college I had nothing to do except write so I increased my writing and my income you know just took off. So it was--I know when he went to Brown [University, Providence, Rhode Island], the youngest boy went to Brown and the year he went to Brown I was making $50,000 a year. That was 1991. And within two years, I was making a $150,000 a year and then (unclear) you know it went $200,000, two--two-fifty [$250,000] you know. So I've been doing fairly well with this business. Speaker 1: Yeah I'd, I'll say. I mean you probably--people have said you may be the most prolific black writer we have-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --at this point in terms of your output. Speaker 2: I think the only--you could only probably be compared to Frank Yerby, I guess maybe for turnout of books. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Did you ever meet Frank Yerby? Speaker 1: No, no I never met him. I never met him. Speaker 2: Yeah. A lot of people didn't even know he was black, but yeah. Speaker 1: Right, I didn't know he was black 'cause I used to read him as a kid you know. I mean you know "The Golden Hawk" you know, "The Saracen Blade," you know I use to read those things. And then I read an anthology of black authors and there was Frank Yerby. I said Frank Yerby, you know? And then I read his first published short story in The Atlantic Monthly, I think it was called "Three Day Pass," something like that, you know. But it was--that was a black story you know, but that was interesting. Story_ID: 106891 Speaker 1: Now how did, how did, you know, having seen some of your books you know and you know my children have read some of them and I've read, read you know "Now Is Your Time!" and other books. How did the civil rights movement affect your writing and how did the black arts movement affect your writing? Speaker 2: Well you know the thing was that I started writing often in a very non-political way with sports and what have you. And then I began to see what was being published with the black arts movement. And what I had seen was people reinventing the same things over and over again, you know. Speaker 1: Example of like--? Speaker 2: For example, when Ishmael [Reed], Calvin Hernton and David Henderson and Askia Muhammad Toure and I were working on a magazine called Umbra back in the early '60s [1960s], you know they would use different spellings of words you know and they would use a certain kinds of poetry. And then I saw my--that was in the early '60s [1960s]. And in the early '80s [1980s] it was the same sort of protest poetry that was being reinvented by another generation. It was--but it was the same, same stuff. So much of the history that was being written was the same stuff. I was in a school in about 1974 or '75 [1975] and I was talking to some grade school kids and a grade school kid told me that he didn't like black books, black boy, young black boy. He said I like to read, but I don't like reading black books. So just, what is that about you know? And then in talking to him I realized what he was saying was that so much of it was about how they were being, black people were being oppressed and they didn't want to read that. And I'm saying okay, I can understand because when a child sees somebody being hurt, they often, they think that that person must have done something bad. I've been in Schomburg [Center for Research in Black Culture], one time I was in Schomburg and had a picture of a lynching on the machine and kids came by--a teacher saw me there and said oh, that's Walter Dean Myers, you know. And they came over and one of the little boys said oh, he must have done something really bad, you know. I'm saying, no. So just seeing the civil rights movement as oppressed, people being oppressed and maybe they're just being bad. But they also don't want to see themselves as just being oppressed. So I'm saying well how do I deal with that, you know? I can understand that too. You know I, I remembered not liking George Washington Carver because I wasn't taught about George Washington Carver properly. I was taught you know, I would say here's George Washington rode a white horse. Robert E. Lee rode a white horse, had a sword. George Washington Carver is messing with peanuts (unclear). I didn't know what he was doing. I wasn't taught that properly. So I knew that if I told these stories, I have to go beyond that. I have to find stories to give a better understanding of history than people who--other people were giving. I had to find the stories, I had to dig deeper into the stories and I had to deal with accomplishments. Not here is somebody who is being oppressed, however they overcame. That story has been told too many times, you know. One of the things that I realized is that people need permission to succeed. You--we need permission to succeed. We need permission to be an interviewer or a good camera person, a good author. We need to permission. And we don't think we need that but our identities are really what you learn about--we're not given our identity, our identities at birth. But our identities are what we learn about ourselves. And what we learn about ourselves is very much tied up with what we see of other people like us doing. It's like back in the '50s [1950s], if you asked a little boy in school what he wanted to be, he may say a doctor, but if you asked the girl, she'd say a nurse because that's what she saw, you see. I needed permission to write about my life and about black life and I got that from a James Baldwin story, Sonny's Blues. I told James Baldwin that, you know. I told James Baldwin, I said you know--he said he had felt the same way when he was growing up. And I wish I had known that as a kid. See, I wish I had known that as a kid. I--so, what I needed to do was to take all of my characters and make them not just symbols, I needed to humanize them. I needed to make the--their feelings real. Story_ID: 106892 Speaker 1: I needed to--I'm writing history, I need to take that idea of history for example in "Now Is Your Time!," I tried to follow families, you know. I did George Latimer and then I did his son [Lewis Latimer] who was the inventor and a scientist. I tried to follow you know here is somebody--I'm trying to show that you learn things from your family and what you learn from your family will help you, will motivate you. People who escaped slavery who had that going on in their (unclear), their children did well. Their children did very well, the same way that immigrant children, people from India come over here and their children do very well. That's what they learned from family. That's what I had to put into the books, you know. If someone is doing something they can't just be a character in a book. He has to have a complete family. He has to have a mother and a father you know. When you read about Jackie Robinson for example, you say oh Jackie Robinson did this and Jackie--Jackie Robinson was a fighter all of his life, you know. That had to come from some place, you know. That did not come from you know, he walked out in the rain one day and it happened to him. When you talk about [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.], where did this come from? Now when I, I did a biography of Malcolm X and I'm saying okay, Malcolm X was the--you read about Malcolm's life, his father was a minister but his father was also a Garveyite. So here is this man who learned--heard his father. His mother wrote for the Garvey newspaper, you know Louise Little. I said people are learning things. I mean you pick this up and that, that makes them more human. It's not just a phenomenon. Oh, here is somebody who did this, you know. Thurgood Marshall's family you know. And I had to bring the--well-rounded characters into the books. If I didn't do this you know--Also, I wanted to write about some subjects that had nothing to do with black life particularly because I know that if I show up and some black kid sees me and he sees that I've written a book on Antarctica, he says--that gives him permission to do it, you know. If I--I just--if I write a book about black aviators, that's just some guy--or he flew, you know. How did he get to flying? Why did he get to flying? What, what you know what happened with his man, you know? I'm writing about a black flyer now, his parents made a sacrifice to get him into school and he's learned something from that sacrifice. Story_ID: 106893 Speaker 1: Yeah, sir, tell us about the pilot that you were researching? Speaker 2: I was in a shop in Harlem [New York City, New York] and, and buying photographs. This guy is a junk dealer. He called himself an antique dealer. I called him a junk dealer. And the guy said, oh you collect photographs? And I said, yes. And he said he had pictures of his uncle who had fought in the Italian-Ethiopian war [Second Italo-Ethiopian War] and I had never heard of the Italian-Ethiopian war. Prior to World War II, then the Italians were threatening to invade Ethiopian. Haile Selassie could buy a few airplanes 'cause he knew the Italians had airplanes but he had no one to fly them. So he sent his emissary to the United States looking for African American pilots. At first he hired this guy Hue-I think Hubert Julian and then--who cracked up one of the planes, his favorite plane. But then he got this guy John Robinson and John Robinson who had this long career in flying from the, from the late-'20s [1920s] into the '30s [1930s], went to Ethiopia to train their pilots and to fly for Ethiopia, and I had never heard of anything about this. So I be--so the guy showed me the photographs and I decided to write about this. As I looked, as I started doing research, I saw, I found fliers that said--that were posted around Harlem, Don't buy from Italians, you know, because they were--they are invading Ethiopia. Then there were people volunteering to go to fight on the side of the Ethiopians. So why had I never heard of this? But now I know it was true because I've got the documents to prove it. I've got photographs to prove it. In London [England] where they covered it extensively, there were interviews with black American pilots and I've got some of those interviews and I've got some of their photographs. Now this is a story that was just fascinating to me. The guy, John Robinson, came from Gulf Port-- Speaker 1: I know-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, the Brown Condor. Speaker 2: The Brown Condor. Speaker 1: That's what they called him yeah, in Gulfport [Mississippi]. Speaker 2: Right, the Brown Condor. Speaker 1: They have a society down in Gulf Port, you know. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You probably met them. Speaker 2: Right. And this, this guy was just fascinating. He built his own airplane which was the Heath Parasol and then he taught himself--he went to a flying school in Chicago [Illinois], worked as a, as a janitor there and then to--because they wouldn't allow him in the school and then finally he, he--they did allow him in, he learned to fly, he learned to fix, repair airplanes, he opened his own flying school. I mean these are just fantastic people that you never hear about. But it's this kind of story that properly told will tell people who--what they are capable of. And here was a, here was a person who is a young man with a dream about flying. He worked hard, he became a pilot. He was interested in the international affairs. Story_ID: 106894 Speaker 1: There were other people--I didn't know there were black flying clubs in the '30s [1930s], you know. No one told me that. What I knew about Bessie Coleman then jumped to the Tuskegee Airmen, you know. One of the things I also found was that what we in America call success means fame, you know. And many African Americans who have done marvelous things, if they had not become "famous", they are hesitant to tell their stories. So there were people that you have to learn to listen to. What have you done in your life? What is your story? What have you done, you know? And you, you don't have to be "famous". You know I worked with a man--I worked with a publishing magazine called Black Creation years ago. And the--it was--Black Creation, I published about three short stories in that magazine and the guy who ran the magazine was [HM] Roscoe Brown. And so, I'm sitting--said okay, Roscoe Brown. And I met the guy, he looked like a nice guy you know. Then years later I'm reading--I see this picture in the, in the newspaper and there (unclear)--what did he do, you know, 'cause it was a story about World War II. Well this guy was one of the Tuskegee Airmen and the first man to shoot down a jet plane. But he never said anything, you know. He didn't walk around with a neon sign saying I'm, I'm a hero, you know. So I began to listen to these people. The Brown Condor [John Robinson] story is just--you know I'll be finishing that this coming year and that's just fascinating to me. In fact, I'll be doing--there's more material on that whole operation in London [England] than there is here and so when I go back to London this fall I'll be doing more research on that. Speaker 2: Now have you read any of the, seen any of the J.A. Rogers [Joel Augustus Rogers] reports from (unclear)? Speaker 1: Right, the J.A. Rogers. No, of course, no J.A. Rogers covered that war [Italo-Ethiopian War] and that was fascinating to me because I had always just seen the J.A. Rogers things in I think the [Pittsburgh] Courier and [New York] Amsterdam News, the little, little car, cartoon type things and I didn't know him as a serious reporter. But it was only through this Brown Condor [John Robinson] story that I knew him as a serious, serious reporter. That was just interesting to me as well. Story_ID: 106895 Speaker 1: Right. It says--so, now what you--I was really surprised when I saw a book of yours called ["The Legend of] Tarik." I bought it for my son and on the cover is a black man on a horse with a sword and-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and all this and I, I said hey, I'll get it for my son to read. I don't think he ever read it. I couldn't make him read--and--but he did read--his first book was one of your books though if I-- Speaker 2: Well I-- Speaker 1: But-- Speaker 2: --you know I wanted to do more now with that story than I did. When I went to the publisher I wanted to do, to write this story. Now you have to convince the publisher that this is a story worth telling. So I went to this, I went to the publisher and I wanted to do something on Tarik, and the publisher was not--well, what do you want to do, you know? I mean I don't think this is going to, to work and I'm not sure if there's a market for it. And they will reject something you know because they don't see a market for it. And I'm saying well I think there is a market for it. You know not only that--is--do you have to convince the editor and the publisher, the sales department. What happens you take a, you take something to the, to the editor and the editor now does a sales projection and he sends to the marketing department. Marketing department may call a Barnes & Noble's and say, this is a book proposal. What do you think of it? And Barnes & Noble: doesn't sound like much, you know. We can't--we can, we can, maybe we can sell 3,000 copies or something like that, and it's knocked down you know. But you have to be able to convince people. This is why, one of the reasons that I began collecting photographs. You had to convince--and documents. You had to convince people that a story is true. Now when I first came across the story of Tarik, I knew that the Moors had conquered Spain in the 8th Century and I knew that the guy who led the Moorish troops was Tarik, Tariq ibn Ziyad, you know. So I'm telling people about this and they're looking at me as if I'm speaking Greek, you know. And it get, they get down to a point where, there's no market for that. There's no market for that. So, and then you tell them well, I've never heard of this person. Well you've heard of Gibraltar? Yes. Well Gibraltar is a corruption of his name. Gibraltar means an Arabic--it's Jabal Tariq, you know. And so when he came from Tangiers [Morocco], landed on the rock named after himself and moved into Spain. But this is an interesting story. This is a fascinating story. You need to--this story needs to be told. Story_ID: 106896 Speaker 1: It's--it was the same thing when I was writing "Now Is Your Time!" and I went to talk about the Islamic slaves and he said oh, I never heard of these Islamic slaves. You know, I thought they were all either you know fetishes or what have you. I said these Islamic story--the story of the Islamic slaves is very important to tell because it shows that these people are not just natives with you know Tarzan-type black people running around the jungle going woo (shakes hands and head), you know. These people came from a culture, they came from a--many of them are educated and trained but they were just, they were just black and they brought them over here. All of these stories have to be told, but you have to tell the--it has to be more than oh, every--you have to say more than here is Rosa Parks, didn't--she was tired so she didn't get up and that was the Civil Rights Movement. It's more than that. It's all about all these other people. And it's up to people like me, especially now in this part of my career in that I have more, much more leeway than a young person, you know. Because I've got, I've got a reputation, my books are going to sell certain, a certain amount of copies. I have more of a responsibility now to tell more of the stories. I'll be doing the Brown Condor [John Robinson] next year. Speaker 2: Do you find when you dig into a story like Rosa Parks, there was a controversy in the movie "Barbershop" where I think Ice Cube's-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --but Cedric [the Entertainer]'s-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --character as a barber said well if all she did was just have tired feet, that ain't nothing. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: A lot of people have tired feet. But when you really dig into her story, she was trained as an organizer and-- Speaker 1: She was trained as a--yep. Speaker 2: --she knew she was going to do that at a certain--some point. Speaker 1: Right, and the idea is that to give the, these lights, light versions of these things, the light versions of it. And these people were not light people. They understood what they were doing. They knew what they were doing. And it's up to people to go beyond that idea. However, the liberal point of view is simply this, oh isn't that sweet? Isn't that wonderful, you know? And, no, no not sweet and wonderful, man these are hard-working, thinking people, hard-working, thinking people who knew what they were sacrificing, knew what they were doing. And, and, and nothing is impromptu. Nothing is impromptu. Nothing is, oh I think I'll do--no. And people--I read a book this week about the sit-ins and the other counters, and they made it sound so white, you know. These people, they wanted to--these people knew that they were risking their well-being, their safety, their--they knew it. They understood that. And you know it was not about being angry. They--these people knew I'm going to sit here and risk my physical safety and perhaps my life in sitting here, you know. And they understood that you know. It--but it's not being told properly. Speaker 2: Right, right at the--you wrote a--well your book, "Now Is Your Time!," I mean the title to me, I mean is so dramatic. I mean it says so much. It's a wonderful title for a book on history. I mean, I have--both of my kids had a copy of it you know and-- Speaker 1: See, now I'm writing another book on black history but I'm going to use documents. I know--I collect documents as well, you know, and I'm just trying to document the history so that I can say--rather than say slavery was bad, everyone sort of knows that, you know, you can say things like, look it was so commercial. I just bought a document of how they're insuring the slave ships you know, so this is a business. This is a business you know. You're going--I'm going to insure your ship and this voyage you know. Not, not, not the slaves but the voyage, you know and that document tells you more than, than even a photograph of somebody with marks, you know. I mean you have to come up with the documents. You have to tell the story. You know I just finished the story of the black soldiers in World War I and they come out with the documents and you see documents wherein someone is saying we don't care if you're right or wrong, don't make waves, you know. Don't, you know, just don't make waves you know. And you see these things and you know it's, it's the documents you have to have. You have to tell the deeper story. Story_ID: 106897 Speaker 1: Now there's a book that I flipped through and recommended when I was managing a bookstore years ago called "The Young Landlords." Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: It seemed like it would be the kind of book that--I mean it has--there's so much possibility in that book. I mean, well tell us a little bit about that one. And you've got over eighty of them, we can't talk about all of them. But-- Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: --"The Young Landlords" seemed to be-- Speaker 2: "Young Landlords," I, I was living in the Lower East Side, New York at the time and I saw all these abandoned buildings. I should have bought them now, but all these abandoned buildings and I said what would happen if a young, some young people got together and took over one of these buildings? You know or when some of these buildings were, they're really run down, what could they do? How would they interact with the people? And I enjoyed writing that, but I also took it as an opportunity to have the young people look at life of somewhat, somewhat differently because they could look at themselves as landlords. They could look at themselves as well maybe I can do this sort of thing. Plus, it was a fun book. It was a fun book to do. I think that you can approach stories with humor as well as seriously you know. You can approach a story in many, many ways. One book can't do everything, but with The Young Landlords which was made into a film by Topper Carew, that was, that was a kind of a book that it was just, I loved writing it, I loved creating the characters. I loved having the kids interact in a positive way with each other. And one of the things I'm really interested in is having young people interact with each other in a positive way. And the letters that I've received from young readers mostly deal with this interaction. They love reading about friendships. They love reading about having people they can rely upon as friends and as confidants. Story_ID: 106898 Speaker 1: And that's a theme that also runs through "Fallen Angels," a book I told you was the first one my son ever read from cover to cover and he was really excited. He wouldn't put it down. Speaker 2: Oh, is that right? Oh, good. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. I like that one. Speaker 1: But that was about Vietnam, brothers in the Vietnam War. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: How were you inspired to write, I mean that one now? Speaker 2: Well I went into the [U.S.] Army at seventeen, and the Vietnam War was just beginning. And when I came home, one of my brothers, one of my half-brothers saw me in a uniform and he was all happy to see me and he was very proud of that idea. Then when he got older, he went to join the Army too. And one of the things--he even joined the Army and he went to Vietnam. The very first day he arrived in the country he was killed. And what I realized what was going, that--what was going on was that we sanitized war. We glorify war. You know it's like up until the last two weeks, we had been sanitizing the whole Vietnam thing--I mean the whole Iraq thing. We've been, you know before then it was the star wars kind of thing. It was oh, the first Gulf War. It was--oh, there's a target and we're going to hit this target you know. It's like a video game. The last few, the last two weeks in particular no, no, no, it's not a video game. No, war is not a video game. War is very permanent. And it was--but so many people glorify it and you know you have kids saying, oh I want to you know, I think I'll join the Army. I want to be a SEAL, wear my--wear the beret and all this sort of thing. And I said no, you have to present it in a different way. It is not a wonderful experience. It's not--war is not something that you--we're all sitting around the living room and then you order pizza afterwards. It's, it's, it's--it destroys lives, it kills people. It--you know for every person that's killed now in Iraq, there's fifty who are so badly wounded that they may never get over it. For every person that's killed, there's fifty that's lost limbs or lost parts of their bodies who will come away from that experience. It's up to me to write it in a realistic way. So I wrote that story. I wrote a picture book, (unclear). I had--when, when I did "Fallen Angels," I had mothers writing to me thanking me for writing that book because during the Gulf War people--one woman wrote to me and said that her son was so anxious to join the service and she said she had begged him to at least finish high school. And then he went out and bought every book on war he could find, and he read "Fallen Angels." He decided he wasn't going to join, you know, he was not going to join. And that's not--I'm not saying that people should not defend their country but no, this is not what they want--they show you in the--on the six o'clock news. This is not a sanitized, beautiful thing, you know. Talking earlier about seeing bodies and friends, seeing caskets lined you know, they stack them, so neatly stack them like this you know, then stack them like that, you know where they're going to be shipped home or what have you, it's, it's a--and I felt, I felt that to a large extent my, my wearing the uniform and my bringing home a few bullets influenced my brother's joining. And then he--and he was killed and I felt that I needed to never again present war in that light. Story_ID: 106899 Speaker 1: Okay. Now there's another aspect of violence that affects black people, black people like a whole lot of nasty violence in the community, you have a book called "Monster" about a young man who was part of a serious crime, right? Speaker 2: I, I have two recent books about that. "Monster" and I've done a lot of interviews of people in prisons and youth houses. And I see that many people young people tempted to go into a life of crime not because their gain is so much but because it's cool, because you get--they get peer pressure, you know. Right now in many urban cities, oh you're going to do this and you're going to sell a little bit of pot and something like that. And what happens when these people get caught up in the juvenile justice system or in the justice system, they don't understand what they're getting into. It's not like a, you know that is a completely different system. You get into that thing and you can get some very serious consequences. The young man in this story needed to make a moral decision and he needed that moral, to make that moral decision long before he was faced with the peer pressure. He needed, he needed guidance. He, really, he should have made that moral decision sitting around a family table having, having dinner or having breakfast. That moral--that decision should have been solidified right there, it wasn't and so he got into that, into a thing. His part of it seemed minor but it turned out that--well many young people don't know that when they, when they do something it doesn't make any difference what their intentions were. It only matters what, what has happened. And I met so many young people who said, well we're going to stick up this place and now we're all nervous and you're going to take a--someone's going to smoke a joint to calm down but that affects your judgment. It affects your judgment, you know people become jumpy and they're nervous. You never know how the people are going to react, you know. And so someone is planning to go in, steal $25 and leave and they're thinking well this is not bad. All--I'm only stealing $25. They, they go in, something happens and there's a death and that's a felony murder, that's it. You know people don't want to say, well I didn't intend for that to happen. Nobody cares. Nobody cares. And too many of these young people are getting felonies you know major felonies. I did another book called "Autobiography of My Dead Brother." One of the things with this book is that the same eleven-year-old that you're talking to today that was against drugs, against gangs is the same person in three or four years who's going to be out there gangbanging and using drugs. And this is a book about two young boys who have been blood brothers and one of them, the older boy suddenly begins to change and he begins to change very quickly. And why he changes is fascinating to me too because very often what we do, we say to young people, you can be anything you want to be. You can be a doctor, a lawyer, you can be an astronaut, you can be an educator. But what we're doing when we say that is we're putting value on those things rather than on the person, you know. And when the kid goes to high school, eventually he realizes, many of them that no you can't be--I can't be a doctor. You know I'm--I'd be lucky if I just finish high school. So does that make me a person who has no value, you know? Does that make me a person who has no, nothing going on for himself? If I'm going to be out here trying to hustle up a job and I, I'm not going to be "going to college" or an astronaut or what have you, now I'm facing the reality of my life. I don't like what I see. I don't like what I see. So now I, I need to find value in some other place and I'll find value in selling drugs. I'll find value in becoming a gang member or I'll find value in the "thug culture" that's so popular today. And what happens--this is what's happening with many of these kids today. Story_ID: 106900 Speaker 1: Repeat what you were saying about self-worth (unclear) but-- Speaker 2: Well, the most important thing for young people is self-worth. They have to be, to be able to feel good about themselves. And if each fourteen, fifteen, sixteen--they can no longer project that self-worth is going to come along at a later date, you know. When they're--when you're twelve, thirteen years old you're saying well, I can be this. I can be the other thing. Who knows what I'll be. You have so many young people saying they're going to be, well I know I can't be a doctor. I know I can't be a lawyer. I don't have the grades for that. I'm not going to college, but I'll be basketball star. Some kids 5'1", he's going to be a basketball star. Or now they're saying, I'm going to be a rapper or I'm going to be a producer. And they're looking for value and they're looking for self-worth. And if they can't find it in the, in what we consider the straight world, the, the legitimate world, they, they'll go, either go into, into drugs or gangs. Or sometimes it's so depressing, it's so depressing to a young person that they will use drugs because the, the, the--you, you ask yourself why would a young person say the New York City's inner city use drugs when he knows more about drugs than the police do? He's seen, you know he's stepped over the bodies, you know. But the pressure on this person to, to find self-worth is so great that if he can't find it, he just wants to escape and this is what many of these people do. Story_ID: 106901 Speaker 1: So when you write a book like the one you just described, you said you interviewed people in-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --detention centers and--how much research goes into each, each book? Speaker 2: A lot. I do a lot of research because I want the books to be authentic. I want to hear the voices of the people that are actually involved in these activities. So I talked to people in youth houses and what have you. I planned books--I plan my books very carefully. What I'm, what I'm known for, if I start a book I'll finish it, if I decide, if I come up with an idea. And I will plan that book carefully. At first I thought, you know I was very young. I thought that it was all, going to be spontaneous, that I didn't have to work on the book. I didn't have to plan it. I could just sit down and it would just flow. And that's fine if you have seven or eight years to finish a book, maybe you'll get it finished eventually, but if you, if you have a family to feed and if you really want to finish a book you have to do some planning. So I plan my books carefully. I plan them scene by scene and I work on a regular basis. I write five pages a day and that's a lot, you know. I write five pages a day and if the book is well-planned, and structurally sound--if I, if I do a, a good plan for a book, structurally sound, I can give it to a fifteen-year-old and he can, and he can write it you know. But it's that structural soundness. And it's like the--it's like a building. You put up the frame of the building and anybody can come along and tackle on the, on the outside, work on the outside. But what I have going for myself is number one, the idea that I will plan it carefully, I will examine that plan and two, I have the discipline to sit there and write my five pages a day. Speaker 1: Now I read that you wrote ten pages a day. Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: But has it gone down or--? Speaker 2: It's gone down because I use to write ten pages a day and I did that for years. And then I found that by writing ten pages a day, I would throw away two or three of them you know or sometimes four of them. I found that if I do five pages a day, that's, that's enough, you know. I mean if I were young today, if I were twenty, I'd write two pages a day. That would be enough. I mean two--that's forty pages a month, you know. That's, that's, that's a book a year, you know. But I do it every day--five days a week rather, do five days a week you know and I, I impose that discipline on myself. And if I can get up and write my five pages a day, I'm up at 5 o'clock in the mornings, you know, I write my five pages and that's it. Story_ID: 106902 Speaker 1: Now have you ever conducted--had an idea about a book and went out to conduct research and discovered that things weren't the way you thought they were or that you got--you know what your, your original idea was kind of transformed about what you heard from people after you interviewed them? Speaker 2: Yes. In two cases, I decided to do this book on why you should finish high school, you know. And I had this, all these ideas about you know, you finish high school this is what have you and what have. And then as I began to work on the book, I decided, I did about a hundred and some pages and I said my ideas are wrong. It's not about finishing high school, it's about education, you know. How you--you know why do you acquire education? It's not just about getting a piece of paper somewhere down the line, it's about learning about education. You learn that this is a useful thing. Education will bring me something. Education is, it's not about just the paper at the end. It's about learning, about the idea of continual learning and that is the--that was by far the most important thing. I did a book, I was study--researching a book that I'm work--going to be working on over the next few months about teenage girls and how teenage girls would conduct their lives. I have a picture of a teenage girl whose mother was incarcerated and she has to take care of her younger sister. So I went out and I'm talking to teenage girls, they're much more sophisticated than I thought. They knew more, they knew more about this system, they had--their thoughts although they are not as facile with their language, they are deeper, they, they--their understanding of what's going on is deeper than I, than I thought. Especially with inner city young ladies, they understand. Sometimes they can't cope, but their understanding is a lot greater than I had given them credit for. And that has to be reflected in, in the book. Speaker 1: Okay, so it's good to do research and-- Speaker 2: It's, it's good to do research. Story_ID: 106903 Speaker 1: Now tell me how do you manage to write without being distracted? You were talking about you know how in high school is the--you couldn't even--it's hard to do your homework-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --you know at home with all the--a lot of people in situations like that young and, and otherwise where they--you know a lot of distractions. Do you--how--do you seal yourself off from distractions or how do you deal with them? Speaker 2: Well I'm up at five in the morning you know, and nobody's up except me, you know. And I work very early on and I try to work away from the time that the phone is going to be ringing. And I, I have to, I have to discipline myself. I have to say look, this is what I want to accomplish, you know and I, and I know this that what I want to accomplish in life I will only accomplish if I bring the discipline. I can't expect the world to bring the discipline to me. I can't expect people to come to me and say, oh we're going to give you the time. I have to bring that discipline. You know my father use to say make two lists. First list, write everything that you want in life and I make that long list, make that--he says, okay, make another list, everything that you, you're willing to work for, for the rest of the day, you know. Are you going to work on, you know--and I said well, going to be all day, have to work all day, yeah. That would be a short list. Now tear up the first list cause what you're going to get is what you're willing to work for and I, I understood that and I know that's, that that's true. So whatever I want from life I know that I'm only going to get it if I make it happen. No one's--the people who are willing to help you, that's, that's for sure. And there are people who are willing to show you things but you have to make it happen yourself. No one's going to make it happen for you. Story_ID: 106904 Speaker 1: Okay. Now you, you've written a memoir of growing up-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --called Bad Boy I think, right? Speaker 2: Bad Boy. Speaker 1: Right, okay. And that was written--when was that written? Speaker 2: Oh, around 1999, 2000. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Can you tell us about why you--I mean a lot of people write those kind of books when they first start. You know a lot of [James] Baldwin's books were, you know-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --a lot about you know-- Speaker 2: Well, you know I had--one of the things that people, people--you normally write about if--either you're a physical person or you are an intellectual person. And I had lunch with a bunch of young men down in Florida. A friend of mine was married, we went down and I met his friends from all around the country. And what we talked about was playing basketball and we talked about bid--we played bid whist you know, all afternoon, talking about basketball and what have you. And one guy was a corrections officer and I'm saying you know you don't have to make that separation between the, the physical aspect, because that's part of our culture. You know our culture--you know, the sports is part of our culture. Some of our best thinkers were athletes as well. You know so when I was a kid, although I loved basketball and I was hyperactive physically, I was also a reader and I was also a thinker. And even though my thinking was not you know, was typical of my age, I was a thinker and I've always been that way. So, and my love of books was, was part of my life. And what, one of the things that happens very often with, with African Americans especially, is that we are not celebrated as thinkers, you know. I mean okay, if you're old, you're [W.E.B.] Du Bois and if you're you know Frederick Douglass, you know. But young people who are thinkers and things, they don't get the same props as the student athlete, the athlete, you know. The guy who's playing, you know--the kid who goes into the NBA at eighteen years old or the kid who's playing soccer at fifteen, Tiger Woods. And yet you have some very, very, very bright people out here doing some wonderful things and you'll never hear about them 'cause they don't make the television. And so I want people to, to understand about me that yeah I'm a book lover, I've always been a book lover and I'm a reader, I've always been a reader since, you know. And they used to hide that. They used to hide that when I was a kid. Go to the library with a brown paper bag. Put the books in the bag, in a brown paper bag. But these were all parts of who I am. And I've always--and they've all served me well. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And also you know that you know I was not what was considered a good kid in school. I was not--I was a bright kid. I was not considered a--but there comes a time when we--if you don't get yourself into trouble, you don't get into any really, really you know heavy, too heavy a trouble, people can turn themselves around. One of the things that really impresses, impressed me in my, in my prison interviews was how many black men discovered in jail that they had a brain. Here is, you know here is a guy who is twenty-five, twenty-eight, thirty years old, now discovers that you know I'm pretty, I'm pretty smart. And you know, you need to, to understand that just because you're not doing something at twelve, thirteen, fourteen, fifteen years old, it doesn't mean that you cannot be successful and achieve later on. Story_ID: 106905 Speaker 1: Okay. What do you think about the, I guess the--or the hip hop contributions to writing today? I mean there are a lot of people writing lyrics now and they're--and there's some poetry, there's a resurgence in poetry too. Speaker 2: Right. There's a resurgence--you know, I've done some poetry myself. I'm doing some poetry now. The--you know we've always had that, you know. It's, it's getting more airtime now but we've always had it. And we've always had serious writing and non-serious writing. Sometimes you know Langston Hughes tried to, to marry the two. You know he, he used some blues lyrics in his words. Some of it's, some of it's not good but I think that ultimately it's going to be useful. It's going to be useful stuff. You know I think that many people don't like some of the lyrics, but we've always had that. We've had, always had these raunchy blues lyrics from the '20s [1920s]. You've had, you had the blanche--raunchy blues from the '30s [1930s]. That's always--that's, that's--you know to me what's going to happen is that from all of this hip hop stuff there are already signs of moving the best of it to the next level and that's going to happen you know. They're going to move the best of it to the next level and I think that in a couple of years you're going to see some of the hip hop, emerging hip hop poets doing good stuff, you know. And much of the stuff today is garbage. Some of the values that--are garbage values but we've always had that. You know, I think that they're getting more airtime and more face time-- Speaker 1: Than ever before, yeah. Speaker 2: Right. And more face time than they should be getting, very often more face time than they should be getting. But I think that from that it's going to emerge, some things--because people are looking at some serious opera. You know there was--I know there was one hip hop opera that was not --"Carmen [A Hip Hopera"]. It was not that good. But that--is--that's a forerunner that opened, it opened the door and there's going to be some stuff that comes out that might be good. Story_ID: 106906 Speaker 1: Okay. Now do you have favorite writers yourself? Speaker 2: Not at the moment. I read everything, you know. I try, I try to force myself to read at least a book a week, you know. And if I can read a book a week I'm, I'm happy. Speaker 1: Okay. Did you have any comments about your own writing style, I mean a--cause you've been more of a practical writer than somebody actually looking at, you know I mean thinking about writing style. I don't know, do you have any thoughts about that? Speaker 2: I am trying to improve my writing, you know. I'm, I'm working at it. I'm at a point in my career now wherein I can publish what I want to, which is a very good thing which puts more responsibility on me. I would like to write better than I've written in the past, try more things and I, and I love it. I love it and I'm doing what I love and I'm willing to do the work to make it as good as I can. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 106907 Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today as we speak? Speaker 2: Well, my basic hope is that we can unite. What's happened is that we've split. Now growing up in Harlem [New York City, New York], we were forced together with segregation and that was good because the, the middle class, upper middle class were right there. And whatever happened to the upper middle class person happened to everybody. Right now the upper middle class and the middle class have moved away from the lowest economic groups and we were--we are no longer concerned. Right now we have a crisis in young people dropping out of school and a crisis in young people getting incarcerated. That is going to--you know we can't allow ourselves to say well that's them you know, and that we're doing okay. So you have this separation. I would like to see us come back together again as, as--and we are because we're getting more and more mentoring groups, 100 Black Men [of America, Inc.], and what we need is mentoring. We need adults mentoring young people to, to, to compensate for the breakdowns in the families, the separation from--of the classes. We can't allow the class structure to destroy us. Story_ID: 106908 Speaker 1: Okay. When you look back at everything you've done till this point, is there any major thing you would have done differently if you could? Speaker 2: Major thing I would have done. Yes, I would have--you know if I had known what I could do earlier, I've been--I would have been writing a lot earlier. I would have been more serious about my writing. And it took me--I didn't know I needed permission and I didn't have permission until I was an adult and met John [Oliver] Killens and James Baldwin. You know the, these people gave me permission. If I had that permission earlier on I would have been more serious about my writing earlier on. Story_ID: 106909 Speaker 1: Have you been involved with efforts to develop young writers yourself? Speaker 2: Yes, I do. I know, I make myself available to most any young writer. You know I read manuscripts. I'm with the Harlem Writers Guild, Society of Children's Book Writers and I'm open to young people who want me to read their work, advise them. Speaker 1: Do you have any advice for people, young or old, that think they have something to say or have an idea and want to know how to get it out here, to get it published? Speaker 2: Yeah, it's craft. It's craft. You know I mean, you know we look at it as something sort of a mysterious process but if you were to become a plumber you wouldn't walk in and say let me see how I feel about these pipes, about these things. You would learn the craft. And there's a craft and it's a business and you have to learn the craft and you have to learn the business. And you know if nothing else you can go to people who--like myself and ask them and says, what is this business about, what is this craft about? And if you learn the craft and the business you can make your way. Speaker 1: Okay. Have you ever thought about writing now for a film--I mean some of your works have been turned into-- Speaker 2: Film, right. Speaker 1: --you know film. But have you ever thought about you know, writing screenplays and that sort of thing? Speaker 2: I've--no. I've, I've played with the idea but I don't have that much of an interest, no. Story_ID: 106910 Speaker 1: Okay. Well when you look back at everything you've done till this point, what would you consider at this juncture--and I mean you've got a lot more to write--to be your legacy? Speaker 2: The idea that, that I humanize my characters, that I am prolific, that I have presented history in a way that's been useful. That people don't read my history books and come, come away with nothing, you know. They, they have found something in the, in the books. Story_ID: 106911 Speaker 1: Okay. You mentioned off-camera that you did some consultation with John Henrik Clarke and others on projects. Speaker 2: Well right, John--you know I've met John Henrik Clarke and he--and I told him about what I was doing with the Songhai people, thinking about writing about the Songhai people and advised me what to read. Dr. Ben [HM Yosef Ben-Yochannan] advised me to study Ancient Jewish History which I did. They taught me what to read. They taught me where, where to go to find books. They taught me what history--Dr. Clarke wanted me to read about the Songhai people you know and their history. Dr. Ben, to read the history of the Middle East, you know. They knew that--what my education had been and they tried to direct me into reading, to, to educate myself and that was to me invaluable. Story_ID: 106912 Speaker 1: Okay. Now we haven't asked about your family. You've mentioned them throughout which is good but can you tell us a little bit about your family and (unclear)? Speaker 2: Well my son--I have a daughter who lives in Jonesboro. And-- Speaker 1: So she got out all right? Speaker 2: What? Speaker 1: She got out (unclear) Jonesboro, Guyana? Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, no. Speaker 1: Oh. Oh, okay. (Laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter). Oh, no, no, no, Georgia. Right. Speaker 1: Okay, good, that's better. Speaker 2: Right, right, right. And then I have a son who is a chaplain in the [U.S.] Air Force, went to (unclear) here. He's in Japan now. And I have a son who does children's books and he's gotten--just finished his eighth book. He's, he's primarily an illustrator and he's, he's had his work in the Street Museum [of Art] and the Museum of Modern Art. And he's a very, you know fine illustrator. And he's--and we work together sometimes and sometimes he does, you know he works on his own. Story_ID: 106913 Speaker 1: I didn't ask about the--all of the--there seemed to be a growing group of black writers in children's books that are really you know getting some recognition and attention now, Jerry Pink--the Pinkneys. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: There's illustrators and-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: I mean there are so--Carol Baird [ph.] and other people. Did--do the black writers and illustrators have an organization or do they have--do they ever meet to--? Speaker 2: We get together sometimes. One of the interesting things is the idea that Jerry, Jerry Pinkney, his family, young writers and illustrators with me, [John] Steptoe, Johnny Steptoe's son-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --and you know, you see. And what happens is that, that's a lesson that this can be taught. This can be taught you know. There, there--we get together occasionally, not enough but we do--we have conferences and we're all friends and we all support each other because we know that we all have the same struggle. Speaker 1: Okay. And I thought so. That's, that's good. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I'm glad I asked that. Is there any question we have not asked that needs to be asked before we ask our last one? Speaker 2: Not, not that I can think of offhand. Story_ID: 106914 Speaker 1: Well the last question is similar to legacy but a little different. How would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: As somebody, somebody who found a job to do and did it you know. Found a job to do and I did it and if I can do it, others can follow. Speaker 1: Okay. As you said, "Now Is Your Time!," right? Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: All right, thank you. Speaker 2: Right, thank you...