 Story_ID: 29844 Speaker 1: I'm going to start by stating my name is James Stith and I'm the interviewer. Scott Stearns is the videographer, and Larry Crowe is the observer. Would you please state your name including your middle name and spell it? Speaker 2: Frederick William Oliver, F-R-E-D-E-R-I-C-K W-I-L-L-I-A-M O-L-I-V-E-R. Speaker 1: Okay. Your date of birth and location of birth? Speaker 2: Ten fifteen forty [October 15th, 1940], and I was born in Baltimore City, Maryland. Speaker 1: Today's date? Speaker 2: July 15th, 2010. Speaker 1: The location of this interview, the address. Speaker 2: Okay. It's on Morgan State University's campus, 1700 East Coast Spring Lane, Baltimore, Maryland. Speaker 1: And your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm a part-time administrative judge. Speaker 1: Physicist? Chemist? Mathematician? Speaker 2: Technical judge and dealing with radioactive-- Speaker 1: Okay. Were you a physicist--? Speaker 2: --contaminant nation, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Good. Story_ID: 29845 Speaker 1: Okay. I'm just going to ask several 'People Magazine'-type questions and all they require is a short answer. What's your favorite food? Speaker 2: Hot dogs. Speaker 1: Your favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Spring. Speaker 1: Your favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue. Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Florida. Speaker 1: And your favorite saying? You have one? Speaker 2: I guess on the water, say, on the Chesapeake Bay. Speaker 1: Your favorite saying? Speaker 2: Oh, saying. Speaker 1: Yes, saying. Speaker 2: No, I don't have one. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Story_ID: 29846 Speaker 1: Now, I'm going to talk about your ancestors, and I'm going to probe in terms of how far you can go back. I'm going to start with your mother's side. Would you state your mother's name, spell it, and her date and place of birth? Speaker 2: Okay. My mother's name was Hattie Oliver. And right now I can't remember her date of birth. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But she was born in Virginia. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you know whereabouts? Speaker 2: Burkeville. Speaker 1: Burkeville. Okay. And her maiden name? Speaker 2: Fowlkes, F-O-W-L-K-E-S. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. And how far back on your mother's side can you go back with your ancestors? Speaker 2: Only to my grandparents. Speaker 1: Your grandparents. Okay. Do you--knew your grandmother's--your grandparents's name on your mother's side? Speaker 2: Yes. Thomas and Edna Fowlkes. Speaker 1: Okay. Let's talk about--are there any favorite stories that come from your mother's parents? Speaker 2: No. I was--I only knew them when I was very young, probably about six or seven, so I can't relate any stories from my grandparents. Speaker 1: Okay. Were there any stories your mother told you about them? Speaker 2: It's very interesting. She would told--she told me what it was like sometimes being young, but she never really went into a lot of history until 'Roots' came on television. After that she sort of opened up and talked more about her ancestors. Speaker 1: Okay. Are there any things that you remember that she told you? Speaker 2: I always remember that she said her grandparents were sold as slaves and they were separated, and they did not tell, who would be my great-grandfather, where my great-grandmother was going because they thought perhaps he may try and go get with her. Somehow that story always sort of stuck with me. Speaker 1: Okay. But she didn't give you their names? Speaker 2: No. Story_ID: 29847 Speaker 1: Okay. What about on your father's side? Speaker 2: On my father's [Willis Oliver] side, I can probably go back maybe two or three generations. My grandfather's name was James Oliver. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And his wife--wife's name was Martha Fowlkes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And their parents--his father was named Randolph Oliver and his mother was named Bordena. Speaker 1: Could you spell those? Speaker 2: B-O-R-D-E-N-A, and Randolph, R-A-N-D-O-L-P-H. Speaker 1: These are your great-great-grandparents? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. You say your great-great grandparents? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. And do you know about when they were born? Speaker 2: I can't--I don't have it with me. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. And so, your great-great--your great-grandparents were slaves? Speaker 2: I have no verification of that. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Are there any favorite stories that your father used to tell about? Speaker 2: No, he never talked very much about his parents, and my father died with I was in the tenth grade, so I guess we never had a lot of heart-to-heart talks like that. Speaker 1: Is there anything at all about his background that you heard from his siblings, if he had any? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you know where they grew up? Speaker 2: In the same area. My father was from Crewe, Virginia, and my mother was from Burkeville. One thing, I think they only went to the third grade, both of them. They didn't--weren't in school very long, and I think that was sort of standard for most blacks in that area at the time. Speaker 1: All right. So now let's talk about your parents, your father's siblings. Do you remember any of those? Speaker 2: There was one called Lee, and to be honest, I have them written down but I can't--there was one named John Henry, but I can't remember all of them right now. I never met them when I was growing up. Speaker 1: I see. Story_ID: 29848 Speaker 1: Okay. What about your own siblings? Speaker 2: Okay. There are--I'm the seventh boy and there is one girl. One brother is a stepbrother. Speaker 1: Okay. And could you state the names of your siblings-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and their birth order, if you can. Speaker 2: Okay. The oldest one was Major Almond that's my stepbrother. And then there was Robert Oliver, Charles Oliver, James Oliver, Dorothy Oliver, Cornell Oliver, and Donald Oliver. Speaker 1: Okay. And where do you fit in there? Speaker 2: I was the youngest. Speaker 1: You were the youngest. All right. I forgot to get your dad's name and his place of birth. Speaker 2: Oh, Willis Oliver. He was born in Crewe, Virginia. Speaker 1: Yes. Okay. And do you know about when? His birthday? [9/12/1888] Speaker 2: I have it written down. I don't-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --know right off. Speaker 1: Okay. How do you spell Crewe? Speaker 2: C-R-E-W-E. Story_ID: 29849 Speaker 1: In terms of growing up, what is your earliest memory? Speaker 2: I guess going to elementary school. I grew up in Sparrows Point [Maryland] which is a steel town and so, everyone who lived there worked in the steel mill. That was a necessary criteria in order to live there. It was built back during, I think it was World War Two [WWII], in order to attract people to come and work in the mills. And so they built some resident houses there. And so just growing up in Sparrows Point. Speaker 1: Where is Sparrows Point located? Speaker 2: It's in Baltimore County and it's going east from Baltimore City. Speaker 1: Okay. Can you talk about the recollection that you have from living in Sparrows Point? Speaker 2: It was a--yes a very small town. It was a segregated town. The blacks lived on two streets, I and J, and there were about six blocks on each street. So it was a very small town and everyone knew everybody there. All of the people there usually walked to work to work in the steel mill. And so, it was--it was a very pleasant experience. As a matter of fact, we still have sort of annual reunions of the people that grew up there in Sparrows Point. Speaker 1: Talk about your neighbors in your area first, on I and J streets. Speaker 2: Yes. If you live in a very small town, eventually everyone there will either be a relative or an in-law, so it was sort of a--I guess there were about six hundred people that lived there. So it was a very friendly, neighborly community. And that's what I always remember. And as I said, just about everyone eventually ended up being either an in-law or a relative. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, on your street all the blacks lived on I and J. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Did you interact much with those who lived on other streets in Sparrows Point? Speaker 2: Once in a while we may play a football game or baseball game or something with them. And it was very interesting. We just never had any desire to interact with them. And there was a large field that sort of separated the two communities and that's where we used to go and play baseball or football, etcetera. And there was never any harassment or anything like that of the black community. And I think of them, even the whites kind of--they knew the blacks. They worked together in the steel mill and so, I think it was, you know, everyone sort of just knew everybody. Speaker 1: In terms of your church life, did you--were your parent's religious? Speaker 2: I wouldn't say they were very religious. We had one Baptist Church and one Methodist Church, and the Baptist Church was on J Street, and the Methodist Church was on I Street. And I don't think, growing up, neither of my parents [Willis Oliver and Hattie Fowlkes Oliver] really attended church very regularly until they got older. I would say once they got to be about fifty, then they started going to church on a regular basis. I always remember my mother [Hattie Fowlkes Oliver] always cooked a very big dinner on Sunday and so, she usually got up very early and would cook, you know. Most of the Sunday morning she would be there cooking. And then the other siblings usually would stop by and visit. And so, she always had a very large dinner for everyone. Speaker 1: So how many siblings did your mother have? Speaker 2: Oh, these were my siblings. Speaker 1: Oh, your siblings. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 29850 Speaker 1: So--but as a young child growing up, what was the experience like living in Sparrow Point [Maryland]? Speaker 2: I think it was just a normal childhood experience. It was--now that I look back, it was a very nurturing environment. It was a community where if you did anything wrong, then usually a neighbor would tell your parents and etcetera, and what--even if your neighbor told you to do something, usually you did it. And it's--it was a very interesting experiment--oh, experience. We had one--when I was growing up, we had one elementary school that all of us attended. Speaker 1: What was the name of that elementary school? Speaker 2: Bragg Elementary. Speaker 1: Spell that. Speaker 2: B-R-A-G-G. And so, all of us went to the same elementary school. Most of the teachers actually came from someplace else to teach there; usually from Baltimore City or someplace else in Baltimore County. Speaker 1: Was this a segregated school? Speaker 2: It was a segregated school. Speaker 1: What about the teachers? Speaker 2: In what sense? Speaker 1: Did you have black teachers or white teachers? Speaker 2: Yeah, they were all black. Speaker 1: They were all black. Speaker 2: All black, including the principal and administrators. And-- Speaker 1: Could you describe your early experience in school? Speaker 2: I always remember when I went to--started in the first grade, I was sort of behind everyone else. A lot of the kids could read in the first grade, and I always remember that. And I guess in my household as a youngster, we didn't--wasn't encouraged to do a lot of reading and etcetera, and I guess it was because of the limited educational background of my parents [Willis Oliver and Hattie Fowlkes Oliver]. But I do remember I was surprised when I went to school the other kids seemed like they were just so far advanced compared to me. And there were some of the students, their parents were teachers and etcetera, and usually they were the ones that did very well, that's in the first grade. Speaker 1: Now, your parents had a limited education but did they value education? Speaker 2: Yes, they did. And I think not only my parents, but in that environment. You were encouraged by everyone in the community, you know, to continue with your education. It was very interesting because at that time, working there [steel mill, Sparrows Point, Maryland] was a good job because, say, relative to the other jobs you could have, you know, during segregation. They paid relatively well compared to the other jobs that blacks could take at that time. And I always remember also that usually a lot of the young men, when they got to be sixteen or seventeen, if they weren't excelling in school they would go and work in the mills. And it was sort of a unique experience in that sense, unlike now, you know, if you don't have a formal education, it's very difficult to get a good paying job. Speaker 1: Now, do you remember special teachers from your elementary experience? Speaker 2: I can only remember the first grade teacher, Ms. Scott; and then there was--the sixth-grade teacher was Mr. Lockhart. I remember him. But I don't remember all of the teachers. Speaker 1: How large was the school? Speaker 2: It was, I would say, maybe about--probably about twelve rooms, two floors, and I guess each classroom probably had about twenty-five students. They at that time, they would bus students in from the surrounding black communities, and so, a lot of the students were from places like Edgemere. We used to call it "Norse's Lane" (ph.), and these are all the small black communities that are near Sparrows Point. Speaker 1: Okay. So what timeframe was this--what years were you-- Speaker 2: Okay. I graduated from high school in 1958, so this was about 1953-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --1954. Speaker 1: Okay. So when you were in elementary school, there were--you already had bus service to the school-- Speaker 2: Yes, from the surrounding-- Speaker 1: --from the surrounding areas? Speaker 2: --communities. All of us who lived in Sparrows Point, we just walked and so, it was--again, it was a very small community. So if you lived there you walked, but the bus service was for students that lived in the other--the black students that lived in the other surrounding communities. Speaker 1: Do you know how it came to be that Sparrows Point was chosen as the place for the school? Speaker 2: That was because, you know, there was a population there because of the steel mill. The steel mill itself--Sparrows Point is a peninsula, so it's surrounded by water. And so, the boats would bring in the iron ore for melting and processing in the steel plant. And so, because there was a population there, that's why they eventually, you know, built the school. Story_ID: 29851 Speaker 1: As you think about your early childhood experience, are there sounds or sights or smells that stand out? Speaker 2: The only thing I can remember is doing a lot of fishing and crabbing. As I say, we were--it was a community that was right there on the water and so, we did a lot of swimming and fishing and crabbing. Speaker 1: Do you remember special events on the peninsula? Speaker 2: No. We didn't have a lot of, say, social events. As a matter of fact, usually for the older students, you know, they would go into Baltimore City [Maryland] or go to another town. In Sparrows Point [Maryland] they didn't allow any liquor stores, so no alcohol. There were no liquor stores or nightclubs or anything like that, and that was because they didn't want the men intoxicated when they would go work in the steel mill. Speaker 1: What kind of student were you? Speaker 2: I think, as I said, when I started out in the first grade, I wasn't very good compared to my peers, but as the years went by I started to sort of surpass them, and I could see that development taking place and it was--and I think it was due to that preschool experience before I started school. I don't--you don't know, I don't remember my parents trying to teach me to read or write or anything like that, but in school I was, I guess I was always a pretty hard worker. And so, I progressed as each year--continuing until I graduated. Story_ID: 29852 Speaker 1: You were the youngest of your siblings? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Do you remember learning anything from them or having those discussions with them? Speaker 2: I don't remember learning anything from them, but my brother [Donald Oliver], who was Donald, he was next to me, I remember when I would attend school the teachers always said he was very good. He graduated from high school and, as a matter of fact, he went to Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland] and got a degree in mathematics. And so, whenever I would usually start in a class, they would always talk about my older brother. The others, there was too much of a gap. There were actually eight years between my brother and myself. So even with him that's a pretty large difference there. Speaker 1: So when you started elementary school, had any of your siblings moved out of the house? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. At that time, when I think back and we talk about this a lot, all of the houses only had three bedrooms. So normally the parents would take one, they would put all the girls in another one, and they all had attics and so they would put all the boys in the attic. So normally as the students start to get older, around eighteen, they kind of wanted to get out. Even in my house along with my siblings, I had an aunt who died in childbirth and she had about four kids, and so, my parents [Willis Oliver and Hattie Fowlkes Oliver] raised them also. And it seems like we always had at least one boarder in the house. So when we talk about what it was like, we can't figure out where people lived or slept in those days. And so, what would happen as the men approached eighteen or nineteen, they usually--they would want to move out and, you know, get more space. Speaker 1: So with that many people was there always something going on in the house? Speaker 2: Oh, it was something all of the time, yes. And that's why I say on Sundays my mother [Hattie Fowlkes Oliver] always, always would cook a very large Sunday dinner, and all of my--the brothers, all the brothers as they got married, quite often they would come back for--we would see them on Sundays, and I always remember that. Speaker 1: What kind of chores did you have as a kid growing up? Speaker 2: I really didn't have any, a lot of chores. My mother was a housewife so she was home all of the time. And she was sort of the type that even if you did something she felt it wasn't good enough anyway, so she usually would do, you know, most of the household chores. So I didn't really have a lot of chores around the house. And I guess also being the youngest there, they may have given some of my older brothers chores to do. But I didn't have any chores. Speaker 1: What kind of child were you? Were you rambunctious, were you well-mannered, were you mischievous? Speaker 2: I thought I was well-mannered and my father [Willis Oliver], he was very strict. And I remember, for instance, my father never spanked me and I used to hear these stories from my older brothers that when he came in from work, and it was very difficult for them, you know, working in a segregated system. So if he came in and usually the mother would tell the father, then you would get spanked with whatever was available, whether it was a broom or coat rack or anything like that. And I think after hearing that you just didn't, you know, you didn't overstep any boundaries. And so, my father, he never spanked me. Speaker 1: Did you ever push the limit? Speaker 2: Not with my--one day I can remember when I was about sixteen I sort of did that and I remember he just stared at me and that was it. He--and I was sixteen. I think I just wanted to see what would happen, and he just stared at me and I didn't--I sort of backed down and did whatever he was telling me to do. Story_ID: 29853 Speaker 1: What were your biggest influences? What influenced you the most as you were growing up? Speaker 2: I think we--there we played a lot of sports. As I said, we didn't have--you know, there were no movie theatres, no bowling alleys, at least when I came along. And so, usually the young men and also the girls, we played a lot of sports, you know, basketball, football. And I can remember on Saturdays and Sundays we just played all day. And I can remember when I was young, very young, I wanted to be a professional baseball player and so, one day someone told me, say, "Well you're not very large, you know, you're not large enough," and I thought about that and I said, "Well, maybe they're right." But growing up, I think--you know, we spent most of the time actually just playing sports. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, you had this big field between your community and the white community and you sometimes met to play each other? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: What things did you play? Speaker 2: It would either be baseball or football. Just those two. sports. Speaker 1: What position did you play? Speaker 2: I used to play outfield and third base. Speaker 1: Football? Speaker 2: Usually I was the running back or sometimes an end. I was always a very fast runner and so, usually I always played one of the running positions. Story_ID: 29854 Speaker 1: What was your interest in science early? Speaker 2: I didn't really have an interest. The reason I went into physics is, sort of, I remember when I was in the--took physics I think in the eleventh grade and so, at that time they would--the eleventh and the--two grades would take a science class together and so, I always remember my physics teacher one day in class, and she would give ten physics problems every day. So she would give these ten physics problems that you would have to work and then bring them in the next day. And so, I came and I didn't have my physics problems and so, I remember in front of the whole class she said, "If you come in my class again without your physics homework done, then I will take your pants down in front of all these girls and I will spank you." And then she said, "And after I do that, I will tell Hattie [mother, Hattie Fowlkes Oliver] what I did." And so, Hattie was my mother's name, and I knew from that statement that she knew who my mother was. And so, I said, "Well, I'm just not going to take a chance with her." And so, I started to do my physics homework, and probably by the end of the year I was the best physics student in the class. Speaker 1: Let's take a break. Story_ID: 29855 Speaker 1: Your courses in high school, but what was the name of your high school? Speaker 2: Sollers Point High School. Speaker 1: Could you spell that? Speaker 2: S-O-L-L-E-R-S P-O-I-N-T, High School. The high school I attended actually was in Turner Station [Maryland]. The high--as I said, in Sparrows Point [Maryland] we had the elementary school [Bragg Elementary School]. In Turner Station they had the high school, so to go to high school we would ride the yellow bus to high school. By the way, the--also, all of the students from, as I said, Norse's (ph.) Lane and Edgemere and the surrounding black communities would also, they would go to Sollers Point High School. Speaker 1: Could you talk about your high school experience? What was it like? Speaker 2: It was very enjoyable. It was a brand new high school and at that time it was actually very modern compared to the other high schools. And so, and I always remember they had a--probably the best track in the county. And I think we were proud of attending Sollers Point because it was a brand new high school at that time. Speaker 1: Do you know was this the first high school there or did it replace one? Speaker 2: What happened was the--at first--before Bragg was also an elementary and a high school. And so, I guess as the population grew there was a need for a high school, and so, we would go to this one in Turner Station that they had built. I think before then a lot of my older siblings, I do remember, when they graduated from--I think it was junior high--in order to go to high school you had to take an examination, and if you scored above a certain level, then you would be able to go to school in Baltimore City [Maryland]. And so, some of my older siblings, the ones that did not go to work in the mill, would actually go into Baltimore City to attend high school. And then, as I say, there was a period when they started having a high school there in Sparrows Point, and then the next progression was they built a high school in Turner Station. Speaker 1: Okay. Now this was about the time when people were talking about separate but equal. Did this have an impact for a reason that this new high school was built? Speaker 2: Yes, it did. As a matter of fact, I just--and I just recently found out about this; in some of the communities, if the students lived near a white high school, they actually had a choice; they could either go to Sollers Point or they could go to the nearest high school which would be integrated. And it's very interesting because, I don't remember us having that choice in Sparrows Point. But I recently went to a reunion and I saw some of the students there that had elected not to go to Sollers--well, at least their parents elected for them not to go to Sollers Point, went to other schools. So some of the communities, they gave them that choice. And they ran the bus to Sollers Point, which was a predominantly--which was a black high school actually. Story_ID: 29856 Speaker 1: Now, do you remember any teachers in your high school that had a special impact upon you? Speaker 2: As I said, my physics teacher, that was, her name was Ruth Law (ph.). We had a math teacher in high school. I always remember him. His name was Arthur Morton. He was, I guess, about six, six [6'6"]; probably weighed about three hundred pounds, and he had a long goatee, was very dark, and I always remember the first day of class, and at that time I was in the academic curriculum, and so they would put the academic and vocational students in the same homeroom. And I always remember he would close the door and he took out his wallet and he put his wallet on the front desk. He said, "My name is Arthur Morton and I'm going to run this class." He said, "All of you young men, if you can beat me all together, then I'll let you run this class." And because he was so large and intimidating, no one would make a move to do anything. Some of the guys would maybe do something like this, and you know, he put his wallet out, he said, "By the way, too, you can have--" he'd say--maybe I'll just use an example, "I have a hundred dollars in the wallet, and if all of you together can whip me, then you can have it and I won't report you." And I kind of remember that, and he was sort of the disciplinarian for the entire school. And so, and I think all of us, we were really impressed by him. And what I always remember, he lived in, as a matter of fact, he was from Pennsylvania, so he had a room that he lived in during the week. He would go home on the weekends. So every evening he would take these--the students could come by and we would just work math problems, and he would put the students at the boards all around the classroom, and he would send out for hot dogs and hamburgers. And so, all of the--and girls--everybody--all of the students that wanted to, we would just work math problems. And we would do that for about two hours every afternoon, and it became very interesting and challenging. And also, out of that high school, quite a few of the students went--I went on in physics, but most of them actually went on in mathematics, and I think we had a very good foundation. And some of the students from--I always remember, several of them went to Johns Hopkins [University, Baltimore, Maryland] and they majored in math, they were good. And so, also Arthur Morton, he was very interested in sports. And I remember he, he actually bought me my first pair of track shoes. And he would be out in the evening, and he would go to all of the sporting events. But I always remember he was a very influential person. Speaker 1: But he became your mentor? Speaker 2: I wouldn't call him a mentor. He was like everybody's. He was there if people had problems. I remember he even--my dad [Willis Oliver] died when I was in the tenth grade, and mother [Hattie Fowlkes Oliver] was a, as I said, a housewife, and I only remember her doing some day's work a couple of times. And I remember he offered me a job just filing his math papers. He told me, if I came back in the evening and just file his papers for me. I remember he paid me for doing that. And also, he would talk about my older brother [Donald Oliver]. He knew him and said he was very smart, and etcetera. And I couldn't really say he was a mentor of mine. It was--like he was there for everybody and so, the students just kind of flocked to him. And so, every day we would work just math problems after school for an hour or two hours. And he would buy sodas and hot dogs and hamburgers and stuff like that. Speaker 1: Did you ever try to challenge him in terms of being better than he was? Speaker 2: It was very interesting. I remember when I was at Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland] and I think I was talking calculus, and so I stopped by the school one evening. I was having some problems and so I remember he said, "Well, I'll get Oliver Stokes to help you." And this was a guy who had gone to [Johns] Hopkins [University] and he was majoring in math. So I knew right when he said, "I'll get him, I'll call him in," you know, "You can come by tomorrow and we'll go over these problems." I knew at that level he probably was not, you know, he didn't know all of the advanced mathematics, but the--you know, the things like Algebra 2, and Trigonometry, and etcetera. And, you know, he was very good at that. Story_ID: 29857 Speaker 1: What kinds of things did you do when you were in high school [Sollers Point High School]? You played sports or (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I played sports also. I used to play the trumpet in the band and I wasn't a very good musician. I remember I had played trumpet for about six years and so, I had a nephew who came and lived with us. His parents separated, so he came and he lived with us. Speaker 1: Was this with you or with your parents [Willis Oliver and Hattie Fowlkes Oliver]? Speaker 2: With my parents. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so, he used to start playing my trumpet, and probably in about six months he was much better than I was, so I knew right--from that experience that I would never be a musician. And he sort--he liked it. As a matter of fact, I think my mother [Hattie Fowlkes Oliver] actually gave him my trumpet when I started going to college [Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland] because I did not play in the band at college, but this was in high school. So I did, I played in the band in high school. But most of it I was--it was built around sports actually. Speaker 1: So what kind of sports did you play? Speaker 2: Well, we only had track and basketball, so I played basketball and track. Speaker 1: What was your distance in--your specialty in track? Speaker 2: It was very interesting. In track, I never-- in physical ed., I think when I was in the eleventh grade we would high-jump and so, the physical ed. instructor told me, "Well, you should come out for the track team to high-jump." So I told him I would try that. So I did, and he would give you a lot of fundamental exams, physical exams just to see how high you could jump or how fast you could run a very short distance, and etcetera. So the first track meet I remember, he said, "Well, I'm going put you in to run the--was the 440 yard relay." So I kind of said, "Well, I can't run that fast," you know, "Why you're putting me in that?" And he said, "You will do all right." So anyway it turned out I was the fastest runner, and this was my senior year on the track team. And that was quite surprising because a lot of the other students had actually run track for three or four years. And so, I ended up running the hundred- yard dash. And so, I always remember I won it for the county, the hundred-yard dash. And the year that I came out, we used to have at the state level--at the county level it was integrated, but at the state level it was segregated, state championships. And so my coach, this particular year he said he wasn't going to go to the separate black state championships. This was his protest against the segregated system, so and I would have lost in the state meet because I could read the newspapers and I could see that there were other students that were faster than I was. So we didn't go to the state championships. But that was a very unique experience, and I think it surprised everybody because I wasn't on the track team for three or four years, so I ran the dash. Speaker 1: So now this is about 1958? Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 29858 Speaker 1: And were there discussions about the segregrated system that you were in that you were quite happy? Speaker 2: My parents [Willis Oliver and Hattie Fowlkes Oliver]--I think they really shielded us from all of that. I never really understood the effects of segregation until I went to work in the steel mill, and that was shocking because then I could see that all of the blacks had the menial and labor jobs, whereas all of the whites had the skilled jobs. And that was my first realization about segregation. Even in the community that I lived in, we had no desire to interact with the whites. And it was very interesting, one thing happened; I found out later there was a--there was a restaurant and it was in the white community. And so, one day there was a fellow, friend of mine who actually worked there. So one day--and so, I worked there for like a week, he went on vacation. And so, I worked for him in this restaurant. So anyway, I found out maybe about ten years later from a cousin of mine that the restaurant was really segregated, and I did not realize that. Growing up we just had no desire to interact with them--with the whites, and so, it was really a very strange experience, and I didn't even know that that restaurant--they used to sell hot dogs and hamburgers, and if we wanted, we usually would go and do the carryout, and we had--we didn't have any desire to sit down and eat. And as I said, I found out later that even if I had wanted to, I couldn't have. But it was so strange because it was--there just wasn't that desire to integrate. I think a lot of the desire from integration comes out when you find that it's something you can't do. You know, you're not allowed to do it. And it's not from something that you really want to do, and I think that sort of adds something, another dimension to it. But that was a very strange experience when she told me that. And I even worked there, but I just, like I had no desire to interact with them. Speaker 1: When did you work in the steel mill? Speaker 2: I used to work there during the summers once I started college. And that was a very interesting experience because then there were suits against the steel plant because as I said, they had--the blacks did not work in the skilled jobs. What they would do was very interesting. They would hire college students for the skilled jobs during the summer rather than to offer these--rather than to train the people that had been there. And so, at the end of the summer, quite often they--a lot of the students were offered permanent jobs, and that was a decision I had to make whether or not I would stay there or go back to college. And a lot of the students, they would just remain there because they were skilled jobs and they paid very well at that time. So during college I used work there every summer. Story_ID: 29859 Speaker 1: What kind of student were you in high school? Speaker 2: I was just a "B" student. I think in high school, matter of fact, I think because I was a good athlete the students didn't bother me. I think if you were a really, real brainy student, you were not an athlete, they would sort of, I think, tease you, and it's almost like it is now in the high school. You know, say, probably for--you hear a lot of students where they don't want, especially for African-American students, they don't want to be too smart. Speaker 1: Do you think you consciously were less than a stellar student because of knowing these kinds of things? Speaker 2: I think I just wasn't aware of doing well academically in high school. You know, I felt that if you did a--if you didn't fail, you were doing well. And I think I went through that also in college to a large degree. And it's almost--I had my daughter to tell me one time, and this is when she was in high school, and she said she noticed that a lot of the students that were the "A" students, she had a lot of students, she said "Dad, they'll make a ninety-five on a test and they are upset because they didn't get a perfect paper." And she said, "I wish I could be like that." And she says she wasn't like that, you know. If she got a ninety she was happy with it. And she said, "I wish I could be like the other students." And I think that's how I was. In undergraduate school and in high school, I think it's if I can be a "B" I was quite happy with that. I really didn't get into the, trying to really excel until I went to graduate school. Speaker 1: Now, when you were in high school, were--well, were you first in your family to go to a college or did any of your siblings (unclear). Speaker 2: The brother [Donald Oliver] who was older than I was, he was first. Most of the older brothers actually worked in the steel mill. Speaker 1: What about your cousins and etcetera? Did they go on to college or-- Speaker 2: The ones that lived in Sparrows--a lot of them did. The parents encouraged them to go on to college. Speaker 1: Where did this culture of going to college come from? Speaker 2: I think a lot of the people that worked in the steel mill, they tried to encourage their kids to, you know, go on to college, and I think I did it because of the--seemed like it was the thing to do. I didn't think about the reason for going or for materialistic reason. It wasn't there to make money and etcetera. And I think it was because growing in that environment, you know, if you worked in the steel mill, they had unions and etcetera. Now one of the things was very interesting even when I first came out of college, the students that worked in the mill actually were, and I had a doctorate, they were making more money than I was. And I remember I had a cousin who actually, you know, told me that. But what happened, the steel industry, as you are aware, got completely devastated. They've gone from thirty thousand employees now. I was reading in the paper this weekend they're down to two thousand. So most of them, you know, they got laid off and it was a lot of people-it was very devastating because they left the job where they were pay--making very good money and they couldn't move into another area cause, they didn't have a skill, per se. And so that was a very interesting and a learning experience for me. Story_ID: 29860 Speaker 1: So it's now 1958 and you graduate from high school [Sollers Point High School, Maryland] and you decide to go to college. Where did you go? Speaker 2: I went to Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland] When I came out of high school, just about everyone there they either went to, we used to call it Maryland State, which was the University of Maryland Eastern Shore [Princess Anne, Maryland] or they went to Morgan. There were a few that may have gone to some majority white schools, but not very many. And as I said, growing up in--we just had no desire to move outside of the community. It's -- Speaker 1: So you've now come to Morgan. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: What was the experience like? What kind of transition was it for you? Speaker 2: It was very interesting because again everybody from the community came to Morgan. You played--if you played sports, the guys you played against were also at Morgan. And if you remember, I said if I had gone to the state track championship, I would have lost. There was one guy who was in Baltimore [Maryland], he was very good. And we ended up in the same class. And that was interesting because when you came here, all of these people that you knew from high school and the different schools were also here. And so, again I think it was a very nurturing experience. And it was-- Speaker 1: When you came to Morgan, what did you intend to major in? Speaker 2: Physics. I stayed in physics the entire time. Speaker 1: And can you remember what helped you make that choice? Speaker 2: When I graduated from high school, if you remember, I said that this physics teacher had threatened me and so I--and when she knew--I found out she knew my mother [Hattie Fowlkes Oliver], I said I wouldn't test her. And so, I became very good in physics and by the end of the year I was the best student because I was doing all my homework then. Others weren't doing it. And so, I kind of liked it and so that's why I decided to major in physics. Speaker 1: And who were some of the students who were here with you when you were in the physics department? Speaker 2: Well, there was Ernest Hammond (ph), Charles Hall, Charles Stewart (ph), and the interesting thing is, quite a few of them, were still in contact with each other. And at that time, it was right after the Sputnik [Satellite 1957], went up. So there was a big interest in science and physics, you know. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so, I found out after getting here that a lot of the students that was one of the larger physics classes that they had had in a long time. Speaker 1: And who was chair of the department when you were here? Speaker 2: Julius Taylor. Speaker 1: And what was it like having him as a teacher? Speaker 2: It really--it was very--it was interesting. He seemed to be, I think from my experience here, that's why I decided to go into college teaching. They seemed to enjoy teaching physics. We had another professor who was Robert Boye. He was a graduate student at-- Speaker 1: Could you spell his name? Speaker 2: Robert, R-O-B-E-R-T B-O-Y-E, and he sort of was the typical physics professor. And he was, I think he was one of the better teachers that I had had. And I was very impressed by him. Speaker 1: How large was the faculty in the physics department back in those days? Speaker 2: Probably there were about four or five-- Speaker 1: Four or five. Speaker 2: --teachers. Speaker 1: It was a large department? Speaker 2: Yes. Yes. Story_ID: 29861 Speaker 1: And what do you remember most about your undergraduate experience? Speaker 2: You mean as far as physics? Speaker 1: As far as physics and the other departments? Speaker 2: Yeah, I think just hanging around the department. The--you know, we got to know each other very well, and we had homework and we would sort of work together and we sort of just hung out in the physics building. Speaker 1: Okay. How did the other students on campus view all of you guys who were over in physics? Speaker 2: As far as I knew at that time I didn't think about that. I think they just--I didn't realize--I think there was more of a feeling when I went to Howard [University, Washington D.C.] of the people being in science as being different from the rest of the student population. At Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland] I never thought about that. Speaker 1: Did you live on campus? Speaker 2: No, no. I commuted. Speaker 1: So did you get to know people who lived on campus well? Speaker 2: I pledged a fraternity as a senior, and one of the reasons I did that, too, I kind of felt that I did--had--never had the undergraduate experience there. I commuted, I used to ride the bus. And I remember it was like a two-hour bus ride coming and going. So, and I kind of felt that I really had never had the undergraduate college experience. And so I did, as a result of that, I pledged as a senior. Speaker 1: What did you pledge? Speaker 2: Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity. And so then I became a little more involved in the college life. Even things like homecoming, I didn't attend a lot of the football games or the dances on campus at all. And I guess it was because I was so far away and I used to ride the bus at that time, or hitchhike. A lot of us would hitchhike back in those days. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you recall what the tuition was back in those days? Speaker 2: Yes. I always--and I used to always tell people it was, I remember it was a hundred dollars, and if you kept a "B" average you didn't have to pay that. So it was quite reasonable. And so I always had a "B" average overall, and so, I didn't have to pay the hundred dollars. I can remember that. Story_ID: 29862 Speaker 1: What did your parents [Willis Oliver and Hattie Fowlkes Oliver] think about your being in college? Were they supportive? Speaker 2: As I said, my father [Willis Oliver] passed when I was in the tenth grade. And my mother [Hattie Fowlkes Oliver], she was proud of it. I think I never realized how proud people were of me until--as a matter of fact, my high school physics teacher, when she passed, she had this request for several of her former students to come and we actually--wanted us to sit on the pulpit. And then it dawned on me that, you know, I must have--she was proud of my accomplishments and I think I was a little bit naive. I just never realized that until, you know, she had passed. Speaker 1: Now, when you spoke to the people in your community, you were commuting living at home, did you talk about what your major was and the fact that you were in the sciences? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Would that have an impact at all? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: No? Speaker 2: No. Again, until I went to Howard [University, Washington D.C.], then there was this talk of, you know, being in science and people in science are supposed to be eccentric and etcetera. But I think as an undergraduate, as far as I was concerned, there was no difference between, you know, a science or a liberal arts major--or not a liberal arts major, but a social science major and etcetera. Speaker 1: We're going to take a break. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 29863 Speaker 1: We're going to start again. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: We're talking about your experience in college, and when did you decide that you wanted to go to graduate school? Speaker 2: I think when I, during my undergraduate days I kind of looked at teaching as a nice profession, because I saw Dr. [Julius] Taylor and Dr. [Robert] Boye and they looked like they enjoyed it. And after coming out of the steel mill, I saw how hard it was for people to work in the steel mill. You know, I said, I think I wouldn't mind being a college professor. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you remember getting any special encouragement from the teachers here to continue your work? Speaker 2: Yes. Yes. And I think that's even true, that's true even today. I think at the HBCUs [Historically Black Colleges and Universites], as one means of, I guess, justifying why you still have HBCUs, there's a big push for students to go to graduate school, go to medical and dental school and to go on. And so, I think it's--and it was true then, and I think it's still true today. So, and as you know, in physics a lot of the graduate students have come from the HBCUs. And that was true back in the day that I was here also. Speaker 1: You mean the black graduate students? Speaker 2: Yes. Yes. Speaker 1: Now, you arrive at Howard University [Washington D.C.]. What caused you to select Howard as the place to go? Speaker 2: Actually I applied to [University of Maryland] College Park because my chairperson, I think they were trying to get more blacks to go there, and I remember there was some, I guess, commotion or something about certain people they weren't admitting enough and etcetera. So I was encouraged by the chair to apply to College Park. And to be honest, I didn't have that much of an interest to go there. And at College Park, the only time I had visited the campus, I went there to visit one time as an undergraduate, and I think there were some R.O.T.C. [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] individuals going through some motions on the field. And I always remember one person yelled out, "Why don't you niggers go back home." And that was my only experience I had ever had been to College Park, and so when I graduated I had no particular desire to go there. I remember I applied to three places; College Park, University of Connecticut [Storrs, Mansfield, Connecticut], and Howard [University]. University of Connecticut admitted me, but it wasn't enough money they offered to cover everything. College Park told me I could come there, but I would have to take some undergraduate courses first. And Howard paid everything. And my mother [Hattie Fowlkes Oliver], right away she said, "Oh, go to Howard. You know, you could even bring your clothes home and I can do the laundry every week, and it's not going to cost you anything." So I went to Howard. You know what, I was glad to go. I think it was a very good experience. Speaker 1: Now were you the first in your family to go to graduate school? Speaker 2: Yes. Yes. Speaker 1: How about your extended family? Speaker 2: Probably yes. Yes. I think, except for a brother next to me, Donald. None of the others went to college. Speaker 1: I'm sorry, you were saying? Speaker 2: None of the others went to college. Speaker 1: So what was the general reaction within your family and to include your siblings about the fact that were now going to graduate school? Speaker 2: They were--I think I grew up in that environment where there wasn't that much of a commotion about the fact that I was going. You know, my parent, I think they were--my mother was probably very proud inside, but as far as relaying that to me, she never did. It was something I just did on my own. One thing I have always--and I've told my brother, he doesn't remember. I remember coming out of school. I was a very good athlete, and so, and I told him I liked physics and I liked physical education. I wasn't sure which one I was going to major in. And I told him, you know, I was pretty good at physics and I liked physical ed., and I thought I would like being a physical education teacher. And so, my brother told me I should go into physics. He thought that the opportunities would be much better. And when I came along, whenever older people told you something, you usually did what they did; you took their advice because you kind of felt they were always looking out for your best interests. And to be honest, I think when it came down to majoring in physical education or physics, and I picked physics because my brother said it was a good--that was the best choice. And so that's what I did. It's sort of interesting when you look back and realize that that decision was just made on a simple discussion like that. Story_ID: 29864 Speaker 1: So you arrive at Howard [University, Washington D.C.] in 1962? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And in to the department, and it's in Washington, D.C., and the city is bustling. Describe your initial experience there; what was going on in the city? Civil rights and all of those issues. Speaker 2: Somehow I think I was insulated from all of that. I usually just kept focused on my studies and trying to do well. I really wasn't involved in a lot of the civil rights effort. And I think it's because of that the community where I grew up, we never felt that we were--that segregation was that bad because as far as we were concerned, our community we felt, was I guess more intellectual and stronger than the white community. And your parents even encouraged you not to associate with them and etcetera. And I just didn't understand all of the ramifications of segregation, like I said, until I went to work in the steel mill, then I said, "Hey, wait a minute. Something's going on here." And so, when I went to Howard, I think I just focused on studying. Speaker 1: So what was it like leaving Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland] and now going to graduate school? How (inaudible)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, it was quite different. The--what amazed me there was the students really studied. And I think at Morgan we didn't study that hard. You know, everybody--seems like everybody had a job, you know, they worked, and it was almost as if you were--if you didn't have a job, you're kind of slacking back in the effort. At Howard, I could see that experience, I could see the difference between middle class families and probably lower middle class. Speaker 1: Describe that. What do you mean by that? Speaker 2: The students were really interested in studying, getting good grades. I saw a lot of students that never went home. They just stayed and I started doing the same thing. We would sleep in the building. There were students that maybe went home once a week. And also, probably because when I was an undergrad I commuted every day. And most of the students I sort of hung out with as an undergrad, they all were commuting; whereas at Howard you had students that were actually living on campus. And a lot of the students, they would study all night; it was normal. You know, they wouldn't go home. Maybe they would just go back to the dorm to change clothes or take a shower. And a lot of them didn't even do that. And that was very unique for me. It was a completely different atmosphere. You have medical school, we have dental school, you had law school, and a lot--there was sort of this saying that a lot of the women there were sent to Howard to, you know, perhaps to end up marrying a doctor or a lawyer or a dentist or something like that; whereas, at Morgan, you know, to me that wasn't- That concept, I just wasn't aware of the difference in, let's say, middle class values and etcetera. Speaker 1: Did you consider yourself middle class, upper class? Speaker 2: No, no. When I went to Howard I knew I was not middle class. See, another thing that was interesting about Sparrows Point [Maryland], all of the houses are exactly the same. You know, I Street and J Street. So there was no, you know, this house is better than that one. Most of the people walked to work. You know, it wasn't that you had a better car than the next person or--and that, I think that sort of gives you a different set of values, you know. It's not important whether you can live in this house or that house or, you know, all of the houses were exactly the same because they were company-owned houses that were rented out. And so, you didn't have this concept of class separation, which our parents probably had it, okay. But I think growing as kids, you know, you never looked at certain people as being poor or--because you couldn't tell because everybody had the same, you know, living experience. Everybody, if they had a car, they usually had a Ford or a Chevy [Chevrolet]. You know, you didn't have people with Mercedes [Benz] or convertibles or anything like that. And I think that sort of--when I went to Howard, I could see the difference. Speaker 1: And what was your reaction to that difference? What did you do? Speaker 2: It was just interesting. I think a lot of us that came from the same background, we just sort of laughed at it because we thought it was immaterial. Story_ID: 29865 Speaker 1: Who were some of the people you remember from your Howard experience? Speaker 2: Only the people in the physics department, primarily. And those are the people we usually associated with, and three of us actually came from Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland] at the same time to major in physics. That was Ernie Hammond (ph) and Randolph Scott. And then my roommates at Howard. And we're still good friends today. When I went there, George Alcorn (ph), and then there was a guy named Rufus Hill. And we're all still good friends. And when I went to Howard, I also moved into the fraternity house. Again, as a result of pledging as a senior, I didn't do a lot of fraternity activities. And so, I wanted to just live in the fraternity house to see what it was like, and etcetera. Speaker 1: Describe that experience for us. Speaker 2: It wasn't what I thought it was going to be. I still ended up studying because I was in that environment where all of the guys in physics, they just studied all of the time. And so, I sort of fell into that environment also. And probably the only time I would leave early in the morning and come back late at night. And I always remember they always had a party on Saturday night, so usually I would--maybe I would get back about ten or eleven [10:00 p.m. or 11:00 p.m.] I may go down for an hour or so. And so even that, I wasn't into a lot of social activities. Speaker 1: Okay. So I'm going to ask you to describe your social life like what kind of things did you do for relaxation when you were there? Speaker 2: I didn't do a lot. I just studied all of the time to be honest. The guys in physics, there was a good nurturing and challenging environment, and I think all of us enjoyed that. Speaker 1: Did you push each other? Speaker 2: I think we didn't push each other that much as that it was. We kind of pushed ourselves not to be at the bottom. We really helped each other. Story_ID: 29866 Speaker 1: Who was your adviser? Speaker 2: Arthur Thorpe. Speaker 1: Spell that if you will. Speaker 2: A-R-T-H-U-R T-H-O-R-P-E. Yeah, he was my adviser. Speaker 1: What kind of adviser was he to you? Speaker 2: He was a very intelligent and a great experimentalist. And he also, he just stayed there in the building. I remember he always commuted from North Carolina, and he had an airplane and he just stayed there in the building all of the time. He used to go home maybe 2:00 or 3:00 o'clock in the morning and come in maybe 10:00 o'clock [a.m.] the next day. And he actually lived in the, I guess, the physics building with us. Speaker 1: Was he black or white? Speaker 2: He was black. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, was it unusual at the time to have--know someone who had an airplane and flew it? Speaker 2: It was. Yeah, that was sort of a shock to me to find out this is someone with an airplane. But also that was--enabled him to do that. I'm sure if he had been married and, you know, his wife was in Washington [D.C.], he couldn't put in those kinds of hours in the building. But--and by the way, I stop by the campus every now and then, and he's always there and he-- Speaker 1: He's still active? Speaker 2: Pardon me? Speaker 1: He's still active? Speaker 2: Yes. And-- Speaker 1: What do you think was the greatest lesson you've learned from your adviser? Speaker 2: I think just to--it's nothing wrong with working hard. That was--you know, that's what he did. And he loved physics. And I think he, you know, it was the love of physics and science and building; he was an experimentalist; building things and seeing them work. And also, I think it has carried over into other areas. And I think that's a good experience. Speaker 1: Did your view of physics change while you were in graduate school? Speaker 2: I think I understood more about the research aspect of it. As an undergraduate, I thought that what everyone did in physics was just teach physics, but I learned about the research aspect about it. I didn't have a good feeling for that as an undergraduate. Speaker 1: Who supported your graduate education? Speaker 2: Howard did. They had a teaching assistantship. And so, they always paid for everything. Speaker 1: Did you keep the teaching assistantship throughout your experience there? Speaker 2: Yes. Okay. Story_ID: 29867 Speaker 1: So what kind of research did you do while you were there [Howard University, Washington D.C.]? Speaker 2: I did something called Mossbauer spectroscopy, which is nuclear gamma resonance spectroscopy. Speaker 1: Could you explain what that is-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: --and why it's important? Speaker 2: Yeah. You just take gamma rays from a radioactive source and it allows you to determine properties of materials. It sort of has a lot of widespread applications. You can look at biological materials; materials, material science, alloys; just about any type of material. One of the things my advisor did at that time, he would always have us focus on experiments that you could go back to the HBCUs [Historically Black Colleges and Universities] and fund; then he said that if you go back to--go teaching you're going to be at universities where they don't have a lot of funds--(phone ringing)--I'm sorry. And so he always-- OFF CAMERA VOICE: Repeat that. Speaker 1: Yeah, repeat that. Speaker 2: Okay. Where were we? Speaker 1: You were talking about the Mossbauer experiment and taking it-- Speaker 2: Yeah. He was--he would always emphasize doing what we call tabletop experiments, and that was you could--when you go back and work at the HBCUs, then you could--because you're not going to have a lot of funds to do various types of experiments. And I think that was very good advice for me, and I think when I came back, came to Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland] and started working, I was able to run a very good experimental laboratory. And, you know, you didn't need a lot of external funds. Story_ID: 29868 Speaker 1: Now, when you were at Howard [University, Washington D.C.], you said that he constantly talked about being able to take the experiment back to the HBCU [Historically Black Colleges and Universities]. Was the expectation there that you were going to be working at an HBCU when you graduated? Speaker 2: There was a strong emphasis to do that. I was in graduate school in the '60s [1960s], and I think there were a lot of people going back to the black communities to work and etcetera, and a lot of the graduate students actually went into teaching in the high schools, teaching physics in the high schools. It was a very interesting time. You had riots going on. I always remember, as I said, in the physics building we would just sleep there on the laboratory--laboratory tables. And I always remember one day, got up early, I think I was a Saturday morning, and went to the window and we had all of these National Guard troops. They were lined up around the campus, you know, with their rifles there. Speaker 1: What was that all about? Speaker 2: The students had taken over the administration building and this was during the '60s (1960s), etcetera. So I think there was--you know, it was a very interesting time when this was going on. OFF CAMERA VOICE: Is that when Doctor [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was-- Speaker 1: Yes, yes. OFF CAMERA VOICE: That was '68 (1968). Speaker 2: Do you remember all the people who came to Howard during that time? Because there was an awful lot going on there, speakers-- Speaker 1: Very interesting. I didn't go to a lot of the political activities. I think I still just sort of hung around the physics building, and etcetera. Well, you know, maybe we just walk up and look at them. And a lot of students were demonstrating around campus and etcetera. Speaker 2: Now, you were in graduate school during the March on Washington [1963]? Speaker 1: Yes, yes. Speaker 2: What was that experience like? Speaker 1: I remember it was during the summer. I was actually working at Harry Diamond Laboratories [Washington D.C.] and I was there, and so I guess I didn't really realize the significance of the March on Washington to be honest, and I think to me it was a demonstration. I remember I was at work that day. Speaker 2: What was Harry Diamond Laboratory? Speaker 1: It was a national defense lab, and this was during the, you know, Vietnam War, and at that time, if you worked in the--a defense laboratory, then you didn't have to worry about getting drafted. So I guess that was an additional incentive for me to work at a defense laboratory. And my brother, too, I always felt that he should have gone on to graduate school. He graduated in mathematics, but he was in the R.O.T.C. [Reserve Officers' Training Corps], the advanced corps, so he went into the service as an officer. And I always used to think that he probably could have gone on and gotten an advanced degree and etcetera. I think he would have done probably even better than or achieved more than I did. And so, and I did not go into the service. Speaker 2: Now, you said that you and your fellow physics students didn't talk much about what was going on in the social-political life in D.C. Speaker 1: We had one guy there Carl Shears (ph). I remember he was very much into things like that. We started a national magazine, at least we thought it was going to be national, and we would write articles. And he was sort of a writer, and that was a very unique experience also, because I had never been around anyone who was sort of the--I guess he was the intellectual type. He used to write poetry, and he was very political. Very, very conservative. And he used to write a lot of books and things like that. And that was a very unique experience, and as I said, it was, maybe when I was at Morgan [State University, Baltimore Maryland] I just didn't associate with a lot of the people in history and things like that. But at Howard, just to be around people that were, you know, writing poetry and--I remember this guy would go out and play his bongos on campus, and etcetera. He was a very good friend of mine and he passed at a very young age. But that was a very good experience. Story_ID: 29869 Speaker 1: Now, you did your research work on the Mossbauer effect. And it was a very famous experiment. Could you tell us why it was a famous experiment? Speaker 2: Well, [Rudolf] Mossbauer, he got the Nobel Prize for the discovery of it, and it's interesting, too, he actually was a graduate student. And they didn't--he observed a phenomena they did not think would work. And so, it's a--as I said, another name for it is nuclear gamma resonance spectroscopy. So he used gamma rays, and they're absorbed in the nucleus of an atom. And they are a lot of applied applications of that. Speaker 1: And so he got the Nobel Prize for work he did as a graduate student? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Why was that experiment so important? Speaker 2: Just the mere fact that he was able to make these types of measurements using this particular application. And as I said, they are a lot of applications of that, to a lot of different areas. And, it's--rather than just the nucleus absorbing the gamma ray, it's the entire lattice in-- Speaker 1: But this is an experiment that a person gets a Nobel Prize for that you can now do in a sophomore laboratory? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Is that--was that just the sign of the times? Speaker 2: I think there have been a lot of experiments like that, you know, high temperature super conductors, and etcetera. It's just that when you--people come up with something that's very unique and there are just a lot of applications for it. And I think it was just that particular type of an experiment. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, do you remember the title of your dissertation? Speaker 2: Yeah. It was the 'Mossbauer Study of Palladium Iron Alloys.' Speaker 1: And what makes that work significant? Speaker 2: We actually put hydrogen into material, and really it's just to study the properties of what happens when this occurs. And also you can measure the environment around the nucleus of the atom. And there are a lot of applications of using hydrogen in materials, including you can use this as an alternative energy source. And really in physics you're studying more physical principles rather than all applications like you would do in engineering. Speaker 1: Now, was there a period in your life that you started looking at the science you were doing and the religious impact or any conflict that it might have had with your religion? Speaker 2: No. I never had that. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, why did you choose to go into solid-state physics? Speaker 2: Actually, my adviser--I was doing some work in, actually in nuclear physics and the adviser left to go into--he actually left to go to law school. And so, Arthur Thorpe was there and so, Thorpe worked with me to complete that master's thesis, and then Thorpe always worked in solid-state physics, and he had another graduate student who was building a Mossbauer spectrometer, and this graduate student was working part time and I was a full-time student, so I think that had a lot to do with it. So he asked me to if I would work with him and I did, to build the spectrometer. Story_ID: 29870 Speaker 1: Okay. So now you're finishing up your work at Howard [University, Washington D.C.], and you graduated in what year? Speaker 2: Actually, I left in 1969. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I started teaching here [Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland] full time, and then I took three years to finish up--writing up my thesis. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: When I left, I had completed all of the experimental work. And so, I got my degree in 1972. Speaker 1: Okay. What caused you to come back to Morgan? Speaker 2: I think I always liked just teaching. It was--and Baltimore [Maryland] was near my family. I had a lot of family here. And so, I think--and I enjoyed working at Morgan. And so I think it's the combination of those things, the location and I worked at Morgan, and I can't--I just stopped by the physics department one day --and so Doctor [Julius] Taylor--and I think I did mention to him or he may have even asked me, he said he was looking for professors at that time. And so I applied and started working here. Speaker 1: What was the state of the department when you came back? Speaker 2: It was about the same. I think they had about four or five instructors. Doctor Boye was still here, Robert Boye and Doctor Taylor was here. They had a couple of additional, new or different professors; Windsor Morgan and--I forgot the other young man's name, but they were here. Speaker 1: All right. Now, how was the adjustment from being an undergraduate student here to now coming back a few years later being on the faculty? Speaker 2: I think it helped me to relate to the students. And I think that the adjustment was relatively easy. You know, just I could identify with the students. Most of them were again commuting from Baltimore, and I could see in them the way I was as an undergraduate student also. Story_ID: 29871 Speaker 1: Now, were you married by this time? Speaker 2: Yes. I got married in 1969. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. So you got married, you left Morgan-- Speaker 2: Howard [University, Washington D.C.]. Speaker 1: --Howard and came here? Speaker 2: Yeah, yes. Speaker 1: Was your leaving graduate school, did it have anything to do with you getting married? Speaker 2: Not really. I think they just happened to coincided at the same time. Speaker 1: Who is your wife and-- Speaker 2: Yeah. That was my first marriage. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Teresa Frazier (ph) was the--my first wife. Speaker 1: Okay. And how did you meet her? Speaker 2: I met her on Howard's campus one day through a mutual friend who introduced us. And then they invited me to a party, I think, that they were having, so I went there and met her at the party. Speaker 1: And did you have any children from that marriage? Speaker 2: Yes, I have two children. Speaker 1: Who are your children and their dates of birth-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --along with their birth order? Speaker 2: Yeah. Chasetta is the oldest one and she's-- Speaker 1: Could you spell that? Speaker 2: C-H-A-S-E-T-T-A, and then Chinyere is the younger one, C-H-I-N-Y-E-R-E. So the oldest one is thirty-five and the--thirty-four, and the younger one is thirty-one. Story_ID: 29872 Speaker 1: Now, so you now arrive back at Morgan State. What did you teach when you first came? Speaker 2: Oh, Doctor [Julius] Taylor, because I was still trying to finish up my thesis. I remember he gave me one graduate course that met on Saturday. So that way you could complete, you know, your teaching assignment for one course on Saturday mornings, and that kind of helped alleviate the load on the week. And I probably--and I think I taught a general physics class. Speaker 1: Was there a master's program there when you left? Speaker 2: There was a master--no, no, there was not. Speaker 1: Okay. So by time you got back there was a master's program? Speaker 2: Yes, a master's of science. Speaker 1: Master's of science. Speaker 2: In science. Speaker 1: Okay. And do you know how that program got started? Speaker 2: I think they got a grant. As a matter of fact, again, I think it probably started around the time of Sputnik [Satellite, 1957]. And so, I think that they got a grant from the National Science Foundation to teach high school teachers. It was sort of a review of a lot of the basic physics principles. And so, it was an interdisciplinary program. And most of the students in the program were high school science teachers. Speaker 1: Was this part of the master's of arts and teaching program that was started at that time? Speaker 2: They used to call it the master's of science--in science. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: It wasn't a pure teaching program. Speaker 1: So could you describe some of your students, the preparation and-- Speaker 2: Well, these were high school teachers. And they were very enthusiastic and they were adults. And they were very serious. And so, it was actually an enjoyable experience. And it was not a high pressure--I didn't--you don't have that same type of pressure that you would have, say, teaching an undergraduate physics course. You know, the students are going to come, you don't have to worry about attendance problems. And they usually will make an effort to do--if they have home assignments and-- Speaker 1: What about the level of preparation? Speaker 2: I think they worked, you know, they worked hard. And they had a science background, I think I could work with it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So as far--and also, you taught just about everything that they really needed for the course, and, you know, if they--if some needed some review in math, it wasn't a problem. They were very serious and I enjoyed teaching it. Story_ID: 29873 Speaker 1: So you're now on campus [Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland] for about three years, and now you get your Ph.D. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Did anything change in your life once you arrived--once you acquired the Ph.D.? Speaker 2: Very interesting. I think I never really realized the advantage of it until after I retired, and so, and that's very interesting because I can see the tremendous advantage now of having it. During the course of teaching here, there was a time when the university went to--matter of fact, they stopped promoting people unless they had their terminal degree. And I think a lot of people sort of got caught up in that, the one's that had not gone on. And so, I think at that time, I kind of realized how important it was to have that advanced degree. And it's very interesting. When I was in graduate school, it was just something I did. I never gave a great deal of thought about whether I'm going to get the Ph.D or not. It was just a natural progression of academics for me. But, and I think as I've grown older I've realized the importance of it and having it. Even now, as I say, I work with an administrative judge--as an administrative judge, consulting position with the Nuclear Regulatory Commission. And part of it is to also recruit other people for similar positions, and then when you look at the criteria that they're looking for, part of it is to have a doctorate. And so, I think the position that I now have I couldn't--you know, I wouldn't have it if I didn't have the doctorate degree. And it's sort of strange how you can go through your entire life, and then as you get older you see that, you know, getting the additional degree becomes more and more important. And it probably depends on the discipline you're in also. Story_ID: 29874 Speaker 1: We'll come back to that later. Now, a number of you from Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland] went to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] together. And then it turns out that a number of you ended up on the Morgan faculty. Speaker 2: Well, Ernest, yeah. One other guy did, Ernest Hammond (ph). Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. What about Conrad? Speaker 2: Yeah, Conrad. Conrad was at Howard when I--he graduated two years before me. Speaker 1: Before you did, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. And so--you're right. He came over later, but he came over after--yes, really retiring from the Naval Research Lab [Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 1: So what I was trying to get a feel for was what led, you know, you all to all go to Howard, and then what was the influence to come back to Morgan? Speaker 2: For me, you know, the reason I went to Howard, they were the only school that offered to pay everything for me. So that's why I went there. And Conrad, I'm not sure why he selected Howard. He was working at the Naval Research Lab, and he went to, I guess it was convenient. I do remember they used to offer--when I first started all of the graduate courses were offered at night. And that was set up so that people that worked with the government agencies during the day could take the graduate courses. And so, everything was at night. Speaker 1: You mean all the courses at Howard were at night? Speaker 2: At night when I first started. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: And then during the period while I was there, they sort of changed it to offer day courses with some of the courses being offered at night. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: But initially everything was at night. Speaker 1: So you get your Ph.D., you've done solid-state physics, and now you're back at Morgan. What kinds of things did you do to--or did you try to instill a research culture, you know, at Morgan because based upon the experience you had? Speaker 2: Yeah. It's just for students to realize that there is this other aspect of science, say, in addition to just teaching physics. And I enjoyed very much doing research. And so, I think it was more of just to expose them to doing research. I could always remember one student one day, we were in the laboratory and he was doing some experiments. And he said, "Well, what do you do as a physicist as a, you know, a lot of the physicists besides teaching?" And I said, "You do what you're doing." And to him, he could not realize that, you know, that is a profession, you get paid for doing it, for doing research. And I think it's something that, that the average person, just they do not understand this, you know, doing research as a profession. Story_ID: 29875 Speaker 1: When did you publish your first paper? Speaker 2: You said "where" or "when"? Speaker 1: When? Speaker 2: When I came--I was teaching here [Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland] in 1972, so I think it was around 1973 or 1974. And I always remember it was on my thesis. And, and so, that was the first. Speaker 1: And where did you publish it? Speaker 2: It was in the 'Journal of Solid-State Physics.' Speaker 1: And do you remember the title? Speaker 2: Yes. It's probably 'Mossbauer Spectroscopy of Palladium Iron High Drives.' It was actually on my thesis. Yeah, I can remember that. Speaker 1: Now, were there any other thing that you did in the summers when you came back to Morgan? Speaker 2: Yeah. Every summer I always went to a national laboratory to work, and that was great experience. Speaker 1: Could you talk about the various labs you went to and what you did there? Speaker 2: Okay. Yeah. I went--well, I worked a couple of summers at the Naval Research Lab [Washington, D.C.] and initially was doing some radioactive studies on thermoluminescent dosimeters, and most of the others were doing Mossbauer spectroscopy. I had made a lot of contacts in this area as a result of going to seminars or requesting literature from people on certain topics. And I worked at, we used to call it Bell Laboratories [Murray Hill, New Jersey] at one time, which is--now it's called A T and T Lab, and I did Mossbauer spectroscopy there; and I worked at Argonne [National Laboratories, DuPage County, Illinois] doing Mossbauer spectroscopy; at NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration], did some Mossbauer spectroscopy on meteorites there. Speaker 1: Now, there were a number of your colleagues HBCUs used going to Bell and Argonne and Fermi [Fermilab, Batavia, Illinois], etcetera. Do you know what drove that? Speaker 2: Well, most of the laboratories would have summer programs, and they have college professors coming in. And also, right after the '60s (1960s) and the '70s (1970s), they tried to do some diversity, you know, in the programs also. And that would help. But, you know, even today, just about all of the labs, they have a lot of faculty coming in to work during the summer. So various research projects. And sometimes they have short-term projects that various faculty could come in and work on. And I think that's still in existence today. Speaker 1: So we're now in the mid-'70s (1970s), correct? And technology is changing rapidly. What kind of impact did that have on the work that you were doing? Speaker 2: I kind of always stayed doing that. It's very interesting. I think if you become a specialist in a certain area, then you develop skills and contacts in that area, and I think I always continued doing Mossbauer spectroscopy. It's very interesting. I was the--because I had to work with radioactive materials, I was the radioactive safety officer for the university. And even when I left, the work I'm doing now with the Nuclear Regulatory Commission is because of that background that I had. So I've sort of ended up working in the same area all along. And you kind of develop interest and expertise in that area. And so, it's very interesting. And I think it worked out well for me because I didn't do a lot of jumping around to whatever the new or hottest topic is. It takes a long time to really understand a particular area. And so, you may--you know, you can spend two or three years just becoming familiar with it and then something else will come up, and etcetera. But I think by as a result of me working in that one area, it worked out well for me actually. Speaker 1: Did you involve students in what you did? Speaker 2: Yes, everything. That was another thing that I liked about doing Mossbauer spectroscopy. There are a lot of individual tasks you can assign to different students. And so, and you need this especially at an undergraduate institution. You need their skill and labor to help you, you know, solve the problems. I think the biggest change has been with the software development. That's the biggest change that has developed in that area over the period of time. Story_ID: 29876 Speaker 1: So when did you take over as chair of the [physics] department [Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland]? Speaker 2: I think the first time was after about seven or eight years. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So that was around 19--let's see--it started in '72 (1972), I guess around about '80 (1980). Speaker 1: 1979, 1980? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: What was the driving force for your becoming the chair? Speaker 2: I think I just showed an interest in the department and the students. And that and also Doctor [Julius] Taylor was, he retired. He was going into retirement, and I think that was the reason for that. And being a chair and an HBCU [Historically Black Colleges and Universities], it's--it's a lot of work. And, it takes a lot of dedication. Speaker 1: So when you came in as department chair, what was your vision for the department? Speaker 2: Just to try and get the--I guess the department to grow. The department had went through a lot of changes; for instance, when I started initially, we had a three-two pre-engineering program, and I could remember we had over a hundred majors. And that's because they were interested in going on into engineering. At that time, the only engineering program at a public university was at [University of Maryland] College Park. So for people that are living in the Baltimore [Maryland] area, there was no School of Engineering. So we had a lot of undergraduate majors in the pre-engineering program, which is a three-two program where they would attend-- Speaker 1: Explain what a three-two program is. Speaker 2: You would attend Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland] for three years and then you would transfer and do the last two years at an engineering school. And so, usually what would happen, if the students were very good, they realize they could always go to graduate school at the master's level and get full support. And so, what would happen would be that you wouldn't have a lot of students actually taking advantage of that program because they could stay here, finish in one year, and then they could go to graduate school. And so, we had a lot of majors when we had the program. And eventually-we and Doctor Taylor was very instrumental in that. They wrote the proposal to the state of Maryland to start a full-fledged engineering school. Speaker 1: Okay. So did the three-two program stop when you started when you started your own engineering school? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Because we had engineering on campus. Speaker 1: Did you consider having a three-two engineering program with your own engineering school? Speaker 2: No. What had happened was very interesting. Initially, there was a lot of opposition. So what we started in the department was an engineering physics--a B.S. degree in engineering physics, which really the students liked that because they would get the B.S. degree in an engineering discipline. And so, when the engineering school started, at Morgan the engineering physics degree is still in the physics department. At most schools the engineering physics major is in the School of Engineering. But because of that historical aspect, it's--at Morgan it's still in the physics department. Speaker 1: Now with the advent of the engineering school at Morgan, what's the relationship between the physics department and the engineering school? Speaker 2: I kind of think it was very good because the School of Engineering really had to start--as a matter of fact, I can remember when they started from one--a couple of rooms in a social science building, and now they've grown, and they have three--they have two buildings with a third one coming--being built now. And because, I think, at least when I was here, we sort of brought in all of the engineering people and allowed them to start the school, and etcetera. So I think that that relationship has always been very good. Speaker 1: How did the department grow under your leadership? Speaker 2: Actually, we had to sort of change the direction because before we had the three-two program, and that really drove the enrollment in the department. Once the engineering school started, and also the university went through a major change where they did away with the physical science department or comprehensive sciences, and they wanted all of the students to take either physics--or physics or chemistry and biology. And so, this meant that you would go from teaching your majors to just teaching the general school population. And so, that's going to drive the enrollment and the number of people required in the physics department up quite a bit. So we sort of went from three or four physics professors up until about eight--we had about eight or ten, and maybe about five or six contractual people. And it's primarily for teaching the supporting classes. Story_ID: 29877 Speaker 1: Let's move on to your professional life outside of teaching at the institution. What kinds of things were you involved in? Speaker 2: There was only one organization. I think that was the National Technical Association. And to be honest, I was involved with that. I would use it as a recruitment mechanism for the physics department; for instance, the organization, we give, we used to give a scholarship, and I would quite often try to convince the student to come into the physics department and sometimes they did. And so, my involvement with that organization has always been geared towards recruitment of students. And I think because of that, it really wasn't outside of the department; for instance, I was a member of the fraternity, and I was never very active. Speaker 1: Could you remind us what the National Technical Association is? Speaker 2: Yeah. That's just a--it's the oldest African American technical organization in the country, and it was started in 1925. And it's a national organization with chapters in different cities. For me it was good because you don't have a lot of people in physics, so you can't really run programs on the local level with just people, say, with African Americans in physics. And quite often, individuals in physics, they are really so involved in their research in their laboratories, they don't do a lot of interaction with the community. And so, that was why I sort of enjoyed working with the National Technical Association because we did a lot of community-based activities. And also, as I said, if I saw some students or, you know, I would try and interest them in to coming to Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland] or coming into physics. Speaker 1: Now, you were at Morgan in 1976 when the National Society of Black Physicists was formed. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Were you part of that? Speaker 2: It's very interesting. I attended the, I think that original meeting. I didn't really have a good feeling for what was going on. And I think what happened as a result of my experience at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] when I came to Morgan I was really more involved with the American Physical Society. I would go to their meetings, and because there you would have a lot of people doing work in Mossbauer spectroscopy. And it's sort of interesting. I think I probably was more involved with the APS [American Physical Society] activities, and it is because of that, I think, from having the experience at Howard, you know, I was already interacting with a lot of black physicists. You know, I'd go back and forth to Howard. And so, I think for a lot of blacks, if they are in a white environment, that sort of provides a mechanism for them, but because of my historical experience, I was probably not, never that involved with the NSBP [National Society of Black Physicists]. Speaker 1: What about APS; what kinds of things did you do with them? Speaker 2: I would just attend the March conference. And that, and even there I would just go to the presentations that were in the areas that I enjoyed. And the thing that I always liked about that, too, was, you know, you're going to have ten thousand people, and you may have fifty people doing work in a similar area. And so, whereas with NSBP, you have people in all different disciplines. And I think because of that experience, I was probably, you know, I would always go to the APS conferences. At Morgan you didn't have a lot of travel funds. You couldn't go to too many and so, I would just go to the APS meetings. Story_ID: 29878 Speaker 1: You were talking about your affiliation with the APS [American Physical Society] and the (unclear) of physics--committee meetings that you go to--at the March meeting. Let's talk about now the--who helped you shape the career path that you took? Speaker 2: I think I really, you know, after starting as an undergraduate, I think really I've been kind of selecting a career path of my own. It's not a--it's very interesting. One thing I've found in life, people make choices, and sometimes you don't even know yourself what you will be doing two years from now. As an example, when I retired, I thought I would be in the laboratory and teaching, and that's not what I'm doing. And it's sort of interesting. I think as you go along you really make those choices yourself. And it's, you know, nothing is laid out or I want to do this or that. Speaker 1: So in terms of being successful, how did you define success? Speaker 2: I think if you can just, if you're happy with what you are doing and if you can financially support yourself and your family, it's for--I guess it's because I grew up in a very simple life. And, you know, we didn't grow up with all of this materialistic values, and etcetera. You know, for instance, I just drive a car and usually when I'm finished with it, I will take off the tags and walk away. And I think that came, a lot of it had to do with the influence of Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], with [Arthur] Thorpe. And I always remember, he said, with him a car is just going from point A to point B. And, you know, it doesn't matter, and so, I think I just have a very--I live a very simple life and, you know, with no grand expectations, and etcetera. As long as I have my health. You know, it's very interesting. Speaker 1: Do you consider yourself having taken any risks along your career path? Speaker 2: I don't think I've really taken a lot of risks. It's been like just a steady grind in the direction that I want to go. I wouldn't really consider it as being risk. I guess I'm probably a little bit on the conservative side. As an example, I've seen my daughter, you know, she has a degree in computer science. And she had very good jobs and she just quit and would go and start her own business, and etcetera, or doing the real estate. And probably that's something I would not do. So I guess in that aspect, I guess I haven't really been taken--I haven't taken a lot of risks along those lines. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 29879 Speaker 1: Now, along the way to provide opportunities for your students, you formed some affiliations with labs in the area, NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration], etcetera. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: How did you go about doing that? Speaker 2: Usually they are always looking for interns. And usually they will send out notices and contact you. I find that it's very easy. Usually I think there are more programs, more summer programs. For instance, the programs that I worked with, every summer when teaching I could always find a laboratory to go and work in. And it was a very good experience, you know. They would pay for travel and housing, and etcetera. And the same thing is true with the undergraduates. I think there are more programs than there are students that can fill them. So the students just have to be made aware of, you know, of their existence, actually. So after, if you do the same for a long period of time, you kind of know what's going to come up, which programs will be successful, and etcetera. And I think it's still true today. There are just so many opportunities out there. It's a matter of--I find the biggest hurdle most students have is that they are just not sure exactly what they want to do. I think it has a lot to do with there're just so many choices and opportunities, and so they--it's difficult for them to focus in on what it is they really want to do or what they want out of life. Quite often I talk to parents and they have sons or daughters, and the parents are really upset. And so I tried to make them aware that that's normal for the average person. Very seldom will I run into a student who did as I did. They're coming out of high school, "Hey, I want to do physics," and then you can get in that path and it's easy. I find most students, they're just not sure what it is they want to do. And also, it carries through for four years. They come out of school and it's because there are so many opportunities available it becomes difficult for them to select one. Speaker 1: Do you see yourself as having a great relationship with your students? Speaker 2: I had a great relationship. See, I'm retired. Speaker 1: I mean during the (unclear)(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Yeah. It was really great. I loved it. Speaker 1: To what do you attribute that? Speaker 2: I'm not sure. By the way, I see it in other--I would see it in other professors. Some students and even some had more, they enjoyed working with students more than I did. Whereas others, you know, they could care less. They would go in their lab and maybe the only thing that's important is getting out that next publication. They don't care whether the student's name is on it or not. I think it has to do with us as individuals. Each of us, we're different. And I think the--looking back, I was an administrator for a long period of time, and I guess I made a lot of errors thinking that everybody would think the way I did, would want the same things that I wanted. But it's not like that. We're all quite different and we have different goals and aspirations. And because of that--and I think that's where a lot of problems develop because you have so many people moving in different directions, and so you tend to come in and say, "Well, if they would just do A, B, and C." But--and so, I think that, you know, we're really all individuals who have different likes and dislikes. And we probably have very little in common with each other. Story_ID: 29880 Speaker 1: You were a long-serving department chair [at Morgan State University]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: But you had a break. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: What was the reason for that break? Speaker 2: I really wanted to just do more research and not be--have to deal with the administrative problems, and so I--that was the reason for the break. I just wanted to go and do the research and work on things that I wanted to and not deal with personal problems. And so, that was the reason for the break. Speaker 1: Now, who was chair during the break? Speaker 2: Carl Clark became chair. Speaker 1: But Carl was someplace else. How did you get- And also, he was a Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland] graduate, too, or was he? Speaker 2: Yes. Yes. Speaker 1: So how did you get him to cover you to be the chair? Speaker 2: I think Conrad Williams probably was very instrumental in doing that because he--him and Clark were in school together. And he may have been aware that Clark was interested in doing something else. And one time, I don't know if you remember, I even asked you [James Stith] to consider (laughter) applying for the-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --position also. And so, so anyway, I think probably Conrad was very instrumental in bringing Carl here. Because to be honest, externally, after him being in South Carolina for so long, I didn't think he would be willing to move that, you know, that distance and come back to be a chair. Speaker 1: Now, Carl stayed for how long? Speaker 2: I think it was about three years, maybe or four. He actually stayed longer but he moved from being the chair. The science department went through a reorganization process and we got a dean. The university divided the administration up into, you know, science, and then we had the social science and the arts. And so, the person who was the chair of the biology department became the dean, and so Carl Clark became the assistant dean. Speaker 1: Assistant dean. Speaker 2: So he moved into-- Speaker 1: And when he moved into the assistant dean, then what happened? Speaker 2: Yeah. Then I went back into being--I was the acting chair. And so-- Speaker 1: How did they talk you into doing that? Speaker 2: Well, they had to have someone, and I think that's why I did it. And also, I was sixty-three (63) at the time, and I said I was going to retire. And had always decided to retire at sixty-five (65), so I said, "Well, I'm"--and when you bring in someone it takes two years for them really understand the operation of the university. So I say rather than to go back, and etcetera, I said I'll just stay here and retire from the chair's position and that's what I did. And I said once I get sixty-five (65) I was going to retire anyway, which is what I did. Speaker 1: As you look back upon your life as chair, what are you most proud of? Speaker 2: That I wasn't--stayed as chair for as long as I did. And also, I'm proud of the fact that I was able to leave when I did. (laughter) Speaker 1: Okay. Now-- Speaker 2: That was the best decision, one of the best decisions that I've ever made. Story_ID: 29881 Speaker 1: Okay. Now somewhere along the way you met your second wife. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Can you tell me who she is? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Date of birth-- Speaker 2: Diane Polson, and she's from Suffolk. Speaker 1: Okay. Would you spell those for me? Speaker 2: D-I-A, and she said make sure it's with two "N's", N-N-E, and Polson, P-O-L-S-O-N, and that was her maiden name. And she's from Suffolk, Virginia, as a matter of fact. Speaker 1: So how did you guys meet? Speaker 2: At a Morgan State [University, Baltimore, Maryland] alumni luncheon. She's also an alumnus of Morgan State. Speaker 1: And what did she do? Speaker 2: She worked for--she's an administrator with Pepco. She was until July first. She retired this year. So up until that time she was an administrator with Pepco, which is a utility in Washington, D.C. Speaker 1: So what do you guys do for fun? Speaker 2: Probably just go on vacations, and I would just say we take a lot of trips and go on vacation. Speaker 1: Where do you get your greatest joy from being a scientist? Speaker 2: I think I just enjoy being in the laboratory and maybe getting a paper published, those two things. Just in the laboratory, and also I enjoyed seeing students getting an appreciation a lot for doing research also. That's a--to be honest, and there were--some students, they don't like it, they don't like that aspect of science. And so some do. And so, at least, again, it's just exposing them to something that's different from what they're used to. Story_ID: 29882 Speaker 1: Now, there are very few African American physicists. Why do you think there are so few? Speaker 2: I think because there are just so many choices now. And I think the other choices, they know more about those other choices. And I think to be a physicist to do the research, it's going to take, you know, you have go along a certain path and a certain amount of development, and it's difficult for most people to understand what it's like until you actually do it. And I think the other areas, like engineering, it's, everybody sort of knows what an engineer--what it is that they're doing. They don't really understand what it is a physicist is doing. Speaker 1: Now, you spent your entire career at HBCUs [Historically Black Colleges and Universities]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. And you produced a number of physics majors from Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland]. And you know that HBCUs produce most of the African American physics majors. Why do you think that's the case? Speaker 2: I think because of, first of all, it gives them an opportunity. And I think even for myself, if I hadn't been given an opportunity to develop, and also, it requires some nurturing, then I would not have been successful in the field. I went to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] and, you know, they allowed me to sort of develop my potential. And I think in most instances, most schools are not going to do that. You know, so I think at the HBCUs, that's how they kind of justify their existence. A lot of it is to send students on to graduate school. And probably from the first year that you're in school, there's a lot of emphasis on going to graduate school and it's constantly pounded into the students. And I think as a result of that, that's the reason for it. Speaker 1: From your experiences in this community, being the African American physics community, do you see changes going on within the community at HBCUs? Speaker 2: I don't know, I think it's very--most organizations and institutions, they develop around individual leadership. And so, it just depends on who the leader of that organization or institution is. I don't think it's a permanent thing. And I think once that individual leaves another person will move in, and what happens will depend on that individual leadership, it's not a--I think it's a very dynamic situation. It's not static at all. Speaker 1: What do you see as the unique challenges that we will need to face in the physics community? Speaker 2: I guess what has happened now, I don't see the physics area as a community. It's a bunch of individuals that are doing--the people that I see that enjoy it, they sort of enjoy it for themselves, it's not a community activity. And I think that's where the difficulty has been. I think, especially when you first go into the discipline, you think that, "Hey, this is great. I enjoy it and maybe I can expose this to others." But I find people are just so different. My--as an example, my daughter I remember when she came along. You know, I put her in research programs, and etcetera, and I remember she said, "Dad, I just don't like doing research. I want to go into--do something else." And so I think being a physicist is almost like being a philosopher. It's very unique and it's something that people do because they enjoy it. And I think it's something that's very difficult to get others to enjoy. And that's not how I felt coming out of--going into physics as a graduate student or graduating, you know, I'm going to teach this and I'm going to have all of these students excited about doing that. And I think we are very individualistic. I think that's part of the problem with--some of the problems we face in societies. We have all these different religions and all of these conflicts, and it's because people are just--we're not--we're just different. And so, we make our own choices and we have to live with them. Story_ID: 29883 Speaker 1: Has race played a part at all in your physics career? Speaker 2: You know, it's very interesting. It probably has but it would be hard for me to pinpoint it. It sounds strange. I remember, and I'm not going to mention the organization, I was offered a job with a company, and so, afterwards--I think there was a suit against the company--and so, I got this call and they said, "Well, what was the reason you didn't accept this position," you know, and etcetera. And that had nothing to do with it. It probably has made a difference, but I can't put my finger on exactly where. And I think because of me coming out in the '60s [1960s], I think it actually helped me, actually. Affirmative action was a big thing at that time. And I think I got a lot of opportunities that I probably would not have had if I had not been African American. There were just so many opportunities. Society, they were looking for diversity in their work force. And so, it's a--I can't put my finger on it. It sounds odd probably for me to say that as an African American. But I think one of the reasons I liked physics also, growing up in a segregated community as such, I liked track because with track you just go and you see how fast someone is running. It doesn't have anything to do with whether they're African American or white, etcetera. So you have an international way of comparing it. And I think with physics I found it to be similar. If you can come up with a discovery, you know, say with a high temperature superconductor. If you can come up with a material where you can raise the superconducting temperature maybe an additional ten degrees, I think you would have made a significant discovery, and until I do something like that and then I say, "Hey, I did this," but maybe if somebody else can find a way to take credit for it, and etcetera. But I tell you, I think physics and science, it's an international community that's there. But I think coming out of the '60s (1960s), it probably helped me. Story_ID: 29884 Speaker 1: Are there any other representatives that you know that you think should have gotten major awards and didn't get them? Speaker 2: Maybe someone like Warren Henry. One of the things I find with physics, okay, and I think this is what makes it so difficult. Like I say, I went to work one summer at Bell Labs [Murray Hill, New Jersey], and I worked with a guy named Richard Cohen, and -- Speaker 1: Could you spell that? Speaker 2: Richard, C-O-H-E-N, Cohen. Okay. And Richard had worked with Mossbauer. He was done work in Mossbauer, okay. And so when I came and I told people, "Hey, I worked with Richard Cohen." They kind of say, "Well, who's Richard Cohen," just like that. And I think one of the difficulties with physics, usually unless you are in that same area, let's say if you're in astronomy, then you're not going to know what kind of work that a physicists in astronomy is doing unless they are, you know, someone like James Gates, who you would see on public television, and etcetera. But most of the physicists--and they are very good--that are out there, the average person will not know them. For instance, I said I would go to the American Physical Society meeting. And so, sometimes I would go because I was interested in a paper that they were presenting. And I would go and sometimes I would find out that they were African Americans and I had never heard of them. And I think because that's the nature of physics. Unless you really do something like get a Nobel Prize or make a major discovery, there are a lot of people that are there, and they are good, but the average person you're not going to know about them. There're just so many different disciplines. And so, you know the people in your discipline, but you don't know all of the other physicists doing work in astronomy and, etcetera, unless, as I said, if you were on public television or something with a program. And I think that is what makes it--and also that's why probably kids have trouble understanding what's there. But that's sort of my interpretation. Speaker 1: When you were talking to all the students who came through Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland], when you were here, what kinds of things did you tell them that physicists did? Speaker 2: Usually it was just teaching and doing research. I think that's essentially what they do. And the research aspect I found that all of the undergrads, they always have difficulty comprehending exactly what you're talking about. It's because they just can't imagine someone doing research and this is their profession, getting paid for. Teaching they can understand, you know. They can relate to someone standing in front of a classroom lecturing. But I think the research aspect is really to them it's an abstraction. Speaker 1: When I walked into this building yesterday, I came to the second floor. I noticed there is a huge picture of you hanging in the hallway. And yours is the only one. To what do you attribute that? Speaker 2: Oh, I think, isn't Dr. [Julius] Taylor-- Speaker 1: I didn't see him there. Speaker 2: He's there also. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Well. Speaker 2: Yeah, Dr. [Julius] Taylor is there; that was the chair. Speaker 1: All right. I missed that. I told you, you put him on a different wall. I didn't walk by that wall because I was curious as to why yours was the only one on that wall. Speaker 2: It should be a Taylor there. Speaker 1: It wasn't yesterday. Okay. Fine. Speaker 2: And also there is a fellow here, Johnnie Norris (ph) who is a procurement officer and I think he had a lot to do with it. I think we had a good relationship when we were--when I was here, and etcetera, and I think that was his idea to put it up there. Speaker 1: Okay. Long time ago you told me a story about getting a lecture hall named after Dr. Taylor. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Can you relay that experience for us? Speaker 2: I'm not sure what part of that experience, but anyway, there is a lecture--when they renovated the building, they renovated the lecture hall. And so they--as a matter of fact, I had to go around and put the names on the rooms, and etcetera. So I put--I decided to call it 'Julius H. Taylor Lecture Hall.' By the way, I also had the research lab named after Warren Henry. And so, someone didn't--it seems as if now there is a process you have to go through in order to have a room or hall named after you, which I did not do. And so, as a matter of fact, it was Dr. Taylor's wife, who also worked for the previous president when she heard that I had difficulty naming it after Dr. Taylor. I think she called the president and said, "Well, you know, he had spent all these years here as chair," and say, "That the university will name buildings and halls after people if they just donate money to the university," and that she felt that it should be named after him. And so, eventually that's what was done. Story_ID: 29885 Speaker 1: Okay. When you look at all of the other departments in the STEM field here at Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland], what do you see as the relationship that you had with them? Was it a warm one? competition? cooperation? How would you characterize it? Speaker 2: I think all of the above. There was some competition, yes. And that's good, I think. It's--I think it's good to--because you're really competing for students and you're competing for good students. And so there's a certain level of competition there. And I think that's good for the university and for the students also. Speaker 1: I'm now going to ask you a couple of philosophical questions. Before I do that, are there things in your career path that you would like to share with us that I have not touched? Speaker 2: One thing that happened which I always wondered what would have happened. Back at--matter of fact, it occurred at the--when the black physicists met here. I have a friend who's in the National Technical Association, and he went around--I forget the young lady's name who used to be in 'Star Wars.' But anyway, they were looking for volunteers for the astronautic program. And so, they didn't have any black astronauts. So anyway, Roscoe and this young lady came and they asked me to apply for the program, and I did not. And that was before we had any black astronauts, okay. And so, and again it was, because it was so close to the '60s [1960s], I think during the '60s [1960s], as I said, everybody was going into the black community, and etcetera. And so, as I look back at that I wonder what would have happened if I had, and I think again that's a situation where the path of your life can get--can be completely different. Speaker 1: Do you remember why you turned that down? Speaker 2: Again, it was right there in the '60s [1960s]. Everybody was going back into the black community, and we saw people that were leaving jobs with corporations and moving into the black community, and etcetera. And I think it was all involved with that. Speaker 1: If you weren't in physics, what do you think you would have done? Speaker 2: I would have been a physical ed. teacher. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. I think, again, I liked, you know, I liked sport athletics and I thought in high school the physical ed. teachers were cool. You know, they walked around with tennis shoes and-- Story_ID: 29886 Speaker 1: After a number of years spent, a lifetime here at Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland], what are your aspirations for the next generation at Morgan? Speaker 2: I think, again, it's--I think it's up to them to determine it--matter of fact, we have a brand-new president who started July one, and I think the direction that the university will go will depend on him. I saw Dr. [Earl S.] Richardson, who was the president, and in my opinion he was a good president, and he moved the university in a good direction and we got a lot of programs, and etcetera. But I think the programs--and I think that's one of our big problems with the black community. We're so involved with leadership and the question is, once that person is no longer there, someone else will come in and you have to--it's going to be up to that individual to, you know, get people to move in a constructive direction, and etcetera. And also I found--one thing I found that in life you're going to make a lot of errors, like you say, you take risks, and etcetera. So along the way, you have to have enough people supporting you so that when you do make those errors they don't all turn against you. And so, I think it requires being able to work with people and showing people that you are sincere in what you're doing. And so I think with Morgan it's going to depend on the new president coming in. He's from the--he's an external person, so I don't think we have any idea what's going to happen. I've seen it at other universities, and etcetera. A lot of us in society, we develop around outstanding leadership, and you just have to wait and see what's going to occur. Speaker 1: What do you see your greatest asset was a leader at this institution? Speaker 2: I think the fact that I recognize in people that they are different, and because of that you're not going to have everybody agreeing on anything. And I think that's very important. I think a lot of people, that's where they make their biggest mistake, thinking that everyone will do and want the same thing that they want, and it's not--as I grew older, I realized that it was more and more true that people are different and they want different aspirations, and etcetera. So you have to give everybody a voice and hopefully you have some mechanism for resolving these differences. Story_ID: 29887 Speaker 1: So looking back, what do want your legacy to be? Speaker 2: I don't know. I'm not really concerned about a legacy. I think that it's--just like you said, my picture's on the wall. When they renovate the building, you know the picture's going to be gone. It's a--I've seen it happen here. They did a renovation of the stadium, and the same thing happened. As a matter of fact, they wanted to change the name of the stadium--it's a football stadium--and so, the family, and this person has--who is named after them, you know, he's been long gone, etcetera. So, there was a--but you know, eventually, this building will probably get knocked down, they'll build another. And the name may even be different, and etcetera. So personally, I don't think we can really establish a legacy like that. There are very few people that will be a Martin Luther King or Barack Obama. You know, most of us are just--I don't think you're going to really establish a long legacy. The publications I have in journals, you know, people may stumble across them a long time from now, but it's not going to--I think life is a dynamic situation. We keep moving on. And I don't give a lot of thought to establishing a legacy. Speaker 1: So I'll ask it another way. What do you see as your most significant work? Speaker 2: I think just the work on Mossbauer spectroscopy and the publications that would be associated with that. And also, I think I was able to motivate a lot of students to major in physics, to keep the department going for the number of years. A lot of departments have, you know, closed, because of dwindling numbers. And I think I had--I was around good people. And I saw them implement programs and approaches that they used. And so I sort of duplicated those. And so, I think those were, you know, significant accomplishments. It's very difficult to maintain a physics department, especially at a HBCU [Historically Black Colleges and Universities]. Speaker 1: So last question. You spent your life doing Mossbauer spectroscopy, you're talking to--how would you have explained what Mossbauer spectroscopy was to your grandmother had she been alive? Speaker 2: I think the same way I explained to you. It's just using a radioactive material and you use this radiation from it to study the properties in the environment of materials. And I think that's what I would have done. Speaker 1: Okay. Thank you very much. Speaker 2: Okay. Thank you. Story_ID: 29888 Speaker 1: Okay. Describe the first one. Speaker 2: This is a group picture at our annual banquet of the Baltimore chapter of the National Technical Association. And these are individuals that are in science, engineering, and other technical areas. And the purpose of the group is to try to--it's a networking group, and to also encourage young kids to go into science and engineering. Speaker 1: Next. Speaker 2: This is a picture of me at my wedding. And that's my wife there on the right. And on my left is my sister and also my brother. And that was taken at our wedding. Speaker 1: Next. Speaker 2: This is a picture, it was taken here at Morgan State, and in this picture there are several of my colleagues. That's Robert Boye on the far right and Doctor Taylor. On my right there's George Alcorn. He was my roommate at Howard University in physics, and next to him on the left is Ernest Hammond, who also graduated from Morgan in physics with me, and he also went to Howard in physics. Speaker 1: Next. Speaker 2: That's a picture of me many years ago, and I am sitting in a laboratory. Speaker 1: Next. Speaker 2: That's me doing a physics demonstration. One thing I do with physics, and I sort of picked that up from Doctor Taylor; always in each lecture, always try to do a demonstration and that would help keep the kids from falling asleep (laughter). So he used to always try to do at least one demonstration there. Speaker 1: Next. Speaker 2: And that's me getting the Ivory G. Jones Medallion and each year that's given to a faculty person on the faculty that they consider that has made an outstanding contribution to the university. Speaker 1: Next. Speaker 2: And that's a picture of Doctor Taylor and myself, and that probably was taken at the Ivory G. Jones Awards Ceremony. Speaker 1: Next. Speaker 2: That's a picture that's taken at my retirement dinner. And that's a plaque that they were giving me. On the right, that was the administrative assistant. Next to the plaque is Johnnie Norris, and he was a procurement officer here in the physics department, and on the left there, that's Joan Robinson who was the vice-president of academic affairs. Speaker 1: Next. Speaker 2: That's me in the laboratory doing a Mossbauer experiment. Speaker 1: Next. Speaker 2: That's a picture of me at the Ivory G. Jones Awards Program, and on the right is my daughter, and the lady there on the left is my wife, Dianne. Speaker 1: Next. Speaker 2: This is again a picture of me at the Ivory G. Jones Ceremony, and on the right is Doctor Earl Richardson, who was the president of the university at the time. Speaker 1: Next. Speaker 2: As I said, I'm a consultant with the Nuclear Regulatory Commission and this is a picture of me going on a tour of the Watts Nuclear Reactor. The gentleman in the center is a nuclear regulatory commission. The others are also administrative judges. And that's me the with the white shirt on. Speaker 1: I meant to ask you if you were there during (unclear), including Shirley Jackson's tenure. Speaker 2: No. By the way they just hired, just appointed by, Obama just appointed William Magwood--do you know him? Speaker 1: Yes, I know him. Speaker 2: He's the-- Speaker 1: Now this is Dave Bingham (ph.) right here (laughter). Speaker 2: That's me. As I said, I was quite an athlete in high school, and I was also the captain of the basketball team. So that's me driving in for a layup. Speaker 1: Next. Speaker 2: And that's me doing a lecture in an electronics course. Speaker 1: Next. Speaker 2: This on the right is my sister and on the left is my mother. Speaker 1: What's their names? Speaker 2: Dorothy is my sister and Hattie was my mother. Speaker 1: Next. Speaker 2: And this is a picture of my daughter's family. And the gentleman there is my son-in-law, and that's my granddaughter and that's my grandson. You know, it occurred to me and I know why. I only have one picture of my father--..