 Story_ID: 349745 Speaker 1: I'll just start by having you state your name, spelling it out for me. Speaker 2: Okay, my name is [HistoryMaker] Melvin Van Peebles. And for the record, that is my actual name, Melvin Van Peebles, it's on my birth certificate. One of the questions that you guys asked, which I thought was very interesting, is the origin of your name. I remember one time I was on 'The Dick Cavett Show,' and he says, "Where did that name come from?" I said, "1965, I mean, 1865," because normally up to that time, the slaves didn't have a last name. So, whatever they chose, or however they chose it, or whatever was written down--that's how many people of Jewish descent are named Ferguson. Because when they came to Ellis Island [New York, New York] and people said--the guy would talk about, "What's your name?" And the guy said, "Fargesn." That means, that's Yiddish and German and Dutch for: "I forgot, I don't understand." And they said, "Oh, Ferguson." So, what do I know? Speaker 1: I read that--and we'll go back and forth. But I read that it was Peebles, and you put the Van on it once you moved to Holland [the Netherlands], to make it more of a Dutch sounding name, because you wanted to disassociate yourself with being American. Is that just a lie (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, how can you disassociate yourself from being American, if you can barely speak the language? No, the--for some reason, my mother [Edwin Griffin Peebles] put Van on the birth certificate. Everybody else was Peebles, and now it's Van Peebles, and that's just what it was ever since then. Now, to go to that story, what happened when I decided to study, pursue my studies in astronomy in Holland, it became very much handy when I wrote my name. And they assumed that I was an old member of a Dutch family, a Dutch descendent coming home. Because I did say--because one of the requirements of the G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944] at that time was that you had to be conversant in the language, or you had to get accepted. And so, when I wrote to the University of Amsterdam [Amsterdam, the Netherlands], I said that I was going to be coming early before studies started, to brush up on the language. Well, brush up on the language--implicit in brush up, means that it's already spoken. But nobody asked me any further than that. And so that's maybe how that story got started. But no, that's right there on the Cook County [Illinois] birth certificate. Speaker 1: So, your date of birth? Speaker 2: August 21, 1932, Chicago, Illinois (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Cook County Hospital [John H. Stroger Jr. Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: Hm? Speaker 1: Cook County Hospital? Speaker 2: I think so. Story_ID: 349746 Speaker 1: And these questions at the top are just sort of, they show up on our website, short answers. Favorite food? Speaker 2: Favorite food? Speaker 1: Your favorite food. Speaker 2: I don't think you can put that on your website. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Your favorite color? Speaker 2: I don't know. I'm not very introspective. Speaker 1: Why do you feel you're not very introspective? Speaker 2: I'm not very introspective. Why would I say I'm not very introspective? Because I'm not very introspective. I mean I don't spend a lot of time trying to ascertain the meaning of my navel; what does this mean, or what does that mean? I was looking at some of the questions you were going to ask, and I found them interesting, but it never piqued my imagination enough. What's my favorite color? I don't know, because to have a favorite, then it sort of rules out the other things, and I like the chaos in life, and the randomness. The one thing I'm familiar with is the unfamiliar. And I like it that way, it's been a great asset to me. People say, "Do you know what's going to happen?" "I don't know, but I'm going to try." I remember sometime I was in a battle, and they said, "Melvin [HistoryMaker Melvin Van Peebles], how did you know you were going to be able to beat that guy?" I didn't know I was going to be able to beat him. I just knew that I wasn't going to take it. There are questions you ask yourself that can also put limits, or constrict how you think. That is, if you say, "How did you know you were going to win? You always knew?" No, I didn't always know. But that wasn't the question. You're a winner once you're on the road to fighting. And so that's just how--so, I don't like to limit myself with the--. It's not a conscious decision, but I don't limit myself. But I mean, I may like blue or yellow or green; I like them all. Speaker 1: You like them all. So, is there a time of year that you like better than any other time of year, or a place on the planet that you like better than any other place? Speaker 2: No, not really. I mean I like them, I like them all. I mean I know it sounds rude, but I just--I like California, because it's cold and it's damp. I like the part of California, the San Francisco [California] part, I like the L.A. [Los Angeles, California] part. I try to imagine sometimes--if someone said, "What city or place, if you could move there, would you choose?" That's not the same thing as liking it. I suppose in that case I would probably say the most versatility that I've run into that I understand--and I don't need to learn how to speak Bangkok [Thailand], et cetera--I would suppose that would be New York [New York.] But if I were offered a choice of staying in New York or Paris [France] or Copenhagen [Denmark] or any of those places, I'd say, "No, no, just let me wander." Story_ID: 349747 Speaker 1: So let's talk about the earliest years of your life. What do you remember? You were born in Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 2: Yeah, I remember it was on the South Side of Chicago. I came up--my earliest, my adolescence was a dual one. I had a duality, I didn't realize this until many years later, which gave me a sort of stereo vision, which has been very, very helpful. My parents [Edwin Griffin Peebles and Marion Peebles], when I was ten, moved to the suburbs, which was sort of a very white suburb. And in fact, you know, they were going to burn crosses and all of that good stuff, because we were the first minority family out there. Then in my high school [Thornton Township High School, Harvey, Illinois] there were, out of three thousand, there were maybe fifty minority kids in all. And so, I never had a black in my class. However, on the other hand, my dad was a small businessman. He owned a tailor shop in the hood, the South Side of Chicago. And every day I would work for my dad. From ten years old, I worked for my dad. And so I ended up with this duality, but I never thought of it as two languages, two ways of talking, the white bred, or blue collar upward mobility, or lower white collar mobility, or minor professional mobility that you could have in the suburbs. And there was hardcore hood on the other hand. So, I was perfectly at ease in the two, and that's, that would be my early upbringing. And then of course, I had, I went to college and I had a scholarship in the arts. And again, that college [Ohio Wesleyan University, Delaware, Ohio] was about three thousand kids in it, and there were thirty-two blacks. Speaker 1: So growing up in Chicago, at what point did you leave Chicago and move to Arizona, Phoenix, Arizona? Speaker 2: I never moved to Phoenix, Arizona. Oh, it was Phoenix, Illinois, I'm sorry (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Phoenix, Illinois. Speaker 2: Which is right outside, which is-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That was the suburbs. Speaker 1: Okay, that was the suburbs. Speaker 2: That was the suburbs. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Phoenix and Harvey, Illinois. Phoenix, Illinois, Phoenix was a suburb of Harvey, which is a suburb of Chicago. Yeah, Phoenix, Illinois, yeah, sorry. That was at ten when we moved out of the South Side. But my dad, of course, would drive in to work; it was a fourteen mile drive every day. And I would come in on the train after school, and then work all day Saturday. Sunday we had to go to church sometimes, but it didn't take. Story_ID: 349748 Speaker 1: So what was your father's name, and his date of birth? Speaker 2: What's my father's name? Speaker 1: And his date of birth? Speaker 2: No idea. I mean, I know his name. His name--and that was very funny, because whenever I would fill out the forms for your mother and father, I'd come back with two lines, and pay attention. Because my mother had all these sisters. She was the last child, and her dad was finally wanting a boy. So, he figured if he named the child first, it would be a boy. That's not quite the way it works, but what the heck. And so, her name was Edwin [Edwin Griffin Peebles], not even Edwina, but Edwin. And my dad had a name, Marion [Marion Peebles], so which could be either way. But it was assumed that I made a mistake, and that my mother's name was Marion and my daddy's name was Edwin. Then I heard my dad might have had a middle name, I don't know. Speaker 1: How do you spell his first name? Speaker 2: I think, I guess it would be M-A-R-I-O-N. I can look it up on a document, but I never had any reason to look it up. Speaker 1: Do you know where he was born? Speaker 2: No. Down south somewhere, Georgia, Alabama, somewhere. But I would tell you, I bet my son Mario [Mario Van Peebles] would know, who's sort of like a family historian of this. I never paid much attention. No, I never paid any attention. Speaker 1: Any attention. Well, you know, people say, "Well, how do you know where you're going if you don't know where you've been." What do you think about a statement like that? Speaker 2: I don't mind. What do I care? And I don't see how it--I don't feel particularly deprived. I know who my dad was because I saw the encapsulation of wherever he was, wherever he came from. Wherever it was, he's my dad. Duh. So that's--and ma. And my mother was from, I know she was from the Texas, Louisiana border near Shreveport [Louisiana] and near Longview--Longview, Texas and Shreveport, Louisiana. That's all I know. I'm not rife with curiosity in that way. Speaker 1: How many siblings did they have, or do you have? Speaker 2: I had a sister, twenty years difference. I may have seen her eight or nine times in my life. She knows me much better than I know her, because she was, the poor kid was at home and got regaled with these stories of me, you know, because I didn't see her before she was two years old. Story_ID: 349749 Speaker 1: Your father [Marion Peebles] was a tailor. You said he owned-- Speaker 2: He had a tailor shop [in Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: A tailor shop. Speaker 2: You know, cleaning, pressing, tailoring, you know, and all that good stuff. Speaker 1: Do you remember where the shop was located? Speaker 2: Sure. We lived above it, we lived in the same apartment building, and it was on 58th Street between Calumet [Avenue] and Prairie [Avenue], across the street from Mr. Blunt's [ph.] typing service. Mr. Blunt had no hands, and he was in 'Ripley's Believe It or Not!' for being one of the fastest typists in the world. And he used his arms, he used to type like that. Speaker 1: Was Mr. Blunt black or white? Speaker 2: Everybody was black. Speaker 1: Everybody was black. Speaker 2: Everybody was black, yeah. And there was Speedy Barnes [ph.], who had gotten gassed in the Second World War [World War II, WWII], and he was a little nuts. I once saw him stick a firecracker in a milk horse's behind and light it, and the horse went ape shit. And he almost, he almost died laughing. And then there was, right next to the place was the--we lived on the third floor. There was, the elevated train would pass. You could reach out the window and almost touch the side. And I suppose, I think before I was--before we moved, I'm just leaning on the windowsill looking out at 58th Street, I'd seen maybe ten people killed just in fights with knives. Because as the elevated would go down the alley, on one side there was one liquor store and one juke joint called Gold's [Gold's Lounge, Chicago, Illinois], I think. And Cooper's [ph.] was on the other side of the elevated train, and both were on the north side of the street, and the jukebox would be blaring. And there was, down in the basement, halfway in the basement was my father's tailor shop, the Hollywood Cleaners and Tailors [ph.]. Speaker 1: Did he name it himself? Speaker 2: I have no idea. I'm sure he did. Speaker 1: Do you remember any of his clients? Speaker 2: I'm sorry? Speaker 1: Do you remember any of the clients, the people who came? Speaker 2: Yeah, I knew the people who came there. Every now and then somebody would say, "Oh, well, this client is famous, Sister Rosetta Tharpe," or this person or that person. Across the street was the record store. I remember seeing Billy Eckstine and Dinah Washington out there hawking records and singing on the street, you know. Every now and then you'd see a blind man with a boy walking down the street, you know, leading him, and he's got his guitar, singing. Story_ID: 349750 Speaker 1: So, in kind of helping me--like filling out the neighborhood [Washington Park, Chicago, Illinois] and the people who were there--do you remember, did people congregate and have conversations at your father's shop [Hollywood Cleaners and Tailors (ph.)]? Was it a place for people to get together and talk (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, but they would, this I do remember about--I remember my mother's parents [Mary Griffin and Edmond Griffin]. We all lived together. My mother's parents, my mother's dad had a barbershop around the corner on Calumet [Avenue], right around the corner. And people would sit in there and do barbershop stuff. And sometimes I could, I would shine shoes and listen to the people just dissect the universe. Speaker 1: Do you remember, did any of those stories--anything sticks out for you? Anything stuck with you from those conversations? Speaker 2: No. Just the flow and the--years later in college I imagine this was how--when you'd have the Greeks sitting around. It never--it reminded me of the salon in Europe, you know what I mean. But I can see a bunch of the old Greek philosophers sitting around in their togas or whatever, and they would come to a conclusion by a sort of logic. Very interesting. Speaker 1: Was there a radio in the barbershop, do you remember? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: What played on the radio at the time? Do you remember what they listened to? Speaker 2: Probably one of the major tragedies of my life, if I could do one thing--I'd really ask, say, "Melvin [HistoryMaker Melvin Van Peebles], what would you do?" It would be to give grandpa two more years, because then he could have seen Jackie Robinson. He loved baseball. But there were no blacks in baseball, in Major League Baseball [MLB]. He would have been thrilled to pieces. But he didn't make it. Speaker 1: So, he died a couple of years before? Jackie Robinson is in '42 [1942], right? Speaker 2: No, no, no, he was much later than that. Forty-seven [1947], I would think, or '45 [1945]. It was after the war [World War II, WWII]. Speaker 1: So, did any of your family, do you remember anyone going off to the war? Speaker 2: I remember in a barbershop on a Sunday morning with my dad [Marion Peebles] getting his hair cut, when everybody--when the Japanese attacked at Pearl Harbor [Naval Station Pearl Harbor, Hawaii]. I do remember that. But after that, no. You know, I'm ten years old at that time or something. So, who do I know that's going to go off to war? Speaker 1: What type of work did your mother [Edwin Griffin Peebles] do? Speaker 2: She helped my dad out sometimes, but she was a basic housewife. Speaker 1: But it was just the two kids, just the two of you? Or, only you, because it was just-- Speaker 2: It was just me. Speaker 1: It was just you. So you were pretty much raised as an only kid, because of the age difference? Speaker 2: Well, I was an only kid, but not raised as an only kid, because I didn't have what you call a major childhood, I worked. I guess it would be called child abuse now, but it didn't seemed to me. It was great. I had a great time. Speaker 1: So you shined shoes. What else did you do? Speaker 2: Yeah, I just shined shoes for my grandfather, and I worked in my dad's tailor shop. I had to run errands or roll hangers, or from ten on I ran the cash register. So-- Speaker 1: What did you do with the money you earned? Speaker 2: Saved it, loaned it out at interest. Speaker 1: To other kids? Speaker 2: No, no, I didn't have any other kids. I was with the grown people, grown men. And so, and I was the overseer. My dad would be doing the deliveries, so I had to keep all these guys in line. And we were all pretty good buddies, and I wrote out certain rules that they'd have to follow. And so that worked out pretty well. If they got their work done, then they could do what they wanted to. So, they worked really hard. My dad was there and they worked fast, and they'd take the ladies back in the--you know, the customer's, the girls who would be hanging around--back in the clothes and do the funky monkey. Never changes. Speaker 1: Never. Speaker 2: It was great. Speaker 1: Yeah, it was great. Story_ID: 349751 Speaker 1: But that is--it was very interesting. Later in life, later in life, in high school [Thornton Township High School, Harvey, Illinois] or something like that, when I'd meet regular girls, you know, girls my age or something, I'd say "Hey, what's up?" I'd talk to them like they were grown women, like I had heard guys talk to grown women. And they'd be giggling. It was a quite interesting mixture. Speaker 2: So, who did you lose your virginity to? Speaker 1: Well, I don't--very hard question, because the guys would let me come in the back there, you know, since I was the foreman [at Hollywood Cleaners and Tailors (ph.)], when they had the ladies' dresses up and so on. So it was a--there was no classical moment, in the classical sense. I guess, I don't think I had a date with a girl girl. I was sixteen or seventeen, and I never went to a prom, I never did this. I worked all the time. I never went to a basketball game. I mean, these things--however, there were a couple of activities that my mother [Edwin Griffin Peebles] approved of. And so, I was in the Boy Scouts [Boy Scouts of America], and that was so I could get out of work to go to the Boy Scouts. But the normal high school life, or the normal grade school life, I was never involved with this club or that club--not to a large extent because I had these other things that I had to do. But I didn't do that. And besides that, I was having a lot more fun at work with the other guys, because they treated me just as if I was one of them, than I was with those dumbass kids giggling, you know what I mean. So I think the first time I had a girlfriend girlfriend, I must have been about seventeen or eighteen. But my other girlfriend said, "Look, I know you're a young man and you're going to want to see other people. And so, if you want to bring them here, it's okay, you can borrow my car." Hey, man, what can I tell you? Huh? Yeah, that lady was, I was sixteen and she was forty-seven, something like that, Miss Ware [ph.]. Hey, so I can give you the whole--and the people I knew didn't--that's always interesting when people get an attitude and all jealous. The people I knew, you know, "Yeah, okay, hey, please." Because if you do, you're ignoring the fact that people will be people. And so (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Did Miss Ware--Miss Ware, you know, the forty-seven year old? Speaker 1: Yeah, that was my lady friend at the time. Of course she was a friend of my mama, so my mama didn't know it. But hey, what can I tell you? That all was a whole different ballgame, a whole different ballgame. And so, I just always remember the kindness of that lady. And the other ladies that I knew, grown ladies, all right, they were cool. Story_ID: 349752 Speaker 1: Okay, continuing on tape two, we're talking about Miss Ware [ph.]. You said but there were other girls. Who else? Speaker 2: I don't know, I just happened to remember that lady's name because she had a Studebaker, and she offered to let me use it. And she offered me the use of her, one of the rooms in her apartment to bring other ladies. Speaker 1: Did you use it? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: Did you use it, both of them? Speaker 2: No, I used the car, but I didn't bring the other young ladies. I don't, I try not to push my luck (laughter). Story_ID: 349753 Speaker 1: School--we're going back now to like when you were a kid, first grade. What did you do after school as a kid like that, like seven or eight years old? Speaker 2: Well, I would come home to the apartment, I guess. And I had, a lot of apartments had several rooms, and a lot of the family lived in the rooms. I remember my Aunt Jane [Jane Thomas] and her husband [Albert Thomas] lived in one room. Aunt somebody, and somebody else lived in another one. My [maternal] grandma [Mary Griffin] and grandfather [Edmond Griffin] lived in another one. And in the front room, in the foyer in the front room, my Aunt Jane, who had a clubfoot, read minds. That's what she did for a living, she'd read minds. (Laughter) And people would come and she'd give them seances; very, very interesting. So you know, "Um-hm, um-hm, um-hm." And you know, you'd just get to, you'd have your various experiences. I suppose one of my most awakening experiences was--when I was a child I was very, very scaredy. I was a little scrawny child, I'd never go far from my mother [Edwin Griffin Peebles]. And we were in this big church, A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church, a big white A.M.E. church. It had two or three thousand people in attendance every Sunday. And from a little kid, I'd be sitting in this chair, and I looked down this row of seats. And there'd be all these, my aunts, with these 40D cups, you know what I mean. And the seats would be heaving with breasts, you know what I mean, in our pew. And my grandfather's name was Griffin, my mother's dad, his name was Griffin. And my grandmother on my mother's side was very, very light-skinned. We thought she was white; she had gray eyes. And my grandfather was sort of small, very dark, very dapper, and he's the one who had the barbershop. We called my grandmama Honey; that was her nickname. Anyway, this guy, this reverend would preach, and he'd explain to you that if you weren't born again, you were going to burn, and blah, blah, blah. And this goes on for Sundays, and by the time I'm six or seven or eight, I'm scared to do the ca-ca [ph.]. So, I decided that I wanted to join church. And for the first time in my life I was ever away from my mother, was to go join church. So they said, "Now, if there're any young people, you get up and go back to the end," back to where all the young people would gather. And they'd come to the line and they'd come forward and they'd sing this song-- Story_ID: 349754 Speaker 1: "--Jesus loves me this I know because the Bible tells--" And all the little kids would get up and join church. And my mother [Edwin Griffin Peebles] had made me a little white suit for the occasion, white short pants, with my legs sticking out like toothpicks, you know what I mean. And so I go, and the minister makes a lot over me. He says, "Oh, look at Deacon Griffin's [Edmond Griffin] grandson. Oh, isn't that wonderful, he's joining church," blah, blah, blah, blah. And you know, I was a little kid, and he hugged me. That was that. So I go home and I'm a conquering hero, and everybody's making over me and fussing over me, and all that good stuff. And before that--I should interrupt and explain something else. It was decided that my life's work because they'd seen it from God--they had seen it from God that I was going to be a minister, I was going to be called to the ministry. Well, what actually happened was every Sunday I would sit in church frightened for my life, because I knew I was going to die after the end of the service. And the reason I knew I was going to die was after service all my aunts would grab me and hug me. Now, there was all these 40D cups, "Come on, come on, come on," and they didn't give you time for a breath. Well now, you learn to just turn your head to the side. I mean, they buried you right there. So I had all these aunts all one after the other. And I would hyperventilate, or would have, except I had one aunt, Aunt Bert [ph.], who was flat-chested. And so, I would always arrange to get Aunt Bert in the middle. So by the time, after two of my aunts or three of my aunts had gotten me, and I'd got to Aunt Bert, I could catch my breath, and then I could get to the other two, you know what I mean. There were six, you know what I mean. Well, one day, Aunt Bert was sick and she didn't come one Sunday. And I had five 40D cups in a row, and I fainted. And people said, "Oh, that's a sign from God." I'm laying there on the floor (laughter) panting for breath. And they're saying, "See, the Lord made it--amen." So anyway, so that Sunday of course I'm making another step toward my great destiny in life, that of being a minister, by joining church. And, but that night, all alone, I suddenly was in a terrible state, because I didn't feel any different than I had that morning. But the minister said, "You're going to walk with angels, and then you're going to shout and this and that, and then you'll be whole and be a new person." So, I'd done something wrong. I didn't know what I had done wrong, because I didn't feel any different. I wasn't, I didn't feel born again. So, what happens, the next Sunday when the children's song comes and they start marching to go past my pew, I just can't take it anymore. I leap up and get in line with the other kids, and everybody in church started looking and laughing. And so I get there and people start snickering, but the minister was cool. And he said, "Oh, look, Deacon Griffin's grandson is back again. Well, son, there's nothing like being saved. Nothing like being saved, you be sure. Welcome back, amen, amen." So fine, I go home that next week, and I am, I'm rigid with fear because I still don't feel any different. The third Sunday, here they come again, the little children. I get up again and I get in line to join again. By this time, the church is hysterical, everybody is laughing. And so when the minister blesses everybody, he goes back again, "Oh, isn't this wonderful." And he gets me and he grabs me by the cheek, and he said, "I don't want to see your ass up here again, little nigger. You're making me a laughingstock." When I come home they say, "What did the minister say?" I said, "Nothing, mama." Now, if I had said to her that the minister had told me he was going to kick my ass if I came back up there again and make him a laughingstock, I really would have got, "You're lying on that man," et cetera, et cetera, et cetera. But at that juncture, me and religion sort of parted ways. Anyway, that was my childhood, and I learned early there was a world that I lived in, and a world I could tell my folks about, well, more or less my--I couldn't tell my mom about the goings-on in the tailor shop [Hollywood Cleaners and Tailors (ph.)]. And my dad [Marion Peebles] would come back, and he was pleased with me because the workers had gotten their work done. I was cool. Speaker 2: Did your dad know what was happening in the shop? Speaker 1: No. Story_ID: 349755 Speaker 1: So, high school, you told me a great story about you as an eight, nine, and ten year old, and your Aunt Jane [Jane Thomas]. But before we go on to high school, whatever happened to Aunt Jane? Speaker 2: My aunt? You mean the aunt with the clubfoot, Aunt Jane? Speaker 1: Right, the one who was the psychic. Speaker 2: She got, well here's the situation. I had a very sweet family, but I graduated from grade school when I was ten. And my mother [Edwin Griffin Peebles] held me back for two years, so I was twelve. I graduated from high school [Thornton Township High School, Harvey, Illinois] when I was sixteen, so everybody was older than me. And I was a slow grower, besides that. And my idea of happiness was Chicago [Illinois] in the rearview mirror. And at ten when I moved out to the suburbs, I guess my other relatives, I'd see them from time to time, but I was never really deeply involved in anything. And let me explain what I mean. Because as I'm sitting here too, I was thinking about it. My peer group was a bunch of roughnecks, ex-cons, good guys, who were all at least twenty to thirty years older than I was. I was one of the workers, that's who I knew. That's the world I knew, that's the world--that was my social world, the world of the hops and the sweaters and the making this team or that team. At first I was--by the time I might have been able to go out for the freshman team, I was already a graduating senior. So I never did any of those things in that world. In the second world, the family world, I was really with my dad [Marion Peebles], who was sort of a worker, not only a worker but a very successful businessman, but through the sweat equity, and I was just doing the sweat equity. I said it lightly, but a ten-year-old running the cash register and charging these guys--that was a pretty awesome thing. And then my dad did something. Sometimes instead of paying me, he would give me old clothes to sell that people had left [at Hollywood Cleaners and Tailors (ph.)]. And he bought me a red wagon and said, "Sell these clothes." I said, "Look, I'm a midget," you know what I mean. I'm in one of the toughest parts of America and I'm--we didn't have a lot of junkies back then. We had whiskey heads and winos and so forth. And I had to sell clothes and things to these guys. And so, but I got very good at it. I got so good that when Dad didn't want to pay me money I said, "Dad, can I have more clothes instead?" I learned to hondo [ph.], I learned to make a deal. So I was just a midget man. So that's, that was, that--I wasn't immersed once I got out of the door at ten to work at the shop. I wasn't immersed in any of the family situations, the family dramas, of one uncle can't make the rent or something. I was away from all of that-- Story_ID: 349756 Speaker 1: How were you as far as a student in school? Speaker 2: Very good, very, very good. And I remember, probably one of these epiphanies. I didn't understand, but I just did it, and now I do it all the time. But I remember in sixth grade I got slapped by my teacher out in Harvey, Illinois. And he slapped me because I was arguing with him about a math problem, we had a little math problem. And everybody in class went in, and I had a different answer. And he said, "Well, no, your answer," I said, "No, my answer is right." And I guess I answered him a little too sharply. Eventually the teacher came to me and apologized about the slap, but this was much later. He had looked on the back of the book, you know, where they have these little books for answers. And my answer was in the back of the book, and he had scratched through my answer ten years ago and put in the other answer. But he hadn't read the problem correctly. But my dad [Marion Peebles] went up to see the teacher about hitting me, et cetera, et cetera. And I said, "Dad, I was right." He says, "Yeah, but don't ever show you're right, if you're right," and then such and such. "You've got to be diplomatic." He said, "You've got to know when to hold them and when to fold them, and when to lay in the cut, et cetera, et cetera." Because I embarrassed the guy in front of everybody. "Well, no, no, whoa, whoa, slow your roll." You know what I mean, a kid doesn't think to do all those things, you know what I mean. And that was very, very, very interesting for me. And the other thing, one time--now when I left school I would get on a train and ride fourteen miles into Chicago [Illinois] and then catch another train and come to work [at Hollywood Cleaners and Tailors (ph.)]. And one day I came in and I was late. And I was supposed to go to a little party that evening afterwards. And I said, "I'm going to go to that party." And he said, "No, no, you were late for work." I said, "But Dad, there was a train wreck." He said, "You should have left before the train wreck." I've never been late again, I leave before the train wreck. It was all, I mean, just hard-nosed type of learning. So I had this duality of these--learning these two things. Story_ID: 349757 Speaker 1: Then after that, I went to college. And I went the first year to a college in West Virginia [West Virginia State College; West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia], an all-black college, because my mother [Edwin Griffin Peebles] said I should be around black people. But I didn't know what she meant. Speaker 2: What did she mean? Speaker 1: Well, she wanted me to see more black kids and so forth. It's very funny, but in retrospect I didn't know what she meant. But the school was not academically as sound as the high school [Thornton Township High School, Harvey, Illinois], which was the sixteenth rated high school in the country at that time. The stuff I had taken in my sophomore year, they were teaching there in the freshman year of college. So I mean I already knew it. So, it was just a triple drag. But anyway, what happened was--but nobody liked me, or I thought nobody liked me until it suddenly dawned me on what was going on. Because when I'd go across the campus at the high school they'd say, "Hey, Melvin [HistoryMaker Melvin Van Peebles]," because they all knew me. I'd go across the campus at the black college and nobody said anything. Well, hell, if you only had three black kids, it wasn't difficult to know you, you understand what I mean. But you'd gotten used to being something that you weren't, just because you were playing on the other side of the street and not even aware of it. I thought I was Mr. Personality, now I'm just Mr. Obvious, do you know what I mean (laughter)? But that was very valuable, it was very valuable. Story_ID: 349758 Speaker 1: And then after that I went to a church school, a Methodist college called Ohio Wesleyan [Ohio Wesleyan University, Delaware, Ohio]. And interestingly, there, all of the black students had been sort of recruited from the ghettos, et cetera, et cetera. They were all there from being extra good, et cetera. And the dean of men called me and said, "Melvin [HistoryMaker Melvin Van Peebles], you know, you don't act the others." I said, "What do you mean?" I mean everybody else would have their work ready on time. I acted just like any other white student; I wasn't trying to be, I wasn't Mr. Overachiever. My grades were good, and I never missed a class. My grades were good and all that stuff, but I never--I got thrown out of one class once, the only class I ever got thrown out of. That was writing class. They said, "You'll never be a writer," and they threw me out of writing class. Duh. (Laughter) Anyway so that's, that's what happened. Then I was mopping floors, with my partial scholarship, and I heard from home, I heard about a course that you could take. They'd give you money for it, and you got a credit too. To go to school I got money, so I took that course. Of course, I didn't know--it's so hard for people to realize what it is when you don't know what these things mean. I took the SAT and went off the charts, et cetera. But I didn't know what the SAT was; I just took the test, you know what I mean. There was no tutor or prepping, or this and that. I didn't know what ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] was, but I finished college, and thirteen days later I was in the [U.S.] military. I was an officer before I was--and I had to wear a minor because I wasn't allowed to drink. I was still underage and still a minor, and I was already an officer in the [U.S.] Air Force. Speaker 2: But before we go forward, you were telling me that the dean said you don't-- Speaker 1: Act like the other kids. Speaker 2: Yeah, you were not the overachiever. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: How was it, how did that get resolved? Speaker 1: How was it resolved? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Well, the dean scratched his head and he was almost going to throw me out of school for being somewhat of a, a bit of a troublemaker. But the other students of color had just gotten there. And they hadn't been around white people, and were scared of this and that. And they didn't know, and they'd be the president of this and such, of that, and da da da da da. They didn't have a barber in the college, in that college town for black kids. And so, they would all hitchhike fifty-three miles away--twenty-three miles away--where there was a barber, and get their hair cut and come back. And I said, "Fuck this, huh." I just shaved my head. And they said, "Well, why did you?" I said, "Well, I couldn't get my hair cut. What do you want?" I mean I did things that they would consider very provocative like that, you know. And I met an old teacher years ago, years after college. He said, "Melvin, you know, you were the first militant I ever met." He said, "But we didn't know the word for it back then." But you got to remember, even at that age I could get in--until my sophomore year of college, I looked so young I could still get in a movie for half fare. I could still get in for under twelve. So you can imagine the dichotomy, this rabble-rouser troublemaker. Speaker 2: But were you, did you see yourself as that? Or were you just being yourself? Like you know, you didn't set out to, you know, like okay, I'm going to show them by shaving my head. You shaved it out of convenience, because there was no-- Speaker 1: Yeah, exactly. But the--it was just simple logic. No way. I got a test coming up, and I'm going to go--forget it. It's just simple logic. No, I was not, I never tried to--I mean people would say, and it was interesting, it's one of the questions, "Do you still have fire in your belly?" I'm still the same. I just do what I do, if it comes out that way. Story_ID: 349759 Speaker 1: Was there ever a time, or was there an incident, something that happened where you realized that you were black, you know, in a sense to whereas people may discriminate against you, people may think you're second class? Did you ever have that awareness of a moment like, oh, like, this guy called me a nigger. Speaker 2: All the time. Speaker 1: How young do you remember that, the incident, the first time they called you that (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, I think the first time I might have been about eight or nine. My dad [Marion Peebles] took me down south once, and I'd wandered off and gone into a post office. And I said, "Can I get some stamps?" My dad comes running in and the guy says, "What is with this kid?" Because this white guy was expecting, "Mister boss captain, can I have some stamps, please?" He said, "Well, he doesn't know that." And he said, "Well, you better teach that little nigger something." Okay, I got it. But that was the same duplicity--it wasn't the same duplicity when mom [Edwin Griffin Peebles] said, what did you do today, and I couldn't say I was in the back with my hand up the lady's dress. So, okay. Speaker 1: But then how did that make you feel about, you know, when you move to Phoenix [Illinois], now you're going to school with mostly white kids. Did you feel inferior to them? Did you feel superior to them? Speaker 2: Oh, I didn't feel anything; they were just kids. But, and everybody was--I never had any problems, any overt problems. I got beat up as a kid in the early grades before we moved. I got beat up three times a day, because I was the smallest, and I'd been taught not to fight, et cetera. Then I finally said, "Hey, forget this. I got to get this shit on," you know what I mean. (Laughter) And so, black kids were beating me up, so I didn't see any difference. I didn't see any difference. I later knew I had some behavior, but it was cultural more than racial. I mean when I lived out in the country, I had this little girl, and she was a black girl. But she gave me lip, and I went upside her head. Well, in the hood if somebody gives you lip, you go upside their head. But this was never--this is nothing down there--and she was crying. I said, "Hey yo, don't be--." You understand what I mean. Because you had to throw down then and there. I remember once I must have been about fourteen, and I went to Cleveland [Ohio] for a few weeks to stay with some friends of my folks. He was a doctor, and he was very nice. And he had some daughters, they were a little older than me. I was like a mascot to them, and they took me around. And I saw two guys get in a fight at a little picnic. And they balled up their fists and they were going around like Jack Johnson or something. I'd never seen that before. I'd never seen people ball up their fists, I mean fights. What I saw was everybody hitting people with pipes or with planks with nails in it and so forth, do you know what I mean? It was a whole different thing. So I just laid in the cut. And it was a wonderful opportunity, being a loner. First, it was not by choice, but you got to see a lot of things. You got to see them from a distance. Later on it became a great way of getting perspective on what was happening. So that's--I remember once at college [Ohio Wesleyan University, Delaware, Ohio] for--they considered--you see, the racial password back then was not to bring attention to yourself, and you might even be considered as one of them, whoever them was. I just never bothered about that, which had its complications, to them. But one year, nobody spoke to me for a year at this college. They sent me into Coventry (simultaneous). Story_ID: 347170 Speaker 1: They sent me to Coventry for a year [at Ohio Wesleyan University, Delaware, Ohio]. People wouldn't speak to me except in class, or things like that, you know, when it was necessary. And I felt very bad-- Speaker 2: For? Speaker 1: Well, I felt bad for them being denied my company. It didn't dawn on me that I was supposed to feel bad. Get out of here. That's just my point of view. Those types of things that you're just supposed--having been forced for so long to be outside of the circle, and being denied the access to the circle was no biggie to me, you understand what I mean. So, that peer disapproval was pretty ineffective, pretty ineffective. Story_ID: 347171 Speaker 1: During your college years-- Speaker 2: Yeah, when I graduated from college [Ohio Wesleyan University, Delaware, Ohio], I was out thirteen days, and I was going to, I'd bought myself a ticket and I was going to try to go to Europe, because I'd saved up. Forget it. And they sent me, I was in the [U.S.] Air Force. Now my mother [Edwin Griffin Peebles], she said, "Son, you're never going to make it all the way down south alive." So she got in the car, put me in the car with her, and drove me to my base. She said, "Promise me one thing, son." "Okay, Mom, what is it?" "You won't go off this base." I didn't go off the base, because she said, "You won't live. You'll be dead." Racism was rampant in Texas. And she was right. Speaker 1: Where was the base? Speaker 2: A little town in Texas, San Angelo, Texas, it was called. Speaker 1: Because the [U.S.] military was only integrated in the late '40s [1940s], right? Speaker 2: Oh, much later than that. It was during the Korean War. I was the only--they were just doing it in stages. I remember when I was stationed at one base in Houston, Texas. You see, the non-commissioned officers, that's the sergeants and so forth, they had two clubs for them. And they only had one officers' club because there were no black officers, and one swimming pool. And the base commander couldn't stand the officers, the black officers. So, he put concrete into the swimming pool and made it a parking lot. Now, everybody else had a swimming pool, it's about ninety hundred degrees. But the officers, I mean, it was nuts, I've landed in places--I remember landing in Laredo, Texas once when we were in training, in a storm. I think it was about seventeen guys, seventeen students, and I was one of them. And we were going into town. And the town where they built the officers' club, because it was just a little small airport, the hotel didn't take blacks. So I had to walk to Mexico to go to bed. I had to go to Juarez [Ciudad Juarez, Mexico], yeah. I was once chased by a lynch mob because I was walking down the street in my uniform and a white soldier came by and he had to salute me because I was an officer. And the townspeople got indignant and started chasing me. The only thing that saved my life was that I was in the Air Force, and there was some [U.S.] Navy artillery or something, and I could see the light from the airport. And so I made a beeline for that, cutting through the brush and everything else, you know what I mean, and the other people chasing behind me. If I didn't know where I was--and I didn't know where I was. The only thing that saved me was that I could see the light. It was a drag, man, a drag, yeah. So, I remember sometimes we'd be flying in formation, and the guys would be talking on their headphone, and it sounded like a Ku Klux Klan [KKK] meeting. And I was the only black, "All right, now boys, we're gonna take over there to the left. Give me four degrees." (Laughter) But my crew and the people you worked with, they were all okay, because if I make a mistake, you know what happens? We all die. I'm telling them the way to go, I'm the navigator. I'm the bombardier. Now, one mistake--if any of us make a mistake--so you can't play that stuff. So, that was interesting. Speaker 1: So you came along after the Tuskegee Airmen? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, that was World War II [WWII] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, but did that have any, did it play, you know, did you take that into consideration at all, that okay, I'm following in the footsteps of these-- Speaker 2: No, because the difference was they had shown that they were capable, but even between that and the Tuskegee Airmen, I think you had a ten year lapse, or a five year lapse before there was anything else. Story_ID: 347172 Speaker 1: But you said there was a ten year, yeah (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) All these things are leading up, were leading up to World War II [WWII]. There were these great black battalions and there were these great Japanese things, et cetera, et cetera. So finally people freaked out when Truman [President Harry S. Truman] integrated the services [U.S. Armed Forces], and then they would do it, they did it in stages. And there you are. Speaker 1: So, what stage did you come in on? Do you have any idea? Speaker 2: Well, I was among the first integrated officers in the [U.S.] Air Force. Speaker 1: So, did they allow you to come to the officers' club? Speaker 2: Well, they had them, but see, what had been done--oh, yeah, nobody mentioned what had been done. It was that many times if you had on a small base, they didn't have a special club for the officers. The officers could use the hotel and the tower downtown, et cetera. But the hotel downtown didn't, was still excluding blacks. It didn't dawn on anybody that blacks would ever be one of the officers. I mean that was an anomaly. And if I ever went into a bar or a restaurant or anywhere else, I'd sit down about ten minutes, and I'd look at my watch. Here come the MPs [military police], "Somebody's in here," somebody had put a call in, "somebody's in here impersonating an officer." It had to be. Of course, the MP would come, and then of course, I'd say, "Who are you talking to? Stand at attention when you're talking to me." And I'd pull out my stuff, and they'd say, so I'd put on a whole show, you know. "Sorry sir, no, no problem," and I'd go back to eating-- Story_ID: 347173 Speaker 1: But in college you had majored, what had been your major? Speaker 2: I majored in English lit [literature], and in art. Speaker 1: Now, why those two things? Speaker 2: Art was what I had a scholarship in [at Ohio Wesleyan University, Delaware, Ohio], and I was good with that. And English lit, because that was my worse subject. I said I wanted to be proficient in everything. So I said, "What's my worst subject?" And English of course, because I was saying feets and policemans and all of this. My dad [Marion Peebles] couldn't read until he was fourteen. So I said, "Well, I think I'll get proficient at this, the things that I don't know." Speaker 1: Who do you credit for introducing you to the arts? Speaker 2: Nobody. Speaker 1: How did you become an artist then? How did you become interested in art, so much so that you had a scholarship to go to college? Speaker 2: Well, what happened, one thing I remember, on a field trip from the Forest School [ph.] years ago, they took us to the Art Institute of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois]. It was like going to, I guess the museum here. And the person was taking us around and showing us things. "And this is Florentine and this is Venetian," and these kids were all here, I think I was nine. So they get to this painting, "Now, who can tell me what this painting is?" I said, "Oh, that's so and so and such and such." The woman almost dropped. "How'd you know that?" I said, "Well, you just said this shows the influence, because you said--." "You could see that?" "Yes, ma'am." I was just telling her what I saw. And this lady called the school and arranged for me to have a scholarship at the institute. I wasn't doing anything else. There are things you can do that you just can do. I was taking an eye exam later on, and the guy said he was checking for colorblindness. He said, "Now, what's that number? Can you see that number there?" I said, "Which one? There's two sets of numbers." He said, "You can see that?" I said, "Yeah, I can see it, two sets of numbers." I could see the colorblind person's sets of numbers and the other sets of numbers. There was a difference, I could see it. It ain't my fault. It's like a person that--the friend who was just in here, my musical director. I can play something over the telephone, "No, no, no, no, no, no, try moving your other finger one key over." But he could hear it, I can't hear it. Do you follow what I mean? Like Roberta Flack has perfect pitch, there are people that can--and other people that go bing, bing, bing, from right there. I can't. So, it was just, it was just something I could see. Spatial things, I can pretty well look at something and say, "Um, no, that won't fit." "Well, what--." "Ain't going to get through that door, huh." But I can see it. I don't know. Story_ID: 347174 Speaker 1: After the [U.S.] Army, or in the [U.S.] Air Force, they shipped you off to Europe (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no. Speaker 1: Or your tour is over when you go to Europe? Speaker 2: No, no, that didn't happen. After that ended-- Speaker 1: How did it end? Speaker 2: Well, I was up for promotion, a double promotion, as a matter of fact. And I was minding my own business, and there was this voice--I guess it was my Aunt Jane [Jane Thomas], I don't know. She says, "Melvin [HistoryMaker Melvin Van Peebles]?" "Yeah, what?" "Get your black ass out of here." I said, "What?" "Get your black ass out of here. Don't re-up." I got out of the [U.S. military] service two days later, and two weeks later the guy who was sitting in my chair was burned to death. I said, "All right, okay, okay." One other time I just missed it. A guy who outranked me--I was going to fly that day. He said, "I'm taking your place." "Yes, sir." He's a captain and I'm a lieutenant. "Yes, sir." And there was a WAF [Women in the Air Force] who I had been looking at, and I persuaded her to come to my place. And this was before the sexual revolution. And anyway, one thing led to another, and bong, bong, bang, bang, there we are doing the funky monkey. And after--why I mentioned this was before the sexual revolution, is because afterwards they would always say, the girl would say, "Where am I? I'm not this type of girl." And you say, "Of course not. And me, I'm not this type of guy either." Yeah, both of us, okay. So she said that I said--and I lived in the desert, in a little house. And I said, "Me either, I'm not that type of boy." Boom, boom, this huge explosion. And it was like Tennyson [Alfred Lord Tennyson] said, "I am part of all that I have met." And it's like: "Oh Lord, oh Lord, that big lie has caused this big explosion." It was like, "No, Melvin, God's gonna get you!" There's this explosion, I was back in Sunday school or something, you know what I mean. Lord, come down on our soul. And I happened to look out the window and there was this huge, black cloud of smoke, honest to God truth. I get in my car, because I was the closest, I was closest to the accident, and I drive about from here to a couple of blocks. And then I had to get out, the road ended, just stopped. And I get out and I'm running through the sand, and there's the plane. There's a guy sitting in the seat with no head. And how I knew it was him, you had to, you wore your jumpsuit with this--it was the guy who had taken my place, the guy that had taken my place. So I said, "Okay, I ain't pushing my luck no more, unh-uh." So I got out of the service and the closest border--I was in Los Angeles [California], in Riverside, California near Los Angeles. The closest border was Mexico. So I said hey. And originally we were only supposed to be in for eighteen months, and they kept upping the time. Because it was eighteen months, then it was two years, then it was three years. And I said, "Hey, while I'm out, I'm going, so they ain't going to get me again." So I went, and the closest border was Mexico. So I went to live in Mexico. In fact, Mario [Mario Van Peebles] was born in Mexico. And that's how I went to Mexico. Speaker 1: And you looked for the closest border because you didn't want to serve, or you didn't want them to call you back? Or why were you leaving the states? Speaker 2: Because I didn't want to be in the service anymore. I was out, but you know, suppose they--I was supposed to be out before, and then they do this--like these guys who have been to Iraq and are going back again and so forth. So, that happened to me twice already. I said, no, no, no. Because what I was doing was very specialized. There weren't that many--they didn't know how to pressurize the cabins of the planes for large crews. So, they only had three guys doing the work that in the war [World War II, WWII] twelve guys did. So I was the navigator, the radio operator, and the bombardier. The pilot was the--the pilot and the co-pilot was my assistant, the pilot's assistant, you know. So these three guys--if you didn't eat your lunch, the packed lunch you took with you, and you were going down the runway getting to take off, you could forget it; you didn't have a chance to eat it. So that's why I was in Mexico. Speaker 1: So, you-- Speaker 2: And then from Mexico, when my time was up--you could only stay so long and then you had to get a visa. I said, "Well, what's the best city in the United States?" And I figured out where that was, what I thought of from what I'd seen, and I would move there. That was San Francisco [California]. Speaker 1: Just to go back a little bit, you quoted Tennyson. You said--who else were you reading up to this point? Speaker 2: Oh, you read everybody. You bet that was what you did when I was taking English lit [literature]--(unclear) from Chaucer's [Geoffrey Chaucer] 'Canterbury Tales' ['The Canterbury Tales'] to 'Beowulf' to whatever, you know, all those things. Story_ID: 347175 Speaker 1: So in Mexico, how did you meet Mario's [Mario Van Peebles] mother [Maria Marx]? Speaker 2: Oh, no, no, no, I'd met her before. I met her before, I met her in--the circumstance was that she went to the same college [Ohio Wesleyan University, Delaware, Ohio] I did. Afterwards, after I had left, the next year she'd come. But we knew different friends, and that's how we met. So, now you got to understand the life expectancy of the job I was doing at that time [in the U.S. Air Force] was ultra-dangerous. Nobody--it was three months. Nobody was supposed to get out of there alive, flying those things. And I never expected to make it. But if you were married, your wife got ten grand [ten thousand dollars]. It's called, buying the farm, if you died or got killed. So I said, "Well, why throw this money away," you know what I mean. So we shacked up. So that's what happened there. I still think she's pissed off that she didn't get that ten grand, but that's beside the point. (Laughter) Not a nice lady. Speaker 1: Not a nice lady? Speaker 2: A nice lady. Speaker 1: A nice lady. Was she black or white? Speaker 2: White. Speaker 1: White. Was that the first white woman you'd gone out with? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: No? Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, I'm an equal opportunity cad. Speaker 1: So if you had to put yourself in the shoes of, let's say, Wilt Chamberlain, or I'm going to say, I don't know, Arthur Ashe, who would you, as far as women, who would you say you-- Speaker 2: I wouldn't sleep with either one of them (laughter). Speaker 1: No, not them (laughter). Well, you know, Wilt Chamberlain, what did he have, twenty thousand women in his lifetime? Speaker 2: I don't know. Speaker 1: That's what the book says. I'm assuming, well, just the number. I mean, were you a ladies' man? Speaker 2: No, I'm not. Speaker 1: No? Speaker 2: I could give less than a jujucaca [ph.]. I was just going along. Speaker 1: But let's just--going along. But to be, you know, just to speak to the times, you know, you're still ahead of your time for a black man in America at this time, to openly have a white girlfriend. Was it, I mean like in the South it would have been an issue. Was it ever an issue for you? Speaker 2: Yeah, I've been around white folks all the time. I've had black girlfriends and white girlfriends, you know what I mean. Believe me, with the lights off, same old, same old. They had pretty much the same culture, certain cultural backgrounds. We got along fine. Speaker 1: Yeah, but people--yeah, that I understand. But you also said, you know, you were talking about--you know, at the time you were an officer, and some places you went, you couldn't go to the officers' club because there were no black ones (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, but that was when I was in the South, et cetera. It was changing rapidly. I mentioned I was on the forefront, and about two or three years later the officers' club felt that they'd gotten over the shock and the trauma, do you know what I mean. But, so when the lady was living with me, I remember the commander came in and he said, "Melvin [HistoryMaker Melvin Van Peebles], you know, I want to, I've got to talk to you about something important." He said, "You know, it's that girl that's living with you and so forth, et cetera." And I'll never forget his name, it was Major Cotton [ph.]. And he had this big southern accent, you know. And Mario's mother was so white, she looked like, she glowed in the dark. I mean she's from a German background, blonde hair. I said, "Yeah, but you know how it is, major." I said, "That's not my girlfriend, that's just my cousin." "She's your cousin?" I said, "You know how it is, things in the South." I said, "That's my cousin, you know, don't say anything." He said, "Okay." And so that--anyway, I mean every now and then you'd have trouble with somebody, but okay, you break their head and keep on going. Story_ID: 347176 Speaker 1: Mario [Mario Van Peebles] was born in Mexico? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And you become a father for the first time? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: How does that change your life? Speaker 2: It didn't. Speaker 1: What changes happened? Did any changes occur? When you become a dad, how's that different from not being a dad? Speaker 2: Well, when Mario was born we didn't have a doctor. We just had to--and it was a place where people didn't speak the language, and we didn't understand them too well. I was, I mean, I changed the navel band and delivered the baby and all that. Oh, it was nothing, it was great, fine. It was just great, a great kid, fine. He cried for six weeks and then after that he never cried again. And the lady from downstairs would come, "Da, da, da," and she'd be explaining it to me. Oh, okay. Speaker 1: You delivered him? Speaker 2: Yeah, me and the midwife. Because yeah, there you are. Speaker 1: How much Spanish do you speak now? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: How much Spanish did you speak? Speaker 2: Well, I was getting along pretty good. And the other day--well, last year I was in Cuba. And I couldn't speak Spanish anymore, and the driver almost got in an accident, and I started screaming in Spanish (laughter). I started talking, I said, "Man, where is that car going?" So it came back, it came back. I guess it was there a bit, I was speaking it again, you know. Speaker 1: So where did you get the name Mario from? Speaker 2: Well, I was living in Mexico. I thought I'd put in a--her name was Maria [Maria Marx], I might as well put another M. So all the kids have, had an M in their name-- Story_ID: 347177 Speaker 1: What was that city? Speaker 2: Right, okay. That city was San Francisco [California] (laughter). So, and so I said to myself, as long as I'm in San Francisco, what would be the greatest job to have? What would be the greatest? And I'd been, I said, I've been inside all my life, from school to the cockpit. I said, what would be the greatest job to have here in San Francisco? What would you do? What would be the greatest job? Speaker 1: Working on a streetcar. Speaker 2: Absolutely, a cable car. I became a gripman on a cable car, yeah. And how you can't get more San Francisco than that, you know. (Laughter) It's like you go to Paris [France] and working, making baguettes or something, you know (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So which line did you work on? Speaker 2: The market, Fisherman's Wharf [San Francisco, California]. Speaker 1: I took it. I know the-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. And you go down to Buena Vista [The Buena Vista Cafe, San Francisco, California], one point of things, yep. That was my line-- Story_ID: 349760 Speaker 1: The greatest job to have in San Francisco [California]? Speaker 2: In San Francisco, when I was driving the cable cars, I literally--I don't have much fat on my hands and so forth, and so it was quite painful. But, so, I'd always try and think of something else as I was working. But I enjoyed it a great deal. And people would, by the time they'd get to one end of the line or the other, they'd be almost like a big happy family. And they would ask me what they could buy, and things like that. And the only thing that you could buy as a souvenir at that time was a little bronze cable car. And I had the idea that I might write a little article about the cable cars. So then I thought I would need photos and so forth. So, I found somebody [Ruth Bernhard] who was willing to do the photography, and I took them out and I showed them each shot. So then I had enough business acumen to say, well, now you always need an edge; it's good to have an edge. And the edge that I thought that I had was, I'll write it from the point of view of a gripman. After all, I was a gripman, right? So I wrote a little photographic essay about it and it grew and grew and grew into a little book ['The Big Heart,' Melvin Van Peebles]. So I called a guy, and the guy said, "Come on down." So I go on down to this place and knock on the door. And the guy says, "We're not interested." And I said, "Well, I just called you." He saw me standing out there, and he took the book. And I published the book, and the book was very successful. And one day a guy got on the cable car, and he said that he wanted to get a signature from the guy who wrote it. He came to the barn, and they said, "Oh, that's him." He said, "No, no, no, I mean the guy who wrote it." They said, "That's him." "That's him?" So he came over and the guy was talking to me. He said, "This is your book?" He said, "You know, the layout's very good." I said, "Yeah." He said, "Who did it?" I said, "What's a layout?" He said, "The layout is the pictures on the page." I said, "I did that." He said, "And the captions, who wrote the captions?" I said, "What's that?" He said, "You know, the story underneath." I said, "Oh, I did that." I didn't know the technical terms for any of this shit. And we went on, and he said, "You know, a book is just like a movie." I said, "Shit, I'll go into movies." That's how I went into movies. Story_ID: 349761 Speaker 1: I called the guy and I said, "Look, I want to make movies." He said, "Great. Is it going to be fiction or," he said, "what's the documentary going to be about?" I said, "I don't want to do a document, I want to make it fiction. I want stories." I said, "How long are movies, anyway? I've been going to movies all my life, triple features and everything else, but I never paid any attention." "Well, they're ninety minutes or a little longer." I said, "Well, how much is film?" He said, "Well, what're you going to shoot it in, in 16 or 35?" I said, "What's that?" He said, "16 or 35 millimeter." I said, "What's that?" I mean, I knew nothing. And he told me, he said, "I got a 16 millimeter camera. And if you want to do it, I'll do it with you. I won't charge you anything for the camera." "Okay." So, my first feature film that I shot turned out to be eleven minutes long. And I began to teach myself bit by bit, nobody taught me. Then I remember we got the first film, the first film I shot, projected on the wall. I said, "Wow, it's okay. The story's here, but it's not right yet." He said, "Of course not, you haven't edited it yet." "What's that?" I mean, that's the level--now film talk is ubiquitous. Everybody knows about this and all that. I never heard--he didn't talk film before. And anyway, I made those short films. And when I, well, first I asked the guy how much it would be. And he told me the price, and I calculated it. And at that time, you could make a feature film for $557; that was my calculation. Shit, no problem, fine. It was a lot of money, but still. But so, I remember the first day we were getting ready to shoot the film, and the guy's out there, "Okay, this is going to be scene four, take this, roll--." "Whoa, wait a minute, the film. Oh, don't use all the film." I had counted how much it costs for ninety minutes of film, period. That's what I counted, not knowing there was editing or this, or none of that. Then after that I said, "Okay, at least we got these shots, and it'll be a little shorter than I thought." The guy said, "Now we got to go to the laboratory and develop it." "Oh, so okay." He said, "No, no, no, no, no, you never touch the negative, you've got to make another print." "What!" (Laughter) In the meantime my wife [Maria Marx] is getting rocks in her jaws the size of Mount Rushmore [Mount Rushmore National Memorial, South Dakota]. I have to sell my car, et cetera (laughter). So, but I got it, I got them. Story_ID: 349762 Speaker 1: And then that's how I went into music. I couldn't afford any musicians, and all, I mean, musicians who were dependable. Everybody else, "Yeah, brother, I'll be there. Oh, man, you know, I got high last night and my old lady," blah, blah, blah. So I got disgusted, and that's when I numbered the keys on the piano and started picking out melodies. That's what happened. And then I made these little films and I took them down to Hollywood. And they looked at them and said, "Oh, you obviously can't be a director. You see, there's a snowfall in Kilimanjaro [Mount Kilimanjaro, Tanzania] this year, so therefore--," and blah, blah, blah. "And there're only so many wheels," and you know, all kinds of blah, blah, blah. So I decided that I couldn't--by that time, Mario [Mario Van Peebles] had a sister [Megan Van Peebles] and I had a family to feed, et cetera. So in the meantime, I'd gotten fired from the cable cars [in San Francisco, California], because the guy who runs the cable car said he didn't think--personally, he didn't think Negroes should read, let alone write. And when the book ['The Big Heart,' Melvin Van Peebles] was a success and complimentary to the cable cars, I got fired. I said, "What are you firing me for?" He said, "It looks like you're going to have, your profile fits the profile of someone who's going to have a big accident." They fired my ass. So anyway, what happened was, I go to work to the Negro university, that is, the post office. And ironically, the post office was called the Rincon Annex [Rincon Annex Post Office, San Francisco, California], where--I mean the irony just won't quit, you know what I mean. So I say, "Okay." So then I say, well, I have to go to my second love. And Sputnik [Sputnik 1], the first little Russian satellite had just gone up. You know, the beatniks were really not called beatniks. They were originally called beats, and then the N-I-K was added afterwards. That's what we called the beat generation, and then later on they became beatniks, in honor of Sputnik. So I felt that the future, one of the secure business futures, was going to be in the calculation of trajectories, to keep these things up, which is called celestial mechanics. And the best place for celestial mechanics at that time was Holland [the Netherlands]. So I had the G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944], I write to Holland, and I say, "Hey, I'm coming early to brush up on the language," and they accepted me. And on my way to Holland, I came to New York [New York] and took a boat, Mario and Maria [Maria Marx] and Megan and myself, to Holland. I took these three films that I had, and leased them to a little art house, to a film distributor, and went to Europe...