 Story_ID: 70557 Speaker 1: My name is R. Eugene, E-U-G-E-N-E, Pincham, P-I-N-C-H-A-M. I was born on June 28th, 1925 in Chicago, Illinois. I am presently seventy-seven years of age. Speaker 2: And we're in Chicago. Speaker 1: We're in Chicago, Illinois at 1900 South Michigan Avenue, the office of [The] HistoryMakers. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. Speaker 1: And today is Tuesday, August 13th, 2002. The time is 1:00 p.m. Speaker 2: Okay, and the interviewer is Adele Hodge. Story_ID: 70558 Speaker 1: Okay, let's find out some fun things about you. What's your favorite food? Speaker 2: Food. Speaker 1: Okay, and your favorite color. Speaker 2: Blue. Speaker 1: And what favorite saying do you have? Speaker 2: My favorite quote comes from having heard my mother say it for so many times during which time as a youth I really didn't understand what she was saying. I came to know what she was saying as I grow older. And that quote, and my favorite quote is, "As for me and my house, we will serve the Lord." As for me and my house, we will serve the Lord. Speaker 1: Okay, and your favorite vacation destination. Speaker 2: 9316 South Michigan Avenue, Chicago, Illinois, where I live. Speaker 1: And you don't-- Speaker 2: You thought I was gonna say the Riviera, Bahamas, no, no, no, no. Speaker 1: You rarely get to take that vacation, just really stay home. Speaker 2: No I'm--I enjoy being at home, tremendously. Story_ID: 70559 Speaker 1: We wanna first talk about your parents and grandparents, gonna start there, long before you got here. Do you--your mother first. Give me her full name and spell it for me. Speaker 2: My mother's name was Hazel, H-A-Z-E-L, Julia, J-U-L-I-A, maiden name was Foote, F-O-O-T-E. Married my father Pincham, P-I-N-C-H-A-M. She divorced him and she remarried a Caldwell, C-A-L-D-W-E-L-L. Speaker 1: And that she was--where is she from, where is her home? Speaker 2: She was born and reared in Athens, Limestone County, Alabama. Speaker 1: And do you have any memory of your grandparents. Speaker 2: Yes, of course. Speaker 1: Okay, your mother's. Speaker 2: My mother's mother, my maternal grandmother, was Safronia [ph.] Sowell. Speaker 1: Spell it for me. Speaker 2: S-O-W-E-L-L Foote Pennington. We called her Ms. Frony [ph.]. And she lived--we did consider maybe three quarters of a city block from where we lived in Limestone County in Athens. She was the daughter of Bob Sowell, S-O-W-E-L-L. We had an aunt, she had a sister by the name of Matt Sowell Lincoln. Aunt Matt, as an aside, Aunt Matt was the maternal grandmother of Dr. C. Eric Lincoln, the noted theologian from Duke University [Durham, North Carolina]. Ms. Frony had another, had a brother named Hinton Sowell, H-I-N-T-O-N, who was a Baptist minister. Ms. Frony's father's brother was Uncle Tony Sowell, who lived down the road on Brownsferry Road from us. And Uncle Tony had children, Columbus, Mattie. And Uncle Hinton had children, Annie Mae [ph.] was one, George was one, that was one of his children, and it was a very, very close-knit Sowell family. And--- Speaker 1: Mother, where was she, the baby? Speaker 2: My mother was the, the youngest of three children born of Safronia Foote and Hayes Foote. Speaker 1: When was your grandmother [Safronia Sowell "Ms. Frony"] born, do you know? Speaker 2: I don't know, I don't know. She--in the late--probably during Reconstruction. She died in 1945 and she was about sixty-five or seventy when she passed away. The Sowell family will now have its forty-fifth family reunion. As a matter of fact, the latter part of this month, in Austin, Texas, which will be for the first time it being held in Austin. Ordinarily it's held in Ohio, in Cleveland. Many of the Sowell family members migrated to Cleveland during the great migration, during the Depression. And there are some of course still living in Athens, Limestone County, Alabama. And at our reunion there are usually over 1,000 Sowell descendants at the reunion. Bob Sowell, Ms. Frony's father, had if I recall correctly, I did not know him, something like nine or ten brothers. And of course with that kind of background, you can see how so many of us were descended from the Sowell family. But yes, I knew them quite well. Story_ID: 70560 Speaker 1: Do you have any favorite sayings or stories that you heard from your grandmother [Safronia Powell "Ms. Frony"]? Speaker 2: I cannot say that I heard--I can recall any favorite stories that she told us. I can tell you that I recall the life that she had to live. She was a very, very comical, humorous person. She divorced my grandfather [Hayes Foote], my mother's father, before I even--I didn't know at the time. When I first became of who she was, she had--she was married to a man by the name of Pennington. And Ms. Frony had two children by him, Mildred, we call her Tootie [ph.] and Neale [ph.], who are my aunt and uncle. Two children younger than my mother [Hazel Caldwell]. I'll get back to that in a moment. Ms. Frony lived a very, very hard life. We were not impoverished using the modern sociological terminology to describe our financial conditions. We were not impecunious, we were not indigent, we were not economically deprived. We were not financially underprivileged. We were po--P-O, po. We couldn't afford the four letters it took to spell the word poor, we could only do two, P-O. We was po. My grandmother Ms. Frony was a domestic servant. She worked for a family by the name of Ingram, who of course were white. And Ms. Ingram was a schoolteacher. She had about as much business with a domestic servant as I've got with a gorilla in my house, but it was a common thing in those days in the south to have blacks working in the homes of white people as domestic servants, paying them meager wages. Ms. Frony's hours were from 5:00 in the morning until 6 or 7:00 in the evening. She had to cook three meals a day and clean and wash and iron and it was a custom in the community that the domestic servants were off on Thursday afternoon. All the kept black folks working for white folks got off on Thursday afternoon to do their socializing and what have you. What I recall most about my grandmother and what I'm about to now tell you, which is a very, very tragic experience. She could not go to church on Sunday during the regular Sunday 11:00 worship service. Usually she got to the evening service on Sunday, and usually late, of course she had to work. And she always pushed--she made three dollars a week, how I'm able to remember it's three dollars a week, I cannot tell you, but it was three dollars a week. And every Sunday she'd put a quarter in church of that three dollars. And periodically there would be a fundraiser at the church. I was reared in the CME Church at that time was called the Colored Methodist Episcopal Church. It's now been changed to Christian Methodist Episcopal Church. And that church founded and financed certain various black colleges, among them being Lane College in Jackson, Tennessee, Miles College in Birmingham, Alabama. And there were several others names escape me now, but periodically the church would hold fundraising rallies to help finance the schools, Miles and Lane. And the story that I remember about my grandmother so much is that when the rallies would come to finance these schools, she'd always give a dollar out of her three dollars. And her pet expression was people got the nerve to talk about the Booker T. Washington and the [W.E.B.] DuBois debates, what have you, my grandmother would always say when you're educated, you'll always be rich because nobody can take it away from you. Go to school. And this was her way of instilling within us the importance of going to school because we just thought it was just phenomenal that she could take a dollar out of three dollars and contribute it to an educational institution as poor as we were, as hungry as we were, as naked as we were. And it made an indelible impression on us, me and my brother who's eleven months older than me, and my Uncle Neale who was two years older than me, and Aunt Mildred who was three years older than me. Made a tremendous impression on us. Quite inspirational and quite motivational. Speaker 1: Such a strong woman. How old were you when your grandmother died? Speaker 2: When she died in '45 [1945], I was 20, I was 20. Story_ID: 70561 Speaker 1: Now your mother [Hazel Caldwell]. What favorite story do you have of your--that involved you and your mother growing up? Speaker 2: Well I often pray to God, thanking Him for all the blessings that he's bestowed upon me and I've received a many a one. The blessings of which I'm most grateful is that he gave me a mother who was my mother. Fifty years ahead of her time. I didn't realize it as I was growing up. And she gave--He gave me a wife [Alzata Pincham] on a comparable order. My mother was a dynamo. And you ask me one of my favorite stories regarding her; there's several. One of which was--and it boggles my mind even today to find black people who have a feeling of no self-worth, who feel inferior, who feel unimportant. I was reared just the opposite. My mother and my grandmother [Safronia Powell] and my uncles and aunts emphasized to us almost daily that we had to be of a superior human strain because we survived, we survived, we lived through the slave stock age. We were taught this. We were taught that we survived the Middle Passage. We survived 300 years of degradation and slavery, and we're still here. So we were taught you must be somebody because those who were weak didn't make it. Only the strong survived it. We were taught that our forbearers were put in the stockades on the west coast of Africa and slave ship came along whenever the wind blew it over to, to the west coast of Africa. And by the time the slave ship arrived, one out of every two who were in the stockade had died. Disease, despair, hunger, brutality. And those who made it were strong. We were taught this, that we were packed into slave ships unlike the Caribbean cruise ships that we know nowadays, the boats were not bigger than a couple of rooms of a house and packed in the belly of the boat. We were taught that. And there was no running water on the boat, there was no Charmin on the boat, there was no place you could get up and go to the bathroom. We had to wallow in our body waste at 90 days across the sea. And we were taught that the slave ships, the odor from the slave ships was so atrocious that many sailors would not work on them. And we were taught that many of the people died during the voyage. And that many of the captains of the boats refused to even allow the dead bodies to be thrown overboard for fear that if they came top deck, there might be a revolution, a revolt on the boat. And the stench on the boat was atrocious. And we were taught that those who made it were strong, and we came from those who made it because ain't never been no dead person had no baby. So as I grew up, and my mother instilled this within us. And we were taught that you have a duty to use your life because you're here because somebody else was determined. Coming across that water. I'm gone make it because I want my forbearers to be here. I do not want my family to become extinct. So my mother instilled that within us. Story_ID: 70562 Speaker 1: Next we were taught, and these are memories I have of her [Hazel Caldwell], that poverty is a state of being and not a state of mind. She taught us that you must at all times do your best. In fact I was taught if you don't do your best, you're sinning. I was taught that if you, if you, if you, if you ain't giving it all you got, it's a sin. And in school it was no debate, no discussion, no talking about it, no, no, no, no, non-negotiable, we had to make A's. And anything less than an A was punishable. Speaker 2: How far in school did your mother go? Speaker 1: I sent her through college. Speaker 2: You did? Speaker 1: Yes ma'am. Speaker 2: Wow, that's-- Speaker 1: When I finished college and began to practice law, I sent her to college; to LeMoyne College in Memphis, Tennessee. Speaker 2: She must have been so happy. Speaker 1: She was, she was a dynamic woman. My mother taught us that you must always do your best. And she taught us that you're supposed to use your talents to help somebody else, make the world a better place. Speaker 2: What was her educational interest, what was her major? Speaker 1: She became a schoolteacher in Limestone County, Alabama. You asked me my favorite experience, there's several. As a child, I often wondered why there were days when she would not sit down and eat with me and my brother. And of course there were days when she did. I later learned as I grew older, that on those days when she would not eat with us, was because there was not enough there for her. And she would make certain that my brother and I had enough to eat before she would eat. And I can see her now after we'd gotten up from the table, coming and picking up the plates and sopping the plates with the bread where my brother and I had eaten. That's one of my favorite memories. Another favorite memory is teacher gave me a B-plus. Her name was Inez, Ms. Inez Higgins Fatt [ph.]. I don't recall the subject, but it was a - plus. Speaker 2: What grade? Speaker 1: About the eighth I guess, seventh or eighth, might have been the ninth. And when I gotten the course book and I saw it, I, I said I can't take this home. I can't, I can't do this. No, no, you Ms. Fatt--and she proceeds to tell me why she's given me a B-plus. I'm proceeding to tell her why I cannot take this B-plus home with me. I will be punished. I loved sports, and my mother would probably stop me from participating in sports and I argued with her all afternoon. And she finally agreed to change the grade and said I'll give you some extra work to make it up. And she wrote over the B plus an A. I took it home proudly and my mother whipped my butt 'cause she swore I changed the course book. She said I changed it, which I didn't of course, but I got a whooping. And of course when she found out that I hadn't changed it, she apologized but she said it just motivate you to do better next time. You didn't have any business getting a B plus in the first place. Story_ID: 70563 Speaker 1: Another one of my favorite stories--another favorite story of mine is--I shall never forget this. Went off to college, caught a freight train to go. First couple quarters reading Aristotle and Plato and all the philosophers. Came back home and we lived in a shack. Naturally air-conditioned because you could look any direction at any time at our house and see outdoors. Roof leaked so bad till when it rained, we went outside and stood under a tree to keep from getting wet. There were no rodents in our house, no rats, no roaches, no ants, impeccably clean. They weren't there 'cause there was nothing there for them to eat. And when the mosquitoes and flies--we didn't have any screens on our windows, would come by, they'd look in our house and say don't go in there, if you go in there, they'll suck your blood. Keep on going by. I came home from college highly intelligent, well read. Speaker 2: Urbane. Speaker 1: I was, I was into something. And I told my mother [Hazel Caldwell] ain't no God. I says nonsense. And I cited some philosophy to substantiate my position. And my mother said boy--she thought I was just engaging her in some kind of intellectual dialogue. At the time I started, she didn't know that I was serious, which I was at the time. And she said can't you see every morning the sun rises over there and goes across the sky every evening and sets over there? I said well that's because--God ain't doing it. But can't you see that when I pick up an object in my hand, turn it loose, it falls on the ground? Pick it up a thousand--it's gone fall. God didn't do it. And we debated. And finally it occurred to her that I'm serious, which I was. And she looked up in the sky and tears began to streak down her cheek. And she closed her eyes and held my hand and said Oh Lord, please spare him until he learns better. And she turned and says you are well read in the books in college, so I cannot debate with you from what you've read. I can debate with you from what's in my soul. There's a god and it will come to you if you live long enough. And I'm grateful that she prayed that prayer because he did spare me until I learned better. Another pet expression my mother was when I left home to go to college. Big deal. Boy, don't disgrace your name. And don't get in any trouble because I have no way of coming to get you to help you. [Unclear]. I'm not gone disgrace my name. Another pet experience was when I played football in high school. And she had the privilege of walking up and down the sidelines. Everybody couldn't do that, but Hazel did that and she's always at the line of scrimmage with the ball. And you could hear her voice above anybody else's on--in the, in the stadium. And she would encourage us and motivate us. "Boy, you ain't hitting. Boy, run the ball, run it." Extremely inspirational. Story_ID: 70564 Speaker 1: Did you--did your mother [Hazel Caldwell] ever tell you how she and your dad [William E. Pincham, Sr.] met? Speaker 2: Very, very interesting. Yes, she did. The school [Trinity School] that I attended in Limestone County, Athens, Alabama, was founded in 1866 by the American Missionary Association. The American Missionary Association took on that name immediately after the end of the Civil War and I'm, I'm embarrassed to tell you now that I can't remember the name it had before the Civil War ended. But it was an abolitionist organization, a very, very avid abolitionist organization. And it changed its name from what it was during the Civil War as an abolitionist organization, to the American Missionary Association so that it would be more acceptable in the South in what it was endeavoring to do in aiding the newly emancipated slaves. And because the southerners had heard so much about this organization as being an abolitionist organization during the Civil War, the organization, the people felt that it would be wise to change the name so that it wouldn't meet the resistance it would meet because of the standing it'd taken against slavery and against the South in the Civil War. So the American Missionary Association founded the school I attended named Trinity [School, Athens, Alabama] in 1866. It also founded such prestigious schools in the south as Fisk University in Nashville, Tennessee, LeMoyne College in Memphis, Tennessee, Dillard University in New Orleans, Louisiana, Talladega College in Talladega, Alabama, Berea College in Berea, Kentucky. And it founded many, many grammar and high schools throughout the south during Reconstruction to aid and to educate the newly emancipated slave and to become assimilated into the culture. Our teachers came out of New England, Massachusetts, Connecticut, New Hampshire, Rhode Island. And most of them were white. They were very, very religious. Very, very committed to the black folks in the community. My mother attended Trinity and one summer one of the teachers who was from Rockford, Illinois, asked my mother to come with her to Rockford to work as a domestic. And she went and she met my father in Rockford, Illinois. My father's parents came from Evansville, Indiana and moved to Rockford, and she met him in Rockford. Story_ID: 70913 Speaker 1: Okay and back to the story your mom [Hazel Caldwell] and dad were in Rockford [Illinois]. Speaker 2: And they married, and they married and they moved to Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 1: Do you know about what year that was? Speaker 2: I can, I can--just give me a minute, I'll give you the exact year, 1923, 1923 they moved to Chicago. And my brother was born July the 4th, 1924. I was born June 28th, 1925. We were both christened at St. Paul CME Church at 46th and Federal, Dearborn right today, there around. My mother had divorced and left my father when I was a baby, I don't remember it. And she went back to her home in Alabama, where we were reared. I never knew my dad until I became grown and one of my precious memories as I look back over it again, appreciating as I said before, that my mother was fifty years ahead of her time. We, as I said, we were very poor. And Easter when all children getting new clothes, we never got any. Christmas, I recall one Christmas we didn't even have a tree. And my mother's in bed crying and she was said I give the most important gift that you have. I gave you life. And the next most important gift that you could probably have, I also give it to you, I give you love (unclear). And we'd become angry because we were denied--I never had a bicycle, I never had a scooter, I never had a tricycle. I think I had one pair of roller skates in my lifetime. And when Christmas or birthdays or Easter would come around, my brother and I would become hostile and angry about our dad. And we would say nasty things about him, he didn't care anything about us. If he cared anything about us, he'd help us, send my mother some money so she could get us a--and my mother would always--no, no, no, no. You shall not say anything demeaning or derogatory about your dad. Well he doesn't care anything about us. And when we would do that, she would make us sit down and write him a letter. And you know how children are about writing letters. You know how children are about sitting down. You can't talk about him, sit down and write him a letter. Tell him that you love him. Dear Dad, I love, you bye. No, tell him why you love him. Dear Dad I love you because you're my dad. I'm thinking trying to hurry up and get through so we can go out and play or whatever. No, well tell him how you did in school today. Dear Dad I love you because you're my dad. I did well in school today. No, well tell him what grade you're in. It would be a long, protracted exercise. I didn't realize that she was deliberately instilling within us to love our father and not to hate him. And it arrived--it got to the point where whenever we had anything angry or hostile to say about my dad, we'd never say it in front of my mother. And as a result of that atmosphere that she hailed for my dad as I grew up, I began to respect him. Wise decision because when I got to know him, he was the best friend I ever had. Best friend I ever had. And he wasn't doing anything for us 'cause he couldn't do anything for himself, it was during the Depression. He didn't have any work. And communication then wasn't what it is now. Transportation wasn't then what it is now. We didn't have a telephone. Bus fare was astronomical to us. We barely could eat, let alone make a trip. But I'm glad that she instilled within me and my brother to love my father and to respect him because as I said, when I, I got to know him when I came here to go to law school. He was unyielding in his love and affection for me and my wife and for my children. Story_ID: 70914 Speaker 1: That's great. Tell me of the experience after you were older. You and your brother, like now coming to really have a chance to get to know your dad. Did you ever talk to him about how your mother handled that? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, of course. My brother went into the war, World War II from Memphis, [Tennessee] we were both going to LeMoyne College at the time [now LeMoyne-Owen College] in Memphis. And as I said, LeMoyne was also an AMA [American Missionary Association] school. And my brother went off to, to the war. And I got off track in Memphis. I had never seen as many good looking girls at one place in my life. I was a waiter in the Peabody Hotel at night, making more money than I knew existed in the world. And I was supposed to go to school during the day and work at night, and I started working at night and playing in the day. And they expelled me from LeMoyne twice on the same day. One for academics, one for deportment. Said if we don't get you out on one, we gone get you out on another. Don't come back this way again. As a matter of fact, they said we would appreciate it if you never even walk down the street on which the school is located. Matter of fact, they said we would be even grateful if you wouldn't even come to the south side of Memphis. Matter of fact we'd be hope--we hope you leave Memphis. And indeed I did. Story_ID: 70915 Speaker 1: And went to Tennessee State. And worked my way through Tennessee State washing dishes, washing windows, mopping floors. I first laid eyes on the girl that I married while I was washing dishes in the cafeteria. Alzata Cordelia Henry. She was supposed to--well the students were supposed to bring their dishes to the wash window, dishes were being washed. And they were supposed to scrape their dishes and stack them, which would make it more convenient for us washing the dishes. And she brought her tray to the window and she didn't scrape 'em and didn't stack 'em. And as she turned to walk away, and I saw that she hadn't complied with the rules of the cafeteria by scraping and stacking the dishes, I called her back. And I used language that would be most inappropriate to repeat here. And when she turned around and realized I was addressing her, she said well you don't have to address me in that tone of voice, nor do you have to address me in that vile, vulgar language. And I responded if you do your job and stack, scrape and stack your dishes, I wouldn't have to address you at all. And she came back and scraped her dishes and stacked 'em, and then she turned around and I looked at her. And I said well we'll finish this conversation when I get off from work. Talking trash. The cafeteria at Tennessee State was in what they call the Women's Building. And it was 75 yards from the library, and another 75 yards from the women's dormitory, one of the women's dormitory. In those days the library closed at 9:00 in the evening. And in those days the women had to be in their dormitory by ten. There were no co-ed dorms, that, that was out of the question. Women had their dormitories, men had their dormitories. And between nine when the library closed and ten when the women in the dormitories had to be in the dormitory, they all congregated in front of the cafeteria for socializing. So when I got off work that night about 9:00 and came outside, there Alzata sat. I was arrogant and pompous enough to believe she's waiting on me. In reality, she's just sitting there waiting with the other students, socializing. So I walked up to her and we started talking. And we talked for that hour and I walked her to the dormitory, Hale Hall, and we talked and we've been talking ever since. And come the 31st of this--August of this year, we, we'll have been married 54 years. Story_ID: 70916 Speaker 1: Finished Tennessee State, again extremely poor but don't feel sorry for me 'cause I had a good time. I had a ball. My mother [Hazel Caldwell] convinced me not to go to college on a football scholarship. Again, showing you she's ahead of her time. In those days if you had a scholarship and you got hurt and couldn't play, you lost your scholarship. It's not true today in colleges. If you get, if you got a scholarship now and you get hurt, you still can go. But in those days--and my mother would say if you get hurt, your education gone. She said get a job on the campus, which I did. And she said because you get a job, you can go right on through. And she advised me where you eat, that's the first requirement of life, you got to eat. So, so I got a job at the cafeteria. I was [unclear] of my fraternity. I was Vice President of the senior class. I was President of Student Council. I had a good time, had a ball. Graduated in June of 1947 with Alzata sitting beside me. You're supposed to sit according to your subject matter, but we sat side-by-side and held hands. And if you come to my house right today, you will see that my diploma from Tennessee State does not have a date on it. And the reason it doesn't have a date on it was because I owed them money, come graduation time. The head of the Political Science Division, Dr. Susan O'Brien [ph.], insisted to the Bursar that I graduate because it would be embarrassing she said to her department for the Vice President of the senior class and the head of the--would not to graduate. So they agreed to let me and several others graduate owing the money. I forget what the amount was, it wasn't that much. But I walked across the stage and got my diploma. After the graduation ceremony, they had us to congregate in front of the Administration Building to take the senior class picture. The photographer was up on the second floor looking down. And as the photographer was adjusting us to his camera, the Bursar, Dr. Sasser [ph.], was coming through the crowd, picking up the diplomas from those students that either had some kind of financial deficiency, some kind of grade deficiency that they'd allowed to graduate for the of, of avoiding embarrassing somebody and we'd make it up later. So I saw him coming. And as he's approaching me, I took my degree and hand it to Alzata, we were courting at the time, I almost said my wife. And she took the degree and stuck it down in her bosom. Dr. Sasser [ph.] was coming through the students picking up from the students those degrees from those students who had some deficiency that precluded them from being eligible for graduation, but who the school had allowed to graduate to avoid embarrassing students and the parents and what have you. And I saw him coming. And when he got to me, before he got to me when I saw him coming, I handed my degree to Alzata [Pincham] and she put it down in her, down in her bosom. So when he got to me, I said you got mine Dr. Sasser, you have mine. He said yeah I do have it and then chipped, chipped off as though he had received it. He didn't look to see, just checked my name off. Years later when I opened the degree to have it put on a frame and I got to be able to afford it, I look at it, it has no date on it. And I wouldn't put a date, I just hung it as it was. Story_ID: 70917 Speaker 1: I graduated and I was admitted to just about every law school I had--to which I applied, Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut], Stanford [University, Stanford, California], UC [University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois]. I chose Northwestern for several reasons. Speaker 2: Well before you explain, you were a political science major. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: So you were headed in the direction you ended up every early on. Speaker 1: Yes, yes. Speaker 2: How did you make that decision so-- Speaker 1: For political science? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: I really should have--I minored in math. I initially majored in math. And my mother [Hazel Caldwell] again persuaded me to switch my major and minor because she said with a math major the only thing you can do is teach in those days. And she was right, she was right. And if you, you're a brilliant mathematician in a classroom. Switch--political science, you can go into teaching, you can go into sociology, you can go into law, what have you. And even, even at that time I didn't realize, even medicine, so I switched and became a political science major. Another reason I'm glad I switched was because the head of the department was a woman by the name of Dr. Susie O'Brien [ph.] from New York. And she's very, very influential in, in, in directing me as to how to go, what to do and what have you. So I applied to the various law schools and I was accepted. I chose Northwestern for several reasons. One of which was during my high school days I wrote a term paper on the Northwest Passage, Louis and Clark exposition [sic, expedition] and what have you. And my research carried me to the founding of Northwestern University in Evanston, Illinois, Methodist institution. And I was extremely impressed by how Northwestern was founded and the people who came there in Evanston and what have you, and it just stuck with me. And I made an A on the paper. And having had that exposure to Northwestern through this research, I was impressed and persuaded. Another factor that influenced me was again my mother. The schools out east are farther away from Athens [Alabama]. Our basic, at least my basic mode of transportation at the time was freight trains. And to get from Athens to Cambridge and Harvard, she point out how many freight yards you're gonna have to go through. Or Yale or Stanford. And she pointed out, rightly so, that from Athens to Chicago [Illinois] is one rail line, the C and EI [Chicago and Eastern Illinois Railroad]. And the L and N [Louisville and Nashville]. Get on the train here and next thing, next stop is Chicago. And it's closer. I didn't realize at the time that she was also subtlety trying to persuade me to come here because she knew my dad was here. And way down inside of her she felt that he would be somewhat of a protector for me once I got here, and indeed he was. So I chose Northwestern. And of course when I got here, my dad was shocked that I was admitted and in fact expressed some skepticism as to whether or not I had the academic ability to go. You were educated in the south and you know how people are up here, they think southern schools are not like northern schools, you can't compete with these kids up here and so forth and so on. I knew better and he was not discouraging me, he was just trying to make me face what he perceived to be reality. So I came to Northwestern. Story_ID: 70918 Speaker 1: During those years, college, political science major, law school, there were many significant political science issues. Which ones stick out? Which one or two stick out for you and your personal response to, to it? Speaker 2: We were conditioned to accept discrimination and racism. And we were likewise conditioned not to like it. There was a transition or a conversion or a diversion from the real true issues in the movement of the '60s [1960s]. And that transition basically has been to our detriment. I'm past my college and law school era now and I'll get back to it. During the movement, the late '50s [1950s] and '60s [1960s]-- Speaker 1: Brown versus-- Speaker 2: Brown versus Board of Education, 1954 if I recall correctly. I went to Mississippi during the struggle. And I flew from Chicago [Illinois] to Memphis [Tennessee] and from Memphis to Jackson, Mississippi. And they had told us do not under any circumstances, bring any weapons with you. And they told us when you get to Jackson, if there's nobody there, you wait in the airport until somebody comes to get you. I was married and had three children, but I was committed to go to Mississippi. And as I was leaving the house, Alzata [Pincham] said honey, if you can't obey the rules, don't go. What you talking about? She said they told you not to bring any weapon. And of course I had my piece in my bag. She said you just have to rely on prayer and your good judgment. And if you're afraid to go, afraid you gon' get killed, don't go. But don't go down there and undo what these people have been struggling and striving to build. If you can't comply with what they say, don't go. So I agreed with her. Took my piece out of my bag and put it down and kissed her goodbye. I tell you this for this reason. When I got to Memphis, the plane landed, sat on the gate for a while. The plan reloaded and a man got on the plane, black man. And he looked at me, I looked at him, only two blacks on the plane, flew into Jackson. He got off the plane in Jackson, I got off the plane in Jackson. (unclear) there to meet us, and they told us very, very written instructions, do not leave the airport, period. Told us get on the phone. I went to the pay phone and this brother comes to the pay phone beside me and I'm dialing, he's dialing. It develops his name is Scott from Topeka, Kansas. His father was a lawyer who represented Brown in Brown versus the Topeka Board of Education. He was my law partner in Mississippi during the time we were there in the struggle. We were there when [Michael] Schwerner, [James] Chaney and [Andrew] Goodman were killed in Philadelphia, Mississippi. When they took 'em out of jail and put a--the sheriff put a gun to their hearts and blew them away and buried them in a dam. We were in Mississippi when that happened. I stayed down there for four months; away from my family in the struggle. Story_ID: 70919 Speaker 1: I was not in Mississippi attempting to aid black folks in becoming integrated with white people. That's not why we were there. We were there trying to break down the barriers of racism and discrimination. We were there for equal chance, equal opportunity, that's what we were fighting for. And down the road the mission was diverted from tearing down the barriers and making opportunity equal, to integrating, and that was a mistake that we allowed that to happen. But it happened on purpose. And the reason they did let it happen was because it was more economically feasible for the white power structure to offer black folks "integration" than it would be to make things equal. I had no desire to go to school with white folks. I had no desire to live in white communities. I had no desire. I wanted the right to have a school as good as the whites. I wanted the right to have a neighborhood as good as the whites. I wanted the right to have a--make a mortgage without being penalized and paying extra premiums on my mortgage because I was black. I wanted good policemen. I wanted black policemen in my community patrolling my streets, just as good as the white policemen. I did not work in the movement to change from where I was or who I was. I worked in the movement to make who I was better. And I don't believe that integrating is making me better. Story_ID: 70920 Speaker 1: Ok. You think the larger public started to interpret integration as a quality somewhere? It got-- Speaker 2: I think, I think, I think that it was--I think the power structure itself that benefitted and profiteered and gained from discrimination and racism, and it's so structured and so institutionalized until they or it recognized that if the barriers of racism and discrimination are removed and blacks are afforded equal opportunity and chance, it will become a competitive area, or era that the power structure did not want to exist. And it would benefit blacks far, far more for blacks to be blacks with equal opportunity, than it would be for blacks to become integrated into the white culture, in the white society. And you see it happening today. Story_ID: 69482 Speaker 1: Okay, we were talking about the integration versus equality and how that has changed, what direction it took African American life. Speaker 2: It's taken us into an area that we don't control it. I think that we has a people, black people in America must do what every other ethnic group in America has done, and that is stand up for who you are, for what you are, Italians are Italians in America. And they call themselves Italians. Irish are Irish in America, and they call themselves Irish and they promote Irish concerns. Greeks are Greeks in America and they promote Greek concerns. Black people unfortunately have been hoodwinked into not wanting to be who they are and becoming integrated with white folks. The Constitution of this nation has five provisions in it, five provisions in it. I'm not talking about the Bill of Rights, I'm talking about the body of the Constitution, five direct provisions, fifteen collateral provisions relegating black folks to slavery. That's in the Constitution. I didn't write it. I wasn't here when it was written. But I was taught that. And I was taught each provision. For example one provision provides that [U.S.] Congress shall have no say so in importation of persons in this country until the year 1708, I beg your pardon, 1808. Because the South didn't want Congress to interfere with the importation of slaves. That's in the Constitution. It's in the Constitution that a person who escapes from a contract of labor into a free state must be returned upon demand of the master; that's in the Constitution. I was taught that. It's no stars in my crown because it's the stars in the crown of the people who taught us this. But how many kids, how many black folks know that? We know that we was counted as three-fifths of a person in the second and first section, Article 1, Section, Second Section. For the purpose of representation and taxation in, in Congress. We were counted as three-fifths of a person, but we couldn't vote. Story_ID: 69483 Speaker 1: But let me go back to your growing up years and tell me, set the scene for me for what day-to-day life for you was as a boy growing up. Speaker 2: In the summer we worked in the fields as hired day laborers. Asked me a moment ago one of my favorite experiences in such-and-such an area. One of my favorite memories is of a woman in my hometown who was my mother's [Hazel Caldwell] best friend. Her name was Ms. Mary Brown. As black as ten midnights in a dungeon. As pretty as an angel. A gorgeous creature. And her nickname in the community was Mary Shake Brown. And the reason her called her Mary Shake is because in those days women didn't have--our people didn't have money to buy girdles. Many of them didn't have money to buy brassieres. And Ms. Mary had everything in the right place. Now I was young, but I had no sexual aspirations, concerns about 'em, just this is what--as I grew up I remember when she walked, she shook. And the thing shook the right way and it shook in the right places. And she acquired the name Mary Shake Brown, my mother's best friend. We'd go out to do day work and the row leader would point out you, you, you. And he'd point out Ms. Mary to come work. And she'd always insist that me and my brother be hired too. The row leader of course wanted Ms. Mary there because he was trying to date her, I knew that at the time that I grew up. And as the story unfolds why I knew better than just my seeing it. And when he would say to her, she'd say well I want these children too to come with me so we can make a little money too. And he'd--okay, come on. We'd go to the cotton fields and we did what--chopped cotton. Chopping cotton is really taking an instrument called a hoe, H-O-E, hoe-- Speaker 1: Have to define it. Speaker 2: Yes, I, I, I don't want your viewing audience to misconstrue the term. And it's a metal blade on the end of a wooden handle. And you cut the grass away from around the cotton stalk because if you didn't do that, the grass would outgrow the cotton and choke the cotton to death, kill it. Cotton is planted in rows, one row, row, row. The rows were eternally long. There were no end to the rows. And the adults of course, could chop faster than the children. The row leader was a man six feet, six, had hands like the bear paw, muscles like calf of a man's leg. And when the white boss would come around to try to impress his boss, the row leader would go crazy. He'd start chopping real fast, and we couldn't keep up. And Ms. Mary would tell him when the boss'd leave, you low down so-and-so-and-so, you trying to impress this white man with your work and got these children out here working so hard they can't keep up with you. And you got nerve to be coming round my house tomorrow night, tonight, trying to talk to me and I won't have nothing to say to you. That's the reason I know he's hitting on her. Story_ID: 69484 Speaker 1: What Ms. Mary [Brown] would do, she would take the center row and put me on her left, and put my brother to the row to her right. The sun would be eternally hot. The days were unmercifully long. The humidity, at 90 percent humidity was a dry day. And she would admonish us as children about drinking water, don't drink too much. And as matter of fact, when the water boy would come around, she would take the dipper and make us swish the water in our mouth, spit it out and take no more than three or four swallows because it give you cramps if you drink too much water out in the field. And being a child trying to cool off, you just go gulp it down and have cramps. And she would not allow us to over drink, and she would take the water and pour it over our heads to cool us off. And when we couldn't keep up, we would fall behind. And we'd get to a point where Ms. Mary was chopping our row and my brother's row and her row. So we got too far behind, she'd start chopping, hit a lick for herself, she'd hit a lick for my brother, then hit a lick on my row. So we got, say from here to Cullerton behind. We got there, she'd made up for us, we'd run, catch up with her. And in that way at the end of the day, the boss would pay us the amount he's supposed to pay the children, rather than not pay us anything 'cause we couldn't keep up. And my pet story is that story because when she'd hit a lick for herself, she hit a lick for me. She carried my row. And I grew up to think that when you are strong, you're supposed to carry somebody's row, supposed to help somebody else. Speaker 2: So therein lies the, the reasoning behind your own approach for never turning anybody down when they come to you for-- Speaker 1: It's a sin. It's a sin. It's a sin. You supposed to help. Help. I'm here on somebody's shoulder; I didn't get here by myself. Those teachers that came down from New England who were ostracized in the community because they were white folks trying to help black folks. And they would tell us I'm here to sacrifice to try to help you. And when you get in the position, you gon' try to help somebody else. Story_ID: 69485 Speaker 1: Clearly your mother's [Hazel Caldwell] first strong influence, father second strong influence. Well I should say your mother, your wife [Alzata Pincham], your father. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: I, I sense that Alzata is a lot like your mom. Speaker 2: Very much, very much so. Speaker 1: And your father was very, very happy that your mother had set things straight to enable you and your brother to come back together with him. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: At what point did you finally get over your urbanity and intellectual superiority and come back to your foundation of-- Speaker 2: When I was in law school. Speaker 1: Christian faith. Speaker 2: Well I think I came back to my Christian faith 'fore I got out of college. I began to see that, that reading them books would make a damn fool out of me. That's what my mother said. You can, you can read so much you become a damn fool. And I saw that there's no conflict between being an intellectual and being spiritual. And I realized that God made man. God made the birds of the air, the fish of the sea, the cattle of the field. And I realized that having been made by God, each creature is limited in its intellectual capacity. However brilliant a dog may be, a dog can't talk. However brilliant a horse may be, he may, he may know how to get to the water, he can smell water when you don't know water's around, and he can--but he can't talk. God in his infinite wisdom I realized limited the intellectual capacity of each creature he made. And wisely he did that because if man knew what God knew, he would be God. And he'd be up in heaven telling God now God, Lord, let's let the sun rise in the west sometimes. We'd be up there having a prayer meeting on which way the sun should rise. So God decided he ain't gone let man be as smart as he is, and I came to realize that. I came to realize that some things we're not supposed to understand. Some things we're not supposed to under--and if we understood it, we'd be God. And I, and I find it extremely comforting to know that he gave me a mind, but he didn't give me his mind. So I got out of that nonsense real early 'cause I was reared in the church and I was trying to be an intellectual. I thought intellectualism meant that you supposed to challenge the universe. That was stupid. Story_ID: 69486 Speaker 1: Okay, let me ask you, we know where your foundation has come from. And before we start exploring your career and experiences as we know it in more recent time, what, what is your basic philosophy? And tell me two or three things on which you built that. Philosophy A, life. Philosophy B, legal and-- Speaker 2: I was--I felt within the inner recesses of my very soul that I was blessed and fortunate first to have come up in a parental family, school environment. To have gotten in and out of college. And to have been motivated and gotten in and out of law school. I was the only black in my class. I waited tables at the Palmer House in the Empire Room from 5:30 in the evening until 1:00 in the morning, Monday through Friday to go to law school. I shined shoes on Saturday to go to law school. I recognized my first day in class, that the attitude that I had entertained throughout my academic career was not the appropriate attitude to have in law school. That is to say common sense told me that I could not intellectually or academically compete successfully working eight hours a day with this white boy whose daddy was a lawyer, whose granddaddy was a lawyer; whose great-granddaddy was a governor, whose uncle was a justice of the such-and-such a court. I--common sense told me that. So rather than compete with my classmates, I competed with myself. And in three years of competing with myself, I never missed a class in three years of law school. And I felt that to miss a class, I'd be cheating myself. I am not going to sit and tell you that I knew what was going on every time I was in class, I didn't. Many a day I had to stand up beside my desk to keep from going to sleep, but I didn't miss a class. And every semester the Bursar attempted to expel me 'cause I didn't have the money. Bless her soul, she lives in (unclear) Delaware. Her name is Evelyn Clepak [ph.]. And every semester I got a notice expelling me from class. I'd go to class anyway. And after the class, the professor would call me up, Mr. Pincham? Yes. See me after class. I have an expulsion notice for you. I said you do? Yes. I come to class the next day. I said I told you--he call me back. I told you I have an expulsion. I say you do. They didn't teach you--they don't pay you to fight and the only way you gone put me out is fight me and I know I can whip you. So but I'm coming. Now if you wanna call the police in here and put me out the class, that's what you gone have to do. [Unclear] word of it. Gone up there and sit down. And I never missed a class. And when I graduated, I owed the law school money. And it's a absolute, positive, unequivocal no-no to take the bar exam owing money. You have to get a slip from the academic side of the school, financial side of the school saying you don't owe any money, you finished the requirements. When I went to Ms. Clepak to get my slip, she wouldn't give it to me. Said you gon' give me a slip. You gon'--well Mr. Pincham you owe the school money. I said I know I do, I don't have it to pay you. But when I get it, I'll pay you. Well the institution, the rule says that you ain't--you cannot be get a pass or so-and-so-and so. I said you gon' give me a slip. And I sat down and made her--you give it to me. She gave--they gave me a slip to take the bar exam owing the money. And I passed the bar the first time I took it, which is another story. And today Ms. Clepak is retired and every Easter, birthday, anniversary, what have you, we get a greeting from Ms. Clepak because Ms. Clepak is one of the reasons I'm sitting here now talking to you. But for her, I couldn't have gotten through. Story_ID: 69487 Speaker 1: I'm here on somebody else's shoulders. You ask me philosophy. I felt, and I still feel that I was blessed. And I felt and I still feel that my academic training was for purposes of helping somebody else. Trying to make the world better by helping somebody else. I felt and I still feel that when somebody asks me for my services, I can sit here and tell you with all the resources at my command with the integrity of Jesus Christ, I never turned down a client because they didn't have any money. I never sent a client a bill. I never had a client sign a contract. I never had a client sign a note. I never sued a client. We'd sit and we'd talk and agree on a fee, we'd shake hands and that's it. And I can sit here and tell you that I have tried cases from Maine to California, from Canada to Texas. I've been to the United States Supreme Court three times, and each case I didn't get a dime. I took the case out of my own pocket. And it's very rare that a lawyer gets to argue a case before the United States Supreme Court. Been there three times. Speaker 2: And it's expensive. Speaker 1: Of course it is. Three, matter of fact the first time I argued a case there, it was such an honor, I had all my family, my Aunt Mildred, the three, one three years old and her children. My brother and his three children. My wife [Alzata Pincham] and our three children. Four, five cousins, I guess we had an entourage of twenty people. I financed everybody's transportation there and their hotel fare to come hear me argue this case. And when you're before the Supreme Court, if your case is say number five, you sit in the fifth position in the spectator's room. And then when one case argue, you move up to four, then you move up to three, two, then one. When I got to position number two, I looked around and none of my nephews and sons and daughters were in the courtroom. I didn't know where they were. Of course I can't say Your Honor will you please pass this case so I go get my children. They called the case, argued the case, and you have certain minutes to argue. And my case went over. 12:30, I had about five more minutes to argue, so I had to stay over that night to come back to finish my five minutes. At 12:30 if you're between--may it please--you can't say the Court if 12:30 strikes, they're gone. You got to come back the next day and say the Court. When the case--when 12:30 came, the court recessed. My children and my nephews and all my cousins were over at the Capital Building demonstrating on behalf of Clayton Powell. Adam Clayton Powell from New York. He was having this turmoil with this girl down in the, the Islands, Josephine Baker or somebody, and he was--they were questioning his, his role in Congress and, and of course they were there demonstrating on behalf of Adam Clayton Powell. So they came there, I paid their expenses to come to hear me and they there on behalf of Adam Clayton Powell. But that's what happened. But I feel that I've been blessed. Speaker 2: Who's court was your, your first, Berger court? Speaker 1: My court? Speaker 2: Was it Berger court? Speaker 1: It was, it was, yes, Warren Berger. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. Warren, Warren was the chief judge when I was there. Warren from California was the chief judge when I was sworn in. I have appealed over 300 cases, won 80 percent on appeal. I have them all bound in naugahyde, the briefs and opinions in my home down in the library. Story_ID: 69488 Speaker 1: I've had the honor of teaching at the nation's most prestigious law schools. As a matter of fact for the week of the 8th to the 16th, I'll be at Harvard [University, Cambridge, University] this year teaching. I've taught there every year for the last twenty years. I taught at Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut] and Cornell [University, Ithaca, New York], [University of] Notre Dame [Notre Dame, Indiana], Northwestern [University, Evanston, Chicago], University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], [University of] Colorado [Boulder, Colorado], [University of] Arizona [Tucson, Arizona], [University of] Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan]. Speaker 2: I'm sure that during your teaching, lectures, seminars, workshops, whatever, I'm sure you bring a lot more to it than just your legal knowledge. I'm sure your mother [Hazel Caldwell] is present and your dad and your wife [Alzata Pincham]. And all these other experiences you've had. Speaker 1: I never tried a case, I never argued a case without first trying it out at home. My wife, and I didn't mention it, is the youngest of three daughters, reared on a tobacco farm on the Tennessee River in Blount County, Tennessee, east end of Tennessee. The same Tennessee River that I learned to swim in, down in Alabama. As the river flows from the east side of Alabama to the west side of Alabama, then back north across Tennessee into the Ohio River. East Tennessee is an extremely unique area of the country, believe me. Mountainous, people are very clannish, endowed with plain, common sense. They had to have it to exist in those mountains. And in our relationship, we have always shared our thoughts. I learned early as a lawyer, that involved in the fracas of a trial, your emotions sometimes blur your vision and your reasoning. You can't see everything. And she would always go to court with me and sit in the back of the courtroom. She's eyes in the back of my head. And during the recess, she would come and tell me her assessment of what was going on in the courtroom. And a many a day I can sit here and tell you now I won a many a case because of something she saw during the course of a trial that I didn't even see. And I've heard her say to me, for example, can't you see that the prosecutor and the judge exchanging signals? Or can't you see juror number 10 hates your guts? Every time you stand up, she's frowning at you and looking over at the prosecutor smiling. So when we come back after recess knowing that, I addressed juror number ten. Every time I said something, look at juror number ten and smiling and trying to convert that juror and succeeded in doing it. And always try and issue with her, discussing with her at home. And I say to students all over the country, lawyers as well as law students, that if I can convince my wife of the justice of my cause, and I been sleeping with her for fifty-four years, how am I gone convince a juror that I don't know? And I learned that if I can convince her. If, if, if she gets--and she [unclear] I, I can't buy that, honey. Well you know she, she was crossing the street and she said, she said she looked both ways, but honey she look both ways, how did the truck run over her? Wouldn't it be--don't you think that would happen as she's about to turn and look to the left, is that when the truck hit her? It makes sense. But for her to say well I looked both ways and I didn't see anything coming, there's a great big Mack truck running over her in her lawsuit. So what I am saying is that that common sense touch--and I tell lawyers this. Tell law students this. Law school makes a fool out of you. Makes you lose your common sense. And she didn't go to law school, although she sent me and sent our two sons. But she hasn't lost her common sense. And because of that, and when I go to seminars with--I take her with me, we always go together. And she brings that taxi cab driver mentality. The elevator starter mentality, the store clerk mentality, the butcher's mentality and the meats at the meat counter. The pharmacist mentality at the pharmaceutical counter. So you get a combination rather than the attitude or the mentality of the lawyer. Speaker 2: And she was one of the original jury analysts. Speaker 1: That's correct, that's right, and a very, very good one. Story_ID: 69489 Speaker 1: Okay. Now I'm going to talk to you about your two sons. Speaker 2: Two sons. Speaker 1: And a daughter? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. But before we do, since we're gonna talk about from their childhood up to today. Tell me the sights, sounds and smells of your childhood that stand out. Speaker 2: If--let me make sure I understand what you're asking me. My mother [Hazel Caldwell] was a community leader. People came to Hazel to talk about their problems and to get her advice and counseling. And I suppose that influenced me. Never too busy to help. Problem is never too big to try to solve it. Never too small to not merit your attention. I am who I am today because of her, seventy-seven years. I am the product of seventy-seven years of experiences. I am blessed that I have never really acquired a passion for money. I'm blessed that I never acquired a passion for things. It wasn't accidental that this happened, but when I got into the practice and began to have a little success at it, we sat down and discussed it, my wife [Alzata Pincham] and I. And we decided that we would not try to get rich. What we'd try to do is try to serve and it is interesting to me today. You see all these security guards in the courthouse and all this kind of nonsense. When I sat on the bench of course, we didn't have it. We did have deputy sheriffs or what have who would often walk up to me and ask me judge can I--let me walk you to the cafeteria or the dining room. You don't need to walk me to the dining room. Court's over, if I work late, dark out there. Let me walk you to your car. You don't need to walk me to the car. Story_ID: 69490 Speaker 1: You were saying all those years you were on the bench, you--they didn't have this security. Speaker 2: No, no, no. You had, you had of course sheriffs assigned to your courtroom, in charge of the prisoners. And in the entire history of Cook County, excuse me, there have been two acts of violence in the courtroom. One act was by a deranged police officer who shot a judge and the system, even if it had been in existence at the time, could not have prevented it because a policeman would have had the right to bring his gun to the courtroom anyway. But the other was where a defendant was slipped a gun by his girlfriend in the courtroom and he was shot dead at 26th and California on--in the court building. But I have never had any fear or apprehension about being by myself, I never needed any protection. And the deputies in my courtroom would say judge, you work late today, it's dark outside. I'll walk--I'll accompany you to your car in the parking--you don't need to accompany me to my car in the parking lot. Or we'll accompany you to the, to the dining room. You don't need to take me to the dining--or we'll take you downstairs to--you don't need to accompany me to the clerk's office. Who's going to accompany me when I'm walking down the street Saturday? Who's going to accompany me when I go to church Sunday morning? Who's going to accompany me when I go to the movies with my wife [Alzata Pincham]? You treat people right and respect them and, and, and I never sentenced a defendant to jail who I didn't explain to him why I'm sentencing you. I didn't look down my nose at these people. I didn't be mean to him or ridicule him or insult him and embarrass him. I would try to make them realize why it is that you're here. Why it is it's necessary for me to sentence you to jail. I don't do it with any degree of pleasure, by any means. I regret it. But it's my duty and I think that you can understand. And I've had defendants to say to me judge, I understand and I, and, and, and I, I appreciate your talking to me. As a matter of fact, I would tell you this. Some of the people I sent to jail now are my best friends. I've had them come out of jail and come by my house and say I thank you. I've had mothers that come to me and say I thank you for talking to my son and trying to get him on the right track. People don't wanna be criminals. They don't wanna be--there are a few of course who exception, but by and large most people want to do what's right. They're put into a circumstance that causes them to deviate from the accepted norm. But I had no fear of being on the bench. I did what I thought was right. Story_ID: 69491 Speaker 1: Your children who are adults now, would you give me their names and the year of--their birth date. Speaker 2: Robert Eugene Pincham, Junior was born April the 7th, 1951. Andrea Michelle Pincham, a girl, was born August 9th, 1953. James Frederick Pincham, a boy, was born March 20th, 1959. Speaker 1: And they're two lawyers and one-- Speaker 2: A doctor. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I can tell you my wife [Alzata Pincham]--I have to back up and tell you this. As I mentioned, we courted in college. Graduated in June of '47 [1947]. And we had agreed that we would marry after I finished law school. We thought it was a wise thing to do. She'd become attached while pursuing an academic career. I mentioned to you earlier that I enrolled in January of '48 [1948] in law school. Law school is over on Chicago Avenue and Lake Shore Drive, right on the lake. And during January, February, March, April, May and June, I'd look out over that lake and I'd see Alzata coming up out that water. And it arrived at the point where she came up out the water and I wanted to go out there and grab her. So that summer when we got together, I said to her, my mind's not on my books. I can't concentrate, which I couldn't. I think it would be better if we married now. First of all, so that I can think about what I'm doing. Secondly, so that when I do get out of law school, we can say you contributed to me getting out of law school. I'm doing all this struggling by myself. And she agreed. So we married 31st of August 1948. She got a job as a manager of a store in Milestone, Mississippi. And in the Fall of '48 [1948] during the holidays, I would go down Mississippi, visit with her. She was living with a family by the name of--they would be--I'm embarrassed. It'll come to me. But we decided when I was visiting with her in Mississippi that she'd come to Chicago [Illinois]. We had no money. One of the clerks in the store was a man by the name of Teeley [ph.]. Alzata was his boss. And as we were trying to make plans for her to come to Chicago, she was looking despondent, and one day Teeley walked up to her and asked her what's wrong. And she told Teeley what was the matter, we didn't have no money. And Teeley said to her well I'll lend you five hundred dollars. And she just met him in September. And he loaned her the five hundred dollars. She came to Chicago, arrived here on the 31st of December 1948. Station there at 11th and Michigan. Story_ID: 69492 Speaker 1: On the 3rd of January 1949, I accompanied her to the Chicago Board of Education office, which at that time was at 160 North LaSalle Street. And there she applied for and received a substitute teaching certificate. And in those days, the substitute teachers called downtown to the Board of Education office daily to inform them that they were available to go to a school to teach. And as we were about to leave the board with her temporary certificate, a call came in and they needed a teacher at Williams School at 26th and Federal; it's still there today. And I took her to Williams School. It was during the New Year holiday season, so I didn't have to go back to class. So I came back and got her that afternoon 'cause she didn't know the city. And that evening she called the board and told the board she was available, and the board told her to go back to Williams School the 4th of January. And I took her back to school the 4th. On the 4th of January, the principal whose name was Mrs. Darton [ph.], said to her I see your boyfriend brought you to class, to school. And my wife said no, that's not my boyfriend. Ms. Darton waiting for my wife to say who I was, but my wife being an east Tennessee person, didn't say anything further because. Well who is he? She said that's my husband. Oh, you married? Alzata said yes. I see he's in school. My wife said yes. She didn't--being a Tennessee person, she didn't say where he was or what school. Ms. Darton say where is that school? My wife said Northwestern University [Evanston, Illinois]. What school? He's in law school. And the dialogue went on, just started. Ms. Darton said to her you don't have to call downtown anymore for vacancy. There'll always be a vacancy here for you. You just keep coming back. My wife taught at Williams for ten years as a substitute teacher. And in those days if you got pregnant, you had to take a leave after you're three months pregnant and you couldn't come back for a year. I mentioned to you earlier the oldest child was born on the 7th of April, 1951. Ms. Darton called my wife into her office when Alzata was about six months pregnant, and said to her you know, there's a Board of Education rule that if you're three months pregnant you have to take a leave and you can't come back for a year after the baby's born. So I know you're not pregnant are you? My wife--said you don't have to answer that because I know you're not. And of course if anybody ask you if you're pregnant, you tell them none of your business. So you keep right on coming. Is that clear to you? If anybody ask you if you're pregnant, you're supposed to--your answer is it's none of your business. You're not supposed to say yes or no because I know you're not pregnant. You listen to me? On the 6th of April 1951 which was a Friday, my wife taught at Williams and went to Provident Hospital Saturday morning at 3:00 a.m. and birthed our first child. Story_ID: 69493 Speaker 1: I took her [Alzata Pincham] to the hospital in a cab with my last five dollars. I had one suit of clothes. I put on the suit. I always known that you get by more looking important than you can when you don't. And when I got to the hospital and took her in, the lady said in the emergency room, she is in labor. You go round to the Bursar, you had to put up a $50 deposit and take care of the Bursar and I'll take her upstairs. I went around to the Bursar, said how much is it? She said it's $50. I wrote a check; I didn't have a dime in the bank, didn't have a quarter. They gave her the check and got the okay, went up and took it to the lady upstairs and she was--admitted her. About 9:00 when I went back home, I didn't wait for her to deliver. I called a young, a student, black student who was a year ahead of me at law school, a boy named Jeter. His daddy was a lawyer in the city of Chicago [Illinois], Howard Jeter, Junior, and told him I needed $50 to cover the check. And to show you what kind of friends we were, he didn't say come get it because he knew I was working. He said I'll go put it in the bank for you. And he left his home and went to Chicago City Bank at 63rd and Green and deposited the $50 in my account. And do you know that Alzata went back to work May 1st. And the lady who kept our baby was a lady named Bea Rowa [ph.]. She's dead now. And we met Bea Rowa at Shiloh Baptist Church, 62nd and May, that's where we met her. She became our official babysitter. August 9th, 1953 was a Sunday and she was teaching summer school at Williams [School, Chicago, Illinois]. We were over on Roosevelt Road and Halsted eating hot dogs and drinking pop. And she said to me when we go back south, you better drive down King Drive 'cause I think I'm in labor. And I drove. When we got to 51st and King Drive, she said go in to the hospital. She said I'm having this baby today. Went to the hospital, they admitted her. I left to go to the drug store at 51st and King Drive, I was smoking at the time, get a package of cigarettes. When I came back, our second child was born. And she worked that Friday, which was the 5th of August. She went back to work the 1st week of September. Twentieth of March, 1959 was a Saturday. She worked the 19th of March at Williams. Saturday morning when she got up, she called my dad on the phone and asked him to come over. When my dad got there, she--I'm on my way to the hospital--she busy cooking the kids--my two oldest children, (unclear) breakfast. My dad was shaking like a leaf on a tree. And of course he was to keep the children while I took her to the hospital, which I did that Saturday and she birthed Jim. And as they pushed her into the delivery room on the gurney, whatever it is, she said "Oh, somebody catch my baby." And that was Jim. That Monday when I went to the hospital to see her. I said now I think I can handle it from here on in. Story_ID: 69494 Speaker 1: I'd been out of law school since 1951. I was sworn in the 18th of June, 1951. We had to bum a ride to get to Springfield [Illinois]. We did not have bus fare. And in those days you had to go to Springfield to be sworn in. They swear you in now over at Arie Crown [Theater]. We had to bum a ride to go Springfield, and that's another story I'll tell you about in a moment. And I said to her on this Monday after Jim was born, I can handle it from now. My practice was coming along and I was doing okay and from that moment on she has been nothing but a housewife and a mother. And what I wanted to tell you is that in those days the Board of Education mailed your check, the teacher's check to them at their home. And for the ten years my wife worked, she never cashed her check. When the check would come, honey our check is here, it's on the dresser. I signed it. For ten years. And she would tell you today if she was sitting here that she was reared in a family where the man handled the money. The man was the breadwinner and she says I know it feeds my husband's ego, but I wanted to feed his ego. I wanted to prove to him that I could be a good wife and I wanted him to handle the money. Now having said that and being as loyal as she has been, and the culture in which I was reared in the South, it was common for the most prestigious members of the community, men, to have what we call back street women. A common thing; it was a part of the culture. On Friday, Saturday night, Mr. So-and-so was over at Sister so-and-so's house. Everybody knew it. On Saturday night, Mr. So-and-so was at Sister so-and-so, had back street women. I thought as a child that it was an inherit weakness on the part of a male. I knew it was wrong. But it was the--part of the culture, men just did it. And the community accepted it. And as I began to grow and mature in my practice having come from that culture, I had a fear of me doing the same thing. A very deep fear. And I sat and talked to my wife about it. And to avoid any possibility of me mistreating her in that respect, and I told her this years ago, and I'm sitting talking to you now, everything that I own is in her name. The house in her name, insurance, irrevocable insurance in her name, cars in her name, stocks and bonds in her name, safe deposit box in her name. Everything's in her name. So if anybody gets me, they ain't gone get nothing but me. To protect her, showing her that I'm grateful to her for what she did in our relationship. Speaker 2: So you were really blessed with the kind of mother you had. And then to be able to duplicate that. Speaker 1: My mother, my mother--and my mother and my father both loved her, loved her. And my dad, incidentally when I was bringing her up here, when I told my dad I was gone bring her up here in December of 1948, you don't wanna bring her up here. He's adamantly opposed to it. She's a southern girl. She get up here in these lights and excite her. I said no, she be all right. And when he met her and they got to--grew to love each other, he, he thought Alzata walked on water, and she has been loyal, a true trooper. Story_ID: 69495 Speaker 1: How did your boys come to select law? Speaker 2: They did it on they own. I never attempted to persuade them. They did it on their own. I always insisted to them whatever you choose to do, make sure you do your best. My daughter came about to medicine--we gave her for Christmas when she was a little tot, a plastic bone skeleton and she had to assemble it. During the Christmas holiday season, she finally got it together, hang up on a hook. And I came in that evening, Daddy, Daddy, I got it together, I got it together, I'm gonna be a nurse, I'm gonna be a nurse, I'm gonna be nurse. I said I be damn if that's so. What's wrong with me being a nurse? I said nothing, except that's not what you wanna be. That's a fine vocation. I said but Sandy, if you're gonna be a nurse, why you wanna be a nurse? I can help sick, I can help the people who are in pain. I said but honey, you can do more for the sick if you're a doctor. She said I can. So from that point on, she said I'm gone be a doctor. I said nothing wrong with being a nurse, but the doctor tells the nurse what to do. I said set your goal high. And if you don't achieve it, then--that's how she got, end up in the medical profession. Speaker 1: Now it's surprising that your kids are so quiet since you're such a prominent person. We hardly-- Speaker 2: Well the oldest boy is teaching at Corliss [High School] out at 103rd and Cottage. And the youngest boy is trying to get his certificate to teach. They decided they didn't want to practice, and I can see why. Speaker 1: But I mean even, you know, socially or politically you don't hear about them. Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: I mean they don't seem to have that kind of presence that you had. Speaker 2: I guess one's enough. Speaker 1: I guess they're, they're like more, more like your wife [Alzata Pincham], the power behind the throne rather than on the throne. But that's nice, they did what their mother-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: That's wonderful. Story_ID: 64295 Speaker 1: Eugene Pincham is a young man. He's out of law school. He is practicing. And he's setting about to make his mark in his area of expertise. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: What were you thinking when you first became licensed to practice law? Where were you coming from back then? Speaker 2: Well the struggle, and it was a struggle to get into law school, and it was a tremendous struggle to get through law school, and a gargantuan struggle to get out of law school. When I got out and was sworn in, my emphasis was to join--the pleasure of having survived the struggle of getting out. The practice of law for a black lawyer back in 1951 when I was admitted, was appreciably different than the practice of law is today. And what I was thinking was how am I going to get into the profession, how am I going to break the ice and get into the profession. I didn't know anybody in Chicago [Illinois], nobody knew me. When we were in our senior year in law school, because of racism, law firms did not even interview us blacks for positions of jobs in the law, white law firms. We would--I interviewed for jobs in government. There was not a single black judge in Illinois when I was in law school. There was one black in the public defender's office, man by the name of John Branyon. There was one black in the corporation council's office, a man by the name of, of Parsons who later became a United States District Court judge. There were blacks scattered in the state's attorney's office over a period of time, Partee was one of them, Cecil Partee [HM] was one, Earl Strayhorn's [HM] one. So what was on my mind is how do I survive? How do I get into the profession? In the inner recess of my mind was a desire to serve, a desire to help. But paramount to that was the necessity of survival. And I want to point out to you that when I came out of law school, I had to bum a ride to get to Springfield [Illinois] to be sworn in, I think I may have told you that before. But I was washing dishes at a Jack and Jill restaurant, which is a fast food chain over on 55th Street, East 55th Street right off of Cottage at the time from five in the evening until 1:00 in the morning in order to survive. Story_ID: 64296 Speaker 1: And I heard about a lawyer by the name of Joseph E. Clayton, Jr. His office was at 3518 South State Street. He was married to Edith Sampson who was the first black delegate to the United Nations. And I tried to see Clayton over an extended period of weeks and months. He was not dodging me, he was just a busy man and I could only get to his office when I was not working. When I finally got to him and discussed with him, which was on a Sunday. He agreed to take me into his office and to hire me. Would you believe it? At the fantastic sum of 20 dollars a week. Speaker 2: In '51 [1951]? Speaker 1: Nineteen fifty-one [1951]. I would come into his office at 9:00 in the morning. He had a tremendous practice dedicated to the law and more importantly, dedicated to the opportunity to serve. I thank God that he was in my profession and in my life because his attitude, his philosophy and his indoctrination and his desire to serve rubbed off on me. I was coming to the office at nine in the morning. I'd go to court with him. We'd get back in from court 2:30, 3:00, 4:00, whatever time. And I'd have to leave him and go to my job washing dishes. And I can tell you now I was making 50 dollars a week as a dishwasher. So my income was 70 dollars a week. My wife was working as a substitute teacher. I did that with Clayton for twelve, sixteen months. And finally he came to me and said to me--I also worked with him on Saturdays and Sundays, did a lot of his brief writing. He said to me how much are you making over at this Jack and Jill Restaurant? I told him. He said well I think I can handle that if you just leave there and come work for me full-time. And I agreed to do that. And at this point he paid me 75 dollars a week. And I was with him from 8:30, 9:00 in the morning until 12:00, 1:00 in the morning Monday through Friday. Saturdays from 9:00 until six or seven, and usually on Sundays from--if I insisted upon going to church, when I'd come out of church, I'd go by the office. I'd stay there six, 7:00 in the evening. I did his brief writing for him, which was a very, very beneficial experience for me. And the reason it was such a beneficial experience was because it really exposed me and taught--I learned more law writing briefs than law school could possibly teach me. And I had the benefit of being in court with him on a trial level, and the state level, as well as the federal level, from the opening of court, 9:00 in the morning, until we finished the call, 4:30, 5:00 in the afternoon. Then we'd go to the office. And while he was interviewing clients and what have you, I would be working on motions and petitions and briefs. A wonderful experience because first of all I learned to work long hours. I learned that a front line lawyer, that is a lawyer who is seeing clients, going to court in the morning, trying cases, has to work longer than nine to five. It's not a nine to five profession for the front line lawyer. Story_ID: 64297 Speaker 1: First appeal that I wrote for him was a death case. He did not try the case. The presiding judge in the case was named Leonard, sitting at 26th and California. And [Eugene Phillip] Childress was--had been convicted, was tried and convicted with another lawyer representing him, with a jury, for a murder robbery at 33rd and State Street. Streetcars at the time went up and down, north and south on State Street, and they had safety islands. That is there's a big concrete mound and a parallel walkway, standing place, with streetcars would come by and people stand. And Childress was charged with robbing and killing a person on the 33rd and State Street, who was catching a streetcar. He was apprehended and prosecuted, sentenced to die. And Judge Leonard asked Joe Clayton [Joseph E. Clayton, Jr.] would he appeal the case. And of course Joe gracefully told him yes, and he just as gracefully handed the case to me and told me to write the brief. And I did. Eugene Phillip Childress. And in those days appellate procedures extremely complicated. And if you cross the "i", cross the "t" in the wrong spot, the court my throw your case out, it's just that simple. And the reason it was complicated was because the courts had devised a means of not hearing cases that they didn't wanna hear. And they'd rely on technicalities if they didn't wanna hear the case, to throw your case out. But we were successful in getting into court in the right appellate procedure, writ of error coram nobis, writ of error appeal, petition for review, what have you. And Clayton did not go to Springfield [Illinois] to argue the case, an oral argument. He was tied up somewhere. But the court reversed the case, reversed the death penalty, yeah, Eugene Philip Childress. Speaker 2: Just on a written appeal. Speaker 1: Just on the written appeal, yeah and I wrote it. Speaker 2: Well you must have been having a ball with the legal activity being fresh out of the-- Speaker 1: That's a, that's a good way to put it. I really enjoyed what I was doing, although I was being most inadequately paid and compensated, but he was doing the best he could. And more importantly, I was in the midst of the trial adversary proceeding by day and writing briefs at night. And it gave me both sides of the, of the practice exposure. And it was extremely beneficial and has benefitted me tremendously, tremendously throughout my career as a lawyer. Speaker 2: You couldn't have bought that. Speaker 1: That is true, that is true, that is true. I was with him for about four years, five years and when I left him and moved out on my own, it was because the CHA [Chicago Housing Authority] was tearing down--had bought the property where the 3518 State Street was to put up the CHA housing complex. And he moved to the Drexel Bank building. Story_ID: 64298 Speaker 1: And I along with seven other fellas who were in the building at the time, moved to 12 West Garfield, and I moved out on my own at the time. Speaker 2: And this was about '56 [1956]. Speaker 1: 'bout fifty, '56 [1956], yes 'bout '56 [1956] yeah. Speaker 2: Now what was it like when you were driving the train, if you will? Speaker 1: When I went out on my own? I was tremendously blessed. God has been awfully good to me. In those days there were professional bondsmen who put up bonds to--who paid for it to secure the presence of an accused in court. And professional bondsmen to a great extent influenced the client as to what lawyer to hire. The bondsmen were Gene Gary [ph.] and Tony Horton [ph.], George Dennison [ph.], Pops Garner [ph.], can't think of the one's name in the bar--in the federal court. His name will come to me in a moment. And by having worked with Clayton [Joseph E. Clayton, Jr.], and I was a firebrand in the courtroom, they were enthusiastic to refer cases to me. First of all because I'd protect them and their bonds. I made sure that the client's in court. George Dennison, who was a bondsman, referred many cases to me. And so did Tony Horton. And what happened was, tragically, unfortunately, after I had left Clayton for more, no more than six months, a year, he passed away. And as I said, he was the husband of Edith Sampson, who was alternate delegate to the United Nations. And of course when he, when he passed away, his practice was up in the air 'cause there was nobody to take it over. And many of his cases where he'd been paid and obviously his estate didn't have the money to refund the fees, the people came to me or were sent to me and I represented them most of the time without fee. But I was running service. I was able to avoid any litigation against his estate by the clients who had paid him and he was unable to render service because of his death. And I just took over basically his practice. Most of his clients came to me. Story_ID: 64299 Speaker 1: I can think of one case, Watty [ph.] was his name. Can't think of his first name. But his wife came to me and asked me would I represent her husband. Mr. Clayton had passed away. She paid him and she didn't have any more money to hire a lawyer and I agreed to take the case, which was a very, very challenging case. It occurred at 59th and Wentworth. And it was a, a neighborhood that was changing or had changed from white to black. Speaker 2: What year was this? Speaker 1: Fifty-six, fifty--'56 [1956]. A white couple remained living in the area because they were too old to make the transition, sell and move away. They couldn't get financing. So they in fact remained in the neighborhood. There was a tavern in the hood at 59th and Wentworth. I can see it now on one of the corners. And this is where everybody in the community would hang out. And on the evening in question Watty was in the tavern with this white couple, Mr. Watty had just moved into the community himself with his family, his wife and two children. Olivia was one of his children; I can't think of the boy's name. But anyway a drunk in the tavern began to--we call it signifying, degrading and deni--demeaning the white couple, calling them out of their names and what have you. And Mr. Watty said to--these, these are my friends. Don't talk to these people like this. And he, the drunk said the hell with him or so forth and so on and words--one word led to another word. It was the state's accusation in the case that Mr. Watty went home, got his gun and came back to the tavern. It was the state's position when he came back in the tavern, that before he left he said to the man, you better not be here when I get back. And that when he returned, the man was in the tavern and that Watty shot, fired a shot, several shots. Missed the man he was shooting at according to the state's version, and hit a patron who was sitting at the bar and killed him. And he was arrested for murder and that was the charge, that was the case against him when Mrs. Watty came and asked me to take the case. I tried the case and it was not guilty. And interestingly enough, when the white couple came to court and testified for Mr. Watty, and this aged white lady took the witness stand, and as she walked by him sitting there, she began to cry. And as she stepped in the witness box, she said in tears, "He would not be here but he was protecting my honor. That's why he was here." And of course then she testified that she knew him, she lived with him, next door to him and he was a wonderful man and he was a good man and what have you. The jury wasn't out five minutes. When they came back, it was not guilty verdict on him. And as I tried more and more of Clayton's cases, the word went out that I would take the case, I'd give it my best and I was successful in many of them. Story_ID: 64300 Speaker 1: It was hard for you to take on Attorney [Joseph E.] Clayton's practice and he had already received the money and you were just kind of getting started yourself. How did you finesse that? Speaker 2: Well again, I've been wonderfully blessed. Interestingly enough, I don't think I've had but one case in my career as lawyer where I charged by the hour. And when the profession began to accept the proposition of charging by the hour, I then said that the clientele that I have wouldn't tolerate being billed by the hour. If I told a client I'm gone charge him three, 400 dollars a hour, the first question he's gonna ask me, how many hours it gonna take, two? Because the clientele that I represented were people who were willing to pay, but their mindset was I need to know what you're gonna charge me. Because they have limited incomes, they're living on budgets and they have to adjust these fees within their budget. But as I sit here now, fifty-two year years later after having been admitted to the bar, I never missed a payroll with my staff, my secretary and my staff. I never missed my rental payments, I never missed a phone bill. I never missed my house note payments, I never missed my kids tuition. It was a blessing. I used to say my wife on Saturday morning, I would get up to go to the office, this is--as time progressed, I don't have my expenses for the week. And if somebody don't get caught doing something wrong and come and hire me, I'm gone go do something wrong and hire myself so I can make a fee today. But--and money has never been a controlling factor with me. Story_ID: 64301 Speaker 1: I see that starting with the [Joseph E.] Clayton [Jr.] practice. You were always involved with the issues and involved with what you were about. Speaker 2: Yes. I, I was told--I think I may have told you when I was interviewed by you before, I grew up in a very, very poor family home environment; we were extremely poor. And my mother [Hazel Caldwell] admonished me when I was sworn that she had to ride a bus to come from Alabama to Springfield [Illinois] to witness the ceremony. And after the ceremony she admonished me adamantly and vigorously that I was blessed to have been able to become a lawyer and above all, don't forget where I came from. That the license is not a license to make money. A law license is a license to serve. And that's been my guiding principal ever since I've been in the profession. So money has--obviously it's necessary to make it, but I never turned down a client; I never refused to represent a client because they didn't have money. And I don't think I've written six letters to clients about a bill, about paying me. I've never had a client to sign a contract or an agreement. I've never had a client to sign a note, a promissory note. I've never sued a client for fee. We agree on a fee and the client says he can pay it, we shake hands and that's it. Many times they're unable to make the payment completely, some have. Some haven't been able to make it at the time the services were concluded. And one case vividly comes to my mind now. The lady who after the case was over, continued to pay me. Ronald Owens was the boy's name. He lived in a CHA [Chicago Housing Authority] high rise at 61st and Wabash, maybe 62nd and Wabash. And he and his friends stole a car of some people who were engaged in a after school celebration at a tavern or bar there around 63rd and King Drive. And Ronald Owens and his friends stole the car and went joyriding out south, Chicago Heights and what have you. And came back and were heading southbound on Wabash at 63rd. And as you know, Wabash ends there at 63rd going south, south. As they were waiting for the traffic to clear, which was going east and west on 63rd, the man who owned the car had come out and missed his car and had gotten in a car with some friends, cruising the neighborhood to see if he could find his car. And as he drove westbound past Wabash, he looked up and saw his car. They pulled over, jumped out, there's my car, there's my car. Ronald Owens and his friends jumped out of the car and proceeded to run back to the CHA high rise building there. And the reality is Ronald Owens who had a gun, everybody admits it happened this way, just took out his gun and, and fired literally over his shoulders, without taking aim and shot the man right between his eyes, killed him. He ran into a building, police came and somebody told them he was in the building. Police went up in the building without a warrant, entered his apartment and arrested him. Story_ID: 64302 Speaker 1: I made a motion to quash the arrest and to suppress the evidence because he didn't have a warrant to enter the house and the judge was Collins, I shall never forget it. He laughed at me, the position I took on that, on that point. He didn't need a warrant to go and arrest him [Ronald Owens], the man just committed a crime, so forth and so on. And he found Owens guilty and much to my dismay sentenced him to fifty years imprisonment. Even the victim's relatives said the case did not justify that, but the judge got carried away and got caught up and as he was talking about it, he became emotional and gave the man, gave the kid--was about eighteen years of age, fifty years. And even the prosecution witnesses admit that he didn't aim at the man, he just took out the gun and bam, and just shot him. I appealed the case and his mother continued to pay me. I didn't charge her for the appeal. Appellate Court affirmed the conviction. Illinois Supreme court denied leave to appeal Illinois Supreme Court. I finally petitioned for writ of [unclear] United States Supreme Court. On this particular Monday the United States Supreme Court decided Payton versus New York, New York. It was the first time the United States Supreme Court held, that in order to go into a house to make an arrest, you must have a warrant. The next Monday the United States Supreme Court reversed Ronald Owens' conviction under the authority of Payton which was decided the previous Monday. Landmark decision and quite a wonderful experience for me. Speaker 2: Now you must--what did that, what did that feel like when you got that word? Speaker 1: It was always gratifying and rewarding. Every client that I've ever had has turned out to be a friend of mine. And I've had some friends with some people who you'd be afraid to sit in church with. But they have always been a friend because I have treated them as people who were in need of help, need of assistance. People don't want to be bad; people don't want to do wrong. Sometimes they're thrust into those positions. Sometimes it's a cultural thing with them. And it is refreshing and rewarding, gratifying, that I told many of them you got another chance now. Use your life now for the good. Don't engage in any more criminal conduct. Stop ripping off the people, stop ripping off our community. Make our community better. And some of the worst "thugs" in Chicago [Illinois], and I won't name any of them now, have ended up now becoming pillars and rocks in the community. Speaker 2: Well that's wonderful. So the Owens case was your first really significant case. First case to the Supreme Court. Story_ID: 69496 Speaker 1: To what the defense attorney says, listen to what the prosecutor and defense attorney says. I listen to what the plaintiff lawyer says, listen to what the defense lawyer says. And use common sense as applying which one makes sense. Because the advo--advocate for the plaintiff is advocating one position, and advocate for the defendant in a civil case advocating another position, and advocating those positions, he's really teaching the judge. And if the judge wants to do what's right, the problem is with many of them, not all of them, but certainly some of them. The problem very rarely exists when you get a judge who's trying to be fair, who wants to do the right thing. He can use common sense and follow what different parties are advocating. The problem arise when the judge is, is partial, as some of them are. And they bring their personal attitudes and views into the proceedings and when they do that, they're not being taught, they are really extending their own biases and prejudices from the bench, and that's what cause the problem. Speaker 2: Instead of being open. Speaker 1: Instead of being impartial, that's right, that is correct, that's right. Story_ID: 69497 Speaker 1: The Owens case was in the late, or very ear--late '50s [1950s] or very early '60s [1960s]. Speaker 2: That's about right, yeah. Speaker 1: So you had, you had the Civil Rights struggle, you had this, the sizzling '60s [1960s] if you will. Speaker 2: Well I was in Mississippi during the struggle [1964 Freedom Summer]. I went down there as a lawyer. Sixty-four [1964]. I spent six months in Mississippi after my wife [Alzata Pincham] and family went down there and represented civil rights workers and what have you. Although-- Speaker 1: Tell us about that experience. Speaker 2: Well they were asking for lawyers to come down to represent civil rights workers. And in one of my moments of whatever, I decided to go. My wife agreed with--that I could, should go. And they sent all kinds of material to us telling us the hazards, the risks, the dangers. What we should do, what we should not do. And one of the things emphasized, under no circumstances you to bring a weapon. Always at the beginning of the letter and the ending of it. I got ready to leave. I took my .38 and put it in my suitcase and started out the door. My wife said [unclear] come back. She said now if you can't follow rules that they ask you to follow, don't go. She said if you think that something's gonna happen to you and you gon' need this, your weapon, then you shouldn't go. She said I'm relying on prayer and my faith to get you back here safely. And I agreed with her and I took my gun out of my bag and went on to Mississippi. How was it? One, we were told many times before we went under no circumstances were we to leave the airport in Jackson, Mississippi without the escort coming from the law office that we would work out of in Mississippi. And as it happened, my first stop on the plane was in Memphis [Tennesse]. And when the plane took off from Memphis, there were two blacks on it. It landed in Jackson, and the two blacks got off. Me and another fellow. I walked over to the phone because there was nobody there to meet me. And they told us what to do if there was nobody there to meet us. And start dialing. The other fellow walked over to the phone beside me and start dialing too. So I was told to wait and a person gon' come pick me up and the person was described. And I went over, and the fellow came over and we sat and started talking. It develops he and I were going to the same place, same office. He was from Topeka, Kansas. His name was Scott. His father was the lawyer who appealed the case of Brown, Topeka, Brown versus Topeka Board of Education, is his father. And we worked together in Mississippi in the movement for six months. Story_ID: 69498 Speaker 1: We [Pincham and Scott] were partners, shared the same room at night, went all over Mississippi representing Civil Rights workers. What was it like? It was a horrible, frightening experience. For example, I saw a policeman stop a boy in a car and took out--asked him for his identification. Boy showed his license. He said who do you work for? He said I work on the Sam Jones plantation. Officer drew back and hit him and knocked him as flat as he could hit him, blood flew every which way. Get up. Cop [unclear]. Boy got up, start talking and say--asked him another question. Who do you work for? He said I work for whatever [unclear]. Hit him again and knocked him down again. It happened three times. And the boy didn't know why he was knocking him down, nobody else knew. And the reason he was knocking him down is because he didn't say mister when he was referring to the plantation owner. And finally when he knocked him down the third time, he said I'm gone keep knocking you down until you learn how to call that white man mister. How was it? And you stood there and you couldn't do anything. Couldn't say anything. Story_ID: 69499 Speaker 1: I represented a white girl who was from Seattle, Washington who had been demonstrating with some of the people in Mississippi for voter registration. She was arrested and charged with carrying a concealed weapon. The weapon she was charged with carrying was a bracelet that had little prongs on it and it was under her blouse. And the officer said it was a concealed weapon. And when they took her to jail, they put her in a cell with male inmates. And they put her in a cell with black male inmates. The twisted minds of law enforcement officers was that these black males would rape her, perform some illegal sex act on her, and the black men in the cell stood up and said anybody touches her, we'll kill him in this cell. And of course when the girl came out for trial, she was just as fresh and beautiful as you are, nothing happened to her and everybody was--[unclear] was amazed nothing had happened to her. And they charged her with carrying a concealed weapon. It was in a time the community, I can't remember the name, where the courthouse was on a dirt road. Pickup trucks are lined up with rifles across the back of the pickup trucks. White people sitting all on the first floor, blacks in the balcony. Judge came out and said I'm gone call on Brother So-and-so to give us a word of prayer. And some white man in the audience stood up and prayed. Case was called. I tried it. And now fast forward, I won the case. And the way I won the case, I looked the judge eyeball-to-eyeball and said to him you can't enjoy the blessings of being a white man in America because of your hatred for us and we haven't done a thing to you. We haven't done one thing to you. Say we didn't come over here free and voluntary, you brought us over here as slaves. And you had all the blessings of a free country, free land, which soil, trees, water minerals, everything. And you so wrought up with hatred, you can't enjoy it. And you're only gonna be here for a short time. And when you leave here, the question you're gonna have to ask is where you going? With the hatred you being up in your soul against me, I can tell you. You may not get where you're trying to go. He turned beet red. He wavered the seat, and I said God made you white. You had no choice in the matter. God made this defendant woman white, she had no choice in the matter. He made me black. I had no choice in the matter. But if I--I can assure you if I did have a choice, I would still be born black of the same mother who birthed me, same circumstances. Boy, I'm gone turn this woman loose, y'all get on out of here. What was it like? We had to be in our--back at the office every evening. We would go all over the state, Hattiesburg, Pascagoula, Milestone, Columbus, Vicksburg, wherever we was assigned to go, we had to be back in Jackson, Mississippi at dark. Story_ID: 69500 Speaker 1: How many lawyers were participating in-- Speaker 2: At the time we were there, there were four of us. But as we left, others came. We were assigned--we asked to serve a certain time, we served the time. Our time expired, some others came. It was rough, it was rough, it was rough. Speaker 1: After your service in the law project in Mississippi, when you came back, how did that change you? Speaker 2: I had--I was in Mississippi when the sheriff in Philadelphia, Mississippi took out of the jail three prisoners. One was black, boy named [James] Chaney, two were white. One's name [Andrew] Goodman, one was named [Michael] Schwerner from New York, and he shot them dead in the time, in the square, in Philadelphia, Mississippi because they were trying to register black folks to vote. And they buried them in a lagoon that had been built up by a dam. And I challenge you, get the book, "Three Lives for Mississippi". Speaker 1: Three Lives-- Speaker 2: "Three Lives for Mississippi". And that crime went unpunished for years. But finally when--sheriff [Lawrence Rainey] ultimately was indicted for it and several other people and were convicted thirty-five years, forty years later. But this was done in the, in the town square in front of everybody. But I was there. I was not in Philadelphia when it happened, but I was in Mississippi when that happened. How did it affect me? It made me forever realize as I'm sitting here now talking to you, the sacrifices that had been made, not only for Americans, but for black folks in America. You know there was a time when women in America couldn't vote. The Constitution didn't confer upon white women the right to vote. But it made me more sensitive to the sacrifices that were made during the struggle, during the Civil Rights Movement, Reverend [James] Reeb who was killed in, in the South, was sitting down at a restaurant with black folks. He was a white minister, priest if I recall correctly, was killed. Viola Liuzzo, who was from Detroit, who was driving Civil Rights workers in Alabama, and a man drove beside her with a 12 gauge shotgun and blew her head off. It reminds me of--how did I feel about it? How, how do I feel about Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] being killed who gave his life? A great statesman, great leader, great religious man. He gave his all and we have not arrived yet. We still suffer from racism and bigotry. It made me more sensitive to my obligation, to my faith and my religion that I have to use my talent and my skills to try to bring God's kingdom here on earth, to make the world better. Not for me, but for others. Story_ID: 69501 Speaker 1: So when you got back, you were there for how long? Speaker 2: Six months. Speaker 1: Six, six months. And is that when you, when you came back, is that when you did Evins, Pincham, Fowlkes and-- Speaker 2: No, I was already in that firm when I went down there. Evins, Fowlkes, Pincham and Cooper. No, it was Evans, Pincham, Fowlkes and Cooper, yeah. I just took off and went down and stayed six months, yeah. But the firm was already there. Speaker 1: So you, you came back. What was your most challenge--your first most challenging case after your Mississippi experience? Speaker 2: I can't recall offhand (unclear). The reality is every case I had was a challenge. The publicity around, surrounding the case, making it a high profile case, did not cause me to think any differently about this case than I did about the case that did not have the same attention. I was just as zealous in the case where there was no publicity as I was in a case where there was publicity. And although I've had some high profile cases, my attitude about each case is it's important. Each mother's son who got represented, is entitled the best. Story_ID: 69502 Speaker 1: Some of the, one of the cases comes to mind when you ask about high profile case is the Alfano case [People v. Alfano]. It's where a Chicago police officer [Detective James Alfano, Jr.] was cruising in an alley behind the old South, Southtown, Southmore Hotel at 69th and Stony Island and a shot rang out, and bullet pierced the back seat of the car and hit him in the back and killed him. And the Chicago police went out and rounded up a bunch of Blackstone Rangers, Peace Stone Rangers street gang members and charged them with the murder. High profile case. And-- Speaker 2: And you tried that case. Speaker 1: I tried it. I was lead counsel on the case along with Jim Montgomery had a defendant. Speaker 2: This was-- Speaker 1: Earl Strayhorn had a defendant. Leo Holt had a defendant. That's four, there was six defendants if I recall correctly. Case was tried before a Judge Lou Garippo [Louis B. Garippo] Speaker 2: What year? [1971] Speaker 1: I couldn't tell you. It'd be a guess. All I can say it had to be before '76 [1976] 'cause that's when I went on the bench. We were on the case, jury was out and by the time we finished, by the time the state rested in the case, the family of the deceased were with us and said we don't believe they did it. This was our final--while the jury was deliberating, socialized with us and the other defendants, hoping that the jury would acquit them and in fact the jury did acquit them 'cause they really didn't do it. Cops just went out and got the first gang bangers they saw and put it on 'em and interestingly enough, we won the case because a Chicago policeman, and I see him occasionally now, can't remember his name, testified that he got the radio call that an officer had been shot as he was driving southbound on the Dan Ryan Expressway. And he says he immediately went eastbound on either 69th or Marquette, I don't recall which, to 69th and Stony and pulled into an alley in his car and got out of the car and it was a light on the post where he stopped his car. The reason he was testifying that there was a light on the pole is because another witness who testified that they were walking eastbound on one of the streets, looked up in the alley and could see the defendants in the alley building a barricade of furniture that was being thrown out of the hotel. So it's necessary to have this streetlight and it was necessary to have it corroborated by this officer who said he stopped his car under the streetlight to corroborate the other witness who says she saw the defendants in the alley building this barricade. As fate would have it, this officer concluded his direct examination at the conclusion of the court session that day, 4:30, 5:00, whatever time that be. And the cross-examination of him was postponed until the next day. Story_ID: 69503 Speaker 1: I knew, common sense told me that no policeman is going to stop and park a car under a lamp post in an alley when he just heard his brother officer had been shot by a sniper. Common sense told me that. This too perfect a case, this is too perfect a circumstance, too perfect a coincidence for it to have actually have happened. Cop gon' see the light, [unclear] going down the street, witness see the defendants from that same light in the alley. So as I was going south home from court, I went back by the scene. And there was no lamp post, there was no light on that post. Now there was an extended period of time between the shooting and the trial. So the lamp post could have been moved or the lamp could have been taken off the post. It was cold, I shall never forget it. Next morning my wife [Alzata Pincham] and I went back, she was a spectator in the courtroom. Around 7:30, 8:00 in the morning. And as we were surveying, surveilling the area, a resident came out of a building, out the back and started through the alley. One of the things you have to be very careful about in this profession is people who overzealous wanna help, and they'll say things that they think you wanna hear. So I had to be very careful how I put it to this man as he came through the alley, and he knew I was on the case 'cause it was all over television, newspapers. So I asked him, I say how long you been living here? He said fifteen years or so. You come this way often going where you're going? He said yeah, I come every day. Say you pretty well familiar with what goes on. Says is it--the alley well lighted at night? He said no. The closest light down, down there, and he pointed to it. Sure there, sure never been a light on this post? No. And of course I had the post identified by the officer that testified. So when I went back to court, when I left the scene, went to court, put him on the stand. He told us he got the call, he was driving down Dan Ryan, he hurried over the scene. You stopped the car, the alley, you stopped your car in the post, and the post was at such-and-such a position. Yes. They done identified, and no question about that, yeah. And you--light was on the post. Yeah, light was on? Yes. I said if I told you I went by the scene last night and looked at that post, wasn't no light on the post, what would you say? I tell you God is good. He said they must have moved it. The state's attorney at that point said--here's some pictures. The judge said don't you have, don't you have pictures of the scene? State's attorney said yes. And he had proceeded to reach up to hand 'em to the judge. I said but the judge not doing the cross-examining, I'm doing it, give the pictures to me. And he did. And truthfully what had happened was the photographer had lined his camera at such a fashion that the light on the post closest to him appeared to be at the--some distance away. If you didn't look at it very carefully, you, you, you'd misread the picture. And I looked at it and I could see it once you looked at it, that the light is on the post at the mouth of the alley, and it appears as though it's on the post seventy-five yards away. And I said judge here it is, look at it. The judge looked at it and said yes I see it. So I said [unclear] yeah. I said there ain't no lamp on this post. The light you talking about is at the mouth of the alley. He said yeah, I guess it is. So wasn't no light there. I said I don't guess it was. When the jury heard that, they through with the case and they found 'em, defendants not guilty. Landmark case, high profile case. Story_ID: 69504 Speaker 1: So you went and you went to the bench yourself. Speaker 2: Seventy-six [1976]. Speaker 1: In '76 [1976]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And you stayed there until eighty what? Speaker 2: I was elected and sworn into the bench, circuit court, December the 7th, 1976. In July of 19--and I ran again in 1982, six year term. In 1984 I was appointed to the Appellate Court of Illinois by the Supreme Court to fill the unexpired term of Kenneth Wilson who was Appellate Court judge who'd passed away. His term expired in 1986 and I ran for that office in 1986, was elected to the Appellate Court in 1986, having served there two years by appointment of Illinois Supreme Court. And I served there until 1990 when I resigned to run for the President of Cook County Board. Story_ID: 69505 Speaker 1: So at the time that Harold Washington faced Bernard Epton, at the time Jane [Margaret] Byrne upset [Michael Anthony] Bilandic, at the time Washington upset Byrne. Speaker 2: Yes, that was '83 [1983]. Speaker 1: Give me your take on Chicago politics at that--in those--in that set of years. Speaker 2: Well the community, black community was--I can't think of any better way to put than to say they were tired of being used by the [Richard J.] Daley democratic power machine to continuously let white candidates to the exclusion of blacks, and when the mayor died, Richard died, it was indeed--and Bilandic was appointed to fill his unexpired term. The reality is, and the statistics will show it, the black vote elected Jane Byrne. There's no question about that. The moment she got in office, she in turn insulted the black community. And the statement she made was white folks got civil rights too. Maybe you don't remember that, but that's what she said. And she began to dismantle the Chicago Board of Education with its black administration, administrators. And it insulted and offended the black community. She was arrogant. She was being herself. She's not a bad person. In, in fact she's a nice person. But her demeanor was just such that we had been, had been having seen King Richard reigning for over twenty-something years. We were at a point where black people didn't want to--a repetition of this. But equally important if perhaps not more importantly, the population status of blacks in the city had tremendously changed during Daley's administration. When I came I think there were what, five alderman or six at the very most. Our population had increased and when it came that point when Harold was to run in 1980--he ran in '82 [1982], he was elected, sworn in in '83 [1983]. The timing was perfect. And several other factors occurred. Harold taught us a lesson that we have not yet learned. Now what he taught us that we have not yet learned was elections are won not during the campaign. Elections are won at voter registration. And it came about as you well know, when he insisted that as a prerequisite for him running, we had to go out and register something like 250,000 people to vote, which we did. And it was that 250,000 unregistered voters that we registered that enabled him to win the election. And here it is, what, twenty years later, we still are trying to win elections during the campaign. Voter registration is the key to winning elections. And quite frankly, it might--I don't want to sound divisive, but the reality is white community in Chicago [Illinois] has been indoctrinated to register and vote, and they do register and vote. Particularly when it's necessary for them to do that. Our people have not been culturally indoctrinated to register and vote, and they really don't appreciate the significance of the political power. They're beginning to become more aware of it now than ever before, but today for example the city budget is four billion dollars, 100,000 jobs. Richard M. Daley is the chairman of the biggest corporation, corporate employer in the city. And he doesn't have to declare a dividend. Just go back and raise your taxes. Once Harold was teaching us this and he was making politics open, he was making government open. And he succeeded in doing that, tragically passed away. But it was a great day in Chicago when he was elected mayor and when he won re-election. He was a classmate of mine in law school, he was a year behind me at Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois]. And I was associated with him in our prac--not in the practice when he was in politics running down in Springfield [Illinois] as a politician. But I don't think anybody really, really recognized the genius of Harold Washington until he was dead. The man was brilliant, he was brilliant. I can, I can certainly say I did--I knew he was smart, I didn't realize how smart he was until he got in the mayor's office and run the office and how he--when he passed away, then you could see some of the things that he did that demonstrated his brilliance. Story_ID: 64313 Speaker 1: This is Adele Hodge the interviewer. Today I was so interested in Attorney and Judge Pincham's interview I forgot to slate the tape. Today is May 5th, Year 2003 and we are sitting in The HistoryMaker's office at 1900 South Michigan [Chicago, Illinois]. Our camera person is Matthew Hickey, I'm Adele Hodge. And we are talking about the [Mayor Harold] Washington years. And I'm coming back to ask you about that period of struggle in the African American political community right after Mayor Washington die. Can you-- Speaker 2: History is going to curse black Chicago [Illinois] for that debacle, and indeed it should because we're worthy of being cursed for that debacle. To be brutally candid with you, as you just mentioned, hindsight is 20/20. I never thought that the two parties involved, or the two factions involved would allow their differences to go to the point where they would destroy the black movement. I really thought that they were jockeying for positions. I thought at the right time, the opportune time, they're gonna sit down, they're gonna go down in somebody's rec room and come out with a deal, shake hands and retain the power. I--and had I had the vaguest notion that they were going to take it to the death, I would have taken them into my rec room, given them a gun with one bullet in it and said now one of y'all gone come out of here being the leader. Now it's up to you. But to have allowed the differences to have destroyed the movement is despicable. I'm not being personal about this. For the black community to have allowed it to happen, for the black politicians to have allowed it to happen, is--history's going to really speak unkindly of us for that. We are the only city in America where blacks outnumber whites, where we don't have the political power and the political strength in the mayor's office. Birmingham, Alabama has a black mayor and don't suggest by what I'm saying that I'm racist, I'm being realistic. You cannot ignore race in American politics, and to do so you're being dishonest. New Orleans, Louisiana has a black mayor, East St. Louis, Illinois has a black mayor, Atlanta, Georgia, Richmond, Virginia. I think Savannah, Georgia has one. I think Kansas City, [Missouri] I'm not sure about that, ahs one. But we don't. And we are not receiving our pro rata beneficial share in the political arena, jobs, contracts or what have you, for the strength and the loyalty and the dedication that blacks have given to the Democratic party. That is unfortunate, tragic. Speaker 1: What do you think--why do you think it went down to the wire like it did and nobody would give-- Speaker 2: Ignorance, egos, stupidity, failure in the lack of accountability, failure in lack of concern for the welfare of the community, the people of the community, but, but more concerned with their own personal egos and what have you. And that is a criticism, and yet it's nothing personal because that's, that's, that's people, people--that's how people react. And I suppose that we just didn't insist that they put the black community above themselves; they didn't. Story_ID: 64314 Speaker 1: Now that's gonna be my next question. What happened those on the outside, or the observers of the fight, what happened they didn't--they were not more vocal? Everybody was taking a side. Speaker 2: And that's the tragedy of it. And you must understand that I mentioned a moment ago when Harold [Washington] insisted that we register 250,000 voters and we did that, that was his margin of victory. And these 250,000 people were people who had never before participated in the political process. And he wasn't in office long enough to give them the benefits of the rewards of their participation because he passed away. So now we have the same people who were voting now who were voting before, but the, the 250,000, that segment of the black community, are no longer participating. And I do believe that we, in order to us, for us to acquire any political strength, we've got to go out and register these people and prevail upon them and persuade them to participate. The people who have not yet--who have not previously been involved. That's how Harold won. The schoolteachers vote. People from HistoryMakers vote. People from the union people vote. We're talking 'bout people who have not previously been involved. We've got to get them involved. Once we show them the benefits of, of having participated, it won't be difficult to prevail upon them and to persuade them to continue to participate. But when they participated before, they got nothing for it and they will tell you that. My response is he didn't have time. He couldn't dismantle a machine overnight, it takes time to realign forces and realign positions and what have you. But it's tragic, it's tragic what happened. I'm sure Mayor [Harold Washington]'s turned over in his grave many a day to see what, what, what happened. And to suggest it wasn't a race election is crazy. When he went up north and marched with [Walter] Mondale, was it Mondale, and they wouldn't let him in the church. And when he came back [Edward R.] Vrdolyak ran against him. It was race. And there's nothing wrong with that, don't, don't--that's, that's--we, we, we must do what every other ethnic group has done in this country, and that is we must liberate ourselves. We're still looking for the oppressor to liberate us, and that's not gonna happen. The Italians support Italians, the Greeks support Greeks, Germans support Germans, Jews support Jews, and blacks support 'em all. We've been intimidated, we've been humiliated, we've been coerced, we have--it's a cultural mindset that we're not supposed to support our, if you, if you support anybody black, you're a racist. Well I'm black, born black, live black, and gon' die black. It doesn't mean I don't like white people; that's not what it means at all. It means that God made me who I am and, and, and, and the statistics show it. You find black folks voting for [Mayor Richard] Daley, white folks voting for Daley. You don't find white folks voting for the black candidate, even when Harold won. They're still not gonna do it. But we're racist when we vote for our own and we, we, we there--race doesn't matter and that's, that's, that's crazy. Story_ID: 64315 Speaker 1: When you decided to run on the Harold Washington Party [in 1991], how did that come about? Speaker 2: They asked me to run and I saw an opportunity to try to bring an awareness to the community of what I just mentioned to you. Harold was very cunning and very shrewd. And when he campaigned, I was one of his advance speakers. I was sent to X address, Harold will be here in thirty minutes. I was supposed to rev up the crowd and I would do that, and I'd tell the people just what I'm saying to you. The man's black, you black, so you support him 'cause he black, period. So when the television cameras came with Harold there, he didn't have to say that. It had already been said for him. And white candidates, Daley doesn't have to tell the white folks I'm white, vote for me. They gon' do it anyway. Doesn't say that to them. And I'm not suggesting he's a racist mayor, that's not what I'm saying. I'm saying the, the, the reality is America is composed of many, many ethnic and racial groups. The reality is that ethnicity is a factor in American politics. The reality is as I said before, Irish support Irish, Jews support Jews, Greeks support Greeks, French support French. But we're intimidated, embarrassed, humiliated, whatever, culturally trained not to support our own. Speaker 1: Did they ask you too late for you to get your voter registration base together? Speaker 2: It was, it was a, it was a, it was destined for failure. I, I realized that but at the same time, I was taught that the Lord in his infinite wisdom does not confine his reward to the victor. He recognizes that too often victory is defeated by evil. So the good Lord rewards effort. He didn't ask you when you get to glory did you win, and I'm gonna reward you 'cause you won. He ask you did you try. And based upon that philosophy that I've entertained all my life, I decided to do it, and I'm glad that I did. Speaker 1: Did you-- Speaker 2: At least I go to bed at night saying to my grandchildren I did all I could son, for you. Speaker 1: Did you feel, aside from them asking you too late, after it was over, did you feel you had run a good race? Speaker 2: Oh yes. Story_ID: 64316 Speaker 1: We'd run a--we, we, we, we run a, an ex--let's go back, yes in answer to your question. The County Board presidency race was an experience that I really enjoyed and I think did perhaps more in the struggle, so far as I'm concerned in my contribution. Because at the time it was a matter of course that the President of the County Board was elevated to that position from Chairman of the Finance Committee of the County Board. That's how [George W.] Dunne became President, that's how [Richard B.] Ogilvie became President. [John H.] Stroger [Jr.] was the President of the--Chairman of the Finance Committee, but he was black and the party refused to slate him for President, for President. They slated--just read about him the other day. It'll come to me in a moment, he's Polish fella [unclear] his name. Speaker 2: Not [unclear]. Speaker 1: He was, he was Polish, but they slated him and they refused to slate Stroger. It was an insult to the black community. Stroger had been a loyal Democrat. He had been faithful to the party. Why change the tradition when it came time for him to move up, and slate somebody else? And I decided to resign from the court to run for that position. I really had no particular desire to be a politician, I had no particular desire to be President of the County Board. I had a desire in my people not being insulted, and my people receive their pro rata benefits from that political participation. And that's why I ran. I got monumental support. I raised a half million dollars. My opponent raised five million and he won by only 30,000 votes. Story_ID: 64317 Speaker 1: But what was significant about that is this: And even today many, many people in the city of Chicago, black and white, do not recognize the, the significant political impact that that race did. What happened was it was the first time a black had run for a Democratic party position county-wide without party support. Speaker 2: And lost by only thirty-- Speaker 1: Lost by only 30,000 votes. Which meant what? What happened was when we lost and [Richard J.] Phelan was elected in the Year 2002 what happened? Carol Moseley Braun [HM] ran for what? The [Illinois] Senate. The first time a black had run for the Democratic party nomination of a state-wide office. And as a result of it, of course you know she was elected. Something else happened. [Todd H.] Stroger was elected when? In 2004 [sic, 2006]. Something else happened too. Jesse White, Secretary of State. What happened was it broke that myth that the Democratic party entertained throughout the years that a black can't win except in Chicago [Illinois]. And I insisted a black can win if the white folks support him. We support white candidates county-wide, why couldn't white folks support black folks when they run count-wide? I'm making sense to you, of course I'm making sense. Of course I'm making sense. If we can support [Dick] Durbin when he runs for the Senate, blacks support Durbin, he's white. Why can't white people support a black candidate running for the Senate? Story_ID: 64318 Speaker 1: When you ran for mayor [of Chicago], did you ever feel that the political community, both black and white, didn't take you seriously? Speaker 2: I don't think that that was the attitude. I think that they felt that I couldn't win. But here again, that is the mindset that the power structure imposes on oppressed people. Do you think that anybody who is the oppressor is going to tell the oppressed people--do you really believe that Goliath was gone--Samson [sic, Goliath] was gone tell David you can whip me? That's not the way it's done. Do you really believe that when the Israelites were being led out of Egypt, that the Red Sea parted, that somebody's was gone say you can't make it. You, you, you not gone--you can make it, they didn't believe it themselves. But that's the part of the oppression and the culture, it's a cultural oppression, that the power structure impose upon oppressed people. Make them think they can't do it. Make them think they can't win. Make them think they're not serious. Make them think it's useless. Speaker 1: When--'cause I noticed a few times the last, maybe the last two times Roland Burris ran, and he lost in both instances. He had a very hard time getting the African American support early enough and strong enough. Which is another side of the no registration of the non-voter. It just seemed like those who were voting and who had the money to contribute to the campaign, didn't really come out. Speaker 2: Well here again, it's a cultural, deliberate indoctrination and we've been doing it for 400 years. We have survived through the horrors of slavery. We've survived through the degradation of slavery, we've survived through the brutality of slavery with a survival mindset. Circumstances have changed and yet our culture and philosophy hasn't kept abreast with the change. We still go to the polls--let me back up for a moment. It's so deep, it is so deep. I sitting here, I remember--and I tell my grandson, when blacks were excluded from major league baseball. When blacks were excluded from major league basketball. The basketball coach at University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] made the statement that blacks were not intellectually or physiologically, physiologically capable of playing basketball. Stagg said that at the University of Chicago. I recall when Jackie Robinson was brought up, Branch Rickey risked his fortune, of the Brooklyn Dodgers. He risked his fortune to bring up Jackie Robinson from Montreal [Canada] to play baseball with the Brooklyn Dodgers. And there were people who well know that he would succeed because they knew that he could participate, he's a good sportsman, and yet there were other blacks who figured he couldn't make it. Culturally indoctrinated that blacks are not as well-equipped to do what they--to compete. That attitude has not been as prevalent in the sports arena as it has been in other arenas. In the sports arena where there's competition with the advantage of what, television, blacks can see other blacks performing and excelling. I would suggest to you that perhaps Michael Jordan has done more for the basketball industry than any other single person. So every kid now is out in the, in the sandlot shooting a basketball. But that mentality, that, that, that cultural desire or attitude I can do it, has not rubbed over into the political arena. It will someday, that's what Harold [Washington] brought. Harold was--did something the, the, the greatest thing about Harold's victory was it told black folks we can do it. And black folks were elated. Just, just in ecstasy because we elected a black mayor. But we lost it. Story_ID: 64319 Speaker 1: And also Harold Washington was in it not only because he was more than able, but he loved politics. That makes a different. Speaker 2: He was brilliant, the man's brilliant, he's a brilliant man. Speaker 1: He loved the, the dynamics. Speaker 2: He knew what he was doing. And another thing that we--I say this to you now. The tragedy of Harold was it left black people thinking that leadership determines the welfare of people, and that's not true. Harold did not elect himself. Black people elected him. I've often said this. I've often said that one of the most famous orations in modern times was [Rev.] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.]'s speech in Washington, D.C. "I Have a Dream". But the speech was meaningless if nobody had been there to hear it. Had he been in the shower, taking a bath saying the same thing, the speech would have been meaningless. As I sit here talking to you today, many people, many people are really unaware of the consequences of that speech, of that demonstration. Either they remember the speech "I Have a Dream", you have children in high school remem--memorizing it. But as a result of that, it wasn't a speech that caused government to fold and pass the Civil Rights Bill that gave blacks the right to vote all over the country. It was because there were almost a million people there to hear the speech. And we have been mislead into believing that movements come from leadership, and that's not true. That's the tragedy of Harold's administration. Speaker 1: So how do we correct that? Speaker 2: The Lord in his infinite wisdom will see to it that it's corrected, 'cause I don't know the answer. Dr. King for example, no question a great leader, no question a brilliant man. But he wasn't elected for his brilliance. He wasn't elected because of his oratorical skills, because the people didn't even know he had it when they chose him to be the spokesman for the Civil Rights Movement in Montgomery [Alabama]. And he was chosen simply because he did not have any allegiances in Montgomery that would interfere with his loyalty to the people; he hadn't been there long enough. Many of the other clergymen there, they voted Reverend X and then somebody said no, Reverend X, he just had a mortgage on his house. First National Bank got a mortgage on his house so he can't be loyal. Well we'll choose Reverend Y. Well no, Reverend Y's wife just bought a mink coat for 30 thousand dollars and it's on credit, so they can't--she can't be loyal. So the bottom line was whether we--what about Reverend Z? Well we just--he just financed this remodeling with his church, and he owes First National Bank two or three million dollars on the church, so he can't be--so Dr. King was chosen because he hadn't been in Montgomery long enough to have any ties in the community that would interfere with his loyalty to the movement. People didn't know about his oratorical skills or his loyalty or his dedication or his brilliance. But they chose him not as a leader, but as a spokesman for the movement. The system elevated him to leadership. So when he--they killed him, it killed the movement. The Romans thought the same thing about Christ. I'm not talking 'bout how he died, now, I'm talking 'bout why they killed him. They thought that by killing Christ it would stop the movement. But indeed it created the greatest movement man has know, movement of the Christian religion. But he was one of the few people who did more dead than he did alive. That's Christ. Christ got more followers dead--while--after he was crucified than he did before he was--while he was, while he was preaching and teaching. But that's a typical tactic employed by the power structure. Escalate a movement from a movement into leadership. Then destroy the leadership, you destroy the movement. Speaker 1: That's where assassination gets its-- Speaker 2: Of course, of course, of course. We still struggling now doing what? We ain't looking for a movement, we looking for a leader. Story_ID: 64320 Speaker 1: Which, address the leadership vacuum, or is there one? Speaker 2: I'd have to ans-answer you candid and say yes there's a leadership vacuum. Because there--the people really--and there's a movement vacuum. When they become--the vacuum leaves the movement, the vacuum will leave leadership. When the movement becomes active, leadership will become active. Speaker 1: Why do we kind of collectively sit on our hands looking or, or maybe not even thinking about leadership or a movement when it's-- Speaker 2: By and large, the--it appears to me that many of us think and believe that the press is gonna liberate us. That ain't gone happen, but that's what we see every day. We see our power going into the oppressed power structure with a mindset of helping us rather than with a mindset if you don't do this, we gon' destroy you. Oppression has never been voluntarily lifted. There's a benefit in oppression, there's benefit to the oppressor, and people don't voluntarily take their foot off your back. You have to make 'em take it off, or if you have to make it so uncomfortable to be in on your back until they don't want it there. But I think it's coming, I'm optimistic. Story_ID: 64321 Speaker 1: Okay, let's address your judicial years. What--what were your most important cases throughout your whole period on the bench, do you see as those cases that left a mark on you? Speaker 2: Well, one of them was, and I don't even remember the name of the boy. This kid was charged with murder 'bout nineteen years of age. A very, very handsome kid. He's bitter, hostile, angry. And every time his case came up and it was continued, his girlfriend came to court. And every time she came to court, she'd approach the bar and ask me Judge, can I talk to him? And she was pregnant by him. And of course I allowed her to talk to him. And I saw the relationship between this young lady and this young man. I saw that he was street smart, I saw that he was no dummy, I saw that he was bitter and angry. Well the case came for trial, there was no question he was not guilty of murder. At most at the time it was manslaughter. I found him guilty and he made an application for probation and entertained it and told him I will give you probation, but you go back to school. And the school was on--right off of Roosevelt Road, I can't think of the name of it, it'll come to me in a moment. Might have been Crane, I'm not sure. So the next day he went to school and came back and he said they won't admit me at the school. I said have a seat. I got my secretary to get the school officials on the phone, made an appointment to see them that afternoon during the lunch recess. The lunch recess came, I told the kid come on let's go, put him in my car and drove to school, went to see the principal. I said my name is R. Eugene Pincham, I'm a judge at the Circuit Court of Cook County. And the principal said yes Judge, I know you. I said this is whatever his name is, Joe Blow, and I want him enrolled. He said I'm not gon' enroll him. I said you didn't understand me. What I said to you was my name is R. Eugene Pincham, I'm a judge at the Circuit Court of Cook County, Illinois, I sit at 26th and California, Criminal Court Building. I placed this boy on probation, and I want him re-enrolled in school. He said I heard you. I told you, he said I'm not gone enroll him. I said just a moment. He said let me show you something. He got the boy's file and showed it to me. And I read what that boy had done, it scared me, I got scared thinking about him riding in my car from the court building to the school, scared me to death. And I could understand why he wouldn't enroll him. I could see it. Plus the fact I didn't want a confrontation with a principal. So I said well we'll talk about it later. I sent the kid home and went back to court. That night I was walking the floor. Story_ID: 64322 Speaker 1: So that night I'm walking the floor. And I'm saying to my wife [Alzata Pincham] this boy would end up in the penitentiary soon as you're born unless he gets some very strict discipline. He needs strict discipline and if he gets it, it's obvious to me that he's not getting the attention or the love that he should have. And I tried to get him enrolled in school and--Cregier [Vocational High School, Chicago, Illinois] was the school, Cregier. And they won't accept him. And he needs to be in school to get his GED [General Education Diploma], to get his high school diploma. And my wife with her east Tennessee mountain reasoning and logic, very (unclear) said to me he needs to be taught. He needs a teacher. I said yes. She said why don't you teach him? I said that's a brilliant idea. Next day I called in my staff, my probation officer and I said we gone set up a school here in this courtroom. And that was the beginning of an organization called Probation Challenge. Harold Bailey [HM] was the Probation Officer in the courtroom. I said Harold go out and solicit some teachers, volunteers, he did. And we began to have class in the evening in my courtroom. Originally the boy I placed on probation, condition of probation was he had to come back here every day to get your GED. Let me push the pause button and point this out to you. In my eight years at 26th and California hearing and disposing of no less than eight felony cases a day. Ninety-nine percent of the offenders who came before me were black. They between the ages of twenty-five to thirty-five. They were repeat offenders. And in eight years I never had but one boy who came before me finish high school. One. An even greater shock is not a one who appeared before me participated in high school sport or extracurricular activity, not a one. Originally I required them to come to court, come to my courtroom every day for class. It dawned on me that I'm, I'm imposing too much on them, that's why they don't have a high school degree in the first place, they couldn't do it on they own and they just didn't have the, the facility, ability to do it. And I realized I'd imposed a burden on them that they couldn't perform; so I changed it. I changed it. I said you must come once a week. If you don't come once a week, I'll violate your probation, send you to jail. And you got to come until you get your GED, that's up to you. You can come in two weeks to get, you can come in five years, doesn't make me any difference. Well that's the kid, the most important one, the most important case I had while I was over there [Cook County Circuit Court]. That organization, Probation Challenge with Harold Bailey has now been moved out to--what's the school 103rd and Woodlawn? The junior college out there. Speaker 2: Olive-Harvey? Speaker 1: Olive-Harvey [College, Chicago, Illinois]. It's out there at Olive Harvey right now. And probationers have to come out there--other judges are sending them to the school. A crime is a cultural thing is because kids, they like to have a culture and they like education. But that's one of the cases I'm most proud of. Story_ID: 64323 Speaker 1: Another case, an important case in my career was the [Frank] DeLuca and [Patricia] Patty Columbo case. It's where this girl and her boyfriend killed her mother and her father and her little brother in the house, horrible crime. Extremely offensive to me because they had been invited to her parents' home to try to reconcile DeLuca going with their daughter who was too young for him. And if a man's not safe in his house, I think the most horrible crime a person commit is a crime upon somebody in their own home. Home should be sanctuary. And they were convicted and I sentenced, sentenced them to jail. It's not an important case, yet it is an important case to me too because it was so humorous. This defendant as about six two, weighed about 220 pounds, 'bout 35, maybe 40 years of age, he's blind. And he's brought out of lockup repeatedly and this case is being continued. Scheduling conflicts. This particular day he said to me, "Judge can I say something"? I continued this case say June 1st. His lawyer said no, no, no. He said no, I'm talking to the Judge, I'm not talking to you. You know how blind people hold they head a certain way? He said I wanna talk to the judge. "Judge can I say something?" I say yes. What do you wanna say? He said would you promise me that you'd tried my case when it comes up again? Give your word as a man, man-to-man. I said I give you my word to try. Thank you judge. Say I been in jail now two years and my case hasn't been tried and I'm--wanna get it over with. He said I see you on June 1st. It develops June 1st came around, I was engaged at another trial, which often happens. And I couldn't try him. So he was brought out, I tell him I'm engaged in a jury trial, I'm gone have to continue your case again. He said, Judge is it all right if I say something? His lawyer said, no, be quiet. He said no, I'm gone talk to the judge. I said yeah, what you got to say, what you got to say? He opened his mouth, he called me everything that you could imagine. I won't put it on this tape. This man called me everything. SOB and all--MF, everything. State's attorney said judge hold him in contempt, hold him in contempt. He looked at the state's, he said what is that? He said we lock you up. He said hell, I'm already locked up. You can't lock me up again. He says--he called me a liar and everything. He said they got me charged with murder. He said quote, I ain't kill nobody. State's attorney says, Judge, he had the man's blood all over him. He said you GD right I had his blood on me, I live in flop house. And the man's on the floor in the toilet. When I went in the toilet and I stumbled over him, I'm trying to get to the toilet. Hell, I got, that's how I got the blood on me. I told the police that. He said I didn't even know the man was dead. Said how in the world I'm gone stab somebody and I'm blind? State's attorney said, well judge he confessed. He said you GD liar, I ain't confessed. I told 'em how it happened. I don't know nothing about this man. Why--I said tell me how could I kill somebody? How could I stab the man four times and I can't even see him? So I said to the state's attorney, I said is this your best case? What, what do you have here? Say well you stipulate to the facts? He said yeah I stipulate to the facts. You stipulate the state's attorney? He said yes. He said I find you not guilty. He say what that mean? I said it men you can go home. Mean I can go home? I said yes. He said they told me he was a fine, honest man. God bless you. It is more humorous that I permitted to, to, too late on this television. But the vulgarity that he called, he called me everything. My mama was a low down so-and-so. My daddy. He just raised. He said--state's attorney said well, we lock him up. He said what you mean lock me up for contempt? I'm already locked up. Story_ID: 64324 Speaker 1: So you've had some interesting cases haven't you? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes. I--one of the most viscous cases [People v. Smith] I can recall, it happened at 69th and Wabash. They received a knock at a door. She went down--her boyfriend went from the second floor downstairs, opened door. And the defendant and his friend came in. It developed that the defendant's mother and this lady worked in the post office together. The lady had been hurt in the post office on a job and been off. And the defendant says when he gets upstairs, I heard you got your settlement for you, for your case. And she said yeah, but I got that six, eight months ago. I ain't got none left on that now. He says well let me have it, can I have some, lend me some money. She said well I ain't got but fifty dollars, but you can have twenty-five of that. So she gave him twenty-five. He left, went back downstairs and left. Shortly after, the doorbell rings again. And she sent the boyfriend back downstairs. When he gets downstairs, he calls back and says it's Terrance, that's what the boy's name--Terrance Smith. She said come on up, come on up. When he came out, he whipped out a pistol and began to call her all kind of vulgar names. You got some money here and I'm gon' take it, so forth and so on. And he [unclear] ranted. Some children were in the house, in the living room, and they broke to run. And the evidence does not clear show whether or not the shot hit the boy, knocked him out of the window or whether the boy ran, ran into the window, but he was shot. And he fell through the window down to on the first floor and was killed. Some of the people ran into the bathroom. He went in the bathroom, put the pistol on his head and said if you drop another tear, I'm gone drop a bullet in your brains. And proceeded to shoot the woman, didn't kill her. He left. You not gon' believe this. Went home and went to bed. Pistol laying on the, on the nightstand. When the police came of course they were told who did it 'cause they knew him. They went to the boy's house, the pistol laying on the nightstand. They arrested him. He's now before me charged with murder. And I said to him this is a terrible experience for me. How could you--the lady gave you half of what she had, half of it. Go back and humiliate her and harm her and her family because you thought she had some more money. How could you do that? His answer just like that carpet on the floor, he didn't have an answer. Well I think it'll be an eternity when he hits the streets again. But that's the kind of thing I live with. Story_ID: 64325 Speaker 1: Do you have many regrets as a judge? From the judicial-- Speaker 2: I do not have any regrets. I was bored, I was tremendously bored. I, I am very pleased that I was able to help people. I was able to bring into my decision-making process factors that we're not taught to use. I didn't sit there as lord, god almighty. I didn't sit there looking down my nose at people. I didn't sit there upset or offended because of what many of these offenders have done because but for the grace of God, go I. And the judgment that I used was simply this. Very simple. Very, very simple. What would I want the judge to do if this victim was my mother? What would I want the judge to do if this defendant was my brother? And I'd come up with a decision. Very rarely would I impose a judgment without first talking to the complainant as well as the defendant. I recall a very vicious rape case. And I'll tell you about this case [unclear] second case, then I'm going. Have to come back. And state's attorney [unclear] and the state's attorney, judge give him 75 years, 75 years. He has no hope, it's too long. So I wrote down on a pad on the desk what I thought the sentence would be. And I said I've written on here what I think the sentence ought to be. And I looked at the victim's rapist and said what do you think I ought to give him? She said judge, don't give him no 75 years, that's too long. She said I figure ten years ought to be enough. I picked up the piece paper and showed her ten years. That was a great relief, that was a consolation. It was, it was gratifying and I never sent a man to jail angry with him. I never sent a man to jail without talking to him. I never sent a man to jail without talking to the victim or the complainant. Which brings me to the next case. This woman was in the Woodlawn [Chicago, Illinois] area on her way home. A man stepped out between two buildings and grabbed her round the throat and put a knife on her and started dragging her, going to rape her. I wish I could tell you what the woman said, but I'll try to clean it up. In essence she said using her vulgarity and profanity, I ain't gonna be laid on no cold concrete floor. I been looking for a man for five years, you don't have to take this, I'm gon' give it to you. I been walking home every night trying to find me somebody. Said I'm so glad you came along, I don't know what to do. Said but you--I ain't gone do nothing on no floor. I ain't gone do nothing on the ground. Said you going home with me. Tonight. And she used all kind of vulgarity. And she took him up to her apartment, knocked on the door. Somebody came and opened the door, it was her husband. She said honey, this man's trying to rape me, and fainted. And her husband grabbed that man and beat his brains out. In fact, the defendant said I was so glad when that man turned me loose, said I was--I was so glad the police came, I didn't know what to do. She said--and it was, it was more--far more humorous 'cause it was--she was vulgar and she was profane. It's just--the lady said I'm trying to save my life. And she said the thought occurred to me and she said I just pursued it. I said to her, what do you think he ought to be sentenced to? Said you can turn him loose if you want to. Said my husband got my justice. Speaker 1: What did you give him? Speaker 2: Three to four years, something like that. She said you can turn him loose if you want to, said my husband got my justice, 'cause he had beat the man. He had given that man a whoop-a sure 'nuff (unclear) whooping. And I--the thing that amazed me about it was I asked him how could you so quickly discern what happened? 'Cause all she said, honey, he's trying to rape me. That's all she said. Now if a man--my wife came to the door with a man and said that, I'd be trying to figure out what, what's going on. I mean and why, why you saying this to me? That man flew into him and gave him--and he still had a knife. Gave him one of the--the guy was in jail--in jail. He was in the hospital for about three months from the beating he gave him. So the girl said no, my husband got my justice. Story_ID: 64326 Speaker 1: Now because of your vast experience, legal experience, personal experience, certainly intellectual capacity and other things, you were--and because of your presence as an individual, you are often called on to participate in the more high profile situations. And you bring so many perspectives of those cases you just talked about and, and other experiences. How does that serve you when you're in the middle of a, a high profile where everybody is hanging on the development, what's gonna happen here? Ryan Harris, the new case you mentioned and-- Speaker 2: My--let me tell you what happened to me. First of all I teach trial techniques and appellate procedure all over the country, Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. Matter of fact I'll be at Harvard in June teaching one month course on trial techniques and adversary. I've taught at Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut], Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey], Cornell [University, Ithaca, New York], Notre Dame [University, Notre Dame, Indiana], Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois], University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], Stanford [University, Stanford, California], UCLA [University of California at Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California], New Mexico [State University, Las Cruces, New Mexico], Northwestern, University of Chicago. Most every law school I've taught at, and still doing it. Story_ID: 64327 Speaker 1: I learned early in the trial pit, in the courthouse, courtroom, first that no lawyer has the capacity to absorb everything that's going on in a courtroom. He don't have eyes in the back of his head. He can't talk to you and see what's going on over here to his right. He can't talk to you and see what's going on to his left. And with that in mind, I learned early to take my wife [Alzata Pincham] to court with me. And she sits in an inconspicuous position in the courtroom, and she has become the eyes in the back of my head. And she can tell me little things that are going on between the judge and the prosecutor, between the witness and the, and the prosecutor, between jurors, that I can't see. And during recesses, she tells me what she sees. That's number one. Number two, every case that I've ever tried, I've tried cases from Canada to Mexico, from New York to California. I've never tried a case without first, in the courtroom, without first trying it at home with my wife. Simply stated, if I cannot convince her of the justice of my cause and I'm sleeping with her, how am I gone convince a jury that don't know me? And I can tell by her reaction whether my position is solid, whether my position is sound, whether my theory is convincing and persuasive. And if it isn't, we doctor it, maneuver and what have you. And as a result of that experience with her, I usually can tell you after my opening statement whether or not this case is gonna be a winner. Matter of fact, you can usually tell when the case come in the office. Goes in one of three baskets, you can win it, can't win it, or maybe so. It's important to all win the case you supposed to win. And it's important to win some of the maybe so's. But when you win those you can't win, your status goes way up and I've won some cases we weren't supposed to win. Not because any skills on my, on my part, but get certain breaks. I was bored on the bench because I never lost the zeal for advocacy. I never lost the zeal for standing up for the downtrodden, the abused and the accused. I love the profession. It has been exceedingly good to me. I have been married fifty-four years to the same woman. We've never had an argument. I did not say she hasn't made me angry, that's not what I said. I said we've never had an argument. We've never spoken to one another harshly in fifty-four years. She has been my support. She's loved me and I've loved her. And throughout my professional career, if I felt that my client did not receive justice, I would appeal the case. And I've appealed over 200 cases in my career as a lawyer and I have all my appeals at home right now bound in naugahyde on the shelf. And I didn't get paid in ten percent of them. I've been to the United States Supreme Court three times and argued there three times which is indeed a rarity because the court only hears about seventy-five cases a year. Those cases they want to hear. So me having heard three of mine of all the hundreds of thousands of lawyers in the country, is a rarity. In each of the three cases, I didn't get a dime, I was not paid by the client. I just felt that I was mistreated, I took the case up on my own. Two of which I won, one of which I lost. But I've never been motivated, thank God, by a lust for money. And here again is how I was able to meet a lot of my bills or obligations. I don't own a boat. I don't belong to a country club. We very rarely eat out because my wife's the best cook in, in, in the state of Illinois. I'm not trying to impress anybody with any physical assets. My comfort is in serving and helping somebody. Now I feel when I go to bed at night, I helped somebody today. Somebody's life is better today because I lived today. And it's been extremely rewarding to me. I'm enjoying it. I know that I am an exceptionally good trial lawyer, I know that. I'm not egotistical about it. I have just not allowed my ego to interfere with my learning. And too many lawyers do that. When I walk out of the courtroom, I'm, I'm, I'm my most critical critic. What did I do wrong? What did I say, how did I stand wrong? What did I approach wrong? Was my demeanor wrong? And I've often said to my wife as I mentioned to you earlier, that when we recess, she talks to me and she knows. Don't tell me how much you love me, we talk about that tonight when we get home. Tell me what did I do wrong. Don't tell me what I did right, tell me what I did wrong. And she's been one of my most ardent critics and active critics. Because you do make mistakes. And the key to being a successful trial lawyer is to minimize your mistakes. There's never been a perfect trial. Never been a perfect cross-examination, never been a perfect direct examination, never been a perfect opening statement, never been a perfect closing argument. You try to minimize your errors. Story_ID: 64328 Speaker 1: Media and the law. The media has a terrific impact on law now. What is your take on that? Speaker 2: It's the greatest freedom factor that you have in a democratic society. I am not saying I agree with everything that they do, God knows I don't. But it's the greatest freedom factor that you have. But for the media, the system wouldn't work. The media keeps the politicians in check. The media keeps the judges in check. The media keeps the President in check. The media keeps the, the governors in check. The media keeps the mayors in check. The media keeps lawyers in check. I'm not saying I agree with everything they do. But if there's one thing I would insist upon in--matter of fact, I want it in heaven, I want a free media when I get to glory. Because it does regulate our everyday lives. Even sometimes in a way that we don't want to be regulated. I think the media has done terri-terrific disservice in the O.J. Simpson case. Terrific disservice. Because the media has the public thinking that the prosecutor proved him guilty when they didn't. Because the media only showed that part of the proceedings that the media wanted the public to see because the media was--the case is not a case if he's innocent. The case only becomes a case when he's guilty. So the media's publicizing that part of the proceeding that demonstrates that he did it. And as a result of the jury's verdict, the public thinks that it was the wrong verdict. The verdict was correct, it was accurate verdict. The media hasn't talked about--what's the officer's name--framed the man and took one glove from the scene, took the other glove to his home. Think-- Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE: [Mark] Fuhrman Speaker 2: What was his name? Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE: Fuhrman. Speaker 2: Fuhrman, Fuhrman. There was a disservice done there. I have felt and I always, and I do believe this. I don't, I don't think that it's in the best interest of our system that judicial proceedings be televised. And I think the OJ Simpson case has established that because the media gonna publicize to the public that portion that they want to hear and it's misleads the public. In addition, it causes the courtroom participants to play to the television camera rather than playing to the ends of justice. That's what happened in this case. So but in spite of that, I don't think we're gonna--we're ever gonna have media in the courtroom again. I think it's, I think it's out, it's gone because of that case. But I, I still approve of a free press. I don't think there should be any restrictions on the press in reporting cases. Sometimes the publicity is disadvantageous to the accused. When that happens in the proper jury selection process will [unclear] the biases and prejudices. But it's one of those rights that is precious. Story_ID: 64329 Speaker 1: How has technology changed the practice and execution of law? Speaker 2: Tremendously, tremendously. We can now present to the jury and court just about what happened. What we do now in civil cases particularly, in the Ryan Harris case which I'm gone talk to you about later. I'm gone leave in a minute. [Unclear] you gon' kill me. I'm tired. I've been going since 6:00 this morning. You go out and that video scene, we video of the jail, we video where the defendant's questioned, we video where he was arrested. So when the defendant or the plaintiff in a civil action takes the witness stand and say I was arrested at 55th and State Street, you throw it up on a video screen. The jury sees it and you have him point out the corner where he was standing when he was arrested. So they can relive what he went through. Confessions ultimately will be videoed, it's going to come although the Chicago Police Department and the State's Attorney of Cook County is resisting it. It's something that we should have. It enhances the credibility of police conduct. DNA is almost at the point now where a defendant is exonerated or a defendant is convicted 'fore he get in the courthouse. DNA does it. What we got to watch now is the integrity of the people doing the DNA testing. That should be very carefully scrutinized and monitored. But thank God for DNA because it now has proven any number of cases that defendants did not do what they were found guilty of having done. Story_ID: 64330 Speaker 1: We're asking Judge Pincham to comment on the Ryan Harris case as a follow-up, an example of what we've just talked about, technology in the law as well as media in the law and tell me how those things worked in the Ryan Harris case, as well as a quick overview of that case. Speaker 2: Well, I am constrained to first tell you how I got in the case. I was in bed that night reading the paper. It was the night of July, Tuesday, July 28th, 1998. And as I heard the newscast about Ryan Harris having, body having been found in the rear yard of the building over on Parnell, if I recall correctly, I made a comment to my wife [Alzata Pincham]. I certainly hope that they won't find some junkie in Englewood who's defenseless and pin it on him to clear up the case, just casually passing. I didn't pay too much attention to the case thereafter until Sunday, August 9th, 1998. A young lawyer by the name of Andre Grant called me and said Judge, they've arrested two seven and eight-year-old boys and charged them with Ryan Harris' murder. And my mother and the grandmother of the eight-year-old boy grew up together as friends, and I want you to come help me on the case. I said, Andre you don't need to help me on the case. Hell you know, anybody know no seven or eight-year-old boys did this. You got to be an idiot not to know this, you don't need me on this. But Judge, I need you so forth, so on. He begged and pleaded, begged and pleaded. Said no, I'm not gon' do it. This the kind of case I'd be with for the next four or five years, I'm not gone--they don't need me. You can handle this. Say well can I call you from time to time? You can call me anytime, but I'm not gone get involved in this case, but you can call and I'll consult with you anytime about the case. But I'm not gone get involved in this case. He say well long as you let me talk to you, fine. This was on Sunday night August 9th. They had just been arrested that Sunday afternoon, they'd been charged. And he said they go to court tomorrow and so forth and so on. In preparing for retire for the evening, I was already in bed. I got up, got down on my knees and said my prayers. Thanking God for having blessed me with a family, roof over my head, intelligence, having blessed me with morals, having given me the goodness of his love, redemption of my sins, continue to bless me. Hold me in the hollow of your hand. And upon my departing this life, receive my soul in thy kingdom in Christ Jesus name I pray to you, amen. I got in bed. Just as I'm talking to you now, a voice came to me. Why would you tell such a big lie? Just like that. [unclear] voice. How did I lie? Voice said you were asked to help two children and you said no. And the books says it is better that you be cast into ten [unclear] sea with a yolk on your neck than to harm one hair on a child's head. The book says suffer little children that come unto me and forbid them not for such is the kingdom, the books says that. How could you turn--I said, you know you right. I said Lord if you spare me till morning, I'll call him and tell him I'll be happy to help him on the--I said better still, let me call him right now. So I called and changed mind, I'd get on the case. Story_ID: 64331 Speaker 1: I was not in court with them on the tenth, which was a Monday because I had said to Andre [Grant], continue the case and we'll get together. The judge [Gerald Winiecki] refused to continue the case. And he had a probable cause hearing. At that hearing an officer by the name of [Samuel] Brown testified that the defendants, that these two children had confessed. That they were riding a bicycle with this girl [Ryan Harris], one of them threw a rock, hit her in the head, she fell off the bicycle. They pulled her up into the brushes, played with her body, and left her. Judge found probable cause. The following day when Andre and I got together, that Monday night, my doorbell rang. And I--said who's ringing my bell at 2:00 in the morning? Went downstairs, lifting the [unclear] in between the screen door and the door, a stack of papers this high. And they was police reports in the Ryan Harris case left by an unknown person. I got up and we started going over, my wife [Alzata Pincham] and I. And it's difficult when you're going over material and don't know what you're looking for, but we found the smoking gun in this stack of papers. And we filed motions and petitions to vacate the finding of probable cause and discharge these kids. In the meantime, they had been ordered confined at Hargrove's Hospital, which is a psychiatric institute up on the north side of the city. And we went up there to see them. When I saw this boy, this seven or eight-year-old kid, I cried. First time I've cried in forty years. Said how could anybody do this to this kid? Well, you would want to believe that the state dropped the charges because they found semen in the woman, and these children weren't capable of producing semen. And the charge was dropped [unclear] September the 2nd. That's not why they dropped the case. They dropped the case because we showed it was a frame. There's no question it was a frame, and we proved it was a frame. Not by what our witnesses say, but by the police reports in the case. And what happened was the officer who was doing the framing had not reviewed the police reports when he concocted the frame on these children. For example, the children never did confess, that's a lie. They never did confess. In fact, when they were arrested on the 9th, which was a Sunday, they were questioned that afternoon at the 51st and Wentworth police district station incessantly. When the question was over and the mother was brought into the room where her children was, the boy said Mama, he's trying to make me say I had something to Ryan Harris and I keep telling him I had nothing to do with her. The officer said he confessed. The mama said confessed to who? The officer said he confessed to Officer X. Well go get Officer X, mama says. Officer comes back, says Officer X is gone. Well did he write it down? Go get it. He came back and say we can't find it. Story_ID: 64332 Speaker 1: And here's what happened. The girl [Ryan Harris] was reported missing initially on the 27th of July, which was a Monday. Are you with me? She's reported missing at or around the hour of 12:00. Her nude, naked, sexually assaulted, battered body was found Tuesday at 3:00 p.m. According to the notes taken by the officers of the confession, the boys were supposed to said to them that we were riding our bicycles, we threw a rock, hit her, she fell. We pulled her into the bushes, we played with her body until it got dark, and we went home. And the next day when we got up, we went to the scene where the police had found the body. The problem with that was in the police reports there were statements from three witnesses who knew Ryan Harris, who knew she'd been reported missing, that they saw her Monday night at 9:00 walking down the street with a man. And when they found--when they discovered her body, they immediately went to the police and told the police that they saw Ryan Harris at 9:00 that previous evening walking down the street with a man, and they told the officers why they knew it was 9:00. Because they were getting ready to go into the house to watch a television show. And they went to the police district station and gave the sketch artist a sketch of the man that they saw her with, which was in the police reports. Now the reason that's significant is because if that's what happened, they couldn't have played with her body till it got dark and then went home and went to bed because they've got some children seeing her after it'd gotten dark, alive. But that's not all. The officer says that this eight year--the seven-year-old blurted out that he did not--I didn't have time to give him his warnings, Constitution, Miranda warnings, he just blurted out that he threw a rock and hit the woman and killed her. This same officer in another case just two years previously had the same statement about a child that he said confessed to a crime. The Allen Miller case in which was said he blurted out, I didn't have a chance to give him Miranda warnings, that he killed the woman. And in that case--woman name was Anna Gilvis who was killed at 79th and Western Avenue. This same officer had this boy confessing to killing Anna Gilvis. He didn't break in the house. And that he confessed he killed her because she called him a nigger. You and I know they don't--black child gon' kill nobody because they called him a nigger. But the judge has held a hearing on his conf--conviction and has set it aside, that is Allen Miller. And the same wording that he used in the Allen Miller case he used in the Ryan Harris case. Identical language in the confession. In addition to that, the pathologist called the policeman immediately after they supposedly confessed and told them that the injuries on Ryan Harris could not have been inflicted by a seven-year-old boy throwing a rock. This girl was beaten, her head was--her skull was fractured from the front all the way around almost the whole 360 degrees from a blow in the head. Her face had been battered in and nowhere in the so-called confession the boy said he hit her with a rock. We know it was a frame. Now the case coming up for trial, the civil case coming up in November. It's a tragedy. The mayor has acknowledged that it was a mistake, charging these children. The superintendent of police, he acknowledges it was a mistake. Dick Devine [Richard A. Devine] acknowledged it was a mistake because they did find semen on the girl, and it was the semen of a boy named Floyd Durr who is already--who, who, who is already under indictment in Englewood for having assaulted other children. It's probably one of the most high profile case I've ever been on. And I'm glad I got in it. And it still been pending. The civil aspect of the case have been pending since August--we're still pending. Speaker 2: Really? Speaker 1: Yeah, we, we--the civil case is be--we--is set for trial in November. Speaker 2: To sue to the city [of Chicago]? Speaker 1: Yes, to sue the city and the police--yes, yes, yes. Story_ID: 64333 Speaker 1: How--how important was the media in that case? Speaker 2: Not really. They thought--there were people who thought that they did it in the media, until we got in the case. And I went to juvenile court, the court atmosphere was hostile towards, against us because of the adverse, and people really thought they had confessed. But I would--if I told you how many telephone calls I got anonymously. Judge Pincham we know them kids couldn't have done that, which they couldn't have. Or another factor in the case was at the press conference that they announced--which they had on Monday the 10th, one of the reporters asked how could two children this size, seven, eight-year-old children, do this? And the answer was they're unusually large for they ages. And the truth is--now I don't know whether or not they're unusually large, they were unusually small for their ages. And in the police reports, they've overstated the height of each of the boys by six inches and overstated the weight of the boys by 40 pounds. Speaker 1: I remember being--the reason I was asking, asking you about the media in that case 'cause I remember the--that was something that was important for the observing public. That it was--the dynamics were so farfetched and by keeping it before the media, that-- Speaker 2: The media intimidated the, the judiciary in the case and I, I'd be remiss if I didn't acknowledge that. The media did intimidate the judiciary. The judge should have granted the continuance that Andre [Grant] requested for the preliminary hearing. And, and he didn't grant it because of the media. Had he granted the continuance and not held the preliminary hearing, and not found probable cause, it would have, it would have come out as I--as it ultimately did. But because of the media and the pressure, the media--he proceeded to hold a preliminary hearing, which he should not have done. And it, it has the embarrassment of the ultimate discharge of these two young boys. And exposing the, the, the frame because as I said, had he just granted a continuance for two or three days, we would have discovered the flaw in it because anybody could see the girl's body--another thing, the police took a picture of her body laying in the underbrush. And you could see that her body's not been dragged anywhere. No drag marks nowhere around her. Matter of fact, her arm is folded like this and you got weeds growing up between her arms, but she fell. So this fact that he say we drug her in the bushes just couldn't have possibly have happened. But the media did intimidate the judiciary in the case. And the judge did hold the hearing when he should not have held it. Speaker 1: In a case like that, who corrects the judge for that kind of-- Speaker 2: Well that's one of the problems in our system. By the time this case--now this judge up for re-election, public will have long forgotten who he was. Speaker 1: Who was the judge? Speaker 2: [Gerald] Winiecki was the name. Wasn't a bad guy, he wasn't a bad fellow, he wasn't a bad judge. He just succumbed to the pressure and held a preliminary hearing when he shouldn't have held it. He should have granted the continuance, the request for the continuance, but he didn't because the pressure from the media. But these egregious tragedies can only be corrected by a vigilant defense bar. Story_ID: 64334 Speaker 1: And the defense bar is not as vigilant, is not as vigilant now as it once was. And as a result of it, you see a lot of--Governor [George] Ryan declaring a moratorium on the death penalty because so many people dying that have been proven to be innocent. The [unclear] in the case where these four boys are convicted of raping and killing that girl [Lori Roscetti], that student nurse over at Rush Presbyterian St. Luke Hospital and the DNA showed that they didn't do it. But more importantly, the crime lab technician lied on the witness stand about the DNA, which you've have not been exposed to 'cause she said that the DNA of the defendants were compatible with the DNA found on the woman, which was not true. And, and the scientists have said there was outright perjury by this woman. One of the most egregious instances of scientific flaw he's heard. Because the four defendants who were convicted of this crime were non-secretors. A non-secretor is a person--well I back, back up. And that the DNA on the victim showed that the vic--that the offender was a secretor. A secretor is a person that scientists can tell their blood type from any fluid, body fluid that they secrete. Saliva, spit, urine, tears, perspiration or blood. A non-secretor is a person that they can only tell a blood type from the blood. All four of these boys are non-secretors. And when they--when the woman was asked on the witness stand, the crime lab technician, was their DNA compatible with that of the finding on the deceased, and she said yes, that's a lie. Because the, the DNA of a secretor is not compatible with the DNA of a non-secretor. And that's how Christine--the girl--Kathleen [T.] Zellner were able to get these boys out. Because the boys wrote her and told her that we--what I just related to you. And of all the people in the world, he wrote it to a DuPage County white woman who took the case and got 'em out. The, the crime lab technician was a gal named Fisher [Pamela Fish], Chicago Police Department. They promoted that--promoted--almost called her--promoted her from the crime, city crime lab to United States crime lab and she's making now 120 thousand dollars a year where she was making 100. And the reason they promoted her was because they figured she tell--she, she exposed what's going on, it would be embarrassing to the city. So to keep her mouth shut, they still--she got to stay working. And the cops that framed the kids in Ryan Harris case, they still on the police force, they still working every day. Speaker 2: And she was never tried? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: Charged with perjury? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: Nothing happened. Speaker 1: No, nothing happened to her. Nothing happened to her. Speaker 2: So did the prosecution ask her to tell that lie, or she just-- Speaker 1: Obviously, obviously did. Obviously they--she should have come forward and said the DNA of these four boys are not compatible with the DNA found on the deceased. Obviously she was prompted and obviously she--and, and the, the other DNA experts who've come in the case said she lied, and she did. Story_ID: 70921 Speaker 1: All right. My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Observing is Andrea Michelle Pincham-Benton. Sir, could you please give us your full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: My full name is R. Eugene, E-U-G-E-N-E, Pincham, P-I-N-C-H-A-M. Speaker 1: They may have asked you at the beginning of this interview process, what the R stands for. You know, I'm gonna ask again. Speaker 2: You certainly may do so. It stands for Robert. Speaker 1: All right, okay and sir what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: My date of birth is June 28th, 1925. My place of birth is Chicago, Illinois. Speaker 1: And what, what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is--Wednesday?. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: January the 17th, 2007. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time. Speaker 2: 9316 South Michigan Avenue in Chicago, Illinois, 60619. Speaker 1: Okay, that's thorough. And, and what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I am trying to retire from the practice of the law. I'm engaged in the practice on a select, limited basis. I was a judge of the Circuit Court of Cook County, Illinois. I was a justice of the appellate court of Illinois, First District. And I've practiced law in--with my offices in Chicago [Illinois] for--well from June 18, 1951 until 1976 when I went on the bench. I left the bench in January of 1990. From January of 1990 to the present I've been trying to retire, but the public won't let me. Story_ID: 70922 Speaker 1: All right, okay. So where we were I think in, in this process. The last time you were in--you were discussing Ryan Harris' case. And can you give us an update on Ryan Harris case? Speaker 2: Well I'm assuming that we had gone over the part of the case where these young boys, seven and eight-year-old children were charged with sexual assaulting and murdering Ryan Harris and were on the 9th of August, 1978. They were arrested [unclear] I'm sorry, 1998. They were arrested and charged with the sexual assault and murder of Ryan Harris, a eleven-year-old girl. And these two seven and eight-year-old children were exonerated completely on the 2nd of September, 1998 when it was--we alleged between the 8th of August when they were arrested and the 2nd of September when they were exonerated, that the facts of their alleged confession were diametrically opposed to the undisputed facts of the homicide. And it was substantiated on the 2nd of September when the prosecutor came in and announced that semen was found on the underpants of the girl. And they were released and the charges were dismissed in September of 1998. And in January of 1999, a young man by the name of Floyd Durr was arrested and charged with the sexual assault and murder of Ryan Harris. His semen was found, had been on her panties at the time and he in fact admitted that, that it was, that it was his semen on her panties. We filed a law--and he subsequently has pled guilty to that offense and received a substantial sentence. Something like I believe 199 years in prison, along with several other sentences that were imposed upon him arising out of his sexual assaulting other young girls in the Englewood [Chicago, Illinois] area. And we filed a lawsuit on behalf of the two young boys against the city of Chicago [Illinois] and the police officers who arrested him and claimed they confessed to them. Another law firm ultimately ended up representing the seven-year-old boy because we felt it--the dual task of representing them both was not in the best interest of them both. We represented the eight-year-old boy in a civil lawsuit. We revealed during the preparation of the civil case for trial, we had charged in our civil litigation false arrest, false imprisonment, malicious prosecution. And we discovered during the pretrial preparation that the confessions attributed to these seven and eight year old children by the defendant Chicago Police Officer [James] Cassidy, was verbatim a confession that Cassidy had used against another young black kid in a home invasion murder case that was ultimately--he was ultimately exonerated, word-for-word, the confession was. We went trial. The case ultimately came up for trial and the seven-year-old kid represented by other attorneys, settled their case before trial for two million dollars. Our case came up for trial subsequently. We refused to settle it for that amount of money, and we went to trial with a jury before a Judge Randye Kogan. Me and Andre Grant and Laura Probst [ph.] were the attorneys for the plaintiff. And the suit was brought on behalf by his grandmother, Mrs. Loretta Crawford [ph.]. And at the time we were about to go to the jury to argue the case to the jury, the city [of Chicago] upped the [unclear] to six point two million dollars and the plaintiffs accepted that amount, and the case was settled. And the city paid the Crawford family and seven--eight-year-old boy, six point two million dollars arising out of this false arrest, false imprisonment, malicious prosecution. Speaker 1: Now I guess the question I have--anybody probably would have at this point is how--were the police officers themselves charged with any crimes? Speaker 2: They were not. No action has been taken against the police officers to this date, which is one of the tragedies of the case. Story_ID: 70923 Speaker 1: The young boy who was charged by the same Officer [James] Cassidy with home invasion and murder of a woman [Anna Gilvis] over in--on the southwest side of the city, 7900 block on Western Avenue--in the Western Avenue area. And I'm trying now to remember the name of the woman who was killed in her house. Brutally beaten and stabbed to death. Speaker 2: This was an elderly woman? Speaker 1: Yes. Her name will come to me in a moment. Sandy. Sandy. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: This young boy was arrested by Cassidy. And allegedly confessed to Cassidy that he killed a woman, and the method that he allegedly confessed to Cassidy in killing the woman, is the same identical method that these two young seven, eight-year-old children allegedly used in confessing to Cassidy killing Ryan Harris, word-for-word. The confession that the young boy made to Cassidy allegedly of having killed a woman did not fit the facts of the homicide. Couldn't possibly happen like the boy said it did. And in fact, he went before a judge charged with being a delinquent, but the bottom underlying factors of the case was he committed the murder of this woman, Anna Gilvis was her name. Went to juvenile court and the trial judge who heard the case and heard Cassidy testify quite obviously was troubled by his testimony. But he found the boy guilty, but gave him probation. Which clearly indicated to us that he didn't believe what Cassidy said. And Cassidy then wrote to the newspapers a very, very hostile letter condemning the criminal justice system and the juvenile justice system for this boy having been exonerated, or at least given probation. And the letter was published. The case went to the Illinois Supreme Court, the Appellate Court and the Appellate Court affirmed the boy's conviction. And the Supreme Court of the State of Illinois denied leave to appeal in the case. The boy's lawyer then filed a petition for writ of habeas corpus in the United States District Court for the Northern District of Illinois, alleging that his Constitutional rights had been violated because the conviction was based upon a false confession that had been coerced from him. And in fact during the trial of the case before the juvenile court judge, the young boy said yes I told him that, but he made me say this cause I was afraid of him and the moment his mother came into the police station, within seconds after he allegedly confessed, the boy said Mama, he made me say this and I didn't do it. But anyway the case, the habeas corpus proceedings came on before a Judge [Rebecca] Pallmeyer. And thank God it did 'cause she had the courage to stand up and she heard the case. And she heard the evidence and the other confession and what have you, and she found that it was a frame and a fraud and ordered him released from custody and found that the conviction was invalid and that finding [unclear] was appealed to the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit. And the Seventh Circuit affirmed Judge Pallmeyer's ruling and finding in the case. It was during this hearing that we were dealing with the civil case of the seven and eight-year-old boys allegedly for killing Ryan Harris against the same police officers. And during that time, we discovered that the same confession, same tactic that he'd used in the Anna Gilvis case was the same tactics he used against the seven and eight-year-old boys in Ryan Harris case. And no action has been taken against him to this day. Speaker 2: The police department did not demote him or anything? Speaker 1: I'm telling you no action, no action of any kind or character has been taken against Cassidy or is his partner, Nathaniel Allen [sic, Allen Nathaniel] in this case. Speaker 2: Not even a reprimand? Speaker 1: Nothing. Speaker 2: For using the same confession twice? Speaker 1: Nothing, nothing, no, no action whatever has been taken. Story_ID: 70924 Speaker 1: This is a--this is like--well for those who think-- Speaker 2: But the reality is we went to Superintendent [Terry] Hilliard who was Superintendent of the [Chicago] Police Department at the time we made these discoveries, and went to him in his office, which at that time was 11th and State. And sat down at his conference room with his attorney representing the city, representing him. And pointed out just what I related to you and the documents, written documents we had to establish it. The police reports in the Anna Gilvis case and [James] Cassidy's reports in the Ryan Harris case were identical. And point out this to him and made it clear to him that we did not want the Ryan Harris case to escalate in the media as a conflict or contest between Superintendent Hillard and R. Eugene Pincham and Andre Grant defense attorneys. And he stood there and tears welled in his eyes when he saw it. We proved it in the civil case, in the civil case before Judge Randye Kogan. We proved it. As a matter of fact, in the proceedings Cassidy had said that the seven-year-old spontaneously as the eleven-year-old in the Anna Gilvis case, spontaneously said to him "I did it and I'm telling you I did it." And before he could give him his Miranda warnings, and that he gave him his Miranda warnings and the children understood his Miranda warnings. And then after he had given him his Miranda warnings, the seven-year-old boy gave his spontaneous, uninterrupted seven or eight minute confession of how he killed and sexually assaulted Ryan Harris. An expert was called to examine the seven-year-old boy. An expert testified the boy had a speech impediment and had a special, a special class in school because he had a speech impediment. He could not utter three, more than three words at a time spontaneously in his entire life, in his seven years. His mother so testified and so did the expert and so did his teachers came in and testified in the, in the civil case that this kid could not possibly have given a sixteen or seventeen page, a twenty minute uninterrupted dissertation because he just didn't have that speech ability. He had a speech impediment that prohibited him--he was unable to speak more than three words at a, at a time. It's, it's more to the case you can imagine. Speaker 1: It's worse than anything-- Speaker 2: The public has never been told the full, complete story behind the Ryan Harris case. Speaker 1: This is the most extravagant abuse of justice. Speaker 2: It beats--it's, it's worse than any I've seen or heard of. Speaker 1: That's pretty bad. Speaker 2: And they both--Allen [Nathaniel] who's a black officer, Cassidy who is white, still on the police force. Working right today in Chicago [Illinois]. Story_ID: 70925 Speaker 1: And--well did you ever have any subsequent con--conversations with Superintendent [Terry] Hilliard about-- Speaker 2: No, in fact he left the department and there's another superintendent came in, [Philip J.] Cline. We never approached him about it beyond what I've stated to you. Speaker 1: So, so this all happened around 2000--2005 or 6 [2006] where, where Hilliard was presented with-- Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes. We presented this to Hilliard right after the, the case was brought to the courtroom. We went to him and told him that. We don't want to embarrass you. We don't want to humiliate you, you're the superintendent. We want, we want to show you cooperating. And we show him at his, at his conference table just what I related to you. Speaker 1: What do you--people would--the average person would think, here's the superintendent of police, black superintendent of police. He can look--he can and will--or will be inclined to look out for our interests. Or at least the interest of justice, you know, or something else. But that he's, he apparently from what you--from people who know him and say he's a good guy. He's, you know--but you describe the man tears falling, dripping down-- Speaker 2: Tears swelled in his eyes. I think what happened to him was the culture of the police department of the city of Chicago and to some extent the culture of the, of the city of Chicago, is that police can do no wrong. We know better. We know that they're humans just like--in their professions, or vocations just like lawyers and doctors and carpenters, plumbers, anybody else. But there are some in the profession who will--who don't have the standards that we would like for them to have. But because the system has more or less left it to the police to police the police, unfortunately, we find that police will cover up for one another, and will condone this conduct by one another. And very, very rarely, although it does happen, are their misdeeds exposed by one of their own. I think it's, it's, it's a culture. And I think that perhaps because of that culture, Hillard was reluctant or hesitant to really acknowledge or to accept the facts that we presented to him and was able to blindly close his eyes and convince himself that we were advocates for the young boys and present our case on behalf of them to exonerate them and perhaps what we were saying was not completely accurate. That's the only explanation I can give you for the failure to do anything about it. Story_ID: 70926 Speaker 1: Do you think perhaps that in 2007 now that a black official, appointed or elected because of our position in this society in terms of economic power and political power, may not really have all the power that's supposed to be invested in the office they're appointed to or elected to? Speaker 2: I think that it depends upon the position. It depends upon how the person acquired the position. I think that there are many, many black persons in positions of power, appointed, who are dedicated and sincere about protecting and promoting the rights and interests of black people and eliminating racism. I think that there are some elected officials who take the same position. Conversely, there are some who are beholden to the system and because of personal, selfish interests, which is understandable, They don't as zealously pursue the rights and interests of black people as they perhaps might, or they perhaps should. I think that's probably one of our weaknesses in the city [Chicago, Illinois] today. We are the most--blacks are the most disciplined, the most loyal, the most dedicated, the most dependable voter at the polls in support of the Democratic Party candidates. And yet--and we are the plurality population in the city of Chicago. And yet we don't--and we're the only city in the, in the nation where blacks are the plurality population, and we don't have a black mayor. And I was mentioning just the other day that every time you see our mayor on television now, he's surrounded not by white supporters, but by black supporters. And you can't condemn the black people for standing behind him and supporting him. They have derived the benefit from having, from doing so. But--and you can't blame [Richard M.] Daley for doing it. We blame the black voters for allowing it to be done. Speaker 1: But that, that kind of leads to a question I was gone ask a little later. But since we're on it now. What, what is your assessment of the state of, of black political power in the city of Chicago? Speaker 2: As I said, blacks are the plurality population in the city. And as I said, it's the only city in America that blacks are the plurality population, and there's not a black--and does not have a black mayor. And blacks not in control of the political process. Why is that? Because the culture in which we operate and we have been indoctrinated, we don't come out and vote in the numbers that we should, or as we should. That by and large is because unlike in the white community where the culture is we have the power, where the culture is we use the power to promote our interests, we use the power to protect our interests. The culture in the black community is my vote doesn't matter. Because we have not had the power except when Harold Washington was mayor and he unfortunately and tragically died before he could really show the black community the benefits of his election to office. But it's nothing unusual, extraordinary about it. Story_ID: 70927 Speaker 1: Since the beginning of time, the technique and the method that the oppressor has used to oppress the oppressor [sic, oppressed] is to deny the oppressor [sic, oppressed] the right to participate in his government. Speaker 2: The oppressed, right? Speaker 1: Yes. Yeah that's, that's been going on--as a matter of fact, when the Dutch and the Germans invaded South Africa and won the battle against the Zulus and South Africa for the next, what, three, 400 years though they were the minority population and blacks by large--certainly were the majority population. The one thing they would not allow the blacks to do is to participate in government. And as you know the African National Congress [ANC] with [Nelson] Mandela and, and the African National Congress leadership went to jail. Mandela stayed in jail twenty-seven years. And the battle was for what? The right for black people to vote. That what the--that is what the struggle is all about in South Africa for 400 years blacks could buy a home, they could live in fabulous buildings. They could own property, they could have bank accounts, they could get degrees, they could go to school and get education. Not to the extent that the--that they should have, but there were those who got it. But the one thing that--matter of fact, they even had interracial marriages. But the one thing they couldn't do was what? Couldn't vote. And the struggle that was successful--waged by the African National Congress and Mandela was released from prison. And the, the apartheid government recognized you're gonna have a blood bath in South Africa if they didn't. And they decided that we may as well control the transition from white power to black power as to not control it and have a blood bath and they released Mandela. And as you know, three or four years later he was elected president of the nation. Story_ID: 70928 Speaker 1: Well what are our prospects in Chicago [Illinois] in terms of the black plurality here? What, what are the chances of us electing another black mayor? Speaker 2: I think that when our leadership becomes dedicated and when the, when the people compel them to be dedicated to the interests of the black people rather than to the interest of the leadership, political empowerment will come to us. One of our problems is our--so many of our leaders, and it's understandable, don't agree with it, don't approve of it, but I understand it. And, and don't accept it, but I understand it. So many of our leaders beholden to the very power structure that's suppressing us. And you can't run with the rabbits and run with the hounds. And there are those who are doing that. And when the black population comes to realize that and insist that our leadership support us and dedicate their, their, their services to us rather than to the oppressive power structure, or rather than to themselves, the transition will come. Story_ID: 70929 Speaker 1: Okay. And in terms of national politics, we stand here 2007 on the--with Senator Barack Obama [HM] of Illinois on the verge of running for the presidency. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Well what are your thoughts about that? Speaker 2: I will support will all the vigor at my command, and financially, whatever decision he makes. And will in no way attempt to persuade him one way or the other in making that decision. I will in no way attempt to convince him of one position or the other. But whatever decision he makes, I will support him with all my resources, all at my command. Having said that, let me hasten to add, that there are those who are of the opinion that he would better serve the interest of the black people in America by going into the [U.S.] Senate, being re-elected and acquiring seniority in the Senate. And with that seniority, use it to bear--to tear down the walls of racism and, and, and bigotry and oppression. And that is a viable concept. That, that, that--are those who advance and entertain it. There are those who believe that he'd be far more benefit to the black community by doing that and becoming the most senior Senator with all the power that's attended to that position, as Senator--what's the senator from South Carolina? Speaker 1: Strom Thurmond. Speaker 2: No, Strom Thurmond was from--Strom Thurmond was--yes, yeah, South Carolina. With all the deference to him, he was--had an assistant had to tell him where to sit because his mind had gotten to the point where-- Speaker 1: About 100 years old. Speaker 2: Yes, but he had the seniority. And there are those who think that Obama would be best serve the interest of black people if he did that, went and got seniority, became head of various committees in, in the Senate that really control government. Then there's that school of thought, there are those who believe that he should capitalize on his present popularity and become a presidential candidate. The interesting thing is I think is if he does become a candidate, if he does announce he's gonna become a candidate, and he's supposed to make that decision on the tenth of February of 2007 in Springfield, Illinois. And as we just said today, it's the 17th of January, 2007, so he's got about three weeks to make the decision, before the decision is made. What would be interesting to me is the Democratic convention naming a, a--selecting the presidential and vice presidential candidate. That's going to be a whale of a, a, an issue. And the reason is very simple, because with the announced candidates and the unannounced candidates, will be--will confront a very, very delicate dilemma. They can't be too opposed to Barack for fear of alienating the black voter. And by supporting him, they may give him the nomination, which they obviously would not want because there's some who want it themselves. It's going to be interesting to see it. And I'm not gonna predict what the outcome is going to be. I will say that there are concerns, justifiably so, that if he becomes the candidate and it appears as though he may be coming close to becoming president elected, there's fear for his safety. And that's a warranted fear. It's a justifiable fear. If we know that the Kennedys were assassinated. Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was assassinated. Medgar Evers was assassinated. Reverend Clarence Reeb [sic, James Reeb], who was down in the Civil Rights Movement, they killed him. They killed Viola Liuzzo, the Detroit [Michigan] woman driving Civil Rights workers back and forth in the South during the Civil Rights struggle. Story_ID: 69515 Speaker 1: Yeah we were talking about Barack Obama's [HM] candidacy and what do you make Barack-o-mania as they're calling it now? I mean it's baffling to some 'cause America seems to have embraced black candidate for some reason and most of them can't pronounce his name, even, but he's embraced in a way that has really-- Speaker 2: I think several things are happening here. There are--or there is a part of America who, or which by and large, is unaware of the extent to which black people are intelligent. There's a part of America that thinks black people stupid and ignorant and who genuinely believe that something is inferior about us because we were allowed to be enslaved. And many white Americans have no concept of what we've been through, what we're going through. They don't have any contact with us; they have no awareness of us except by what they see in the media. And when this man got up at the [2004] Democratic [National] Convention and made an intelligent speech, they say wow, he can chew gum and talk at the same time. Nothing unusual to us about it because we know it--it goes on all the time. So this young black man who was exposed to be extremely intelligent, extremely articulate, Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts] graduate, a fellow in America with a great deal of accolades and acclaim, that's number one. Number two, and I may be totally in error on this part, but this is my thinking. And not only is it my thinking, there are others who share the same thinking. White America does not look at Barack Obama as they look at you or as they look at Harold Washington, or as they look at Kanye [West], or as they look at the average black American. And the reason for that is very simple. They see him with a white mother and a black father. So to them the inherent apprehensions that many of them have about blacks is not present when they review Obama. There are white people who genuinely believe that if black people ever got in control, we would retaliate against them as they have retaliated against us; we know better. And one of the problems we have had in our struggles for liberation has been we evaluate them with our thinking, as we think rather than evaluate them as they think. Speaker 1: So, so you're saying that because he doesn't have the historical link to slavery and oppression in this country that the rest of us have, that they don't feel that threat of-- Speaker 2: I don't know if it's because he hasn't had the, the back history, slavery as, as we have. But I can see how a white person would look at Obama differently than they would look at me. I can see how they will say well he has a white mother, his mother raised him. So he couldn't be as hostile against white people as some other black who doesn't have the similar parentage. And I think that is fact in their minds. I think also the time is, is such. Here we're fighting a war against dark skinned people over in Asia, an unjust war. And we are reluctant to call it that, but indeed it is. And here come along comes a man who has the unmitigated audacity and the gall and the courage to stand up say we shouldn't be there. And he's, he's expressing the views of many people, white and black, who are reluctant to express those views for being--out of fear of being called a traitor or disloyal to the country. But he's saying what the people wanna hear. And it, and it makes sense that he's saying it. Whether they will support him to point of elect him president is another question. But there are those who fear violence if he, if he becomes a viable candidate. Story_ID: 69516 Speaker 1: What, what would you consider to be the number issue facing the--I mean in terms of the importance to black people in this country. Speaker 2: The number one issue? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Facing black people in America today? I think that the fact that industry and jobs have been and are being what do you call the outsourced, the transferred overseas to China and India and to Asia. Taking jobs out of America that blacks and indeed whites would otherwise have is one of the most serious threats to the welfare and the security of middle class Americans, black as well as whites. When I came to Chicago [Illinois] to go to law school in 1948, the stockyards were here, International Harvester was here, US Steel was here, many manufacturing plants were here. And so jobs were available just in those areas that I mentioned. The stockyard's gone, U.S. Steel's gone, International Harvester's gone. Those jobs are gone. For example, and I just mentioned to my family the other day, I went out and bought some light bulbs, electric light bulbs the other day. Had a stamp made in China. Everything literally you find now; I even have a--my daughter brought me a jacket made in Bangkok [Thailand]. The textile industry, which was very strong industry out on the east coast, in New England and in the Carolinas, is gone. And I think the, the, the worst threat to blacks and whites in America is the, what they call the outsourcing of American industry. The jobs are gonna be gone. I think--and I think it's capitalistic suicide. But we don't have control over it, so we have to take it as we see it. Speaker 1: So you, you ever see blacks and whites who depend on these jobs ever getting together to-- Speaker 2: I think they will get together, but I think it's gonna be too late. I'm a--and the reason I use the light bulb, this, this, this is a, a, an invention, purely an American invention. [Thomas] Edison invited the light bulb in America. Electricity is American concept. And to, to, to, to take the light bulb making industry from America to China. Make the light bulb and bring the light bulb back to America to sell in America, is just one of the many, many--the automobile industry for example is, is, is--been outsourced overseas. This global economy is benefitting the globe except in America. And the irony is the, the, the light bulb cost the same [unclear] back over here, than, than it would have cost had it been made in America. But the jobs are overseas. So the profit factor is what's motivating it. Not cheap production, but the profit factor, the profit factor is greater when the cost of labor is less. But the consumer does not reap the benefit of the, the, the decline in the cost of production. The person who reaps the benefit is, is the investor who doesn't need the money in the first place, which is wealth--that's another story. Story_ID: 69517 Speaker 1: Okay, well back to the criminal justice system for a second. You--we were talking during the break about you were saying that you receive like ten calls a day from people whose offspring are in trouble or relatives or friends are in trouble. Black males usually [unclear] trouble with the criminal justice system, Chicago Police Department, and they have complaints about, you know, unjust arrests. What, what do you--does that, I mean are we making any progress? Speaker 2: Very, very little, very, very little. There are 13,500 budgeted police officers in the City of Chicago [Illinois]. Five hundred are usually off through attrition, sickness and what have you; 13,000 active. Of that 13,000 only perhaps 2500 are black. And yet 95 percent of the defendants and victims in the criminal justice system in Cook or in Chicago, are black people. So there are 1,000 state's attorneys in Cook County, Illinois. Speaker 1: Defendants and victims. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Ninety-five percent. Speaker 2: Are black, of course. Go to 26th and California, Maywood, Maybrook, Skokie. Ninety-five percent of the defendants in the system are arrested. Ninety-five percent probably higher, of the inmates of the, what 25,000 inmates over at the Cook County Department of Corrections are black. Twenty sixth and California, the main criminal court building. Ninety-five percent of the defendants who--and victims who come through there are black. There are 1,000 Assistant State's Attorneys in Cook County, Illinois hired by the Cook County State's Attorney [Richard A.] Devine. And of that number, only fifty are black. And not one assigned as first assistant, first chair in any courtroom in Cook County, Illinois. And as a matter of fact, in the United States Attorney office I think there are 260 Assistant United States Attorneys, and only three are black. There are about 280 Assistant Corporation Council in the City of Chicago, and of that number only about forty are black. We're underrepresented in the justice system in terms of power. We're overrepresented in the justice system in terms of victims and defendants. In traffic court, there are seventeen traffic court buildings or recording rooms downtown in the Daley Center on the fourth floor, on the concourse level, in the lower level, seventeen courtrooms. And I challenge you. I, I challenge you, I'm serious about this. Tomorrow, Sunday, go down in the morning at 9:00 and go down there and go to any one of the courtrooms. Ninety-nine percent of the people in the courtrooms are black people for traffic violations, and that's a revenue court. And it's not a court that's designed to help regulate traffic, it's a court there that's designed to raise revenue for the city. And black people are the ones who are financing the courtroom because they the ones who're there allegedly for committing traffic violations. I often say when you walk in the courtroom down there, you think white people don't drive in the City of Chicago. But they do. But they're not getting the traffic tickets. So the system is very, very overloaded with blacks being in the detrimental aspects of, of the system. And, and being underrepresented in the power structures of the system. And I'm sitting here right now, I doubt if a black--a white person lives in the radius of five miles of here. But if I call the policeman and right now, and you wanna give me a test on it, we'll try it. I'll bet you it'll be a white policeman that'll come in response to that call. And I'm not suggesting that they're not doing their jobs, but I am suggesting that when we're underrepresented in, in the area of, of, of jobs in the justice system, in the area of law enforcement in the justice system, the white community with 11,000 policemen obviously is better patrolled if for no other reason you got 11,000 policemen living in the white community than the black community with 2,000 living in the black community. It's common sense will show that. Story_ID: 69518 Speaker 1: So with, with attorneys like yourself, Standish [E.] Willis [HM], Thomas [N.] Todd [HM] over the years, you know trying to fight, you know for rights of, of the black community. You said very little prog--seem like [unclear] worse rather than better. It doesn't seem to be enough-- Speaker 2: It rise and falls, it goes and comes. We are doing better. We're having a--I'm encouraging lawyers and people who are being abused and violated by the system to take their matters to the courtroom, file a lawsuit for damages. Because one thing that the system responds to is money. When you begin to hit 'em in the pocketbook, they begin to respond. Speaker 1: Remember the case many years ago of a young man on the west side who became an alderman eventually, who was in an altercation with the police and sued, Wallace Davis. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Wallace Davis who was shot trying to protect his barbecue place from being robbed. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Police, police showed up and thought he was robbing it. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And when he tried to tell 'em, he was shot and hospitalized, never could use his organs again like he should. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: He was--Wallace Davis sued and the whole community got behind him and he ended up settling out of court without most of the community knowing that's what, what happened. Do you think it's better to settle these cases or to--I mean I guess there's no way we can tell the client to take it all the way through. The system itself has gotta really prosecute somebody or do something-- Speaker 2: There's no reason to, to--not to settle it if the city is going to offer the victim, the plaintiff-victim, a reasonable amount of money to settle it. At some point the officials of the city are going to take the position that rather than continuously burden them with--the taxpayer with defending improper conduct by policemen, rather than continually burden the taxpayer with hiring lawyers to defend inappropriate conduct by policemen, we begin to discipline the policemen ourselves. That will cut down on the police abuse, and also will serve to aid--better aid and protect the citizen. And it's going to come. I can see it. It, it, it is inevitable. I will--and you ought to undertake it yourself to go find out how much money the city has paid out, the city and county has paid out to plaintiffs over the past two or three years for inappropriate police conduct. I'd hazard to say it's in the billions of dollars. Story_ID: 69519 Speaker 1: Yeah, I think a few years ago the [Chicago] Sun Times produced a piece, Sun Times or the [Chicago] Tribune, on the amount of money and officers who are repeat offenders. They, they've been sued over and over again. Speaker 2: That's right. You see we just had ten from the Office of Special Operations Section of the Chicago Police Department, [unclear] indicting [unclear] nine in appellate court for shaking down drug dealers and stealing money from them and shaking down citizens. And there's gonna be some lawsuits filed against the city as a result of this inappropriate police conduct. And at some point the city official is going to say enough is enough, and they're going to stop and start policing the police. And that's what we really need. We really need an independent investigative body, prosecutorial body for the police department. Speaker 1: So you're saying it's okay to settle out of court on these cases and we, we don't really need a judgment in, in court? Speaker 2: Well, no. When you settle out of court, the, the, the plaintiff, the defendant has agreed to give to the plaintiff a certain amount of money to settle his claim. So there's no point in going to trial if the city agrees to give him--for example in our case, we went to trial. And before the jury could--argue to the jury in the Ryan Harris case, they agreed to give us $6.2 million. Why go to jury if you're gone to--if the city agrees to give you that? Speaker 1: Okay. Well I, okay. Speaker 2: And, and, and-- Speaker 1: Value in having a verdict and a, a-- Speaker 2: There is no value in having a verdict if the city agrees to give you the amount of money you're trying to get. It, it, it's a, it's a value in the public being made aware that, that the amount of money's been given. That is the media--if the media notifies the public, for example in the Ryan Harris case as they did, that the city agreed to give this boy $6.2 million, the same has been accomplished s if the jury had returned that verdict. Because what you're trying to do is let the public know that the city has agreed to, to pay and compensate for the wrong the city has done. Speaker 1: Isn't there a reason though, why the city agrees to settle rather than to-- Speaker 2: Of course, of course. They don't wanna take the risk of a jury deciding the case. Speaker 1: Right, but that's-- Speaker 2: By the same token, the, the plaintiff don't wanna take a risk either. See a jury may come back with less than 6.2 million. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It's a risk on both sides. And as I advised my clients in that case, I cannot advise you to turn down $6.2 million. Now you, you--it's up to you if wanna take it, fine. If you wanna go further, I'll try your case further. But I cannot advise you not to accept $6.2 million for this boy's--fifteen at the time when the settlement came down. Speaker 1: Okay. So in these cases though, it's not--I mean how do we--is there a way to sue these officers as individuals in terms of them being criminally responsible for-- Speaker 2: We cannot bring criminal charges against them because that's the state's attorney's job. That's solely within his province. You can't make him do it. And there's alliance between the state's attorney's office and the Chicago Police Department. Best we can do is file a civil lawsuit and get damages. And the tragedy of it is, the policeman doesn't even have to hire his own lawyer. Doesn't cost him a dime. The city hires a lawyer to represent him. Corporation counsel represents him or the city hires a lawyer to represent him. The further tragedy is that $6.2 million that they paid out to the eight-year-old boy in the Ryan Harris case, the policeman didn't pay a dime. [James] Cassidy and Allen [Nathaniel] didn't pay a quarter, the city paid it. So there have been no repercussions to the law enforcement officers in this--my children always said to me as they grew up, well if there are no undesirable consequences for misconduct, you're gonna have misconduct. That's true in rearing children, that's true with the Police Department, that's true with lawyers, that's true with any profession. If there's no repercussions, undesirable repercussions for misconduct, you inevitably will have misconduct. The deterrent for misconduct is undesirable repercussions for it. Fired, laid off, fined or what have you. Story_ID: 69520 Speaker 1: So our [Cook County, Illinois] state's attorney has managed to fly under the radar on these issues. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Is that--is it still Dick Devine [Richard A. Devine]? Speaker 2: I beg your pardon, yes it's Dick Devine, yes, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, I was downtown the day he received that Abraham Lincoln Award. Speaker 2: Well you don't want me to get started on that, do you? I ran for state's attorney of Cook County, Illinois. Was it 1996? I believe it was. And I ran because I wanted to focus attention on some of the evils in that office during the candidacy. And I spent a substantial amount of my own money, [unclear] money, in doing it. And I don't say this out of arrogance, I say it out of a blessing because God has been good to me, I've been blessed. I didn't need the job. The salary of the job was less than what I was making practicing law. But I felt it my duty to try to expose some of the evils and some of the errors of the office. I can meet my maker and face-to-face and tell him I did what I thought was right. And so doing, I didn't win, but we did expose some of the evils of the, of the office to the public but to very little avail because nothing was done about them. Because the persons who were perpetuating the evils were re-elected to the office. So those evils are still there. Racism in the courtroom where you don't have any blacks assigned as First Chair in any courtroom in Cook County, Illinois. Racism in hiring personnel, a thousand assistant state's attorneys, only fifty black. It's still a problem. Story_ID: 69521 Speaker 1: Okay. Let, let me ask about some of the other cases or high profile cases that you've been involved in in the last few years since we talked to you last time. One is the R. Kelly case. What can you tell us about R. Kelly's situation? Speaker 2: Well he's--his case is pending before Judge [Vincent M.] Gaughan and we are ready to try the case. Ed Jensen is co-counsel with me. Or I should say I'm co-counsel with him. We believe that justice will prevail, he'll be exonerated, he'll be acquitted. It is alleged that he had made a video, a sexual video with a minor. We, we denied it and we can prove that he didn't. And we're waiting to try the case. Speaker 1: Okay, I know it's popular opinion that he did do that and the--people have seen, claim to have seen it. In the neighborhood it's just like in--people say I saw it. Did you see it? Speaker 2: When we get to court it's not gonna be as simple as it sounds. We feel he didn't do it and we can prove--I know the state can't prove he did, because he didn't, but that's not a story. We will successfully defend him. Okay. Story_ID: 69522 Speaker 1: All right. What about the E2 Nightclub disaster? That occurred--what was that three years ago when-- Speaker 2: February the 17th, 2003. Speaker 1: Okay. When the patrons at E2 were trapped in the nightclub and couldn't get out. Speaker 2: First of all the E2 club is located 2347, 2340 or something like that, Indiana. The building is owned by an automobile dealership and the building was leased by the automobile dealership to our client, Dw--Dwain Kyle. And that was over nineteen years ago. He's been operating a business there since--over nineteen years now. Dwain Kyle was an attorney, and he was very, very high in the [Harold] Washington mayoral administration, as well as the Eugene Sawyer administration. He was the attorney for the McCormick Place, and the moment [Richard M.] Daley became mayor, he was fired from that job. But he worked that job simultaneously with running the lounge and restaurant at 23--in the 2300 block on South Indiana Avenue. Being an attorney in the McCormick Place hierarchy, he was aware as the public was not aware, of the planned expansion of McCormick Place. The planned expansion of McCormick Place was to move McCormick Place westward from South Parkway or King Drive, all the way to Indiana, which would have butt the restaurant and the nightclub there where the club was located. Speaker 1: Isn't the club on Michigan? I thought it was on Michigan. Isn't it? Right across from The [Chicago] Defender? Speaker 2: You're right, you're right, you're right. Indiana is a parking lot. You're correct, I beg your pardon, thank you for correcting me. Michigan and then the parking lot for the club is on-- Speaker 1: Indiana. Speaker 2: Indiana. Let me fast forward because McCormick Place has been expanded now from King Drive all the way to Indiana. You go down there now, it's been expanded all the way over there. Right across from the E2 Club property. There are those of us who believe that there was a, a deliberate attempt to run these people out of business so that this property could be better used for the, for the McCormick Place expansion. We know that to be the fact because prior to the disaster, police were writing tickets on patrons in going into the nightclub, into the restaurant, for parking over six inches from the curb. Writing tickets for having cracked windshields. Writing tickets for leaving the cars with the windows open, this kind of a thing. And towing the cars all the way from 23rd and Michigan out to 103rd and, and, and Doty. And Dwain was complaining about that and he was complaining--continued to complain about it. And finally when it was revealed that the alderman's relatives were involved in McCormick Place, the police harassment immediately stopped. Now the first floor of the premises was occupied as a restaurant. The second floor of the premises was used as a nightclub for dancing and cabaret-ing. In 2002, Dwain leased or sublet the second floor to a man by the name of Flores for the purposes of having entertainment. Story_ID: 72081 Speaker 1: So where we left off is at the, the second floor of the [unclear] was E2, and that's where-- Speaker 2: It was being, it was leased by Dwain Kyle to Flores and to who sponsored nightclub activities on that floor using a radio, and I can't remember the name of the company. What's the name of the radio company that's got all these new stations? Speaker 1: I can't-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, that's it, that's it, that's it. Speaker 1: Radio One? Speaker 2: No, it's--it'll come to me. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But Flores was advertising over this radio network this nightclub activities. There was a mezzanine to the premises. And it was discovered that the truss holding the mezzanine, according to the inspector, was weak. And they filed a complaint against the club alleging the weakness of the mezzanine and demanding that it be corrected. And when they went to court on the 19th of July 2002, the judge entered an order pursuant to an agreement of the city and the building owner and Dwain that the mezzanine would not be occupied or used until the truss was corrected, or supporting it. And let me fast forward here and tell you that the truss was corrected with some epoxy glue and one piece of steel. After July 19th, '02 [2002], when the judge ordered that they, they agreed that the circum--that the mezzanine would not be occupied, or the VIP [Very Important Person] Room which is synonymous to the mezzanine. The case was continued repeatedly. And after July the 19th when the judge entered his order, the club still operated on the second floor. And the city in fact issued license for the club to continue to operate on the second floor. The club issued license to sell liquor to the patrons on the second floor. Speaker 1: Now this is in contradiction to what the media suggested, that the place was condemned by the city. Speaker 2: That's right. And I'm telling you-- Speaker 1: Inoperable-- Speaker 2: These are the facts. These are the undisputable facts. As recently as October of 2002 when the case came up before the judge again and the judge continued the case until the 18th of February 2003. It was then stated that it's the truss on the mezzanine that's causing the problem, and the mezzanine should be closed until it's repaired. Nothing about occupancy of the second floor. As a matter of fact, they applied for license to operate the second--the license expired for the operation of the club on the second floor after the July 19th order was entered, 2002, and license were issued to con--to operate the second floor as a nightclub after July 19th. And license were issued to sell liquor on the second floor after July 19th. A license was issued to sell--he applied for an occupancy statement. That is tell us how many people can occupy the second floor. And that was applied for on the 2nd of September of 2005. Now certainly he wouldn't be applying for the occupancy statement from the city if the place had been ordered, ordered closed. And we have the receipt where we, we applied for it and showed it to the judge at 26th and California the other day when we were in court arguing this case. Story_ID: 72082 Speaker 1: It develops that on the 17th of February the club [E2 nightclub] was open, a fight erupted in the place on the second floor. The disc jockey on the loud speaker said "mace 'em". And the security officer, let me back up a moment too. I'm ahead of myself. Chicago policemen were hired as security guards during the operation of the nightclub on the second floor after the July 19th order was entered. And I think it's elementary to say ain't nobody gone hire Chicago policemen to, to security in a place where the license of the place had been suspended and did not--and, and is not--there's a court order directing the place to be closed. Moving back to the incident in question when the disc jockey said "mace 'em", and the security guard sprayed the persons involved in the altercation with mace, and the pepper spray spread through the place. This was shortly after the September 11th, 2002 incident in New York City. And everybody's now concerned about terrorism and terrorist attacks. And somebody in the crowed hollered "terrorist attack, poison gas." And that's really what happened. And with that, the persons began to rush to the door through which they'd come into the place. Somebody fell as they were doing so, and other people fell on top of them causing a jam in the door. Speaker 2: Now this door, there's a image on television of all these people pressed against this glass door in agony. Speaker 1: Because--I'll get to that, I'll get to that. Some of the people went out another exit leaving the place. And some of the people remained in the place and refused to leave. When they saw they couldn't get out, they just stayed there and serve--kept drinking liquor. When the call went out, apparently it went out as though it was a terrorist attack to the Fire Department and Police Department. So when the police arrived, they were reluctant to go into the place because they feared it was a terrorist attack and it was poison gas. Now they don't tell you that, but I can prove it to you. But they cordoned off the place where the people stacked up on top of one another in the stairwell. And we have videotapes of policemen walking around looking at the people and, and, and has blocked the door, letting the people--so they can't get out. And they did this for several, not several minutes, but almost half an hour. People stacked up on top of one another. And the reason they did so because they were afraid to go in because they feared it was a terrorist attack and it was poisonous gas. And we have a memo from one of the people on the ambulance who, who said that. Said we got the call, we didn't know what we were going to. And when we got there, we didn't want to get contaminated and therefore we, we reluctantly laid back and when they brought out one person, threw 'em on our stretcher, we thought we might have been contaminated. We didn't know whether we were contaminated or not. And they said finally when one wagon came and said the hell with the contamination, that's when they went and got the people out of the place, which had been there half an hour, and that's why they suffocated and died. Now that's really what happened. Had nothing to do with closing the place. Now shortly after the incident which was on the 17th and 18th, this was about a week before the mayoral election, some reporters stuck a microphone in [Richard M.] Daley's face, who's up for election, and in Mary George's face, who was the corporation counsel. And somebody told Daley the place should have been closed and Daley said it should have been closed, therefore, we're gone have criminal prosecution. Mary George said the same thing. The owner closing the mezzanine of the place had nothing to do with these people being killed. As a matter of fact as the judge ruled yesterday, I'll get at that into mo--more detail in a moment, it had nothing to do with the, with the stampeding of the people. But an indictment was returned in sixty-three counts charging Dwain Kyle, Flores and Collins, and Collins' son, with involuntary manslaughter. Three different involuntary manslaughters against each of the twenty-one deceased. An indictment alleged that they acted recklessly and, and these people were killed. But the indictment does not allege what act that they did that was reckless. Are you with me? You sure you with me? Because the indictment did not allege what reckless act was involved, the defense lawyers filed a motion to quash the indictment because it didn't tell the defendants what they were charged with having done. The judge ordered the state's attorney to file a Bill of Particulars to specify and designate what it is reckless that the defendants did. The state's attorney filed a Bill of Particulars specifying what the reckless acts were. But they did not designate who committed these reckless acts, nor did they designate what count of indictment the reckless acts applied to. So the defense is still in a quandary as to what it is you alleged we did. One of the acts they said we recklessly did was operated a club when the club had been ordered closed. That's not a reckless act, but that's what they said. Another reckless act they said was we had the place overcrowd, overcrowded. Let me back up and say this. During the period--if I didn't tell you, he applied for an occupancy status through the city. We have the receipt where he applied, tell us how many people can occupy this place. And they still haven't responded to this day, from September the 5th of 2002 till, till January the 17th, 2007, the city has not responded. Story_ID: 72083 Speaker 1: There's no standard to measure it against. Speaker 2: Pardon me? Speaker 1: There's no standard to measure the occupancy against to see-- Speaker 2: Well I, I suppose the engineers can say if a building is, floor is so many feet by so many feet, safe for occupancy for so many people. Therefore they can say that, but they didn't say that. That's why the boy was applying for one. They also said some of the--we didn't correctly patrol the stairs. We didn't have exits marked and what have you. But that's not our responsibility. It's the responsibility of the inspector who came out and inspected the building to, to, to point out where the exits should be marked and where the exits, the doors should be. Now what we did was, we filed a motion to bar the prosecutor from using evidence that the judge ordered the mezzanine floor closed during the course of the prose--prosecution because it had nothing to do with the death of these people. But for the fact that it was open, these people wouldn't have died, and that makes sense. But the but for doctrine does not apply in criminal cases. They were contending but for the fact that you had closed this place, it wouldn't have happened and therefore you're guilty of involuntary manslaughter. And that doesn't necessarily follow because as I said but for does not apply in criminal cases. But more importantly, the fact that the--judge ordered the mezzanine closed had nothing to do with the death of these people. So the judge ordered the state's attorney could not use that as evidence on the course of trial with the jury before, with Dwain Kyle. State's attorney said fine, they're appealing the order and that's where we are now with respect to Dwain Kyle. The other three defendants who took a bench trial, on trial, now as I'm speaking to you. Story_ID: 72084 Speaker 1: We regret the incident. We regret the, the life, the loss of life. But you cannot possibly in a highly mechanized, highly industrialized society as we have in America, make criminal conduct out of accidents unless the action of the party involved is so atrocious and egregious until it amounts to reck--criminal negligence. For example when the six people died in the County Building fire because the doors to the stairwells were closed, there was no criminal indictment there. And the, the finding was that there was negligence in ordering, ordering the doors locked from the top floor down to the first floor. The people in the stairwell couldn't get back into the building. There was no criminal indictment when the porch collapsed on the north side and 13 people died because the porch had been improperly repaired, and they found that it was negligence and they repaired the porch, and the porch had been repaired in violation of city ordinance. There was no criminal indictment in that case. There's no criminal indictment where the engineer ran a train, a Metra train 70 miles an hour through a ten mile an hour switch and killed two people and 70 people injured there at 48th and, and, and Wentworth. There was no criminal indictment when the airline pilot in the Southwest Airline plane was landing a plane where he couldn't see two feet in front of him, overshot the runway and ran out on Cicero Avenue and killed this kid sitting in the car waiting for the light to change. There was no criminal indictment there. There was no criminal indictment when the scaffold fell off of the Hancock Building onto Michigan Avenue and killed the people sitting in the car waiting for the light to change, and they found that the scaffold was improperly placed on the building. You can't have criminal negligence, criminal conduct out of negligence, out of improper negligence. And this is the case as we said, it was politically motivated, and it should not have been brought in the first place. And I don't think any--I don't think, I don't think, I don't think any--I don't think the state's attorney or anybody else can defend or justify indicting in the E2 case and not indicting in the staircase or the County Building fire case, or the train accident case, or the airline accident case. You can't--there, there--you can't distinguish between them. Except one's political and the others were not. Speaker 2: All of them are tragedies. Speaker 1: All the tragedies, that's right. Speaker 2: All [unclear]. Speaker 1: That's right, that's right. There was some men working on a building over here at 77th and Racine I believe it was, and the concrete slab that they put in the building collapsed and killed three men over there, no criminal negligence there. Negligence, somebody's negligent, but it's not criminal. It's civil, not criminal. Story_ID: 72085 Speaker 1: Okay. So are there-- now the, the community as you mentioned, calls you every day ten times or more. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: More on some days. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: They, they call for you to get involved in cases. How, how do you choose which cases to get involved with and which cases not to get involved with? Speaker 2: I try-- Speaker 1: You're famous in Chicago [Illinois] as a lawyer who can be fair to people and-- Speaker 2: Thank you. Speaker 1: Get [unclear]. Speaker 2: Thank you. I appreciate that. Speaker 1: Everybody knows, everybody knows you. Speaker 2: Well I, I do my best. I've been fortunate, I've been blessed, I'm grateful. God is good all the time. I try to guide the people to a source that would benefit them when they call me. I take on those cases, have some sociological or impact, political impact on the community. I also have as my wife [Alzata Pincham], my late wife has always said to me, married to her fifty-eight years. She said you're the person when you need it, you can't say no. And she's right. I can't say no. But I take those cases that have some--where the, the, the abuse is so egregious until somebody else will come forward. I'm on a case right now for the, the special section, Special Operations Section of the Chicago Police Department. Went through a cyclone, iron gate and arrested two black children on the front porch on a Sunday, August the 6th. Accused them of, of knocking them down the stairs and attacking them as they came in the gate and took 'em to jail and charged them with aggravated battery against a police officer. And you know doggone well a seventeen and a fourteen year old kid ain't gon' attack no three armed Chicago policemen on their front porch and knock 'em down. That just didn't happen. If they did, they wouldn't be there, we'd be going to their funeral. But that's a case I took; it's pending now. The community over there was up in arms about it and I took that case. Another case over at 77th and Hermitage where the cops shot a boy and claim the boy had a gun when he didn't. When they were arguing about a woman that they were dating. Took that case. I took the one where they arrested a schoolteacher down at Dyett Academy. Allegedly she'd made a call to get the policeman there and they say that she said the people had a gun, to get the people there in a hurry. And they arrested her and charged her with making a false police report. Arrested her in the presence of 300 students in an assembly, black teacher. They shouldn't have done that, well I took--those the kind of cases I'm taking. God willing, we will get justice for them. Speaker 1: Okay. Is there any--I haven't been to Chicago in about a year. So I mean I haven't lived here in a year. But is there any big case pending now that you-- Speaker 2: Now? Speaker 1: [Unclear] created a lot of keen interest. Speaker 2: Interestingly enough, my late wife used to always tell me every case you get is a big case. If it's, if it's spitting on the sidewalk, you treat it as though it's the biggest case in your career. And that's, that's true. Every case I have is a big case. It may not be highly publicized, but to the litigants, it's a big case. Story_ID: 72086 Speaker 1: When you look back at everything you've done to this point, and all the cases of your career as a judge, your political runs for mayor and for state's attorney, is there any major thing that you would do differently now? Speaker 2: Well I think one of the mistakes that was made in--was it '91 [1991] when I ran for mayor? Whatever it was. Speaker 1: Yeah, I think the Harold Washington Par-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I should have run in the primary against him instead of in the general election as a Harold Washington party candidate because the black community is just Democratic Party oriented. We just--and since the Great Depression, we are Democrats and Democratic Party's served our interest and I think I would have done that differently. But other than that, offhand I can't think of anything I'd do differently. Speaker 1: Just to point out most people don't realize that in Chicago everybody's a Democrat, right? Speaker 2: Well that's true. Speaker 1: Friends and enemies are all Democrats. Speaker 2: Yes, that's true. We don't have a, a viable dual party system in Chicago, and that's tragic, that's unfortunate. And that's why we are being denied our share of the political benefits because we don't have a dual party system in Chicago. And in reality, the black voter is the most loyal, dedicated and disciplined Democratic Party voter. But we don't derive our appropriate share of benefits from being loyal, loyal Democrats. And one of the reasons because we don't have a dual party system. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 72087 Speaker 1: Now also when you look back at everything you've done to this stage in your career, and you're, you're past the age that most people, people would have retired and been playing golf and all those other things. Speaker 2: I don't play golf. Speaker 1: Okay. I know you're not retired. But you--when considering everything you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: Well I've done my best. I'm doing my best. If I could adequately, accurately describe for you my roots, where I came from, you'd recognize that just me sitting here talking to you is a monumental achievement. When I was admitted to the bar in 1951 in Illinois, racism and sexism was dominant. As a matter of fact, we went to Springfield [Illinois] to be sworn in as a lawyer, and the Springfield hotels would not accommodate us blacks. Didn't need to segregate against me, 'cause I didn't have enough money to go in the hotel in the first place, but I have tried to make my people aware and sensitive to who they are. Proud, to be proud of their heritage, country and what they have been culturized into believing. I was taught and I was indoctrinated very, very strongly with the concept that we are a strong people. I was indoctrinated with the concept that we are a wise people. I was indoctrinated with the concept that but for the fact of our strength and our wisdom, we wouldn't be here. The fact that we survived and it was said, Jerry Butler [HM] says only the strong survive. I was taught and I was indoctrinated with the concept that those of us who were captured and put into slave dungeons and awaiting the arrival of the slave ship on the east coast of Africa, packed into the dungeons like sardines and then put on the boat. [unclear] days across the Atlantic Ocean, the equator, into the Caribbean. Weather was tremendously hot and there were no running water on the slave ships. There's no Charmin on the slave ships. There's no toothpaste or toothbrushes on the slave ships. And many of them died and was thrown overboard. But the strong made it. And obviously somebody made it 'cause I'm here. And whoever made it, was strong. And I was taught this; that we're strong, not, not weak. We're smart, not stupid. The fact that we survived 400 years and, and the books talk about the atrocities of slavery in two or three paragraphs like it was a couple of days, an adventure. We're talking about 300 years of oppression, abuse. And yet we, we made it. And I often tell people in the Constitution of the United States of America there are fifteen provisions relative to slavery. Fifteen provisions of the Constitution relative to slavery. Matter of fact, the, the single subject of which the Constitution of the United States directs itself most, is slavery, and yet we made it and we're here. And in every area in which black people are allowed to compete in America, not only do we succeed, but we excel. And to suggest that we are inferior, to suggest that we have--don't have the talent, the skills, is, is just, it's stupid. And for black people to be--many of us have been culturized in believing that because we've been ostracized, we've been discriminated and we've been abused. And we have been philosophically indoctrinated with a concept that's to our detriment. So I'd like for my legacy to be that I'm standing tall and will continue to stand tall on behalf of black people. We've been embarrassed and ashamed into acknowledging racism exists, don't talk about that. Here comes [unclear]. I'm gone talk about it as long as I see it. Gon' do something about it as long as I can. And I'm not by any means ashamed of [unclear]I'm proud of who I am. I'm proud of black people. The Germans loved Germans, the Italians love Italians, Greeks love Greeks, Spaniards, love Spaniards, French love French, Germans love Germans. Black, I love blacks 'cause I'm black. Born black, gon' die black. In between those two events, I'm gone stay black. And not ashamed of it; proud of it. Story_ID: 72088 Speaker 1: Now you're the, the hero of many. You're often invited to commencement ceremonies to speak and, and so forth. Who, who are some of your personal heroes? Speaker 2: My personal heroes, in addition to those that you ordinarily think about, Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] and Thurgood Marshall and Fannie Lou Hamer, Clarence Reeb [sic, Reverend James Reeb], [James] Chaney, [Michael] Schwerner, [Andrew] Goodman. But in addition to those that you've never heard of, the school that I attended in Limestone County, Alabama [Trinity School, Athens, Alabama] was founded in 1866 by an organization called the American Missionary Association. It changed its name, it was an abolitionist organization during and before the Civil War, but changed its name to the American Missionary Association so that it would not be identified in the South as an abolitionist organization when it came down. But they founded the school that I attended in Limestone County, the grammar and high school. And to give you an idea of who--what the organization was, it also founded such prestigious schools in the south during the Reconstruction Period, as Fisk University in Nashville, Tennessee, LeMoyne College in Memphis, Tennessee, Talladega College in Talladega, Alabama, Tougaloo College in Tougaloo, Mississippi, Berea College in Berea, Kentucky. And was cofounder of Dillard University in--with the Trinity United Church of Christ, in New Orleans, Louisiana. They founded many, many grammar and high schools throughout the south during Reconstruction to aid the newly emancipated slaves to become educated and to become assimilated into the new culture. The teachers that were in our school were from New England. They came from Massachusetts, Connecticut, Vermont, Pennsylvania. And they were white missionaries, truly missionaries. And they came down from New England in September. And they stayed in the--what they--building called the Teachers' Home on the campus of the school from September until June. They were ostracized from the white community in Limestone County, Alabama. As a matter of fact, the school was burned down at least four times. And every time they burn it down, they built it better because the people there hadn't heard of insurance. And what started, what caused them to discontinue burning it down was because every time they burned it down, they built it better. And you go to my hometown right today, there is a monument there where the cistern was built by slaves, made with hand brick, handmade bricks to build a cistern there in downtown Athens, Alabama, where the school was originally located. But these teachers, these missionaries, Congregational Church, Presbyterian Church, Methodist Church, were true missionaries in the true sense of the word. And they were very, very highly indoctrinated with the Christian principle. In fact if you walked in front of somebody and didn't say excuse me, or somebody handed you something and you didn't say thank you, they'd have a prayer meeting right then and there. Lord, teach this young boy to be respectful for those--so forth, so on. Story_ID: 70573 Speaker 1: Okay, sir. If you could pick, pick up where you were, you were talking about your school [Trinity School, Athens, Alabama] and-- Speaker 2: The missionaries [at American Missionary Association] were extremely dedicated, committed, truly committed to the principles of Christian missionary work. They taught us well academically, culturally, and they instilled within us certain principles. They would always say we are here to sacrifice to help you. They instilled within us the principle that the purpose of your life is to use your life to help somebody else to make the world better. I did not have the faintest idea as I was growing up, how deeply instilled there--those principles were embedded within me. They taught us that, that you, you're, you're to use your talent to help somebody. We practiced football, played football and baseball. The principle was to help your teammate. You win the game by playing as a team, helping your teammates. We were taught that when you don't do your best, which was instilled within me as well, that it's a sin. That when you go to the classroom and don't do your best. It's a sin when you go home and don't do your homework. We were taught that and we believed that. And more importantly, we were taught that the reward for using your life for the benefit of the human race, is eternal life. We were taught that, that you do what you can for others and when you reach the point that this life is ended, you're transformed from one life as you now know it into an eternal life. And those are the persons to whom I boastfully give credit for guiding me and indoctrinating me and showing me the way and the purpose of what, of, of, of my life. You achieve not for yourself, but for others. Your achievement is in helping others. Your achievement is doing for others; making the world better for somebody else. And if you look at it, if you look at history, those persons who have been designated as true historic--true, true benefactors to the human race, are those persons who gave of themselves for the benefit of mankind. We just celebrated a man's birthday here Monday. He gave his life. Not for himself, but he gave his life trying to help somebody else, helping black people. Abraham Lincoln gave his life, for what? Trying to help. Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.], Fannie Lou Hamer, Medgar Evers, go down the list. Not only blacks, but whites as well are noted for, historically for using their lives to help other people. And those are the persons I attribute--are my heroes. In fact, two of the ladies, two of the teachers, Ms. Perkins and Ms. Tawry [ph.] in their wills they created, that they be cremated and their ashes spread on the Trinity campus, and they were spread on the Trinity Campus. Ms. [unclear] H. Allen was a principal for thirty-something years and Ms. Davis taught the ninth grade, Ms. Inez Frent [ph.] taught the seventh grade. These people really indoctrinated to the extent that when I went to college, I went to college four years and didn't buy a book. I went through Tennessee State [University, Nashville, Tennessee] and didn't buy a book because the education I got in high school was comparable to what Tennessee State was teaching in college. Story_ID: 70574 Speaker 1: Now tell us something about your family. I know your wife [Alzata Pincham] passed not too long ago. Speaker 2: We met, I met my wife in September of 1944, '45 [1945], '45 [1945]. I was washing dishes in the Tennessee State [University, Nashville, Tennessee] cafeteria for students and it was right after the war had ended and the campus was overcrowded with veterans coming from the war, coming to college. The war ended--some August of 1945, World War II. And the campus was overcrowded, cafeteria was overcrowded. And I was working the cafeteria washing dishes. And the rule was that students who finished their meal would take their tray, the dirty dishes to the dirty dish room and put 'em in the window, scrape 'em and stack 'em. And the reason was to enable us to wash dishes faster. And this young lady came up to the window and set her tray in the window and turned around and walked off. And I looked at her and I called her back in language that would be inappropriate to repeat here. And told her come back and stack her dishes. And she looked around, turned around and she said I'm sorry, but you don't have to speak to me in that language or in that tone of voice. I forgot to scrape my dishes, stack 'em. And I responded if you did what you supposed to do, scrape and stack your dishes, I wouldn't have to speak to you at all. And she came back and she leaned over and--to put her tray back to stack her dishes--this is true. And as she did so, she had on a beige v-neck, wool, form-fitting sweater. And as she leaned over to pull the tray, I looked down at the V. And what I saw fascinated me. And she scraped and stacked her dishes and she turned to walk away. And as she did so, she didn't have on a girdle. And what I saw was a small waistline and unimaginable, beautiful hips. And I said to her if you are standing--wait outside when I get off, we'll finish this conversation. And she kept walking out of the cafeteria. The school library closed at 9:00. Students congregated in front of the cafeteria from nine until ten because the female students had to be in their dormitories at 10:00, unlike today when they're indiscriminate going and coming and roommates. But girls lived in dormitory, boys lived in the boys' dormitory. Boys couldn't go in the girls' dormitory, girls couldn't go in the boys' dormitory. But we could walk the girls to their dormitory. And students congregated in front of the cafeteria because that's where they came in to buy little snacks and what have you, to take to the rooms at night. So when I got off at 9:00 and went out in front of the cafeteria, she was out there. And I was arrogant and pompous enough to believe that she was out there waiting on me. In reality, she was just out there with the other students. So I walked up to her and talked to her, and began to talk to her and one word led to another. And I asked her could I walk her to the dormitory, which was about a three or four minute walk. I don't recall whether she said yes or no, didn't make any difference, I was gon' walk her anyway. So we walked to the dormitory and we talked as we walked and we walked and talked from that day until she passed on the 9th of April, 2005. We were very close in college. I had to work my way through school, mopping floors, whatever assignment I had. She was there watching me; we courted while I mopped floors. We courted while I stoked the furnace on the campus. We were so close until the faculty and many of the students thought we were married. And the matron of the dormitories would always say to Alzata, you need to tell us that you're married so that if anything happens to you, we will know about it and we can justify whatever actions you may be taking because you're married. Well Alzata couldn't tell her we married, 'cause we weren't. But that's how close we were. Story_ID: 70575 Speaker 1: We graduated June of '47 [1947]. We sat side-by-side, although we shouldn't have because you sat according to your division. She [Alzata Pincham] was in business, I was in math, political science, but we sat side-by-side. I shouldn't have graduated because I owed money. And they allowed me to graduate. And after the graduation ceremony [at Tennessee State University in Nashville, Tennessee] when they was--we were standing out in front of the building for the photographer to take our class picture, the Bursar was coming through the group, getting diplomas back that had been given as we walked across the stage. I saw him coming. And I gave my diploma to her and she stuck it down in her bosom. So when the, the Bursar, Dr. Sasser [ph.] got to me, I said you got mine, Dr. Sasser. Yes, yes, yes, he checked it off. And that's how I got my diploma, my degree. And if you go in my office today and look on my wall where it is now laminated, it does not have a, a date on it because I was not supposed to get it because I owed 'em money. I paid 'em of course. But when I finally got it out of the storage to laminate it, I saw it didn't have a date on it. I wouldn't insert the date. I just had it laminated as it was. We married on the 31st of August, 1948. She came to Chicago [Illinois] in December of 1948. I had finished one year of law school [Northwestern University School of Law, Evanston, Illinois]. She got a job teaching at the Board of Education in January of 1949. She taught from January '49 [1949] until March of 1959, during which time we had three children, Robert Jr., Andrea Michelle [unclear], and Jim. And when she birthed Jim on the 20th of March 1959, she did not go back to work from that day until she passed in August, in April of 19--or 2005. [Unclear] during the period of time she was working, teaching for ten years, she never cashed her check. Check came in the mail. When it come, she'd always say the check's on the dresser. Years later, why'd you do that? She said because I know you wanted to be the boss. I knew you wanted to be the man of the house. And I didn't want to be--didn't want you to feel beholden to me. Let me add this to it too. Before we got married, I visited her. She lived on a farm in Blount County, Tennessee. One of the border lines of the farm was the Tennessee River. And it flows south and westerly out of east Tennessee, down in north Alabama, across north Alabama where I was reared, then it makes a turn to go back north at the Mississippi side, across Tennessee, back into Lyle River. But I visited her on the farm, and the farm is still there. And it's so far back up in the mountains, in the hills, I could not possibly tell you how to get there. She couldn't tell me how to get there. They'd meet me on the highway, it was just so far back up in the woods. Right on the river. When I visited her, she's the youngest of three daughters. And the four women, the mother and the three daughters and her dad was sitting down for dinner at the kitchen table. And they literally worshipped the man, their daddy. They, they actually worshipped him. He was very, very quiet. I don't think I heard him say two words in the years that I knew him. He'd raise his eyebrow and four women would say "Daddy you want? You want some--" One would pour his water, one would butter his bread, one fix his plate. And he'd get up from the table after he'd eaten. They'd rush into the bedroom, which was right off the kitchen, turn his cover back, fluff his pillow, give him his pajamas. I said they must be showing out for me. Ain't no way in the world nobody [unclear] man this way. I, I really thought that. So I told my mother [Hazel Caldwell]. I said you know, just what I related to you. Say they worship this man and he grew tobacco. He wouldn't allow them in the field where he worked. So I said to my mother I believe they just showing off for me. I don't think they could possibly be as sincere about this man. She said, well if you think that, say what you do son, is you go back without them knowing you coming. Go back unannounced visit. Just walk in one day and say here I am. That's a good idea. And I did that. When I got back, man they worshipped him more when I came unannounced than they were, than they were when, when I was announced. So I--she came from a family where the man was the man of the house and the, the mother and the daddy got along just like that. And I was married for fifty-eight years to this girl. And I can sit and tell you before me and God, we never had an argument. We never spoke to one another harshly. I didn't say we didn't disagree, we did often disagree, but it was always a compatible disagreement. It was always a discussion. If the discussion came when it was over, we would decide which position we should take as a couple and we took that position. My children tell me today that they laugh and tell us we used to slip around the house at night and try to see if y'all arguing. We'd get up at night and ease up to your room and see if you were arguing 'cause they say we knew you couldn't be getting along as well as we did. But our children never heard us say one harsh word to, to each other. Our children never heard us argue, our children never heard us angry with one another. They've heard us disagree. But the disagreement was always compatible and cordial. I had a happy marriage, a good marriage, pleasant marriage. Matter of fact, I ought to write the book on marriage. Matter of fact, I think I might do that. Story_ID: 70576 Speaker 1: Okay. Now what about your children? Speaker 2: Well the oldest boy ran track and played football up at Harlan High School [Chicago, Illinois]. He won the 100 and the 220 in the state championship meet, track meet in 1968 as a junior in high school. He went to Michigan, University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] on a track scholarship, graduated, then went to Northwestern University Law School [Evanston, Illinois] and finished and became a lawyer. My daughter was a cheerleader. And she went to Dickinson College [Carlisle, Pennsylvania], she cheerleader at Harlan. And I hasten to point out that of all the track meets and football games my oldest boy and youngest boy for that matter played, we never missed a track meet, we never miss a football game, nor did she, in four years. And in the four years that the youngest boy who went to Morgan Park Academy, out at 111th and Bell, he played football, we never missed a football game he played in. Went to every one, and never missed a track meet he was in. The daughter went to Dickinson College in Carlisle, Pennsylvania and finished, and then went to University of Illinois Med[ical] School and became a doctor. She's emergency room physician now down in Birmingham, Alabama. The youngest boy went to Duke [University, Durham, North Carolina] from Morgan Park Academy and finished Duke and then went to Northwestern University Law School and became a--finished law school. He's living in Milwaukee [Wisconsin] at the moment. The youngest, oldest boy lives across the alley over on Wabash Avenue. My daughter lives in Birmingham. Speaker 1: Okay. You have any grandchildren? Speaker 2: I have two. The oldest boy has a boy, eighteen, he's at Bowling Green [State] University of [Bowling Green,] Ohio. The youngest boy has a daughter who's about seven, she's over on 101st and Halsted. Story_ID: 70577 Speaker 1: Okay. Now is there anything I have not asked you? And I know we--it's taken three sessions to get this interview to this stage and we still might have to come back for something. Speaker 2: That's all right. Speaker 1: Anything to your knowledge that I wouldn't think to ask that you think we ought to address before I ask my last question. Speaker 2: Well, you mentioned my children and their education. We were very active in that education. As I mentioned to you earlier, we never missed a track meet or football game. We never missed a PTA [Parent Teacher Association] meeting. We were up at Harlan High School and at Morgan Park Academy every time the doors opened. The youngest boy who went to Morgan Park Academy became the president of the senior class, it was a white school, predominantly white. We never missed a meeting there. But I am convinced that the basic shortcoming in Chicago [Illinois] for blacks today is in public education. Our children are being shortchanged. It's unfortunate that there's no school and no place you can go to get a degree on being a good husband or a good wife. There's no school or college or university you can go to, to get a degree on how to rear children. Parents rear their children as they were reared. Parents are the kind of husband and wives that their parents were. But our children are being tremendously shortchanged because I don't think that the Chicago educational system is designed to educate our children. I think it's designed to provide jobs for those people who are working, and to provide a means for these various businesses to profit from the system. And I think our system--and it makes sense to me because--we were taught really as I grew up down south, and in fact it was a violation of the law, it was a felony to teach black folks to read or write during Reconstruction, it was a felony. And we were taught by these missionaries [American Missionary Association] that the system does not want us educated, and we could understand why. And that's why--and, and, and in fact there was no public school above the third grade for blacks in Limestone County [Alabama], and the schools that I attended, Trinity [School], didn't close until 1977. It didn't--even twenty years after Brown versus Board of Education. And I'm going back again, should be going back this month, back down there to try to take care of the property on which the school is located, but that's another story. But that's--I think, I think that's a problem that we've got to deal with ultimately. Our children not being properly inspired, motivated or educated. Story_ID: 70578 Speaker 1: You mentioned culture earlier. What, what, what do you mean specifically by culture and what would you consider the kind of culture that we need in our community today? Speaker 2: A culture--we were taught again, that if you don't do your best, you're sinning. We were also taught that liberation comes from education. We were also taught that all wealth comes from the land. These missionaries [American Missionary Association] taught us this. All wealth comes from the land. And I'm won't sit here and try to expound on that further than by saying it's a true statement. And we were taught God ain't gone make no more land. And we didn't get any land when the land was being distributed because we were enslaved. And the vehicle of, of acquiring a better life is an education. You got to get something in your head to sell. That a better livelihood comes from having something to sell. And the more unique that commodity is, the more valuable and more money you can get for it, and that's true. Diamonds are valuable because they're unique and they're rare. The higher education, the better job you get; we were taught this. Our children aren't being motivated. Our children aren't being taught this. Children--you can go to a high school right now and ask why you in high school? Hell, he don't know. We were taught--we went to college. And, and, and nobody told us how. We were told but--it wasn't whether, it wasn't if, it was when, when you go. You are going to college. And I left home to go to college on a freight train. I didn't have fifteen dollars in my pocket when I got to Tennessee State [University, Nashville, Tennessee]. And my mother [Hazel Caldwell] advised me, admonished me to get a job in the cafeteria 'cause you can eat. And once you eat, everything else falls in place. But we were taught that. These, these children are not taught--they now want grants and scholarships. We didn't have grants and scholarships. Scholarship for this here, and this, that was [unclear] scholarship. But our children are not being indoctrinated with the reason, the desire to go to school. And I'm here to tell you, and I say this. It's going to be even worse in the next ten or fifteen years, it's almost at the point now you have to have a Ph.D. to open up a can of sardines. You buy, you buy a computer. Matter of fact I got one in there now I can't even operate it, and I know I'm intelligent. But my daughter does it for me. But I believe that if we don't, if we don't, if we don't take a second look at the education system in our city, and, and, and the concept is poor. For example when the budget crisis comes, they take away the most important thing from education, that is playing. Children wanna play. Children want to play. You've got to give them a motive to come here. I, I can remember very well in high school dissecting a frog. I can't remember a damn thing from it, other than I dissected the frog. I barely remember dissecting an earthworm, I can't remember a damn thing from it, except I dissected the earthworm. But I can sit and tell you what I learned out there on that football field Monday through Friday is still with me. What I learned out there playing baseball is still with me. What I learned about teamwork and companionship and achievement and, and hard work is still with me. And our children need to be motivated. I would say if I ran the Board of Education, you couldn't graduate without participating in an extracurricular activity. It'd be compulsory. You may not be able to play football, but you can run track. If you can't run track, you can swim. If you can't swim, you can, you can sweep the floor. They ought to be compelled to engage in some kind of extracurricular activity. You see kids walking up and down the street today, going back and forth to school and don't even have a book in their hand. That would be my comment about our present circumstances because in, in ten years mister, if you don't have a degree, an advanced degree, you ain't gon' be able to make it. You just won't be able to make it. Story_ID: 70579 Speaker 1: Okay. I sit here and I'm looking around. I see a lot of African art on the wall, you know black art, Jacob Lawrence. Does that play a role in cultural--in the cultural development? Speaker 2: Of me? Speaker 1: Yeah, I mean the art and the-- Speaker 2: I, I love it. I love it. I'll show you some more before you leave here. Speaker 1: Okay. And we're gonna get to the pictures I guess at the end here. But our last question we ask is similar to legacy, but a little different. Sir, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: As one who cared about his people. As a person who cared about his people. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I often use this adage. I'm doing my best to help others, to make life better for others. I'm using my life to help others, to make life better for others 'cause I don't want no debate at the gate. I don't want no mess out of Peter. When he see me coming, I want him to open the gate and say come on, brother. I don't wanna have to argue with him at the gate. And I don't think I will, really. Speaker 1: I don't think you will either. Speaker 2: I don't think I will. Speaker 1: Thank you very much. Speaker 2: My pleasure, my pleasure. Story_ID: 68573 Speaker 1: That's a picture of my late wife [Alzata Pincham] and me. That picture was made--estimate about 1995. Speaker 2: That's a picture of my dad William Hugh Pincham, Senior. And I wouldn't dare try to estimate when it was made. I guess that was about 19-0- Speaker 1: Looks like the '60s [1960s], the continental suit. I don't know. Speaker 2: That was probably made around 1965, shortly before he passed. Ready? Speaker 1: Yes sir. Speaker 2: That's a picture of my mother, Hazel Julia Foote Pincham Caldwell, C-A-L-D-W-E-L-L. Speaker 1: Have a guess as to when that was taken? Speaker 2: She passed in 1960, that's about 1955. Speaker 1: All right, what about this? Speaker 2: That's a picture of my youngest son's daughter, my granddaughter Christina Jackson Pincham. That was taken about five years ago, she's now seven. Speaker 1: That's my oldest son's son. That's Robert E. Pincham, Jr.'s son, my grandson, Evan Eugene Pincham. And that was made about 2004 when he was probably a freshman in high school at Fenwick High School in Oak Park [Illinois]. Speaker 2: That's a picture of Alzata Cordelia Pincham, my late beloved wife. That was made when we were in college. That's about 1947 or '46 [1946]. Speaker 1: That's a picture of Alzata Cordelia Henry Pincham, my wife. That was made in the year 2004 or 5 [2005], shortly before she passed away on April 9th, 2005 she passed away. Speaker 2: That's a picture of--was taken during a political rally. On the extreme left, I beg your pardon, extreme right, there's Alzata my wife, yes that's my wife. Then next was me, then sitting to my right is Mayor Harold Washington. The two people to his right, I don't know. The person standing behind him is Eugene Sawyer [HM], right there. I don't know who the other--I should know the couple behind him, but I don't know who--I can't name who they are. That picture was made I guess probably during the '87 [1987] campaign. Speaker 1: That's a court artist drawing of me in the juvenile court in the Ryan Harris case. And that was in September of 1998. Speaker 2: That's a picture of artist--court artist drawing of me and the mother of eight, eight year old boy in the Ryan Harris case in juvenile court on August 29th, 2000. No, that's made during the trial of the civil case. August 29th, '05 [2005], yes, yes, during the civil case where Ryan Harris, no, the eight-year-old boy is suing the city for false arrest, false imprisonment and malicious prosecution, that's his mother on the witness stand being examined by me. August 20-- Speaker 1: That's a picture of me. That was probably made about 1928, '27 [1927], '28 [1928]. I couldn't have been more than three or four years of age. I was born in 1925. It was a small camera. Speaker 2: That's picture of my brother, William E. Pincham. That was made about 1928, '29 [1929], when we were three or four years of age. Speaker 1: [OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION] Speaker 2: That's my brother holding the ball. That's me in front of my mother, standing in front of my mother. I can't see who the other people are. Speaker 1: Okay, so that was about 1929. Okay. Speaker 2: That's my mother Hazel Julia Foote Pincham Caldwell. And that had to have been made around 1927, '28 [1928], shortly after I was born. Speaker 1: That's a picture of my class at Trinity [School, Athens, Alabama]. I guess I was about the first or second grade. And that's me behind the X. And yes, well you, you drop down a little, there you go, that's me. That's on the steps of the--going into the building I went to school. You want picture of the house? I was reared in a shack, I was reared in a-- Speaker 2: That's the shack I was reared in, my home. That's a pecan tree in the backyard. That tree is still standing and still bearing pecans. It's got to be over 100 years old, yeah. 'Cause it was, it was that big when I was a child. It's still there and still bearing pecans. House is torn down of course. Speaker 1: The South could be such a paradise if it wasn't for--the South could be such a paradise if it wasn't for the people. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. That's my dad. And that was made in 19-- Speaker 1: One moment. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Okay now I'm ready. Speaker 2: That's my dad, William E. Pincham, Sr. And that was made in the early '40s [1940s] in Chicago here. Speaker 1: That's a picture of me and my brother William E. Pincham, Jr. And we was called Bitter and Bobby. That was probably made in the early '30s [1930's], and it's probably a picture made at the fairground. I couldn't have been older--ten, twelve years old at the time. Speaker 2: That's a picture of me, I was either in the first or the second grade, going to Trinity. Speaker 1: That's a picture of Trinity School, the school that I attended, grammar and high school. Founded by the American Missionary Association in 1869, 1866 rather. Story_ID: 68574 Speaker 1: That's Wells Cottage, the teacher's home. That's where the faculty lived, which was about 100 yards across the campus from the, from the school building, called the Teachers' Home where the teachers lived from September until June on the campus, the faculty from New England. Speaker 2: They called it Wells? Speaker 1: Wells Cottage. Speaker 2: That is a picture of the--some of the faculty and some of the officials--some of the faculty at Trinity [School, Athens, Georgia]. And some of the officials of the American Missionary Association who would periodically come to the school from visiting. The lady on the extreme left, my right, is Ms. Louise H. Allen, who was the principal, who was from Connecticut. And I cannot identify the other two ladies or other two gentlemen, but I know they were officials of the NAA--of the American Missionary, American Missionary Association. Speaker 1: That's Ms. Mildred Groupie and I believe Ms. Perkins, who were missionaries of the faculty at Trinity School. I can't tell you when that picture was taken, probably 1927, '28 [1928]. Speaker 2: That's a picture 1973. On the left is our youngest son Jim, standing next to him is our daughter Sandy, and next is me and standing next to me is my wife and mother Alzata Pincham. And the extreme right end is Scooter, the oldest boy, Robert E. Pincham, Jr. Speaker 1: That's Robert E. Pincham Jr. on the right in his arms holding is his, is his son, my grandson, Evan Eugene Pincham. Speaker 2: And the lady is Rosa Parks. Was made in Detroit [Michigan] when [Nelson] Mandela was released from prison and came to America, about 1990. I can't remember the year. But it, it had to be close--Evan was born, when Sandy? 1989? Speaker 1: That might have been-- Speaker 2: Nineteen ninety [1990], ninety-one [1991]. Speaker 1: Ninety-one [1991]. That was made in Detroit when Mandela made his first trip to America on his release from prison. It was the year before-- Speaker 2: That was in '90-- Speaker 1: Either one or two. Speaker 2: Yeah, '92 [1992]. Speaker 1: That's a picture of my daughter Sandy, Andrea Michelle Pincham, my wife--doc--Alzata Pincham and me. We were on a cruise in the Caribbean, I don't remember what year it was. Speaker 2: [OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION] Speaker 1: Yes, that's my graduation picture from Northwestern University School of Law [Evanston, Illinois], January 24th, 1951. Speaker 2: Which one is you, can you point to yourself? Speaker 1: Well look at the only black on there. Speaker 2: Okay I see you. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's right. I'm the only black in my class. One woman in my class, one woman in law school. Elaine Strothchild [ph.] is her name. Speaker 2: [OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION] Speaker 1: Newton-- Speaker 2: Yeah, he's a classmate of mine. Speaker 1: Isn't he the man that said that TV is vast wasteland? Speaker 2: That's right. That's exactly who it was. He's my classmate. Speaker 1: Northwestern University School of Law, Northwestern University Board of Trustees never allowed the different graduate schools to have an independent, separate graduation ceremony in the history of the school. For reasons which I do not yet know, in 1978 the Board of Trustees allowed the law school to have a separate, independent graduation exercise. And the law school faculty and, and students invited me to be the guest speaker at that ceremony. Speaker 2: Independent, now how, how do they divide it up? Speaker 1: When, when, when Northwestern University had its graduation exercise, all the, all the school graduated. Law school, medical school, all the schools. Speaker 2: This was a separate law school. Speaker 1: Separate graduate--the first time they'd allowed it. To have the grad--separate graduation ceremony. The law school invited me to be the guest speaker, and I was a speaker on June 17th, 1976. And they have not allowed a separate graduation since. Speaker 2: That's a picture that was made in 1987 when my youngest son graduated from law school. Is that right? Yes, that's him. And that's a picture of the fathers and sons and daughters of the Northwestern University Law School graduates. The man on the right, and that's his son, law school graduate. That's me and behind in the white coat and next to me is Scooter, my oldest son. And in front of us is Jim, our youngest son who graduated. The gentleman--the other people I don't know by name, but I know they're graduates of Northwestern University Law School where their children have graduated in 1987 when Jim graduated. Speaker 1: Mandela came to Chicago and was at the Swissotel July 1993. We were invited down and we had the honor and the privilege of meeting him and shaking his hand and making a contribution to his campaign when he was running for president of South Africa. And of course the lady to the left is my wife Alzata. The gentleman next to her in the background, was, I don't know who he is, but he was responsible for the--in part for the affair. That's Mandela and that's me to his right, to his left rather. That was one of the proudest moments of my life. Speaker 2: That's--from Olive-Harvey [College, Chicago, Illinois]--that's Speaker 1: That's right, that's right. Speaker 2: Rogers. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: Rogers, that's Rogers from Olive Harvey. Harold Rogers. Speaker 1: That's right. And I, and I'm here to tell you the, the atmosphere in the room changed in Detroit [Michigan] as well as in the hotel in Chicago when Mandela walked into the room. You could feel the difference when that man walked into the room. Speaker 2: That's a picture of "N'Digo" [unclear] Hartman magazine the, publishing editor, of me, [unclear] Powell, Lou Meyer and Andre Grant representing the seven and eight-year-old boys in the Ryan Harris sexual assault and murder case. And that had to have been taken in the Fall of--well it's on there, '98 [1998] isn't it? Speaker 1: Ninety-nine [1999]. Speaker 2: Taken April of '99 [1999], April of '99, yeah...