 Story_ID: 485829 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: Freddie Pitcher, Jr. F-R-E-D-D-I-E, P-I-T-C-H-E-R, Jr., J-R [HistoryMaker Freddie Pitcher]. Speaker 1: Now do you have a middle name? Speaker 2: No middle name. Speaker 1: And your given name is Freddie? Speaker 2: Given name Freddie. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: April 28, 1945, I was born here in Baton Rouge, Louisiana, Lady Lake Hospital, well, Our Lady of the Lake Hospital [Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana]. Speaker 1: All right, and what is your occupation? Speaker 2: Currently I'm the chancellor of the Southern University Law Center in Baton Rouge, Louisiana. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is March 24, 2008. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're presently at the Southern University Law Center in the chancellor's conference room. Story_ID: 485830 Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that management compels me to ask of everyone, and they only require a short answer. The first one is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Yes, I really like fish of--really all kinds, but if it's fish, I like it. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue. Speaker 1: Favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Spring. Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: I like Florida, Orlando [Florida] in particularly. Speaker 1: Okay, the last question is do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: I really don't. Story_ID: 485831 Speaker 1: Well I'm gonna ask about your family history, I'm gonna ask your mother's side of the family and your father's [Freddie Pitcher, Sr.] side, but we'll start with your mother's side first. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Lucy, L-U-C-Y, Angrum, A-N-G-R-U-M, Pitcher [Lucy Angrum Pitcher] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) A-N, I'm sorry? Speaker 2: A-N-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --G-R-U-M, Pitcher. Speaker 1: Angrum, okay. Speaker 2: Angrum, yes. Speaker 1: I never heard that name before, is there a story behind that name that you know? Speaker 2: Other than the fact that I, I understand that they are related to some folks who spell their names Ingrum, I-N-G-R-U-M, and at some point I think either their grandfather or father changed from the Ingrum to Angrum, and I, I don't know when or why, but (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, so it is a derivative of Ingrum, a name that you-- Speaker 2: Yes, that's, that's what-- Speaker 1: You normally see with an I. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Or sometimes with an E. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Ingrum, okay. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And sometimes it's Ingrum like that you know. Okay, so Angrum Pitcher, do you know about what time in history that was changed? Was that, was it--? Speaker 2: No, I don't it just, it was passed down to me from my mother and, and how I got that was there is a guy who owns an upholstery shop in south Baton Rouge [Baton Rouge, Louisiana] and I was talking--my mother indicated that, that he was related to us. I said, "Well you know he spells his name Ingrum." She said, "Well you know, you know our grandfather changed the spelling of our name." Speaker 1: Okay-- Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: --so it was in your grandfather's generation-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --that it was changed, okay. Okay well t- what is your mother's date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: My mother's date of birth is May 6--gee whiz and a date--well she's now deceased. She would've been around eighty-four right now had she still been living, so. Speaker 1: So about 1924 I guess, or--? Speaker 2: Yes because my father was born in 1919 and, and he was five years older than she was. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: All right. And where was she born? Speaker 2: She was born in St. Francisville, Louisiana. Speaker 1: Okay, St. Francisville, Louisiana, okay. Now what do you know about your mother's side of the family? First of all, how far back can you trace her side? Speaker 2: Well I, I really can't trace 'em back that far because my mother, my mother's mother died at a very young age. My mother was young when her mother died. I, I don't have any recollection of my paternal grandfather [sic. maternal grandfather] either, and so when they moved to--from St. Francisville to Baton Rouge [Louisiana], it was basically in my understanding all of the siblings moved here and I think only the father may have been living at the time. The mother had already passed I think. Speaker 1: So about when did they move to Baton Rouge--did the family move to Baton Rouge? Was your mother still a little girl then? Speaker 2: My mother was still a little girl. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And there were about twelve in the family, and of the twelve, I think five--well say five or six of 'em remained in Baton Rouge, the others went to, moved to New York, and so we, we only had you know very little contact with the ones who moved away for a long time, and then as I grew older I was able to you know make contact with, with them, but as a youngster growing up, I hardly knew that other side of, well not other side of the family, but the brothers and sisters who moved away. Story_ID: 485832 Speaker 1: What did your people on your mother's [Lucy Angrum Pitcher] side do, I mean were they farmers or did they work in town doing something else, or--? Speaker 2: My--the sisters who lived here, and she had one, two, three sisters living in Baton Rouge [Louisiana], and they or one worked--well, two worked at, at cafeteria at school, lunchroom persons working in, in at a school. The other sister was a--remained a housewife you know all the years that I, I knew her. The--her brothers basically were laborers working with the construction companies. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, are there any, any stories in your family that were passed down about Reconstruction or slavery or any of that? Speaker 2: Not, not from that side of the family but from my, from my father's [Freddie Pitcher, Sr.] side, from my paternal side, not, not from the maternal side. Speaker 1: Okay, well we'll get to his side in a second. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: I just wondered if any passed down from the maternal side that-- Speaker 2: No, unfortunately, you know, we did not meet as a family unit that much off of my mother's side. It was--the big gatherings basically were, were always off of my father's side. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I think that was maybe largely contributed to the fact that you know a good part of our family had moved away and didn't have the reunions that we had on, on my father's side. Story_ID: 485833 Speaker 1: What's your sense of your mother's [Lucy Angrum Pitcher] growing up, did she talk about how it was to grow up and what--did she get a chance to finish school and, or (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My--she, she did talk about that, she talked about the fact that, you know how she you know did not have the opportunities to do some of the things that she wanted to do primarily because--well, she just didn't have the support. She talked about how she had to go and live with an older brother and how she was not very well received by the older brother's wife and how she had to you know put up with that and until she was you know could, able to move out of there--that situation, but she--at that time you graduated from high school in eleventh grade and, and she made it to the eleventh grade, but she didn't finish. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right, so she went to the eleventh grade but she didn't finish? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Now what did she do for a living, did she, was she basically a housewife or did she do-- Speaker 2: Basically a housewife to--for--and when I was in high school [McKinley Senior High School, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] my mother went to the J.M. Frazier Technical School [J.M. Frazier Vocational-Technical School; Baton Rouge Community College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] and took up cosmetology, and she became a hairdresser. My father [Freddie Pitcher, Sr.] built a room on the, onto our house, and that's where she set up her studio for to do, to do hair. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I have some very vivid memories of waking up on Saturday morning to the, to the smell of you know hair cooking (laughter), but, but she did well. She had a great clientele and a lot of customers and, and she helped to support the family that way and so it was--and she, she, she was good, she was good at it. Story_ID: 485834 Speaker 1: Let me ask you about your father's side of the family. Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Freddie Pitcher, Sr., F-R-E-D-D-I-E, P-I-T-C-H-E-R, Sr. (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. And what's his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: My father's date of birth, August 2nd, 1919. Speaker 1: And where was he born? Speaker 2: St. Francisville [Louisiana]. Speaker 1: Okay, now what do you know about his side of the family? Speaker 2: I guess a lot because my grandfather, George Pitcher, Sr., used to come down to our house often and we used to--you know he used to talk about you know growing up on the plantation. How life was you know back during that time, but I, I--all of his brothers and sisters they were very clandish [ph.]. We got together on a regular basis, most--it was ten in the family, and of the ten only one was living away, that was a sister--no, one was living in, in New York and then were two sisters who lived in New Orleans [Louisiana], but they were here in Baton Rouge [Louisiana] all the time. But of the seven all--they lived in the Valley Park community [Baton Rouge, Louisiana], area where I grew up, and so it was always some gathering going on out at somebody's house in the family. Speaker 1: Okay. Now you say your grandfather grew up on a pla- what did he say about growing up on a plantation? 'Cause I suppose the family would've been on that plantation from the end of slavery until I guess maybe your father's generation I guess, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, my, my, my grandfather, he died, he was 100, 101 when, when he died. Speaker 1: This is George. Speaker 2: George, right. Speaker 1: George Pitcher, Sr. Speaker 2: George, Sr., and so he was, he was on the very tail end, I don't think that he was a slave per se, but he was still on the plantation, but, you know, he talked about you know how tough it was. How they didn't, how they didn't--so many things that they didn't have and how they had to make do, and be going from the plantation to sharecropping on the same plantation and, and still not being able to you know make enough to--you're always the--the sharecropper was always behind the eight ball--never, never able to catch up because by the time he got his crop in he had to give it to the landowner be-you know in order to pay for the rent and so forth in order to--so, well, to satisfy the rent. But, in any event, he moved the family to Baton Rouge to the--down in an area called--well it was, it was down the Perkins Road, it was--you know we used to call it down in the country, but it wasn't in the Valley Park neighborhood, but it's a very rural area, and the family eventually moved from that very rural area into the Valley Park community, more of an urban setting, but still kind of rural. Story_ID: 485835 Speaker 1: Now is there any story or drama associated with how he [Pitcher's paternal grandfather, George Pitcher, Sr.] was able to manage his move? Now as a, as a sharecropper as you were saying, he always owed money, he was always behind, how did he manage to get out of that situation (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well you know I used to hear him talk about how they--I mean he moved down in a wagon I think, and the trip--how they packed up everything to move all the way from St. Francisville [Louisiana] to Baton Rouge [Louisiana], and may have taken you know several trips on that wagon over the course of, of several days, but it was--and, and I think, from what, from what I recall, a lot of people were moving off of the plantation at that time. And-- Speaker 1: Okay did something happen that, that-- Speaker 2: I, I think maybe-- Speaker 1: --made it legally possible for him 'cause I know a lot of the plantation owners would, could almost keep you there because you owed them money-- Speaker 2: Yeah, but I think that-- Speaker 1: --which-- Speaker 2: --this--they'd come on hard times at the plantation which, which made it you know pretty easy for you know-- Speaker 1: Possible for them to break off? Speaker 2: --for them to move away, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But he used to talk about, I mean, just how you know tough times were. I always wanted to sit down with him and record some of the stuff, and I'm, and unfortunately I didn't. For instance, 4th of July gatherings or something like that we would be together and, and my grandfather, you know, after having a few adult beverages you know would reminisce about you know back during the time on the plantation, so, how tough it was in the fields and all that kind of stuff and what (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Any specific stories that you remember? Speaker 2: I, I don't have any specific stories. Speaker 1: Okay. Well let me ask you this. Well, was it the work itself that made it so tough or the relationships between the owner and the-- Speaker 2: Work, yeah and--the work and the relationship, how they were treated. You know the treatment was horrible, not respected, you know all of the things that you hear about how things were probably during slavery other than the fact that they were not bound you know to the master, but-- Speaker 1: Well were they told things like they can't look a white person in the eye-- Speaker 2: Oh, oh-- Speaker 1: Get off the street-- Speaker 2: Yeah, all that kind of stuff. Speaker 1: --and all that kind of stuff you couldn't-- Speaker 2: Yeah, all that, yeah you couldn't walk the street and be on the same sidewalk, if you did you'd have to step off and let the white person by or you, you walked you know and you had to you know look down and as opposed to looking 'em in the eye and that kind of stuff. If you, if you did anything that, if you talked back you were an uppity nigger you know and all that kind of stuff you know. Speaker 1: Anybody--I know they had a horrible prison called Angola [Louisiana State Penitentiary, Angola, Louisiana] there was used to house people for all kind of petty offenses and stuff. Speaker 2: Right, right, well Angola--well that's what the threat was always over the head you know, well Angola's right up the street but it was just that you know the tenor of the times, it was just rough and, and tough on, on African Americans who--you know that was their plight. Story_ID: 485836 Speaker 1: Now is there a story about how your parents [Lucy Angrum Pitcher and Freddie Pitcher, Sr.] met? Speaker 2: I, my mom and dad I think vaguely knew one another from, from St. Francisville [Louisiana], and they kind of like lost touch and I think that they met at a dance or something and renewed you know the acquaintance, and-- Speaker 1: Okay, so did they meet in Baton Rouge [Louisiana]? Speaker 2: No they, they (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I mean get together in Baton Rouge? Speaker 2: --initially met in St. Francisville. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But they got to--really got together in Baton Rouge? Speaker 2: In Baton Rouge, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Yeah, they had gone to a dance or and also the--my great-uncle, Reverend W.M. Pitcher, who was a long liver also, he died at 107 still trying to preach then. He--they were members of his church, Sixty-Aid Baptist Church [Greater Sixty-Aid Baptist Church, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] and so I think that you know through that church association, as well as you know they were able to renew their early relationship. Story_ID: 485837 Speaker 1: Tell us about their personalities and talents and dispositions, and, and who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: I re- I think, I think I get something from both of them. My father [Freddie Pitcher, Sr.] only had a formal third grade education, but my father went back to night school and he did not complete his GED [General Educational Development], but he worked--he was at the twelfth grade level I think at the that he, he actually stopped. But my father was very aggressive, he was hired at Exxon [Exxon Mobil Corporation], which was back then was Standard Oil [Standard Oil Company], and he was one of the first African Americans at Exxon to, to get what they called then first-class pay. He was an avid reader, he--and I remember when I was in elementary school when he was going to, to night school, and, and I can vividly--saying--when I came in from school and, and if I didn't have homework, or if I told him I didn't have homework, and first, he'd say, you know, "If I can go and work all day, and go to school at night and, and come in and study after all of that, and you come from school, and that's all you have to do, and you're not studying, so you'd better get in there and, and study something." And you know that was a kind of push toward education that he put upon you know me and my brothers and sister. And you know because he personally wanted to improve himself, he took that to the job with him, and at the time they opened up positions other than being a laborer at Standard Oil, he was--he had to take a test in order to get hired in another position, and he took all kind of tests and he finally passed one and became a welder, and so he moved, so he was in that first group of African Americans who worked at Standard Oil who got equal pay to that of his white counterparts. Story_ID: 485838 Speaker 1: And I never forget there was a--we had a big celebration at the house when, when that happened because it was you know quite significant in terms of you know how much money he was making, and you know it also engendered a certain amount of respect in the community because Exxon [Exxon Mobil Corporation] had, had a--I mean well Standard Oil [Standard Oil Company] at the time you know had a lot of blacks working, but they all were laborers and you would hear these horrific stories about how they would--they only could ride on the back of the truck, it could be raining cats and dogs and you would--all the blacks would be on the back of the truck and, and the white driver would be up front with enough space for you know two other persons to sit in there, but they couldn't sit in the truck, or you would have just one person riding on the back, one black and, and a white driver, and, and it's raining cats and dogs and you know they couldn't ride in the, in the cab of the truck you know it was just you know--I use to get those stories all the time. My father [Freddie Pitcher, Sr.] worked at Exxon, he had two brothers and a cousin they all you know worked there. When I keep using Exxon and Standard Oil being the same. And, and my father was the youngest of the brothers working at--and he was the first amongst his brothers you know he--to, to get this upgrade in pay, and he progressed at Standard Oil. He moved from being a welder when his eyesight got bad to being a, an insulator and which even was supposedly another pay grade raise, and then he got to be one of those guy who, when he got further up in age, then he was the guy who was, was driving the, the bus. Course he was close to retirement at that time, but he was well respected by the younger African Americans who came to work at Exxon because he was you know somebody they could go to and he could to 'em and tell 'em about you know, you know the transition between the old and the new and how--'cause I had many of those guys to come and tell me you know how my father you know used to advise them and so forth so he was, you know he, he was--I, I was always impressed with how he handled himself on the job, he was a, he was a man. Speaker 2: Okay, so he was a--he basically worked during the '50s [1950] and '60s [1960] I guess? Speaker 1: He--yeah, yeah '50s [1950s], '50s [1950s] on up, I was--'cause I was in elementary school when, when he was--first started at, at Standard Oil. Story_ID: 485839 Speaker 1: So you think you take more after your father [Freddie Pitcher, Sr.] than your mother [Lucy Angrum Pitcher]? Speaker 2: Yeah, I think so in terms of you know that aggressive part because I'm--my mother was just a jewel of a person who, who believed in family, family sacrifice, do all those things that a mother would do in order to make sure her, her kids got what they needed. She, and you know she was a domestic, but that didn't work well with her because she was a person who also would say what's on her mind too, she didn't hold her tongue that much so, so she got fired (laughter) from a couple of jobs so, and so when she ended up going back to school, the technical college [J.M. Frazier Vocational-Technical School; Baton Rouge Community College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] and her becoming her own boss and being able to run her beauty shop. She turned out to be a pretty good business person and I think that you know I've turned out to be a pretty good business person also. And she you know she managed the household well and so you know she had some great attributes, and my dad had some great attributes. My father later in life drank a little too much, matter-of-fact too much, and so his, his retired life was not as, as good as it could've been. Story_ID: 485840 Speaker 1: We were talking about your parents [Lucy Angrum Pitcher and Freddie Pitcher, Sr.], and I think you were getting ready to tell us something about your father That-- Speaker 2: Yeah, my, my father did not enjoy his retirement the way I, I always thought he should have been able to, because you know financially he had no financial issues because of you know having worked at Exxon [Standard Oil Company; Exxon Mobil Corporation] for forty-three years he had a you know a great retirement, and--but because of his alcoholism that created a very you know tough situation for him and, and at time I had been elected to the bench [Baton Rouge City Court] and, and there were a lot of things that I wanted him to be involved in that he couldn't be, because you know he was just not up to it physically and so he, he you know his sobriety was, was a big issue for the entire family, but you know I had to give him due respect for--because the people that, that he helped along the way were people who stepped up to help me. You know to say that well, this is Freddie's son you know--Freddie--that, that meant a lot and it, it went a long way, but I was always just, just sad that he could not enjoy his, his retirement. Speaker 1: Okay, you think that the, I mean that the pressures of you know working at Exxon being the only black person to do a lot of things like just-- Speaker 2: Well, I mean I think you know that was part of it, I think that he, he did talk about you know how bad they were treated a lot. I mean it was--and especially when the brothers got together they would talk about you know, you know how tough it was to work at Exxon and how people used to do them and how they you know should've been paid more than they were paid and how they did all this hard work, and, but still I mean it was part of a, a custom of just getting together and drinking and, and so forth that I think it just got the best of him. He eventually--he had esophageal cancer and, and that's what he eventually died from. Story_ID: 485841 Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: You know, I, I--one of the things that I was thinking about would--you know I have you know a lot of childhood memories but one of the most enjoyable memories I used to have, well I have, is our loading up in the car, driving to New Orleans [Louisiana] to visit with our aunts down there, well my aunt down there, well it was two of 'em, and it was I mean didn't do it on a regular basis we'd probably go to, take a trip to New Orleans once a year, but when we did it, it was, it was a big thing. And we would kind of like go down in a caravan, several of the brothers and sisters from Baton Rouge [Louisiana], we'd all head down and would stay down all day and oh just family would get together and just be a, you know, big party. I had a couple of cousins who, very talented, played the piano and sing and stuff and we would just--all day long just a, just a big New Orleans party, and that was great, that was great you know I had just you know wonderful time. I always would remember that. Story_ID: 485842 Speaker 1: Now do you have a lot of musicians in your family? Speaker 2: Not really, off of, off--well my, my cousins in, in, in New Orleans [Louisiana], Ralph Cato, Ralph was a young kid at the time, but he was playing the piano then at an early age and was singing and when--and Ralph is now an opera singer, and he's based out of California and he's traveled all over the world singing, and, and I have a story about how he met my daughter, who's also an opera singer and--I can tell you about that now or I can tell you about it later. Speaker 1: Well tell us now since it's fresh now-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --then we'll go back to childhood, I guess. Speaker 2: Ralph left New Orleans a long time ago, and he went to California and we pretty much hadn't heard from Ralph in years. We knew that he was--he had gone to either USC [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California] or UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] and he was doing something, but no- nobody really knew what Ralph--'cause we hadn't heard from him in a long time. My, my daughter majored in music at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] and she auditioned for--at the University of South Carolina in Columbia [South Carolina] for a master's program. You had to go and, and sing and do an audition for an assistantship. And, and while there, she was invited to go to an opera that was being put on by the school, and they had invited this guy in to replace somebody on their faculty who had gotten sick to sing this particular role. And she was in the audience, and, and they did the opera and when it was over she was invited to come backstage to meet some of the cast. And so she was introduced to this guy who had this lead role. His name was Ralph Cato, and she didn't know who Ralph Cato was, and so when my daughter said, "Well hi, I'm Kyla Pitcher." And he said, "Pitcher?" He said, "Where are you from?" She said, "I'm from Baton Rouge [Louisiana]." He said, "Well I know some Pitchers from Baton Rouge. I'm, I'm related to some Pitchers in Baton Rouge." Well, actually, he said, "Do you know the Pitchers from Valley Park [Baton Rouge, Louisiana]?" She said, "Well, my dad [HistoryMaker Freddie Pitcher] grew up in Valley Park." He said, "Well I'm related to some Pitchers from Valley Park. I'm, I'm Ralph Cato, I'm your cousin." And all of a sudden, amongst all of these people, the two of them got to laughing and hugging and dancing around where they didn't know one another and all these other people looking at them, t- how, you know, what are they doing? You know, they just met one another. You know she came in here from Howard, and, and he was living in New York [New York] at the time and he--so strange thing. They that's, that's how they met so. Speaker 1: Both drawn to the same type of music-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --on the same, on a similar level. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: That's something, that is something. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, so, but it's not unusual in New Orleans to have musicians in the family I guess (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right. Speaker 1: And so you have somebody that could play the piano and do other things. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Story_ID: 485843 Speaker 1: Describe I guess the neighborhood you grew up in, and tell us what were some of the sights, sounds and smells of growing up. Speaker 2: (Laughter) I--smells, okay. Valley Park [Baton Rouge, Louisiana] is an all-black community, neighborhood rather, and it was--I don't know if it was a developed around the, the landfill, or the landfill was brought in after the community was--but it was a landfill around our neighborhood, and at, depending upon when the wind shifted, you would get this horrible smell from the landfill. So when you talk about smells, yeah, I have vivid remember- remembrances of the horrible smells of the landfill before they moved it. They eventually moved it from the area, matter-of-fact a school [Valley Park Elementary School; Valley Park School, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] is now on that very site where the landfill used to be, but, but Valley Park was a close-knit community. Most of the people in the Valley Park neighborhood were landowners; they owned their own homes. It had, of all of the, the African American communities in Baton Rouge [Louisiana], the Valley Park community had the lowest juvenile delinquency of all, and we attribute a lot of that to the fact that you know we were all you know homeowners out there, and, and most of the people had stable jobs. Like my father [Freddie Pitcher, Sr.] worked at Exxon [Standard Oil Company; Exxon Mobil Corporation], a lot of the people in that area worked at Exxon, or one of the plants. And had organized sports for the kids fr- off the playgrounds at--I remember the Little League baseball teams and--BREC park, the recreation center always had activities for the kids in the, in the neighborhood. And, and Valley Park was kind of like the neutral ground for other competing African American communities that fought against one another. They had South Baton Rouge [Old South Baton Rouge, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], had Scotlandville [Baton Rouge, Louisiana] and Eden Park [Baton Rouge, Louisiana], you always had the kids fighting against one another, but it--when folks came to Valley Park, it was understood that this was a neutral ground. You came to Valley Park, and none of that stuff used to go on. You know we had a lot of baseball games, softball games out there and you could come from Eden Park, you could come from South Baton Rouge and we would not have any of the stuff that would happen if somebody from South Baton Rouge went over to, to Eden Park. And I guess how that happened was because many of the guys in the Valley Park neighborhood were caddies at the golf courses where the guys from Eden Park also caddied, so we knew them, but we all went to school in South Baton Rouge at McKinley [McKinley Senior High School, Baton Rouge, Louisiana]. So, we had ties to both those communities and consequently that I guess kind of you know made us the, the neutral area. Story_ID: 485844 Speaker 1: Now did you know any, of any black lawyers growing up at all? Speaker 2: I--my, my cousin, I'm, I'm a lawyer today because I had a cousin who was in the first graduating class here at Southern [Southern University Law School; Southern University Law Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], Alex Pitcher. He was one of the first seven African Americans who graduated from Southern University Law Center--Law School at the time. Speaker 1: Okay so he came out with Jesse Stone [Jesse N. Stone] and Dutch Morial [Ernest Morial]-- Speaker 2: He was, he was-- Speaker 1: --is that--? Speaker 2: --well, Jesse was in the, in his class. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, Jesse was in his class, but it was Alex, Jesse Stone, it was seven of 'em, I can't recall (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I think Morial was one, in the first class? Speaker 2: No, no, no-- Speaker 1: He wasn't in the first class? Speaker 2: --Morial did not graduate from Southern Law School, he graduated from-- Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: --LSU [Louisiana State University Law School; Paul M. Hebert Law Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana]. Speaker 1: Oh, okay, all right. Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right. Speaker 2: He broke that, he broke that color barrier over there. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so this is the one that became the mayor, the first black mayor of New Orleans [Louisiana], Dutch Morial? Speaker 2: Yeah, Dutch, right, right. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: But, but Alex, Alex was an outstanding attorney and who was very active in the Civil Rights Movement in Baton Rouge [Louisiana], and as a youngster growing up I used to--he would come by the house and, and I, I admired how the family admired him, and he would--he was just like a rock star amongst the family. You know, folks would gather around and he would talk to them about various things that was going on in the movement at the time, cases that he was involved with, and I was pretty much enamored you know with that. He filed the fir- there's, there's a longstanding desegregation case [Davis v. East Baton Rouge Parish School Board] that was settled in Baton Rouge about a year and half ago that he was the initial lead counsel in-- Speaker 1: Just settled a year and a half? Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, it was probably the oldest desegregation case that was pending in, in the country at one, one point. Speaker 1: What was it about? Speaker 2: To des- desegregate the public school system in, in East Baton Rouge Parish [East Baton Rouge Parish Public Schools]. You know there was desegregated, but still the, the system was under court supervision, so it had not been taken under, from under court supervision until recently. But anyhow Alex did not end up having a, a good situation in Baton Rouge. He, he got disbarred, and he got disbarred primarily because of his civil rights activity, and, and because of that really my parents [Lucy Angrum Pitcher and Freddie Pitcher, Sr.] did not really want me to, to be a lawyer because of all the, the stuff that he went through after--. And it's amazing how his, his story un- unfolded. Story_ID: 485845 Speaker 1: I got a lot of this information from a, a white judge, who at a Christmas party started to tell me about--'cause he thought I was Alex's [Alex Pitcher] son, and he was a family court judge, Judge Pugh, George Pugh, not, not George, it was Judge Pugh [ph.], I can't think of his first name right now. But anyhow I--he pulled me off to a corner at this Christmas party, and he started telling how--wanted to know how Alex was doing and that how he was the assistant D.A. [district attorney] at the time who prosecuted him because he was actually prosecuted for a theft of client's funds, and, and they used that to, to disbar him, and that was to get him out of the civil rights business, and he, he told me he said straight up, he said, "Look, we offered Alex an opportunity out of this. We told him that he needed to you know quit that civil rights stuff and everything would be all right," and I know the whole thing. The theft of funds was from a relative who he was representing and who the D.A.'s office pulled in and squeezed on, on another issue. And my--I, I mentioned to you about my uncle, W.M. Pitcher, who was, Reverend W.M. Pitcher, who was very well-to-do and Alex's father was a, a preacher also and it wasn't a question of money because they could've paid the, the money back. It was questionable as to whether he owed the money anyhow, but they used the long arm of the law, as it was done back during those days, to, to leverage stuff that they wanted to leverage in order to get people out of the civil rights arena. So when Alex refused to drop the cases that he was working on doing some of the stuff they pressed this comingling of client funds and, and no one had ever went to jail on comingling clients' funds, but he actually was tried and convicted--matter-of-fact it was--I mean to hear the story the--you know how they--old saying, railroaded him, was, you know, classic. They actually even sent him to Angola [Louisiana State Penitentiary, Angola, Louisiana], never had a more, more as a traffic ticket and, and this was to, in turn, intimidate other black lawyers to try to get them from also likewise you know pushing the civil rights envelope in Baton Rouge [Louisiana]. Speaker 2: About what year was this when your cousin was--? Speaker 1: In something like '59 [1959], '60 [1960]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: It could've been as early at '58 [1958], between '58 [1958] and '60 [1960]. And he only stayed six months in Angola, but the irony of the whole thing, he could've done six months in Parish Prison [East Baton Rouge Parish Prison, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], but you know they wanted to use the Angola thing in order to exact punishment and invoke fear on other black lawyers. When he came out, he was working, not as an attorney, but clerking for an attorney here in the Scotlandville [Baton Rouge, Louisiana] area and they sent somebody in there, and the guy asked Alex for some legal advice, which I mean this man's been trained as a lawyer, but he's now working as a clerk, and he made the mistake of saying, well you ought to do this or do that, and now they threatened him, you either go back to prison, or you leave town. That night, he left Baton Rouge on a bus to San Francisco [California]. He got to San Francisco and went from washing cars to becoming an assistant to Mayor Alioto [Joseph Alioto]. He ended up running the Hunters Point Housing Authority [San Francisco, California]. He was president of the NAA- San Francisco Bay Area [California] NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. He was--became a very well-respected person in the San Francisco area. When he died, I went to his funeral. Willie Brown [HistoryMaker Willie L. Brown], who subsequently became mayor and who was then on the--in the legislature in San Francisco--I mean the entire city council, the mayor; they all came to his funeral. And--because he was a--you know very--he was a smart guy. Real articulate, I mean very well-spoken. And so he, he, he was my hero, he was, he was the guy who kind of set me on the path to, to become a lawyer. Story_ID: 485846 Speaker 1: Where did you first attend school? Speaker 2: Elementary school at the Valley Park Elementary School [Valley Park School, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], well I take that back. My first--I went to the Perkins Road Elementary School [Baton Rouge, Louisiana] for half a year because the Valley Park Elementary School had not been completed, and the second semester we moved into the new school at Valley Park. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (TAPE INTERRUPTION) Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay you have speed, Larry [Larry Crowe]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Okay, yeah-- Speaker 2: So started out Valley Park Elementary School after that half year at Perkins Road. Speaker 1: Okay, now did you like school? Speaker 2: Yeah, I did, and, and I did--again I think that again it came from the influence of my father [Freddie Pitcher, Sr.], and I always had perfect attendance. I, I mean I think from--I don't, unless I was sick, that's the only reason why I didn't go to school. I always felt I was gonna miss something, and I, I did like school. I--and it was in a you know I was thinking about this the other day you know academics to me really took off when I was in the fourth grade, and what I remember so vividly about that is a teacher of mine by the name of Ms. Godfrey [ph.] was teaching phonetics and, and using you know phonetics I was all of a sudden you know a light bulb went off and I was--my spelling improved, my reading improved and, then, man, I was you know I mean I was on a roll at that particular point. I, I remember that so vividly and how I just liked I you know started to blossom and so I you know, did okay. Speaker 1: Okay, did you have any favorite teachers or any teachers that served as a mentor or anybody (unclear) like that? Speaker 2: I think that even though I, I think I probably learned--my, my reading level just went up with Ms. Godfrey, but there was a Ms. Chrisentary, who, Ms. Chrisentary, I had her in the third grade and the sixth grade, and Ms. Chrisentary-- Speaker 1: Can you spell her name for us? Speaker 2: C-H-R-I-S-E-N-T-A-R-Y. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Ms., Ms. Chrisentary was a real hard taskmaster and I caught so many whippings from Ms. Chrisentary, and Ms. Chrisentary would whip me and she would call home and tell my parents [Lucy Angrum Pitcher and Freddie Pitcher, Sr.], and I'd get another whipping at, at home. So that was the third grade, so in the sixth grade I knew that, you know, I had to be very, very circumspect in how I dealt with Ms. Chrisentary because she was gonna whip me and call home you know. So I didn't want that to happen and she made such an indelible impression upon me. I remember I was (laughter) giving a speech many years later and Ms. Chrisentary was in the audience, and you know I said, "I see Ms. Chrisentary sitting there, and, and here it is I'm an adult, and I still feel today that Ms. Chrisentary is gonna call my house and I'm gonna catch a whipping," (laughter). She, she was really, she was really a pistol, but she was, she was a great teacher and she wanted very badly to expose African American kids to the finer things in life, and I think that in the sixth grade she went beyond the call of duty I think sometimes in trying to expose us to stuff that we would probably normally deal with at that, at that time. Story_ID: 485847 Speaker 1: Now when you were growing up was, were there any community centers that played an active role in what you were doing? Speaker 2: Like I said in, in the Valley Park [Baton Rouge, Louisiana] community there was a playground, and the, the initial playground was tied to, it was only like a summer thing and it was tied to, to the school, to the elementary school [Valley Park Elementary School; Valley Park School, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] and then when they moved the dump, and they reclaimed that area, they, they left the incinerator. Now, now you know dig this. The old incinerator was also redone because it was a solid building and when they got rid of the smoke stack and all that other stuff, it was a solid building that they converted into a rec center and it was a lot of area so it had softball diamonds, baseball diamonds. We even had a little mini gold course that those of who caddied and knew how to play golf and we'd--somebody had a couple of clubs and we would you know go up and down the place playing, playing golf. But we--dances over there on Friday nights and on the weekends you know a lot of ping pong and I was--got pretty good on the trampoline and all that kind of stuff so we had, we had a lot of good things in that community, so. Speaker 1: What was the name of this the community center, what was the-- Speaker 2: Oh, it was the Valley Park-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --community center. Speaker 1: Okay now was radio and television or movies significant at all? Speaker 2: Television, I, I kind of remember when the first, the first person in Valley Park got a TV and you're talking about a big thing. A guy by the name of Jimmy Smith [ph.], he was staying with his grandmother on Balis Drive, I lived on Balis Drive as well, and we kind of heard--you know all at--a bunch of us young kids that Jimmy Smith you know got a TV and all of a sudden Jimmy Smith became one of the most popular guys in the neighborhood because now here we would load up, you know all down in their front yard and piling into their small house. I mean it looked we had twenty folks packed in there, kids you know sitting on the floor, you know, watching TV and the thing about it at that time you know it only had a couple of programs you know we, we could watch so it was great. Speaker 1: How big was the screen on TV? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Oh it was small. Speaker 1: Can you give us some idea maybe just hold your hands up? Speaker 2: (Gesture) It was, it was maybe about that big you know-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, so, what's that, about twelve inches or something, you know? Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Maybe twelve, twelve inches, something like that, yeah. Story_ID: 485848 Speaker 1: Let's talk about McKinley High School [McKinley Senior High School, Baton Rouge, Louisiana]--that's where you went to high school, how big a school is it? Speaker 2: Well, you know McKinley at that time was one--well it was one of three high schools in--black high schools in Baton Rouge [Louisiana], and, and when I attended McKinley it was still a segregated school. I--you know '58 [1958] to '62 [1962] McKinley Junior [McKinley Junior High School, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], McKinley Senior were housed on the same land mass, and that was on South Baton Rouge [Old South Baton Rouge, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] on McCalop Street. And it was the largest black high school in Baton Rouge at the time, and historically McKinley was the only high s- black high school in Baton Rouge. It was a--actually it was the first black high school. People used to travel you know from miles around to come to McKinley from--word I'd get from as far as thirty, forty miles people used to come even from New Orleans [Louisiana] to go, go to school at McKinley, but during, during my time attended McKinley Junior High School, McKinley Senior High School. I was--my senior year I was co-captain of the football team. I also was a, a thespian, I was in the--football player who was an actor and-- Speaker 1: Now what position did you play in football? Speaker 2: I played, played guard linebacker. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Guard linebacker and 160 pounds of dynamite. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I had--I, I was a starter my, my junior year and senior year and actually (laughter) it's a long ways from quarterback to being guard but I actually went out for quarterback, and I'll never forget, you know when I first went out, all, all it would do is let you play defense, had a whole bunch of guys lined up to play quarterback. I never could get a chance to, to actually you know get into the mix of things but they always needed some bodies on defense and so when I got a chance to get in, I played hard, and how it went from wanting to be an offensive player to, to end up being on the line, the line coach told my brother, my, my, my oldest brother that--say, "Tell your brother if he really wants to play some ball, he switch over to the line, he's gonna play." And so I wanted to play so as a result of that I ended up moving over, and I just like I said I was 160 pounds, but playing linebacker I usually--I'll get in there and I'll stick you and then moved onto playing, playing guard, pulling guard, so, but it was fun. Actually, you know I had an opportunity to play college ball if I would've picked up some weight and that was the, that was the proviso if you can get up to a hundred and--at least 185 pounds--I couldn't do it. I mean I didn't start picking up weight until after I got out of college [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana]. It was just, just amazing but I, I had a, a great time at McKinley. McKinley was pretty much--academically I, I did well I--my first, the ninth grade was not all that well for me because I got in with a--not the right group and I remember-- Speaker 1: The wrong crowd? Speaker 2: Yeah, got in the wrong crowd and was--started cutting class going home. Well walking the railroad track, two guys, and both of those guys failed (laughter) and I passed. Because I couldn't go--one thing that I couldn't do, I couldn't go home and, and not pick up a book so invariably you know I was doing enough to, to pass but--then we took some IQ tests and I was moved out of the classroom, the homeroom that I was in into another group in the tenth grade, and you know my grades went back up to the top again so, so, so I had a you know a great run at McKinley I think I finished in the top maybe 15 percent of the class. Story_ID: 485849 Speaker 1: Now were there any special teachers at McKinley [McKinley Senior High School, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] that you remember, or students to tell truth that we would know of there? Speaker 2: Special teachers, Mrs. Cummings [ph.] who taught history, excellent teacher. I did very well in her class. My homeroom teacher Mrs.--oh, gee whiz, I can't think of her name right now--it'll, it'll come to me but--I'll never forget she rescued me from--my senior year I was with something like a month before graduation, I, I got into a fight in the cafeteria. Speaker 1: Well what happened? Speaker 2: Well this guy stuck his fork (laughter) into my plate and was you know--I didn't like it, so-- Speaker 1: Now that's pretty--now, now you often hear in white schools they have food fights-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and that sort of thing, but-- Speaker 2: Oh, this, this was a fist fight. Speaker 1: But culturally you know in the black community if somebody sticks their fork in your plate and they're not your relative you know trying to get you know a bite or something, it's a problem right? Speaker 2: It, it was, it was a problem you know and I just you know, I just you know had to--I, I just got a little irate. And anyhow he and I got--it was more of a tussle than anything else we didn't really you know get to be all out of hand, we just kind of like the turned the tables over and that kind of stuff, but anyhow we got called to the principal's office and all of a sudden you know it, the principal, the assistant principal then a Mr. Young [ph.] was talking about you know, you know now I'm going to be expelled from school and I won't be able to graduate. You know they called my mother [Lucy Angrum Pitcher] and they were all crying and stuff. And but then there was a Ms. Bayham [ph.] who was on the disciplinary committee who come--you know when she looked at my, my grades, my academic background and because my homeroom teacher came and told me this, said that you can't put this boy outta school you know, look at his record, you know, the other guy you can put him out you know (laughter) but anyhow you know because they didn't put me out they couldn't put him out as well, but my homeroom teacher came in and said, you know, "You go and thank Ms. Bayham because Ms. Bayham actually is the person who you know overrode Mr. Young who wanted to put you out of school." But Mr. Young wanted to put me out of school because he put my brother out of school many years ago, so, but anyhow Mr. Young came, got me and told me said, "Son, you know I had no idea that you were doing this well in school." And talked about you know how, "If I had known you were doing this well you know all these things, other things that we could've done for you," and so forth. You know here it is you know a month before I'm about to graduate. Speaker 1: It seems like a curious kind of a thing for him to say. Speaker 2: Well, yeah, but he was not somebody who was engaged in academics, he was a disciplinary guy. He would walk around you know he didn't have his head into what was going on. I, but I mean I think that, that was his apology for saying that you know he was advancing the fact that you know he was gung-ho about kicking me out when in fact you know there were some redeeming values and virtues that he should've known about that he didn't know about. Story_ID: 485850 Speaker 1: How did you end up choosing to go to Southern [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana]? I mean did, did you think in high school [McKinley Senior High School, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] you were gonna go to college based on the experiences in the, in the-- Speaker 2: Yeah I always, I always thought I was going to college and I even had my, my test scores on standardized tests you know had me doing well enough to go to some of the big schools, and matter-of-fact Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia]--. But we never had you know the, the whole thing was--where was the money was gonna come from you know and, and I didn't, I really did know enough about student loans and stuff at that time and I, I think that much of you know I was a--you know the big football player, the go- you know the co-captain of the football team you know and I kind of like flew under the radar screen as far as academics were concerned and was just kind--you know I always did well you know and could do well you know when I had to do well, but I di- I just didn't have the, the, the counseling that I probably should have gotten and--because my parents [Lucy Angrum Pitcher and Freddie Pitcher, Sr.] felt that they couldn't afford for me to go off to school, and had--because a couple of guys in my, in my high school class went to Morehouse and, but I, I came to Southern. I came to Southern because Southern was there and I just, you know I, I knew about Southern, I-- Speaker 1: State school-- Speaker 2: State school and-- Speaker 1: --and close by I guess. Speaker 2: --right, you know. Speaker 1: Okay, did you know anybody over there at the time? Speaker 2: Here, at Southern? Speaker 1: Yeah, Southern. Speaker 2: I knew, there was a professor who lived down the street from me who I used to--she used to, she used to bring me up on Saturdays, she and her nephew and we used to come up to play tennis. I also played on the McKinley tennis team when I was back in high school, football player, tennis player you know. It's a combination there. And so you know I knew about Southern. Story_ID: 485851 Speaker 1: So what was it like when you got here [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], I mean who was the president, and what was the atmosphere on campus like? Speaker 2: When I came, Dr. Felton Clark [Felton G. Clark] was the president and at the time I came and I graduated from high school [McKinley Senior High School, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] in 1962, and it was right after when they had tension here on campus from students demonstrating downtown [Baton Rouge, Louisiana] at the 1960 student sit-ins downtown, and in 1961 also some students went downtown. And so here on campus it was you know still a little, little tense from that, the administration was you know concerned about student involvement in the Civil Rights Movement and so forth, but when I came I started--my major was architecture. I had a--thought I wanted to be an architect because a friend of mine named A.C. Stansberry you know talked me into believing that this was the you know way to go and you, you know--T-square and your slide rule and you'd be designing these you know big buildings and all this kind of stuff and--and I said well, you know let, let me give it a try. Even though I knew in, in, in my heart I really wanted to be a lawyer, and again going back to my influence of Alex [Alex Pitcher] for me, but at the very same time you have parents [Lucy Angrum Pitcher and Freddie Pitcher, Sr.] saying, said, look you know you, you're going into law, you know, it's not something you wanna do, look at what you know happened to your cousin and so forth and you know are lawyers really making any real money and that kind of stuff you know so. But anyhow I started off majoring in architecture, I spent a year in architecture and grade-wise I started off fine the first semester and then you know if you're on this campus long enough you know there are some beautiful women, and I decided I wanted to be a playboy for (laughter) for, for a-- Speaker 1: This is a vocational decision? Speaker 2: Look I tell you, hanging out in the union [Smith-Brown Memorial Union, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] and, and had a grade dip as a result of that. You know like going from the dean's list you know to almost on probation and you have to you know kind of like get yourself shocked back into, in, in the real world. Story_ID: 485852 Speaker 1: So I dropped out of architecture and decided I was gonna major in political science. And Dr. Jewel Prestage was head of the political science department, and she tells the story right now that she was wondering, what is it you know, say, you know, why this guy is coming from architecture to political science? There's no nexus between the two whatsoever, and, and she said she wondered whether or not you know this would be a good fit for me, and it turned out to be a, a real good fit. I did extremely well in the, in political science, grades again went way back up, my--and also I, I played on the tennis team my first, my freshman year and my, my--part of my sophomore year. But my junior year I interviewed for a program that was being held at Yale University [New Haven, Connecticut] the summer of, the summer between my junior year and my senior year. It was run by Community Progress Incorporated [Community Progress, Inc.] out of New Haven, Connecticut in partnership with Yale where they brought in persons from around the country for a six-week program in taking courses in--well modern social--basically it was geared toward modern social problems and it was ba- from a grant that they got from the federal government to develop a cadre of college graduates to go into the poverty program to be college graduates who had worked you know in the, in the war on poverty. Speaker 2: Is this the program that Hugh [HistoryMaker Hugh Price], oh, he was head of the Urban League [National Urban League] at one time was in charge of in Yale and he was an undergraduate student--Hugh (unclear)--. Well go, go ahead maybe-- Speaker 1: Well this was the very first year that it was started so I, I don't know, but anyhow went up that summer, lived on Yale's campus, (unclear) in Stiles College [Ezra Stiles College, New Haven, Connecticut] and they had (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This is summer of 1960-what? Speaker 1: Summer, I graduated in 1966, it was the summer of '65 [1965], summer of '65 [1965]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And stayed on Yale's campus, I stayed in Stiles College, we--all of our classes were right around that area, and the way the program was fashioned, we went to class in the morning, and in the afternoon everybody had jobs and various programs in the city. I worked at the New Haven city planning agency [New Haven City Plan Commission] and all of the black kids in the program were from down south and all of the white kids were from up north. It was seventy-five, it was seventy-five kids in the program all together, and we were paid, which was great, to do this. This was my, really, really my first time being in, in an integrated academic environment, and integrated environment in general, and, and I refer back to this experience as my coming out party because you know I discovered then that I could compete. You know, I, and, and really you know because when you're sitting in a class you know with the guy next to you who you know may have gone to you know Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] or Yale and then you find out that, gee whiz, you're reading the same material that he's reading and you have the same opportunity and that you didn't--you know I didn't find them to be more normal or endowed than I was and I, I was able to hold my own and everything that I did and you know the work product and I did at New Haven city planning agency. All that stuff you know helped, helped to really embolden me to believe that you know I really can you know be somebody. I really can really assert myself-- Story_ID: 485853 Speaker 1: And when I came back from that experience--and, and backing up a little bit, we got a chance just to do so much in New Haven [Connecticut], not only just being at Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], but I remember a girl by the name of Lucia, Lucia Faithful [ph.] who invited me to go home with her in Bedford, New York. She took two other guys, me and a guy named Charles Johnson [ph.] and--I can't think of the other's guy right now--but, it will come to me because the other--'cause I have another story about this other guy. Speaker 2: Okay, Charles Johnson is not that Charles Johnson the writer--that became the writer in the--? Speaker 1: I don't think so. Speaker 2: Okay, different Charles Johnson. Speaker 1: Different Charles Johnson. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But anyhow we--she took us to her home in Bedford and her home was a home where you had to you know the house out back for the, the guest house out back and you know the servant's quarters and all this kind of stuff, and, and she had invited a lot of her friends who were back from the summer. Well you know they all go away to school and Bedford is you know a bedroom community of New York [New York] and you know a lot of rich white folks, basically it's a Jewish community, and, and I'll never forget they cooked red beans that day. I guess because, so they wanted to you know impress me being from down south you know, like I had to have my red beans today. Speaker 2: Louisiana in particular (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. The beans weren't, weren't good 'cause they weren't--they were half done, but it was back during the time when folks playing a lot of folk music and you know sit around the fire you know and make a campfire like and we were sitting out in the back and you know you, this question about what it was like growing up down south you know and-- Speaker 2: Now that was the summer after the big summer of '64 [1964] when all the SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] volunteers in '64 [1964] went to the Democratic National Convention [1964 Democratic National Convention, Atlantic City, New Jersey]. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Did you know people that, that participated in that dramatic effort? Speaker 1: There was a guy named Slick Carter [ph.], I can't think of Slick's first name right now but Slick was involved in some of the--active--but he was a student here and he was-- Speaker 2: So he was in SNNC-- Speaker 1: Well he was-- Speaker 2: --and, or associated with--? Speaker 1: --he was on, he was kind of, of course you know, know, know Rap Brown [H. Rap Brown; Jamil Abdullah Al-Amin] is a Southern [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] person also and-- Speaker 2: Now was he in school when you were in school? Speaker 1: He was, he was here, he was-- Speaker 2: H. Rap Brown? Speaker 1: H. Rap Brown, right. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Right, matter-of-fact east side of South Baton Rouge [Old South Baton Rouge, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] and he and I were members of a fraternity called the Phalanx, which was through the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] and so I knew Rap well. Speaker 2: Both members of the Phalanx? Speaker 1: Phalanx yeah-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --Phalanx Fraternity, yeah. Story_ID: 485854 Speaker 1: You know his--the, the nickname Rap [H. Rap Brown; Jamil Abdullah Al-Amin] came from the fact that he, he could stand in front of that union [Black Student Union] and have a crowd and just telling jokes. I mean he was, I mean he had just--he had a repertoire of jokes and would have folks in stitches so you know I was-- Speaker 2: Yeah the book, 'Die Nigger Die!' [H. Rap Brown]-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --he wrote, a combination of street poetry and you know stuff that you hear on the street corners and mixed with other things. Speaker 1: I mean that's, that's all and that's it was always, that was always, always, I was always amazed at the fact that how he, well Hubert Brown is his real name. Hubert H. Rap, how he would--got to rise to such a level of importance but he wanted to be like his brother Eddie [Eddie Brown, Jr.]. Eddie was a, was really a civil rights stalwart in the early days. He was one of the guys who was actually kicked out of Southern [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] for his participation in the-- Speaker 2: Sit-ins. Speaker 1: --sit-ins, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But anyhow getting back to-- Speaker 2: Now later just, let me just be clear about--I have a hazy notion of this and you could straighten it out. There was a president of Southern that dismissed the whole student body (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Dr. Clark [Felton G. Clark], um-hm. Speaker 2: Dr. Clark. That was, that was in the early-- Speaker 1: It wasn't the whole student body. They, they closed the school down. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And, and matter-of-fact I'll give you a copy of a DVD that we, that we have. We, we brought all of those people back here and honored them and there was a program that we, we did that was sponsored by the law school [Southern University Law Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] called 'Taking A Seat for Justice' ['Taking A Seat For Justice: The 1960 Baton Rouge Sit-Ins']. It was Dr. Rachel Emanuel [Rachel L. Emanuel] who's my director of communication. It's a videographer and she--what well you know she's a documentarist and she did the documentary on those sit-ins. Speaker 2: Well what year did they take place that group? Speaker 1: That was in, the '60s [1960]. Speaker 2: In the '60s [1960s]? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: In 1960--? Speaker 1: Well, let's see, let's see, because these folks were put out of school, it was earlier than the--. It was earlier then--because we had two groups, we had the--I'll get the, I'll get the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, all right. Speaker 1: --the video for you. Speaker 2: Okay-- Story_ID: 485855 Speaker 1: We'll go back to high school [McKinley Senior High School, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] for a minute to look at these two incidents together, your cousin being disbarred for his civil rights activities basically, and then the students, sixteen students being dismissed from Southern University [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] by President Clark [Felton G. Clark] back in 1960. Now they happened about the same time so-- Speaker 2: All that happened back, Baton Rouge [Louisiana] at that time was a, was pretty hot and we--when they had the student sit-ins--matter-of-fact down in high school there were folks talking to us about you know getting involved and stuff like that, and but then there was you know folks who were also saying you know students you got to stay in school, you don't--you know you're just in high school you don't need to you know get involved in, in that kind of activity but my cousin, you know Alex [Alex Pitcher] you know was involved in a precursor to you know some of what was going on with--well his activities were a precursor to the sit-ins but it was family talk, and we all knew that what was happening to Alex was part of a, of a set up and because as I indicated before it was another family member who, not close family, but a distant family member who ended up--was the person who caused Alex to get into the jams he got into and they wouldn't let the family you know pay off the alleged debt. So when you know as a youngster, I'm, I'm you know listening to you know all of the talk you know about this. I, I was never fearful of you know what would happen to me but I always felt that I, I had to get involved in some kind of way to help change the plight of African Americans in this country. I--in my, my senior year in high school there was a neighborhood group that, Mr. Tom Purvis, who was kind of like a leader of the Valley Park's civic association [Valley Park Civic Association] and you know and as a youngster I tried to work with that group. We'd put out flyers or whatever they might have going on, and when I was in college I still--'cause I stayed at home commuting and, and as that group worked in the community I worked in the community also, which also led to my first job out of college working, working with the poverty program. I was a--worked as a job developer for an employment agency. But anyhow, the, the--and to answer the question how did I, even though my parents [Lucy Angrum Pitcher and Freddie Pitcher, Sr.] didn't want me to go into law you know what was the thing to send me over to that side? I thought that this was the, the area where I could go and, and make the greatest contribution, and as I indicated to you earlier when we were riding along in the car I--you know I've always thought I wanted to be a civil rights lawyer. You know I wanted to make a contribution and, and the law was the way I thought I cou- I could do it. Story_ID: 485856 Speaker 1: Now I took a kind of a circular path in order to, to get here because I didn't go straight to law school out of, out of college [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana]. I--when I graduated from, from college you know after having such a wonderful time back at Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] as I told you that, that summer. I, I came back to school that last year in, in college I had the greatest grades of all. I was a kind of like a snack bar philosopher and because my you know picture was in the yearbook as being you know a guy having gone to Yale for a summer and I was sitting up in the union [Smith-Brown Memorial Union, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] and we use to have these great philosophical conversations about the Civil Rights Movement and that kind of stuff and, and we would be four and five chairs deep in a circle of people sitting around talking and about you know what we need to do in order to, to change society and how we could you know what we could do and so forth and, but all of that moved right out to when I graduated. My first job was a job developer with the Community Advancement Incorporated [Community Advancement, Inc.] anti-poverty program and-- Speaker 2: So this is--again what's the name of this, this is-- Speaker 1: Community Advancement Incorporated, the anti-poverty program in Baton Rouge [Louisiana]. Speaker 2: Community Advancement Incorporated (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Incorporated. Speaker 2: Did it have an acronym? Speaker 1: CAI. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And, I worked for about four months as a job developer and then I was promoted to assistant director of the in-school Neighborhood Youth Corps programs, in that position for about three months and I got drafted. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And off to the [U.S.] military and spent twenty-one months and seventeen days in the [U.S.] Army. Speaker 2: So this is 1967 or '68 [1968]? Speaker 1: No, this is 19- I graduated what, I graduated in 19- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sixty-six [1966], right? Speaker 1: Sixty-six [1966], and in 1967 I w- I went in the service in 19- in March of 1967. Speaker 2: Okay, what branch--you went to the Army, right? Speaker 1: To the Army, yes. Speaker 2: Okay, now you--this is the height of Vietnam War, this is a time period when nobody wanted to be in the Army, I mean you know I mean a lot of people. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: Unless they're gung-ho or something or something had some right wing-- Speaker 1: I was right-- Speaker 2: --they didn't want to be in. Speaker 1: --right in the heat of it. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Got drafted, went to Fort Polk [Louisiana] from--basic training, from there went to Fort Gordon, Georgia as a personnel specialist working in what they called a transfer point and I was also put on what they call the Third Army POR [preparation for oversees replacement] team processing for overseas replacement, which meant that wherever they needed extra help for troop movement, and I could get called to go and help the process out, folks to go overseas like I did the 2nd Brigade of the 102nd--101st, 101st Airborne [101st Airborne Division]. And, and my job was to be a part of the team that, that processed them, made sure that they had all their shots, all their records were in, in place and intact and so forth and everybody had to have next of kin and all this stuff you know identified and that's the kind of stuff that I, I did, and I was asked to go to Vietnam with the group. I said, "Well you know I'm, I'm not Airborne," they said, "Well they could make you Airborne when you get in the country." I said, "well but I'm going home to get married, (laughter). Said, "Oh, she'll wait." But I, I didn't end up going to Vietnam with that group. I ended up going back to Fort Gordon and I came down on the levy to go to Germany and went, went to Germany. My wife [Harriet Pitcher] came over 'cause I did get married right after the, the troop movement, the 101st, and, and my wife came over and spent six months with me, lived on the economy, and it was a great experience, we traveled to--spent our first wedding anniversary in Paris [France], came back to the states. I got an early out to go to graduate school. Story_ID: 485857 Speaker 1: Now were you in the [U.S.] Army when Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated or--? Speaker 2: I was. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I was. I was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Do you remember what that period was like? Speaker 2: I remember, I remember it very distinctly and I was, matter-of-fact I was at Fort Polk [Louisiana] and, and I remember going to--they let all of us who wanted to go to the chapel, I remember, we'd go to the chapel you know for a memorial, but there was--I remember, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Do you remember, was there any particular thing that you remember about the Army's reaction to it in general, was there? Was it respectful or was it (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Yes, because I had a black company commander who made it a point to make sure that it was a, it was respectful and--no, he was, he was, he was on, on the top of his game. Matter-of-fact that's another story. I got an Article 15 [Non-Judicial Punishment] when I was a--in basic training; two guys from Zachary [Louisiana] who was--which is right, about twenty-five miles from here. We got our first pass, weekend pass and they said, they said, "Pitch [HistoryMaker Freddie Pitcher], we're going to Baton Rouge [Louisiana] for the, for the weekend," said, "we got--somebody's coming up to pick us up." And I said, "Well okay let me catch a ride to go home," so I came to Baton Rouge. So I called him, said--on that Sunday said, "Look, you know what time you guys coming to pick me up to go back?" He said, "Well we decided we're gonna stay a couple of days." I said, "Man we're gonna be AWOL [Absence Without Official Leave]." "Aw man they ain't gonna do nothing to you." Here it is, that's, that's when I took my very first plane ride, went out, my dad [Freddie Pitcher, Sr.] bought me a ticket to catch a plane--a prop job from Baton Rouge to Lake Charles [Louisiana]. Got to Lake Charles, went to the bus station to only learn that there were no more buses headed to, going to Fort Polk until the next morning. So I get to Fort Polk when you know everybody's already out in formation and I'm, I'm walking up in my civvies, and the company commander, you know, black guy as I indicated. When he called me in he said, "You know, you're the only black college graduate I have in the whole company," (laughter), "and you the first one f-ing up. You know, so, now you know I gotta do something to you." So, he you know I ended up going on extra duty so, but you know it turned out good, it turned out good. Now the other two guys they got worse than what I got because they didn't come back until mid-week. Story_ID: 485858 Speaker 1: I didn't ask you about this but I probably should've asked you about this too but in '63 [1963] did you go to the March on Washington, or did you or what did you, what was your experience in regards to that? Speaker 2: No, I didn't 'cause I remember sitting in my living room with my father [Freddie Pitcher, Sr.] watching the March on Washington. No, I didn't go. Speaker 1: Did your uncle go who was the lawyer or (unclear)? Speaker 2: Alex [Alex Pitcher]? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Alex was in San Francisco [California] at the time. Speaker 1: Okay, he had already. Speaker 2: I don't, yeah, I don't know-- Speaker 1: Oh okay he had already shifted out? Speaker 2: --if he did or not. Speaker 1: Okay all right. Speaker 2: Yeah. But he was in San Francisco, yeah. Speaker 1: All right, okay well let--so 19- so where are we at 1968 and you're back? Now when did you, were you discharged from the [U.S.] Army? Speaker 2: In '67 [1967], no, no '69 [1969]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was sixty--January of '69 [1969] I came out of service and as I indicated I got an early out to go to graduate school. I had an assistantship at LSU [Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] and matter-of-fact I got this assistantship offered to me before I was drafted, and matter-of-fact I was the first African American to be offered an assistantship in the school of government [sic. Department of Political Science] at LSU and so I came, I came back. I got the early out, started graduated school, but while in graduate school the CLEO program was gonna hold a program here on Southern's campus [Southern University Law School; Southern University Law Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana]. Speaker 1: Now, what, what were you in graduate school for? I mean what were you trying (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Government, I was getting a, I was gonna do a master's in government. Speaker 1: Okay the CLEO program, now that's the-- Speaker 2: Council on Legal Education [Council on Legal Education Opportunity, Inc.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so CLEO was gonna be here at Southern, here at the law school that summer. I was in graduate school that sem- that second semester 'cause I was--I c- got out in January of '69 [1969], and I had to make a decision as to whether or not I wanted to continue working on a master's degree or go to law school, and this was an opportunity now for me to get into a pre-law program that would also pay me money in addition to the G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944] to go to school. So I made the decision to get into the CLEO program and, and to drop out of graduate school. Story_ID: 485859 Speaker 1: Getting ready to enroll in law school that--for the fall and my wife [Harriet Pitcher] was pregnant, and, and I had to weigh whether or not I needed to work to deal with the pregnancy because we did not have any insurance at the time so I had to really make a call as to start school or work and, and take care of my obligations there, so I decided to go back to Community Advancement [Community Advancement, Inc.], work--said I was going to work for a year, we get through you know having a child and then I would start school the, the following year which and that's exactly what I did. I started school, law school [Southern University Law School; Southern University Law Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] in 1970, and when I started school in 1970, I also started an employment agency, my own employment agency. Well, I along with two other guys, it's called Fields Associates Incorporated [ph.] and this was based upon my experiences having been a job developer that time that I worked at, at Community Advancement and some people you know suggested, oh you could take this and turn it into something commercial and make a lot of money and but anyhow that lasted about just the first semester for me because law school was kicking my butt and I couldn't possibly work and, and be the kind of student I wanted to be so I sold out my, my little interest that I had in the business to the other two guys to concentrate on being a full-time law student, and my wife was teaching at the time so I had to rely on her income and you know she--we had the child and so we were you know rocking and rolling along. And then I was elected president of the student bar my second year in law school, which normally is a (unclear), your third-year person, a senior always get elected and I beat a guy out who was a senior. I became student board president. I graduated number two in my class, passed the bar on the first try. Speaker 2: Now who was number one in the class, do you remember? Speaker 1: A guy named S.P. Davis [S.P. Davis, Sr.] and I was--yeah it was kind of competitive between the two of us and my, my last semester in school I kind of ratchet things back and really started more concentrating on, on the bar, (unclear) bar then I was and the courses I was taking so-- Speaker 2: So, so when did you pass the bar? Speaker 1: In July of, I graduated in '73 [1973] in May of '73 [1973] and I took the July bar and passed the July bar, matter-of-fact I was the only one in my class to pass the bar on the first try. Story_ID: 485860 Speaker 1: We were discussing this earlier too when we were out, what is--now there's a--what's the difference between civil law and common law and you know Louisiana being a state that was founded by the French and has some Spanish influence too. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I think the law is based on civil law I think basically--in court (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, the civil law is influenced by the Napoleonic Code and some Spanish law, and the--whereas the--so it is, it is law that is written and anticipated and codified into, into several codes. Whereas the common law basically is considered judge-made law that has been codified; situations occurring and courts ruling, that becomes the law and then that law will establish you know precedent. Speaker 1: A precedent, right. Speaker 2: Whereas in, in civil law you have what you call jurisprudence constante. Jurisprudence constante means that the whole idea behind the codes is to keep the law constant, that is, it won't change, whereas in and it's more, in the codes, more of a guide than when you have non-code law. For instance, well when you have judge-made law, you, you know things change more often than they do when you have you know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well they can--yeah-- Speaker 2: --the law is codified. Speaker 1: --so they can show--slowly morph over time I guess? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Based on the attitude of the judge or and what was done before? Speaker 2: Yeah, right if you, if you--you can vary from precedent, whereas jurisprudence constante, you're supposed to keep the law st- well, static I guess. Story_ID: 485861 Speaker 1: Which style is more conducive to social change, I mean from a black perspective? Speaker 2: Well, well basically, your, your codes pretty much define rights and relationships between parties regardless of, you know, you know who they are. You have codes that deal with property, codes that deals with succession rights, codes that deal with contracts, and so all these things you know are applicable to you know any and everybody. Outside of the codes, you know, you get into criminal law, and evidence and stuff like that you have more room to maneuver and do things that--it's not binding by, by code law, you know you have more discretion to--if you wanna mess over somebody you, that's where you do it at you know, but--. I--and another thing that has happened is that you had a lot of influence with common law on the civil law and consequently we call it a bastardization of the civil, of the civil law based upon common law influences, for instance you know people who have gone to school outside of the state and who who've come back and become judges and who've become legislators and so forth you know, they bring you know knowledge and experiences outside into, and, and which has influenced changes in the, in the codes that have made the codes look more like some common law legal tenets and so forth. Speaker 1: Okay but is there really that much difference these days? I think we were discussing this too, is there really-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --a whole lot of difference between Louisiana law and other states? Speaker 2: I mean your, your codes would be different, but much of--same, same concepts, different terminology. I gave the example of our servitudes would be common law easement, and the law of obligations covers common law contracts, you know, so you know we teach both here. We teach contracts, which is you know common law, and we teach obligations, and obligations are--is based upon on code, and the Napoleonic Code influences, and, but when you do a comparative analysis of both the contract law and obligations, you know there is a kindred spirit to all of it. So, a lawyer who practices in another state if he can make the mental gymnastics of, of terminology, you know, there's no difference in being able to go to court here and go to court somewhere else as far as--and procedurally is concerned. Story_ID: 485862 Speaker 1: Now what did you do after graduation [from Southern University Law School; Southern University Law Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], did you try to get a job or with a firm or did you have to--did you join a firm or form one or go in (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) When I graduated I went to work for the attorney general's office [Office of the Attorney General], criminal division and, and I opened a small law practice on the side. I stayed with the--matter-of-fact I, I clerked my senior year at the attorney general's office as a law clerk and I along with Ralph Tyson [Ralph E. Tyson], who is now a federal court judge on the Middle District of Louisiana who--he and I became law partners, and just quickly on the side, Ralph and I met when I took a course down at LSU Law School [Louisiana State University Law School; Paul M. Hebert Law Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], my--the summer of my--betwe- the summer between my, my junior and senior year, Ralph was the only African American attending LSU Law School at the time and I was--I use to call, he was the resident black, and I was the visiting black, and so and that's when the two of us first met. We subsequently ended up clerking at the attorney general's office, criminal division at the same time, and after we passed the bar we both continued to work there and I opened a small practice and then he eventually joined me at that practice and we eventually formed a, a law partnership. Speaker 1: Okay now we have here that you all formed Pitcher, Tyson, Avery, and Cunningham, was that-- Speaker 2: Right, it was first Pitcher and Tyson, and then we subsequently had several other persons to, to join us. We had about seven lawyers in that office at, at one point. We started off in a little building on Plank Road [Baton Rouge, Louisiana], matter-of-fact I rented the buil- we rented one side of this building for fifty dollars a month, and my uncle, who's Emmanuel Pitcher was a, number one finish carpenter, he--got him to go in and panel the place and he, he carved two offices in there for us and a reception area and a small library in the back. My father [Freddie Pitcher, Sr.] gave me as a graduation present money to buy the first part of my law library and one very interesting thing that happened when I went to Claitor's Bookstore [Claitor's Law Books and Publishing Division, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] was a law book store to buy some law books. The lady behind the desk said, "Look, let me suggest that you buy this book." And she pulled out this red legal secretary's book and I became a little insulted you know I said, "I'm a lawyer." She said, "I know," said, "but you take this book it's gonna make you more money as a beginning lawyer than all this other stuff that you're buying will make," and it turned out to be true. Because (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) How so? Speaker 2: Well because in there--I mean in law school we didn't have a course, which eventually they put in here, as law of- called Law Office Practice. I didn't know how to--nothing about notarizing stuff, I didn't know anything about you know I--transferring a car title, or, or doing real estate transactions whatsoever, and all of that was in that legal secretary's book...