 Story_ID: 71539 Speaker 1: --My name is Larry Crowe, I'm here interviewing for The HistoryMakers with our videographer, Scott Stearns. Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] john powell, j-o-h-n p-o-w-e-l-l, all lower case. Speaker 1: Okay, and why the lower case? Speaker 2: Well, the lower case, in the 1960s, as a number of African Americans started changing their names from, slave names to African names, I considered doing that. I was in high school, and as I was thinking about it, I ran across E. E. Cummings, and then, during the same period, Muhammad Ali changed his name, and I decided to change mine. But my, my mother, in particular was upset because I was named after her father that I was going to drop his name. So the way I, made the name my own, was to drop the lower, capitals. Speaker 1: Okay, so it was a matter of making it your own. Speaker 2: Um-hm. And also, I would say it was my first venture into the decentered self. Speaker 1: Okay, the decentered self, (laughs) tell me, what is that? Speaker 2: Well, you know, basically, there's a lot of people thinking in writing now about how we situate the self and basically in modern history. If you look at early history people didn't sign paintings, didn't sign works of art, it was always a collective process. This sort of, focusing on "I", or the self, as being the center of attention, is relatively a new phenomenon, and primarily a western phenomenon; only now is spreading around the world. And, while it has some healthy aspects, I also think it has some unhealthy aspects, and now people are starting again to sort of thinking, think of the self in a decentered way. Where basically, I am not always at the center of everything. Speaker 1: Okay, but, can you give us, give us your date of birth, and place of birth. Speaker 2: I was born May 27th, 1947. And I, I was born in Detroit [Michigan] and grew up there. Speaker 1: All right, and what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I teach, at the law school here, at the University of Minnesota, and also, and also I run an institute called the Institute of Race and Poverty. Speaker 1: All right, and what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date, that's a good question, I think it's, the ninth [9] of August, 2002. Speaker 1: And, where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: That's another good question, we're here at the University of Minnesota Law School, in one of the conference rooms. Story_ID: 71540 Speaker 1: All right. Before we get into depth, there are five, "People Magazine-ish" type questions, that, that I'm compelled to ask you. The first one is, what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: I don't know if I have a favorite food, per say, I'm a vegetarian, and, you know, when I was in Mozambique, I like, spinach and ground nuts, haven't been able to have that since I've been back. I like a lot of Indian food, you know, mangos, papayas, so I don't know if I have one favorite, but. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: No, I can't say, I mean it depends, and the short answer is, it depends on the situation. You know some times I like green, certainly out in nature, I think green is very beautiful. I also like black, but it depends. Speaker 1: All right, do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: I like the spring, but, you know, again, I also like other parts, you know the fall, I think it is quite beautiful. I guess it is probably, more accurate to say is, for the most part, (unclear) protractive of winters is not a favorite time for me, but the short, you know the snow, the first snow, you know I love that, but, then I'm ready to be done with it. Speaker 1: In Minnesota it's tough. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: All right, do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: All right, and do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Well, as you probably can tell I don't have many favorites but I, my friends sometimes say, one of my, one of the sayings I like, is that, "Everything that reveals also conceals." Story_ID: 71541 Speaker 1: Okay, let's talk about your, your background. You were born in Detroit [Michigan], in 1947, what, can you please, you know, state your mother's name and her birthdate and where she was born? Speaker 2: Her name, she died four years ago, her name was Florcie Rimpson, and then, that's her maiden name, it became Florcie Powell when she married my father. I have to think about her, her actual birthday, I think it was 1923, October 11th, in Missouri. Speaker 1: Okay, and how do you spell her name? Speaker 2: F-L-O-R-C-I-E. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Rimpson is R-I-M-P-S-O-N. Speaker 1: Okay, and what about you father? Speaker 2: Marshall Powell, Jr., born in 1921, September 7th, I think he was also, either born in Mississippi or Missouri I'm not sure which. Speaker 1: Okay, now, can you spell his name? Speaker 2: Marshall, M-A-R-S-H-A-L-L, Powell P-O-W-E-L-L. Speaker 1: Okay, now did your parents have a story of how they met? Speaker 2: Yeah, they have a number of stories, but my father went to town, and my mother was I think fourteen, and my father was sixteen and he was driving, had a car, and he was actually a sharecropper, so they were, both had modest living circumstances. But he had managed to get a car, and I think there was some event and he'd tell us when he was going to take our mother home. And he did, and I said the rest is history. Story_ID: 71542 Speaker 1: Okay, now did either one of them have, stories that were passed on to them, through their grandparents, or other relatives about conditions, in their, in the family during Reconstruction, and slavery, or during the Civil Rights Movement? Speaker 2: Yeah, they, they, it's actually interesting, my family is quite interesting and you're probably, I'm probably the least, equipped to sort of answer this question. But, I recently had been doing some reading, and I was talking about, the reading was talking about how people hold, memories, and as you know people don't hold memories singularly, they hold memories in groups. And so each person can be assigned to, to, have a part of the memory. And, most people do this unconsciously, but my family does it in a pretty conscious way, so, the, the holding of memories in my family is a collective process. And I'm probably, have the smallest role in that regard, but my, I think my great grandmother, was, had a first child while she was still a slave, and she lived, we had a number of relatives live well over one hundred, so I knew some of these, relatives, and they all had incredible stories about, the times. And more than just stories, I think there was also a feeling, I mean my parents left the South because the South was such a harsh place for blacks. We had a little land, like I said my family was, my family was a family of sharecroppers, and they owned, I eventually got a little land, and I remember, at one point, my father was talking about selling the land and I talked about buying it, and at this point I was an adult. And he said no, he wouldn't sell it to me, because I didn't know the South and he didn't want me down there, he didn't want me connected with the South. So they, so then they disposed of the land. You know, there were stories of lynching, we used to go south every, summer, and in fact when I was eleven, there was a rumor of a lynching and that was the last time I went, you know, until I became an adult. Speaker 1: This would have been in '58 [1958] I guess, right? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Now, did you go to, or was it Mississippi or Missouri? Speaker 2: We spent most of our time, as kids, in Missouri. I think my oldest siblings also went to Mississippi, where my grandfather was from, and traveled around more. Speaker 1: Whereabouts in Missouri? Speaker 2: I think a little town called, Wyatt, Missouri. Speaker 1: And what's it near, and how do you spell it? Speaker 2: I have no idea, basically you know, it was, just, just, you know, I had sort of gotten in a car with the rest of the family, you know, and we went. And I haven't located the geography. Speaker 1: Okay, alright, so Wyatt, Missouri. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Was the ancestor you talked about before there was born, that was alive and had her first baby during slavery, was that one of your mothers relatives or your fathers? Speaker 2: That's one of my fathers. Speaker 1: Okay, and do you remember a name? Speaker 2: I don't, 'cause we just called her, I think she's great grandmother, but we called her "Grandmother." Story_ID: 71543 Speaker 1: Now, what's the lynching story, from 1958, what, what did they- Speaker 2: You know, something, you know, as we lived in, my family's lived in a very segregated part of the South and they worked for whites. And it was just, we went down there and it was just this buzz, that something had happened, and, like I said I was eleven, so I wasn't entirely clear, but, I think there was either going to be some reprisal, and somebody was going to be lynched. And there was sort of this, more of a mood, there was this mood of real fear and anxiety, and everybody was sort of paralyzed at the time. And, that's what, like I said I stopped going back, my great grandmother died so that was another reason to stop going down there. Speaker 1: This was in Missouri, this is a state that most people don't associate with, lynching. Speaker 2: Well, you know I was down in Saint Louis [Missouri], trying to do some work on racial justice and, and talked to the people in Saint Louis about working with the surrounding, area, city, and suburban, and rural areas. And they said, we don't work together, and I said why not, because you know we took different sides during the Civil War, so I think there's a, a long history of racial antagonism in Missouri. And as you know our, current Attorney General is from Missouri, and you know I think he's very, very hostile, in fact to, Civil Rights. So Missouri, kind of like a lot of border-states, was really split, it was not silently in favor of emancipation or, the civil, the Civil War. Speaker 1: Right, and there was slavery in Missouri. Speaker 2: Right, that, you know the Missouri, Missouri Compromise [1819], as you know. Story_ID: 71544 Speaker 1: Any, any other stories that were passed down, I don't mean to reduce them by calling them stories, but, any other things in the past that you remember that your, from slavery and reconstruction, that your, that your family was involved in? Speaker 2: You know, for the most part, my family like I said was a family of, economically fairly modest means and fairly modesty education, so they didn't talk necessarily in those terms. So there were certainly family stories, and, but they didn't, frame them in that way. I know there was a lot of, both on my mothers and fathers side, there was a lot of, marriage with Native Americans, and African Americans. I think some of them was associated with all the way back to reconstruction and slavery and, my, mother's father, was, I think, half Native American, and still was associated with the tribe, I'm not sure which tribe. But, there's stories also about, going to school in the South, and, my parent's parents having to, carry a gun, to walk the kids to school. Now this is sort of interesting because they weren't going to integrated schools, but there was still like hostility toward, educating blacks. There's also, I think, I remember being in college, and my grandfather saying something about, white people. And my grandfather who is from Mississippi told me, with tremendous fear, "Don't--you, you better leave those people alone, you don't know those people." You know, he'd never said what he meant, but there was, there was something ominous, in his presentation. Story_ID: 71545 Speaker 1: Okay, well then, let's, let's talk about grow, growing up, now you grew up in Detroit [Michigan], right? And how did your family happen to move to Detroit [Michigan]? Speaker 2: Well, my brother, I have a brother I have three brothers, but my brother who is next to me in age is five years older than I am. One of my aunts, came down, onto Missouri and took them up North and kept them there, before my mother finally wanted to get them back. We, and, she went up North and, which was Detroit [Michigan], and she liked it, and came back and told my father that, they should think about moving to Detroit [Michigan]. And, and as the opportunities came, you know that's interesting 'cause he was sharecropping and he would have an opportunity to have a larger plot of land, a farm. And so he had to decide whether to go to Detroit, and try his luck there, or to stay in the south and continue to farm. And I think partially because of my mother, he decided to, head North. Speaker 1: Okay, so what did he do when he got North? Speaker 2: This was during the war, World War II [WWII], he did a number of, you know my father is a work horse, he was just, you know, he works incredibly hard, even now, in his eighties. So, he did different jobs and eventually he got a job in, the factory, he also hauled you know what we call junk, you know, I remember doing that a little bit when I was a kid with him. We'd go around and get scraps of iron and, metal, and I know while he was doing that he had to get a ton if it to make, you know, just a little bit of money. So, it was hard work, so he always had two or three jobs going. And, and, when he finally got a, a job in, at General Motors, which is where he worked the last thirty-five or forty years of his working life, you know was, was almost like he had arrived. Speaker 1: Okay, that's a familiar story, you know, people, black people working in the South, and then you're working with General Motors (unclear). Story_ID: 71546 Speaker 1: Yeah, and what a lot of people don't realize, is I think, I think it was either General Motors or Ford, built a separate part of the city, Inkster [Michigan], for black workers, you know, so both Ford and General Motors participated in, in the, segregation of Detroit [Michigan]. Speaker 2: I didn't know that story, I knew that, I had relatives in Inkster [Michigan], I know a lot of people had relatives in Inkster [Michigan], but is that, you know, how did that happen, can, can you give us any details about that? Speaker 1: Well, you know, housing was at a short supply in World War II [WWII] throughout the country and, whites were very nervous about the flood of blacks coming South, and, Ford and General Motors really owned Detroit [Michigan]. And so I say, encouraged, and it did some good things, I mean they, they did hire some people which was, still at that time a controversial thing. Often times, they worked through, through the church to look for black workers, and primarily, but some women, for people who were really interested, you know I would say, you know the, African American History Museum in Detroit [Charles H. Wright Museum of African American History in Detroit, Michigan], I think is a rea--traces of some of this history. But it's, it's sort of interesting because when people think of the riots, they think of the '60s [1960s], but as real historians know, most of the race riots in major cities happened in the '20s [1920s], '30s [1930s], and '40s [1940s], where whites were trying to drag blacks out of town. So the accommodation, from, both Ford and General Motors if I remember right, was to, they would hire some of these workers, and would build them their own, town. Speaker 2: Just to go back to the riot scenario, I think the kind of riots you're talking about, are a little bit different from the kind that we're used to. Where black people, who have frustration, you know, rebel and so forth, but what, what, were the nature of those earlier riots? Speaker 1: Well, mainly they were, whites trying to keep blacks out, there were a number of houses that were fire bombed. I mean, fire-bombing houses in the North, was the North's version of lynching, although there was some lynching in the north, including here in Minnesota, in Duluth. It's much more frequent as blacks moved into neighborhoods, to, have the neighborhoods, basically attack the homes, and sometimes, (unclear), not just attach the homes, but a whole riot would come out of that. The police often times, were complicit in those, riots, in that they, since there were a lot of white crowds, to attack blacks, blacks very much smaller numbers, much more vulnerable, so it was almost always white-on-black violence. Speaker 2: Okay, that's how we make that important, 'cause this is, is tape will be archived, and somebody might want to know, what the difference was, you know. Let's see, oh, back to Inkster [Michigan], is there any, and I have to ask this, I don't know if you know the answer but, is there a relationship between the, the people that live in Inkster [Detroit], and the name, "Inkster"? Speaker 1: That, I don't know. Speaker 2: I've thought about it, and it makes you wonder. Speaker 1: Yeah, it does make you wonder, no, actually an interesting story about you know Ford, was sort of a very complex person, Henry Ford. And very racist, but also he did open up some opportunities for blacks at that time, but it was almost like, in your place, right, you can do certain things but you have to stay in your place. Which meant, outside of white neighborhoods, and certainly out of Dearborn [Michigan], where he lived. Dearborn [Michigan] was heavily, it was, it was heavily policed, and there was a story a friend of mine became a law enforcement officer, I think a federal agent of some sort, when we were straight out of high school. And he was following someone, and he crossed the Inkster [Michigan] border, and the police stopped him, the Inkster [Michigan] police stopped him, because he was African American. And basically said he was following someone, and they said not, "Not in Dearborn [Michigan] you're not." And, they held him up and whoever he was following got away. So, essentially when I go back now, because you do see, people of color, and even blacks, living in places like Dearborn [Michigan]. Speaker 2: Yeah, so even the police couldn't go into Dearborn [Michigan]. Speaker 1: No, it was, it was really quite bad, and I had a friend, a white friend who lived in Dearborn [Michigan], and it was like, like having a closeted relationship. I mean I almost had to sneak to his house at night, and be, you know sneak out. Story_ID: 71547 Speaker 1: Tell us something about the neighborhood you grew up in, in, in Detroit [Michigan], and try to think back and tell us about the sites, and sounds, and smells, of the neighborhood, you know, who lived there. Speaker 2: Well, the neighborhood was heavily populated by the Powells, our house was sort of a, a weigh station for relatives coming from the South. So we always had, we had, I don't know how we did it, 'cause there were, we had nine children in my family. Speaker 1: You're number six, right? Speaker 2: I'm number six, and, for a good part of my life, we had, my younger sisters, much younger, so they were, we sort of grew up with eight kids, and then she came along much later. But, for a good part of my life we had three bedrooms, sometimes we had two, I can't remember how, I know that when we had three, I remember, up until leaving, up until I was almost grown, all the boys had to sleep in one bed. So you learn to sleep, without moving, especially for me, because I'm the youngest male, so I could, move into somebody else's space and I'd get punched, so you learn to sleep absolutely, still. And, to this day, I don't like sharing a bed with anyone, you know so, to me one of the most significant bonuses to leaving home and going to college was I got my own bed. In terms of growing up, I think, you know we grew up in, in one area which was, called the Black Bottom in Detroit [Michigan], which was where most black people lived. And early on, it was always teaming with people, you know, there was, it was over crowded, and but, every house had, you know, two and three families, living in them, and so, one of the ways you dealt with that is you had people in the streets. You know, you didn't have, everybody in the house was not really comfortable, of course as a child I didn't realize, my mother would say, you know, "Go outside and play." You know, "But it's cold outside," "I don't care, go outside and play." And there was always people outside, so you know, at least, in the time span of a young kid, the streets were, teaming with kids, teaming with adults, a lot of the gangs played in the streets, you know, baseball, and they played it in the streets, football. You didn't go to, at least until I was older you didn't go to, a playground, you played in the streets, you know, this car was, where the touchdown place was. The, you know grass was, infrequent, you know, you had, you know, and when we finally moved and had to start cutting the grass was a big deal. My family was from the South so, we always had little gardens, we always, were growing some food, and, everybody knew everybody. And, I remember going to, elementary school, Trobriets [ph.] you had to go past the white section of town, in order to get to Trobriets [ph.]. So you had to fight, you know, on the way to school, and often times you'd be chased home, and, I remember one time being chased home. Story_ID: 71548 Speaker 1: You know, so, going from school, often times there were fights and you'd have to run, and I remember coming home one day and I running home one day, and running up on our porch, we had a little bitty porch, and my mother meeting me at the door. And she was like, asked what was going on, and there were a couple of guys, you know, and I'd say, "These guys are," you know, "chasing me to beat me up." And she said, "You don't have anybody run you home, you get back out there and fight." And, she said that if you, "If you don't whip them, I am, I'm gonna whip you." Speaker 2: Two guys? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: She expected you to go out and whip them? Speaker 1: I did, and had more fear of my mother and more so my father than, than, these kids, so, and also in terms of growing up, you know there were, there were these smells. I mean, part of, part of being in the South, I remember, the, being down South, and the hogs, and, the chickens, you know the, literally seeing ringing chickens necks, and watching chickens run around without the head on. The smells being very powerful, and the food always seemed like there was, I remember going, just walking around following my mom in particular, when she was cooking, and you know, smelling, beans cooking, and, with the ham hocks in them, listening to her sing, she had a beautiful voice. And, I remember the smell of grease, my father worked on cars, and, so as I got a little older, especially after nine, we moved, we got a garage, and, which is a big deal 'cause we hadn't had a garage before. And he set up a little shop to work on cars, and a lot of things I realized now he had Jerry-rigged. You know, so sometimes it was a little dangerous, he'd put a little stove in there that, and it half heated the garage, so in the winter time we'd be out there, we'd be freezing, and then we'd be hot. And so, there'd be wood burning in the stove and, the smell of car grease and oil. Or going under a house, to try to, you know, we're from the South, you know you don't, you don't, call people when something go, when something goes wrong, you fix it yourself. So then, the sewage line got plugged up, we'd climb under, we'd go under the house with my dad, and, work it. So I remember the smell of sewer, and then, fruit falling from trees, apples, or pears, so, and my grandfather, my father's father ended up moving next door to us. So there was two houses of Powells right next to each other, and we'd go back and forth, and, and then down the court--, down the street there was a, what was called a beer garden. I don't know if they have those anymore, which is a small bar, where people would go in and hang out and drink and, have revel on the weekend. Speaker 2: Okay, we're going to change tape right here. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 71549 Speaker 1: Okay, now what were some of your activities as a youth in Detroit [Michigan], what, what did you like to do? Speaker 2: Well, you know my youth in Detroit [Michigan] is sort of, broken, up into two large areas, 'cause the first nine years we lived in Riopelle [Detroit, Michigan]. And in fact it was interesting, we probably would have stayed there but, they told us they were going to build a highway or build something, I don't know if, or what it, what it was. But, they tore down all the houses across the street from us, I think this was, later came up, came to be known as urban removal, and so we moved. And we moved to, what then, what then we thought was gonna be an integrated neighborhood, of course it turned out to be all black also, a few years later. So, we were living in Riopelle [Detroit, Michigan], it was, you know I realized now it was a very- Speaker 1: How do you spell that? Speaker 2: I think it's R-I-O-P-E-L-L-E, I believe, anyway so, there was a big shift, you know, we had a much bigger house, we had grass, there were playgrounds, there were white folks. And, so before then, I think you know what we did was sort of play in the streets. You know, I remember going to, junk yards, and building fires, throwing rocks at abandoned buildings. You know, chasing dogs, fighting, you know, having a good time. But not much in the way of, what we call organized activity, I mean there were gangs, but that was about as organized as it got, not the kind of gangs people have today but, gangs nonetheless where you proactively fight with each other. When I was nine and we moved, all that changed, not all of it changed, but there was a substantial enhancement. You know now we could, go to the field and play baseball, or go play basketball, instead of playing, just a makeshift basket like there were real baskets. And still was a more middle class community but it was in terms of just, basic everyday resources we thought we had arrived. Had a back porch, you know, and, there were places to go swim, so many of the things many people take for granted, you know I didn't get exposed to until I was nine. But even then, like I said the neighborhood changed very fast, and the pools, after a few years there was no more water in it. You know and, it sort of dried up, and I had, I didn't associate what was going on, I knew that the neighborhood was changing, people were moving away, but I didn't associate it with the loss of resources, or white flight, or any of that, I just knew that there was some change. Speaker 1: So, the resources started to deteriorate once the neighborhood became all black? Speaker 2: Mmhmm, sure, sure. Went to Foch [Middle School, Detroit, Michigan], in the ninth grade, we went to elementary school, we were the first kids to try to integrate this elementary school [Foch Elementary School, Detroit, Michigan]. That didn't work, we fought every recess, every time, every time we were all on the playground together we fought, we'd just bust in the school, and we'd just fight. We'd fight from the moment we got off the bus to the time we got back on the bus, and so they stopped the bussing for one year or two years, and then years later they restarted it, in the schools. We were integrated for a short period of time, or desegregated would probably be more accurate really, and then eventually it turned all black. But, you know I did sports, after I got a little age, and having older brothers you know you, hang out with them a lot try to keep, try to keep up with them. Story_ID: 71550 Speaker 1: As I got into my teenage years, dancing, you know, trying to impress the girls, that was a big part of teenage life. I remember this guy got a suit for one, I don't know if it was Easter, or, it must have had to been Easter, and, you know, kids getting suits was just un-heard of. He got this suit, he must of wore that suit until it, you know I think they had to peel that suit off him, he wore that thing out, I mean it was just, tattered. He was so pleased to have had that suit, and obviously it wasn't a particularly fancy suit but, so, when I got to high school, I started to be a pretty decent athlete, and my brothers had been, and my sisters, but I thought at the time more in terms of guys playing sports, and didn't have any, very many women's sports teams. But, not all of them were, oh, the high school I went to was essentially a high school that was about fifty-fifty, mainly black and white. And they tracked all the black students into, the remedial courses, wood shop, and metal shop, and college prep courses, this school was actually a pretty decent school, has a feeder for some of the good colleges. But none of the black students took college prep courses, and so they didn't take, advanced placement courses, and for the most part the blacks weren't allowed to participate in sports. So I went there with a, because I had seen that, and again I didn't quite understand it, but I knew it was wrong on some level, I was determined, I was 'gonna take college prep courses and go to college, and I was going to play sports, and-- Speaker 2: How many is, you say about fifty-fifty? Speaker 1: Mmhmm. Speaker 2: But they, okay, but the blacks were excluded from college prep and from athletics? Speaker 1: Yep, they were tracked into th- Speaker 2: And what was the name of the school? Speaker 1: Southeastern [High School, Detroit, Michigan]. Speaker 2: Southeastern [High School, Detroit, Michigan], okay. Speaker 1: And so when I, you know I think you have to test into the college prep courses, it was, some sort of screening device, who was the, like the, you know like the poll tax and the, literacy test for voting. You know you had to take a literacy test to, [laughter], which I think they are still using today, on a different euphemism. But anyway, I tested okay and they still didn't want to let me in, and so my parents had to come up to the school, and the school advised against them having me in college prep. And my parents, didn't quite understand what was going on, but they, they stood by me. And the school said, "Okay, but we're not going to be responsible for what happens to this kid" [laughs]. Story_ID: 71551 Speaker 1: So I had this weird experience in high school, where I was in a high school [Southeastern High School, Detroit, Michigan] that was about half black, and my classes were virtually all white. Speaker 2: And the implication from the counselors is that this is somehow dangerous for you. Speaker 1: Mmhmm. Speaker 2: You know, to, even be admitted to (unclear). Speaker 1: Yes sir, yes sir. It injured me in some way, and by this time the sports were starting to become a little bit more integrated so, my black friends by in large I knew on the sports fields and then, had white friends and associates mainly from academic. And it created this, you know it sort of became a bridge, and it also created this sense that I was really no place, I mean the black students respected me 'cause I still was in gangs with them, and was good at the sports. But then I'd go off and study, or go off, and the white students they sort of respected me 'cause I was good in academics, but you know, I sort of crossed this border I didn't quite belong. In fact one of my experiences in high school we had a, a class picnic at a park, and they arranged for some of the, this was eleventh grade, some of the white students and some of the other students had cars. And so we carpooled over to the park, and there was this, white woman, white girl, who was actually one of my closer friends, in, in an academic setting, and, you know we really weren't interested in each other in, in a romantic way, but we did like each other as friends. But anyway so we went off and went for a walk in the park and, it created a huge thing, and my ride ended up leaving me, so I had to walk back, home, after the event. Speaker 2: What happened, did they actually challenge you back then or something like that? Speaker 1: Yeah, I, you know I don't remember the details, but you know it was clear that we were violating you know, demanded an explanation, right, first of all you had to, you had to, make the, you know, "No, no, no we're not, you know whatever, romantically involved." I forget the term we used at the time, but we were upset, and it was one, and so and, and we were isolated, to some extent, so, so they gave her a ride home, left me to get home as best I could. There were a number of incidents like that, so, in some ways, it was, it was fortunate. Because I think that the high school experience, helped me just to start to develop a social conscious, and started to see how, we police injustices, in society, by both privately and publically, through both individuals and through structures, you know, and have this, I started seeing that early on, having first handed experience of it in terms of high school, you know this, you know. Teachers would come in the room, and every so often there would be another, black student in my class, and you know, more often a girl than a boy, and then, every so often there'd be a, young, young man in my class. I remember one teacher coming in and saying to the class, "I need my car washed, do any of you colored boys in here want to wash my car" [laughs]? And, oh I remember when our homecoming queen who apparently was white, was confronted as to why she hung out with black students so much, and she said 'cause I'm black. And it turned out that she was black, but she was, phenotypically looked white, they kicked her out of school. Speaker 2: They kicked her out of school? Speaker 1: Mmhmm, she had been going to the school out of district but everybody knew and it was okay. But once this got out, then they used that to get rid of her. Story_ID: 71552 Speaker 1: So there was a lot of, you know, racial stuff and you know, I organized some, protests at the school, they were trying to get rid of the, principal, not the principal, a coach of color, and, and we didn't have many, the head of the athletic department was the guy who had said, if any of the colored boys want to wash his car, let him know. So we tried, we signed a petition to keep, this coach and they called some people in and threatened to expel them, for doing this petition. So, then I organized this thing where any of the students were expelled in this time period, we'd all go out on strike, so I started getting involved in sort of political action, and collective action. Speaker 2: And how old were you then? Speaker 1: I probably was in eleventh grade, so probably sixteen, fifteen or sixteen. Speaker 2: At this time you are, you are in college prep courses, you, you're playing basketball right? Speaker 1: Basketball, running track, and playing baseball. Speaker 2: Baseball, okay, you, are you like, how were you doing on the basketball team? Speaker 1: You know, I was decent, I wasn't great, I didn't have any weight, I had size but I didn't have any weight. I was better at track and, baseball, although in baseball I had very fine reflexes, but I didn't have a lot of power. So the older I got, I'd hit the ball but I couldn't hit a home run, but I, I could hold my own. I was a, I was a, you know I lettered in all the sports, and was very good in track and baseball. Speaker 2: Okay, and did any of that success, protect you in anything, I mean helped to protect you, when you started to get involved in social action (unclear)- Speaker 1: Not so much, I mean it protected me and it gave me a, a social space to hang out with the black students and, but no. I was actually valedictorian in my school, and so it was hard for the administration to come after me but they did nonetheless, but they didn't really have much, you know to, to tag me with. They didn't, they didn't particularly like me, I mean... Story_ID: 71553 Speaker 1: Two stories, one is, the principal of our school, assistant principal had been in the military, and so, by this time, it's '63 [1963] or '64 [1964], you know like, the military academies are starting to recruit, young black boys. So they came and recruited me, and they told my parents, you know I'd be, I would, I didn't even have to finish my senior year, I could go to the military academy, and my college would be paid for, and I'd be an officer and whatever. And my parents were just excited, and so they said, you know, well I, you know, this is a great opportunity, I said, "I'm not going in the Military," they said, "What do you mean you're not going to the Military?" And obviously Vietnam [War] was already starting to happen, although the, national consciousness hadn't matured yet, but the principal was livid, that I did not take his gracious offer, and threatened not to graduate me from school. And, and then when I got ready to go to school, getting ready to go to college, most of my teachers would not write me college recommendations to the better schools. They said if I wanted to go to, Wayne State [University, Detroit, Michigan] or whatever, they would write recommendations, but I really should not be looking at the more prestigious schools. So, I had a hard time even though I was, number one in my class, had a hard time getting recommendations, and one teacher in fact said something like, "Well you may be valedictorian, but you're not the smartest kid in the class" (laughs). And again, they warned me that if I, went to a place like Stanford [University, California] or whatever, it would ruin me for life, I would flunk out, and, and then to make matters even worse I got accepted to a number of schools including Harvard [University, Massachusetts], and I decided I wasn't going to go to Harvard [University]. Because they didn't allow women, there, at the time, that was 1964. And again, people were quite confused as to why, that would, would concern me, what was wrong with that. Even some of my sisters and mother were quite upset, that I, decided not to go to Harvard [University]. And I couldn't articulate exactly, I mean I knew it was wrong, and I said, you know, "It seems wrong, not to let women in, or girls." But I didn't have a social or political analysis to go much further than that, but that's one of the reasons I ended up going to Stanford [University]. Story_ID: 71554 Speaker 1: Okay, now first of all let's go back a little bit to student strike, did that ever take place? Speaker 2: No, I mean what happened was, they, they were very upset that, it became clear that if they put any students out, we would all go on strike, so they didn't expel any students during that time. I think that had expelled one or two students, and I helped organize this thing where, if any more students were organized, were expelled during this time, we would all go on strike. So they stopped, expelling students. Speaker 1: Okay, expanding on the reason why they didn't like you, they already didn't like you- Speaker 2: (Laughs). Speaker 1: First of all, they, they like you less because of those kind of activities I guess, and then, did you have any, was there any teacher or counselor or student, or anybody there that gave you any encouragement? Speaker 2: Oh sure, there was a number, one is still very much a friend of mine, John Telford, he's actually in the school of, the Detroit Public Schools, administration, right now. Speaker 1: How do you spell his name? Speaker 2: T-E-L-F-O-R-D, Dr. John Telford, he was my track coach, and my English teacher, so he gave me a lot of encouragement. There is another guy named, Mr. Walero, I don't know how to spell his name, but, so yeah there were a couple. You know, and, but the, there were many more who were, hostile. Story_ID: 71555 Speaker 1: Okay, so when you, you're considering, you have all these offers in, by the time you're, you're ready to graduate, why did you choose Stanford [University]? You've told us about why you didn't choose some of the others, but why did you choose Stanford [University]? Speaker 2: Well, part of it was academic, you know I wanted to go to a school that had a good science and math program, but also the free speech movement had started. And, you know it was interesting, when I was growing up I was in many ways very isolated because I, I sort of, I'm very curious and I would dig, and read, and search for things, when other people wouldn't. I can remember being at a party, and we'd have too much to drink and, people would sort of pass out, I would get up and go read, and people thought that I was nuts. And most of it, a lot of it was not, was non-fiction, when I was about thirteen or fourteen, and I was sort of grappling with this stuff trying to find my place and find my voice, maybe even younger. Anyway the, a friend of mine's father became, he and I became friends and he sort of introduced me to existentialism, so I started reading existentialism when I was thirteen or fourteen, and it really helped a lot. And so we'd have these deep discussions about the meaning of life, and reading [Jean-Paul] Sarte and [Albert] Camus and [Fyodor] Dostoyevsky. And it was a very important period for me, because, one thing I skipped over, my father, is a Christian minister in the Church of Christ, he's an elder. And, when I was eleven, and at the church that my father belonged to, my family belongs to, they had a practice that if you didn't understand something, you were supposed to ask, and the person was supposed to direct you into the Bible, where the answer was. They weren't supposed to tell you, they were supposed to direct you to the Bible. And after every sermon on Sunday, the sermon would end and then the minister would say, "Does anyone have any questions?" And actually it was interesting because it hadn't occurred to me, that no one ever stood up, that no one ever asked a question. And then when I was eleven in my sort of reading and investigation, I found out there were Chinese, and I also found out that there were a lot of them, and that most of them were not Christian. And, that seemed problematic to me, on a number of levels, one because the doctrine that we were taught suggested that unless you became a Christian, you were going to hell. Well, how do you condemn, eight hundred million I think it was at the time, people to hell, and it also occurred to me how did, why, why is it that God didn't make it all the way around the Earth, you know, God of the universe got stuck, in the Western part of the earth, it just seems odd to me. So anyway, I'm eleven years old, and I had already been preaching in church, I've always, you know, been pernicious, you know avoided a lot of stuff and then, precautious I should say, person and had delivered sermons and everybody was sort of grooming me to be, another minister in the church, and then I read about these Chinese. I never had even seen a Chinese, so anyway the ministry ended, brother, Emanuel, I remember his name, I actually had a lot of respect for him. And he said, "So does anyone have any questions?" And I stood up, and you could hear audible gasps in the church, and I said, but Brother Emanuel was very, he was not frustrated by it, he said, "Yes Brother Powell, what's your question?" I said, "Brother Emanuel, what's going to happen to Chinese?" And he took me to different places in the Bible, and none of them I thought gave me a very satisfactory answer, and I was a true believer, and that's the last time I went to church, and- Speaker 1: That's actually the last time you went? Speaker 2: Well, I've gone back now, but as a visitor, but my affiliation with the church ended then. And I said I couldn't be, in my heart, I couldn't be affiliated with something that would condemn that many people to, damnation. Speaker 1: That's a third of humanity, pretty much. Speaker 2: Yeah, and, at the time I thought I was going to hell, you know I thought, but I still couldn't do it, and in the church they taught the doctrine that if someone fell away, you weren't supposed to have fellowship with them. So, from about the time when I was eleven, to sixteen or so, maybe even longer, but certainly at that time I had a very strain relationship with my parents, because they were, especially my father was trying not to have fellowship with me. So, on Sunday everybody would go out to church, and I became like a stepchild, and it was like, "If you're not going to go to church, you can clean the basement while we go to church," and so they would go out to church and I would do a chore. And so then, a few years later, I met, Mr. Pope, and he introduced me to existentialism. And, it really created a lot of tension, because my parents felt like I was getting what they call, book knowledge, and I wasn't, and I wasn't getting Bible knowledge, I was getting book knowledge. Story_ID: 71556 Speaker 1: Now, why do you suppose, with all the struggles, here, here we have a family that would actually take guns to, to you know, to guard their children as they try to get them an education. You know, it's just a, this is not atypical, you know this is something pretty powerful, black people fighting for education, and your family fought for, and then when you get to a certain juncture, when you really start to, you know, really try and make sense of the world, then they, there's a, you know, "You've gone too far, you're going too far now, you need to be pulled back in." What is, what did you think they actually meant by- Speaker 2: Well, I think they knew or felt that if you weren't too far, you would start to, question some fundamental tenets, and so to them, there were markers, there were borders, that you're not supposed to cross, and the Bible was a, inspired text, and the meaning of life, and all, this sort of, the question about death, all those things were already answered, and so it was important to know how to read. It was important to know how to read, in part, I think, my parents, and I think a lot of black people thought about it, especially from the South, thought about it as, a way of getting a job. A way of, a way of studying the Bible, my father still studies the Bible, and he's a tremendous scholar of the Bible. But if there's a conflict, between the Bible and any other text, there's no contest, you put that other text away. You don't read it, you don't consider it, and so, that's book knowledge, you're taught, you're deviating this sacred text. And so, I couldn't for years engage my family in any of those questions, because, the answer was given. I'm probably going to have to stop in a minute, but I'll tell you one last story, that's more contemporary than when I was a child. My family actually is quite an amazing family, they're incredibly supportive, and we've healed those wounds, and I think my father has grown, and I've grown, in ways that have allowed us to be, incredibly close. So, I'm back with the family a few years ago, actually last year, and my family's just, they enjoy life, they really, they really do. And they're so wonderful, I was talking to someone one time, and they said, talked about this storybook thing about, "If you meet someone and you fall in love and you live happily ever after," and that, image ruins us because we're looking for the perfect love. And really life is hard, and relationships are hard, and you know, you end up liking your partner sometimes, and disliking your partner sometimes, and that's the reality. And I said, "Well, I know it sounds grown up, but that's not my reality," 'cause my mom and dad had this storybook, relationship where they were, deeply in love with each other, all their life. So, and so, even though I was a sort of, estranged from the family, love was already present, always present in the family. When my mother died a few years ago, my family had this meeting of, and they call it, they're having a party to give thanks, for, and there was no special occasion, it was just, you know, we should be thankful. And so, we're all sitting around, and the, and the people are saying, it's sort of, it's sort of interesting, one person would say you know, "I want to thank God, you know for my life, and you know, I was diagnosed with cancer a few years ago, and God brought me through that." Then, there is something terrible that would happen, and someone would say, you know, "I'm thankful to still be here, and two years ago God took my husband, and you know, he gave me the strength to keep going, and I want to be, I want to be thankful for that." So if someone got sick, they were thankful, if someone died, they were also thankful (laughs). You know, people would say, "I'm blessed because God is, you know, works in mysterious ways, and we can't question God," but, so you know, it's going around the room. And, I haven't said anything, and so at some point people are looking at me, and so I said, "Well you know I do feel blessed, and, I do, I feel incredibly blessed and I have a wonderful life, and just an incredible family and I said you know, but, you know I'm not really a believer." And it's like, silence, so I said, you know I shouldn't have gone there (laughs), so, well I said, you know "I'm just blessed," and I stopped. And part of it, it's actually interesting, I think my family tries, but it's like, there's still these things that are hard to have a conversation about. It's not even that I was trying to convince them, but it's like, it's hard for them to hear me, so I stopped at that point. Story_ID: 672402 Speaker 1: All right. My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns and we are completing an interview we started in August of 2002, correct? Speaker 2: I think that's correct. Speaker 1: And, and can you give us your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: john a. powell [HistoryMaker john powell], J-O-H-N, P-O-W-E-L-L, all lowercase. Speaker 1: All right. And what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm a professor at UC Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California] and I run an institute called The Institute--Haas Institute for a Fair and Inclusive Society [Berkeley, California], which is a research action oriented institute. Speaker 1: All right. And what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is December 12, 2015. Story_ID: 672403 Speaker 1: We left off with you in high school [Southeastern High School, Detroit, Michigan] and you were considering what college to go to and you're, you were talking about how the--well your high school administrators and teachers are sort of uncooperative. They really--they wanted to recommend you for Wayne State [Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan] but they didn't actually like, in fact they warned you against going to a larger school like Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California] because you'd be damaged irreparably for the rest of your life. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So, so what happened, what happened at that point? Speaker 2: So what basically, it wasn't the size of the school, 'cause Wayne is actually larger than Stanford by two or three factors. But they really wanted me to go to what we might call a second tier school and I got accepted at a number of schools like Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey], Stanford and the--they felt those schools basically were for white students so even though I was number one in my class and most of the my classmates who were ranked very high were also white, they felt that a black student should not go to an elite school. So they tried to direct me to Wayne or some other local schools and in doing so most of my teachers refused to write recommendations for me to Stanford. Speaker 1: Okay, but you, you managed to get in anyway, right? So what was the story behind that, how you got in? Speaker 2: There were a couple of teachers--yes there was a story behind that. There were a couple of teachers who were very supportive. You know I was sort of an outlier at my school. It was a mixed school but the classes were largely segregated so that my classes were almost all white because I was in college prep honors classes and there weren't I think for the most, most of my time in high school I was the only African American male in my classes. The school was about half black or even more so in track team or basketball team there'd be a lot of black students that I would hang out with but not in classroom. So the teachers were not happy that I was outperforming--some of the teachers were not happy that I was outperforming some of the white students and they were pretty explicit in their disquiet. In fact I remember one teacher coming into class and saying something like--to me in front of the whole classroom, "You may be the top student in the class, but you're not the smartest student in the class," and, and they said basically that if I went to a school like Stanford, I would flunk out. Story_ID: 672404 Speaker 1: But you were accepted to Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California] anyway and well, what did you do in the summer between Southeastern [Southeastern High School, Detroit, Michigan] graduation where you were valedictorian right-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --of the class and, and your first semester at Stanford? Speaker 2: I think that--I worked at the River Rouge foundry [Ford River Rouge Complex, Dearborn, Michigan]. I think that was my, my first summer and the second summer and people may not know River Rouge foundry was the largest foundry in the world, I believe, at the time. And came back and worked I think the second summer as well. And my family, some of my family members once I got the job was saying, "Well maybe you should stay," because I made $3.75 an hour and it just seemed like so much money at the time so why bother going to college. And at the foundry they had a sign as to how many days had gone without a serious accident and the summer that I was there I think it never got over eleven. Speaker 1: You said it never to over--I mean the-- Speaker 2: Yes, we never got more than past eleven days without a serious accident--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Really? Speaker 2: --in the foundry, yeah. Speaker 1: All right. And so people are like, this is a steel foundry? Speaker 2: Yeah, so we're pouring hot steel. Speaker 1: Molten. Speaker 2: And it's so it's extremely hot and it's, and has weight to it so and you can't flick it off so they're often burns and I think some deaths. I remember coming outside in the summertime, come outside it'd be ninety degrees and it be cool because you been in the foundry all day where it's 120 [degrees], noisy, hot, smelly. It would--today I think it would be--it would be environmentally illegal to run something like that. Speaker 1: Were members of your family working at River Rouge foundry? Speaker 2: They worked in the factory. I don't if any was at at River Rouge but my dad [Marshall Powell, Jr.] worked at General Motors [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company]. He started off as a sharecropper, he and my mom [Florcie Rimpson Powell], in the South and they moved to Detroit [Michigan] for opportunity, but really they moved to Detroit to get my brother back. My mother, one of my aunts had come down south and taken my brother to Detroit and for whatever reason was delaying sending him back and so my mom decided to get on a train and go get my brother. And when she go to Detroit, she sort of fell in love with it. She told my dad, "We're moving to Detroit," and she usually got her way. Speaker 1: Okay. Now this is from, this is from, from where? Where was she initially? Speaker 2: Well the family was mainly--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: I know we talked about it before, but--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --yeah they were, they were scattered through Missouri and Mississippi and they moved to Detroit I think in 1943. Story_ID: 672405 Speaker 1: So what was Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California] like in 1969? Wha- this is fall of '69 [1969]. Speaker 2: Well I went--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Sixty-five [1965], right? Sixty-five [1965]? Speaker 2: Yes, I went fall of '65 [1965]. It was strange. It was so much money and they were strange in a lot of different ways. So there were I think twenty-one or twenty-two African Americans in the first year of class out of you know well over a thousand. They--Stanford was the only elite school at the time that allowed women in, which was one of the reasons I went there. I didn't wanna go to a school that didn't allow women in. And I didn't have the language for it but it struck me that that was wrong, which is one of the reasons I wasn't interested in Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. But when we got there one of the things Stanford had done they always allowed women in but they allowed two men to every one woman. That was the ratio. Speaker 1: By policy? Speaker 2: By policy. And they obviously changed that. The exception was our class. So we're African- African Americans they just like one man to one woman you know it was just a pretty clear message right it's like you know we don't want you to be looking at and messing around with these white women. They--and they were trying to do the right thing but they were just screwed up every which way. They, they tried to put one black in each dorm so that the white students who otherwise didn't have contact with black students would have contact with one black student. They realized that might be a little difficult for the black students so they, I remember they had a psychologist come and call all of us together and we had a picnic on Stanford lawn and she served us watermelon and wanted to sort of talk about how to acculturate to being at Stanford. And then it was the first time that I really met obscenely rich people. You know my freshmen roommate, his name was Dustin Holmquist. I think his family owned the largest--one of the largest mines in the world. First time I met or heard of a billionaire and it was as strange for him as for me for us to be roommates and it was just a very strange place. I mean it's not a place I could have conceived of before going there and even though we were there, they didn't, they had a hard time with us in many ways in classes and there were literally fights and some of the fraternities would attack the black students. (Unclear)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Was there--I'm sorry--was there like a black student organization on campus? Speaker 2: There was not when I got there. There weren't any before I got there, there weren't you know we're the historically largest black class ever you know, twenty, twenty-one, twenty-two students out of yeah. Speaker 1: Now this is yeah '65 [1965]-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --this is just when black power is being coined I guess the same year that you--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah just a little bit before that but yes, yes. It's Stokely [Stokely Carmichael; Kwame Ture] and, and Rap [H. Rap Brown; Jamil Abdullah Al-Amin] and all them was just starting to emerge and the Panthers [Black Panther Party]. The free speech movement, the Civil Rights Movement was in full swing which is also one of the things that attracted me to California. I liked the--what I could read and hear about. Also I was interested in science and Stanford had a good science and math department. So I wanted to go west. I never been west, you know--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --but it was, it was strange. It was quite strange and I just remember coming back to Detroit [Michigan] and just my whole body relaxing you know having been in this very strange place for much of the college year. Story_ID: 672406 Speaker 1: Now how was it academically? Was it difficult academically? Speaker 2: Well I remember taking more courses than I was supposed to. I think you supposed to take fourteen and I took nineteen and this one semester my freshmen year and I got all A's in the, in the courses and and I remember calling my parents [Florcie Rimpson Powell and Marshall Powell, Jr.] and telling them that well and my dad said something like, "That's very good, keep it up." And I said, "No." I wasn't gonna do that anymore. The, there were other things to life than getting good grades and I was starting to get politicized. And I think shortly after that, not immediately later at Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California] and then certainly by the time I got to law school and graduate school I stopped even collecting my grades. So to this day I don't know how I did in law school. Story_ID: 672407 Speaker 1: Are there any particular students that stand out, other students that you were impressed by or became friends with? Speaker 2: I was impressed with all the students and there were a group of guys, there were six of us, now it's five, one's passed away, that we met back 1965 in Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California] and we're still friends and this once a year we call off and take a trip together. And all of them have you know impressive resumes and then we added one more from law school. So you know one was president of one of the first black banks in the United States. One was vice provost, vice chancellor at Arizona State University [Tempe, Arizona]. One of them's a very noted engineer. They're an impressive group of guys. Like Stanford even then had a pretty good football team, not the powerhouse that it has now and I have one friend, his name of John Hagar [ph.] and they had recruited I think this All-American linebacker you know from another school, a white guy, and, and those who don't know sports won't appreciate this, but John had been a good athlete in high school and so he walked on. He wasn't recruited, he wasn't given a scholarship, he walked on to play. And they said well you know we got this two or three people in front of you including this all, All-American and basically John beat 'em all out. He just--in fact the story is that they, they kept trying to block him and he was--kept getting to the quarterback and the coach stopped the game and said you know, "You gotta stop this guy you know. He's blowing through you." They couldn't figure out to stop him. So John Hagar, Flip (unclear) [ph.] he's a friend of mine. So there was a lot of people who know O.J. Simpson, the person who was leading the pack ten in rushing was a guy named Nate Kirkland [ph.]. He was leading, he was doing better than O.J. and just a phenomenal half back. Speaker 1: So this was here during the time that O.J. was playing? Speaker 2: Yeah. They were, they were playing same time--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: O.J. was at Southern Cal [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California], right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And Nate was better and Nate got politicized and quit football. So Gene Washington was another football player, he went on and played with the 49ers [San Francisco 49ers]. So yeah it was an impressive group. This woman named Grace [ph.] who is a very prominent educator. So they recruited a very impressive group of people. And those people went on to do impressive things and most of them that I'm in contact with are also just really good people. Story_ID: 672408 Speaker 1: Okay now what about the faculty? Were any teachers, are there, any teachers step up to be like mentors or, or at least you know respected by you as good teachers? Speaker 2: Well, it was an interesting time. St. Clair Drake came there at Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California] while I was there and he became friends and sort of helped the black students but it was a turbulent time as well. You know the--it wasn't just we're going to Stanford, the whole world was changing. You know we started the--I helped start the black student union at Stanford. We start pushing for different courses, more black students to get involved, we--some of us helped start a school in East Palo Alto [California] for black kids. There's a guy named Warren Hayman [Warren C. Hayman] who I think became a superintendent in Baltimore [sic. East Palo Alto, California]. So one of the things that was happening is that we were lowering the boundaries between education and the larger world. And there were a few teachers who were supportive but most were not. Not, not necessarily hostile, they just didn't know what we're doing. It didn't seem--you're supposed to live on campus your first year and a bunch of us moved off campus the spring of our first year and that was unheard of. Stanford was a little bit stodgy at the time. I think every Friday, once a week you had to wear a tie to a formal dinner and I, I showed up a few times without a tie and they reminded me, pulled me to the side and said, "You know the rule is you have to come to this dinner with tie." So the next--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Now-- Speaker 2: --next week--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Had your--go ahead. Speaker 2: I did show up with a tie and a tee shirt, which is not exactly what they had in mind. But as I recall the rule didn't say anything about a shirt, it just said a tie. So I followed the rule and wore a tie and a tee shirt. So there was a struggle there and again there were some professors--but they were actually more than not, they were counseling us to tone it down, just fit in. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. But there weren't any professors you were particularly close to? Speaker 2: There was one in particular. I mean there were a couple. There was one so--I mentioned St. Clair Drake, there was also a professor I can't remember his name you know as I think about it now, he probably was not that much older than us, we used to meet at his house. He was pretty radical and-- Speaker 1: Was this a black teacher? Speaker 2: He was a white teacher actually. Speaker 1: White teacher, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. I think he supported progressive politics. He supported SDS [Students for a Democratic Society]. So, it was an interesting place. It wasn't, it wasn't overtly hostile except for a few set of incidents here and there. But it wasn't, it certainly wasn't supportive. Story_ID: 672409 Speaker 1: One of the things interesting, I was in the same class as Mitt Romney so I actually knew Mitt Romney. I got to know his family. He seemed like a fairly decent guy and then he disappeared and what I was told, his, his cousin was also there a woman named Rebecca Romney. What I was told was that he was getting too liberal and they pulled him to go on a mission and the next time I heard about him he was governor of Massachusetts. Speaker 2: So this is a Mormon mission right? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Yeah, he's a Mormon so okay. Well. So-- Speaker 1: And you know there--the lodges had children there as I recall. I mean there was--this was the elite of the elite and for you know a young black kid coming from Detroit [Michigan], in fact actually when I first started, when I first went to California I remember thinking you always hear that white people are the majority in the country. I thought that was just a patent lie. Because like as far as I could see, there was a white person here, a white person there, a few of them over there, but certainly not a majority. And I kept thinking, so if there are all these white people, where are they (laughter)? And then later I found out, they were at Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California]. Story_ID: 672410 Speaker 1: Let me ask you a little bit more about St. Clair Drake. I mean he's you know so many people I've met and talked to speak to the brilliance of St. Clair Drake, but I--what kind of a person was he? Did you have much interaction with him? Speaker 2: Yeah, he was, there was two or three people. There was a guy named Jim [ph.], I can't think of Jim's last name, who's still around so there weren't that many black professors and, and he used to again have us over his house, counsel us, talk to us, and really sort of mentor in some way. So he's very accessible and that's actually one of the things that was positive about Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California] is that you know the classrooms were small. I think the student teacher ratio was like one to eight. So there's an opportunity if, if--but it's only in looking back that I realize how few black teachers I had going to schools. Yeah we knew it was an issue but we didn't know--I didn't know how much of an issue. But yeah Drake was definitely very helpful in many ways. Story_ID: 672411 Speaker 1: So you were a philosophy major right, was that? Speaker 2: Yes. I started off in physics and math and then switched to--actually I majored in psychology and minored in philosophy. Speaker 1: Okay. Now why psychology? Speaker 2: You know it's interesting I remembering being in lab and, and there were riots in the streets and I was thinking hm, you know I'm in the lab and people are out there and you know I always thought that whatever I did I wanted to be something that contributed to society to help people who, especially the most marginal people. Part of that to me seemed just understanding the human condition, the human mind. So psychology, philosophy seemed natural. (Cough) Excuse me. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. All right so you graduated [from Stanford University, Stanford, California] in '69 [1969]? Speaker 2: Yeah. I'ma get some water. Speaker 1: Okay. Nineteen sixty-eight [1968] seemed a pivotal year especially when race relations in this country so can--do you remember what you were doing in '68 [1968] in terms of campus activity and how were you infected by the--and how did the campus react to the assassination of Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]? That, that seemed to be like a milestone (unclear)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah. A few things. One I think I finished my coursework early but asked them to delay my graduation because of the draft. So, and so I don't I was actually on campus in '69 [1969] I was still enrolled but I had actually gone back to Detroit [Michigan] and was in Detroit when Dr. King was killed and as you might imagine the whole country was just in, in turmoil. I think that was part of the thing that precipitated the Detroit riot which was very large. I also think that there was this whole tension between method and one way one could say that there wasn't complete agreement on where we should be going but there was more consensus on that than one might, might imagine where there was real breakdown of consensus was how to get there. Excuse me. So you had some people who believed that there was no place for blacks in America and we should succeed from the country. There are other people who believe that what was needed was a revolution and that wasn't just blacks. You know there were a lot of whites believed that as well as Latinos and others. And then there was some people who believed that we should transform the country in a, quote, nonviolent way and that obviously was presented by the Reverend Dr. King. And there was big fight between groups as to what was appropriate and then you had things like Nation of Islam. So you had all of these different expressions in the black community as to the best way forward, King's death, I think, cemented the people who believed in black power and actually believed in violence as it seemed like his, his, his death represented in a sense a defeat for the idea of nonviolence. So I think in some ways it enhanced the arguments of people like you know Rap Brown [H. Rap Brown; Jamil Abdullah Al-Amin] and Huey Newton [Huey P. Newton] and others that we needed a violent revolution. Speaker 1: Okay where did you fall in that debate? Speaker 2: You know I would say a committed agnostic and the sense that I was committed to the transformation of the country and the, the lives of black people and other marginalized people. I was agnostic as to the best way to do that and so I studied a lot of different things. I, I was affiliated with the Panthers [Black Panther Party]. I certainly had a lot of respect for King, I talked to a lot of religious leaders, I was aware of things like US [US Organization] and, and so I was agnostic. It's like what works and what makes the most sense. That agnosticism both had me involved with a lot of groups but also had me not completely absorbed in one, one place. And it created problems. I mean I remember I think they had a meeting where someone was I actually think it was Stokely [Stokely Carmichael; Kwame Ture] he was saying some things and I--in a public meeting to ask questions and they were questions that were sincere from my perspective and my guess would be questions that others had as well. But I wasn't--the question wasn't answered and instead I was attacked and that would, that would play out in a number of venues and for many years to come. But the--in a sense the inquiry really trying to understand things and not just sort of take things at personal value but not taking that lack of complete certainty not using that as a excuse for inaction. But so I believed in one, we had to act; but two, we needed to constantly inquire and rethink and question things at the same time. Story_ID: 672412 Speaker 1: Did you go directly into graduate school after 1969 or? Speaker 2: I did. I left Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California] and John Hagar [ph.] and I, we had agreed that if we both got accepted to Yale Law School [New Haven, Connecticut], we would go. And we both were accepted, and we went. So I went to Yale. It was a profound learning and a deeply disturbing experience. In a sense by the time I'd gone to Yale I had become somewhat cynical and start painting with a very broad stroke so I basically believed that all white institutions were essentially the same, hypocritical, problematic. So it didn't matter where, which in a sense from that perspective which institution one affiliated with. And then I went to Yale and really learned that, that statement was extremely over, overstated, that all institutions are not the same. Not saying that any are perfect but that there was in fact a qualitative difference between Stanford and Yale. Both in terms of culture and, and that was an important lesson. Speaker 1: What was the difference? Speaker 2: Well one thing I would say is that first of all I was there in 1969 so Yale, that was the first year that Yale allowed women in. You know and it was extremely awkward. Also felt that the Yale students were much more consciously status oriented. I remember sitting at a table with other black students and students talking about what percentage white they were. That would have never happened at Stanford. And a lot of Yale's buildings, the windows face inside. You see courtyards and the windows face inside and to me that in some ways was an apt way of capturing what Yale represented. It was inwardly looking, very closed and so again not that Stanford was perfect, it was not, but it made me appreciate that there really are differences between these places. And the, the major black professor that we had at Stan--at Yale was completely hostile. His name was Dean Thomas [James A. Thomas], and you know he was really there for the administration and not there for the students and I used to publicly use disparaged words to describe him you know so very few black professors and the one that we had at Yale reflected in some ways the, the worst expression of, of blacks working for white institutions. Story_ID: 672413 Speaker 1: So now you didn't stay at Yale [Yale Law School, New Haven, Connecticut], right? Speaker 2: I did not. I was there--when I was there, Bobby Seale trial, the Bobby Seale trial was going on and we had a lot of demonstrations and I became really disheartened with the students at Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], including the black students I must say. I wasn't, I mean, some good people there and some of them have gone on to do impressive things. I have a friend who was, went to the Sixth Circuit court of appeals [U.S. Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit]. But-- Speaker 1: So Bobby Seale's on trial in Chicago [Illinois] right? Or was he on trial in Yale--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: He, I think he was in Yale, New Haven [Connecticut] I don't know what-- Speaker 1: At New Haven? Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Because I know there is a Panther [Black Panther Party] chapter that I've been told that-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I think he is in New Haven. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So they had demonstrations and stuff and I just felt like the, the ethos was not, it was too much inside the existing system you know then. And the university I think threatened to kick us out of school unless we stopped demonstrating and a number of the students including black students were just shaken to the core with that threat. One--so much so that one student started crying and it's like I couldn't believe that. It's like you know we're revolutionaries and we're crying you know. And so I decided I was--Yale wasn't the place for me. I'd gone there with John Hagar [ph.] and so I said you know I don't wanna leave you in the lurch, so I'll stay for a while because we came together and we were roommates and another month or two and then John was ready to leave as well, so we left. And an interesting thing when we left, we had mentioned to someone, maybe some administrators that we were considering on going to Berkeley and we drove back out to California in a Volkswagen and applied to Berkeley Law [University of California Berkeley School of Law, Berkeley, California] and I got in and John Hagar not--did not get in. And then the next year, my second year at Berkeley, they tried to kick me out of school. And the rationale they used is that I had not been in class the required number of times. I missed too much class and they had a rule saying you could only have three unexcused absences or something like that, which no one ever paid attention to. And it was a good fight and this very, I'd say, moderate to conservative well esteemed white professor Stefan Riesenfeld [Stefan A. Riesenfeld] he came to my defense, he said you know--and I, I started taking all the classes he taught, but then I also found out that the reason they were trying to kick me out is that Yale had actually contacted Stanford, excuse me, Berkeley and let them know that I was coming and that under no circumstances should they allow me in, that I was a troublemaker and they had transposed my name and John Hagar's name so they, they meant to keep me out and instead they kept him out. So he got in the next year and then they were trying to correct their error by kicking me out. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. But you survived that? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. And okay did you have a favorite course of study in law school? Speaker 2: Well, I don't know if it was favorite. I would say because of what Riesenfeld did, I ended up taking all the classes he taught and they weren't you know, they weren't you know, certainly there was no such thing, but they weren't critical race theory, they--he was a properties and securities professor so that's what I took. It was him that I was following around just because of his integrity. And no, I didn't particularly like--I thought law school was a tool to try to do good, but I didn't particularly like it. In fact I disliked it and as my absence might suggest, I avoided it as often as I could. Story_ID: 672414 Speaker 1: Now when you were in school at UC Berkeley [University of California Berkeley School of Law, Berkeley, California], the--I think the [HistoryMaker] Angela Davis case was going on? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: I don't know what else. I mean Huey Newton [Huey P. Newton] I think was in prison still, in prison. A lot going on in the Bay Area [San Francisco Bay Area, California]-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --Ron Dellums [HistoryMaker Ronald Dellums] was running for [U.S.] Congress-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Did you get involved in the political activities? Speaker 2: Yeah, very much so. And, and the school itself was quite active so then again another set of good friends and I'm trying to think of when Berkeley started hiring a few professors of color. Henry, I'm trying to think of Henry, Henry's last name, he I think he recently passed away, but he's one of the first black professors at Berkeley and unlike the black persons then at Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], he was, he was a good brother and you know hard and demanding but also very clear and secure in his blackness. But yeah we had contact with some people got involved with going to prisons to represent people. I did some of that. Also got involved with some of the stuff with Native Americans, so. You know part of it was just--Henry Ramsey [ph.] I think is his name. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But yeah the school was very active and I think my position in terms of using or thinking about law as a tool to actually promote social change to help social change, there was a whole cadre of us that felt that way. I also end up meeting someone who would now become a lifelong friend and a guy named Paul Hudson [Paul C. Hudson] who was a president of Broadway Federal Savings and Loan [Broadway Federal Bank] until recently. So it was, it was a, not easy experience but it was a good experience. Latino brother whose continued to be one of the most progressive and insightful person, Richard Delgado. So it was a nice, nice group of folks. Story_ID: 672415 Speaker 1: You graduate in '73 [1973], right? Speaker 2: (Nods head). Speaker 1: Now you clerked in Seattle [Washington] for who? Who did you? Speaker 2: I didn't, I didn't clerk. Speaker 1: You didn't clerk? Speaker 2: No--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: When I, I--one semester I mean one between semester I went and worked at the Navajo [Navajo Nation] and Hopi Reservation [Arizona] and then I left, when I went to Seattle I worked for the public defender's office. And in fact in some ways I deliberately didn't clerk because I felt like there was a pathway to status and success and a tradition relative to traditional setting that I wanted to askew. I didn't want that to be reflected in my, my life. It's interesting my daughter years later would go to law school, in fact go to Berkeley [University of California Berkeley School of Law, Berkeley, California], and I encouraged her to look at clerking and she probably--and, and in fact I had a federal judge who was a friend of mine who was interested in having her and she wouldn't do it (laughter). Speaker 1: She takes after you? Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean I think--I don't think it was a mistake that I didn't clerk, but I think you know I don't think you have to avoid that. I don't think that necessarily has to--what we don't--well we do matter you know. You know you can't do something every day and not have an effect on you. On the other hand we can as they say with some effort and work be in the world and not be of the world and I think we have to be willing to use some of the instruments of power to change power and to make power and resources available to the marginalized communities. So it's a, it's a delicate thing because I think that power and money and resources and status that comes with that is extremely seductive and so it's easy to get pulled. On the other hand if you don't have any power influence, you can be as revolutionary as you wanna be, you're not gonna be impactful. So it's that constant push and pull. Story_ID: 672416 Speaker 1: So, what did you do between--I know you went to India in '78 [1978] but I don't have what you did in between. What did you--? Speaker 2: I went to, I went to do post graduate work in human rights and I wanted to look at human rights from the perspective of non western culture. So I got a--I went--I got a postgraduate fellowship to the University of Minnesota [University of Minnesota Twin Cities, Minneapolis, Minnesota] to study human rights and the site for the fellowship was Tanzania. So I went to Tanzania--raised some money, went to Tanzania. That's where my daughter was born and worked closely with someone who's an icon in terms of African liberation, declo- decolonization, and Pan Africanism, Bill Sutherland and he and I became quite close. In fact we adopted each other. He became my adopted father, I became his adopted son. And got to meet people like Julius Nyerere, had dinner at his house and talked to him and Kenneth Kaunda, Robert Mugabe all these were friends of Bill's and at the time you know they were still in a fairly revolutionary state fighting to Rhodesia and the white rule so that's what I did for a period of time and then I left there and I went to India. Speaker 1: Yeah, that was the time when you know when Zimbabwe was fighting for independence and-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Yeah it was called Rhodesia at the time-(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --formerly called Rhodesia, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah the Mugabe and Joshua Nkomo and (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Yeah I know all those people and-- Speaker 1: Sithole [Ndabaningi Sithole].-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. They used to come to our house and we have conversations. Some of the people I met got killed. So it was a, it was a very intense and serious time but it was also a pretty special time. Speaker 1: Yeah now was I know there were American expatriates there, I mean in addition to Sutherland, you had, was Bob Moses there at the time? Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: And [HistoryMaker] Prexy Nesbitt. Speaker 1: Um-hm, Prexy Nesbitt right. There was a group from Kansas that had chicken farms--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Um-hm that's right. Speaker 1: --and everything? Speaker 2: Um-hm that's right yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah I met all those folks. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And as people was trying to figure out how to live an ethical life that was reflecting what we call now transformative at the time called revolutionary values. And in some ways Nyerere's was the best expression of that that was available to us and he was, he was the real deal. And then I met him a number of occasions and you know I remember having wine at his house out of a jelly jar as president you know, but he was not trying to amass personal wealth and personal power. He really cared about people. Speaker 1: Now were, were you disappointed later with it was it Zimbabwe? I mean I know people told me that they were kind of disappointed with the aftermath of the revolution--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --seemed as though Ian Smith was set out to pasture and that people just took over what he was doing in the catho- I mean the Mugabe and his party. Speaker 2: Yeah and certainly, I've been to Zimbabwe a few times since the revolution and South Africa. You know to--I mean to be candid, I'm disappointed with both. But not disappointed in Mandela but disappointed in Mugabe because it seems to me I think of Mandela as the spiritual son of Tanzania if you will and in terms of really caring for people and not just caring for himself. And it seems to be just in terms of that Mugabe has actually got enticed by personal power and personal wealth. So that's a disappointment but I'm disappointed where both countries are although it's not over you know so I think one way you deal with disappointment is you withdraw and just be disappointed, another is you continue to work. Speaker 1: Right. You say Nyerere seem to be the real deal? Speaker 2: Yeah so I think of I, I say, I've said to people that I don't think that there would have been a Nelson Mandela if there hadn't been a Julius Nyerere and so I think of in my own mind I think of you know Nyerere as the father, spiritual father of Nelson Mandela. Story_ID: 672417 Speaker 1: Now I think when you were there also I guess Idi Amin was-- Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: --was in the news and I don't know if you were there when he, when he was finally you know defeated by the invasion by Nyerere [Julius Nyerere] in Tanzania. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: He picked a fight with the Tanzanians and lost. Speaker 2: Yeah it's interesting because I wrote a paper on Idi Amin and you know I think like a lot of people at the time and maybe all people, I was trying to, because he was opposing the West and the West at the time seemed to me to be the expression of many things bad. I was trying to find something good in Idi Amin and you know he just kept making it harder and harder (laughter) and you know just so that, that saying that the enemy of my friend is my friend is like no. Sometimes the enemy of your friend is also your enemy as well. So from an ideological and practical perspective I--and it was actually an important lesson, you know. And there have been a few of those along the way but that certainly was an important one. But I, you know, Tanzania is just an amazing country right because there was not a lot of corruption, it's a poor country but Nyerere clearly believed in putting the power you have including the army to other, other people in Africa outside of Tanzania. And he defined the interest in this since he really was a Pan Africanist. I just think he is one of the great, great minds and leaders of the 20th, 20th century and sort of understudied. Story_ID: 672418 Speaker 1: So you were there, you were in Zimbabwe until what, se- from '73 [sic.] until? Speaker 2: Well I went to, I went to Tanzania and-- Speaker 1: Tanzania--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --then I, I worked, I was working with something called the Frontline States so that took me to Mozambique and Zambia and not so much Zimbabwe because Zimbabwe was still under control of-- Speaker 1: Right. Right. Speaker 2: --white supremacists, although I did have some contact, I went to Botswana and then after the white dictatorships fell in Rhodesia and I was in Africa when Steve Biko was killed and that another heartbreaking thing because he was you know very charis- charismatic and sightful. And I remember a time thinking that South Africa would never see the end of white dictatorship, apartheid and a few years later it was over. Which also set a discontinuity of things, right, is important. We sort of project what is into what will be. We create a sense of, of false causation and false necessity. We, we lose the ability to imagine anything being different. Not that imagining things by themselves will make things different, but anyway so I think those were some of the important lessons for me growing up. Speaker 1: To actually see something change because of, because of you know. Speaker 2: Yeah. And something that I was intimately involved with and couldn't foresee the kind of pretty rapid change that happened right before my eyes. Speaker 1: Okay so, so were you an instructor in Africa, in Tanzania and (unclear)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: No I worked closely with Bill [Bill Sutherland] in supporting the Frontline States and I did research and so I was like a personal assistant in research for Bill when Bill was working for American Friends Service Committee-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and trying to inform the West, particularly United States, as to what was going on. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So that was before the big antiapartheid movement that came a few years later. Story_ID: 672419 Speaker 1: Now what took you to India in '78 [1978]? Speaker 2: Well when we sort of finished our work and fellowship and I wanted to stay really in Africa and I applied for something at the Seychelles and they had expressed willingness to bring me there and have me work there. I actually worked for a number of companies. I worked for Mozambique and you know as well as Tanzania. So I was doing some legal work on the side, some trade work and I love the Seychelles, loved the people there so I went to go there. My application was held up and I didn't understand why. And after a while they made it clear that the United States government had leaked that I worked for the CIA [Central Intelligence Agency] and they are trying to prove whether it was true or not and if I could prove I didn't work for them, as you know it's impossible to prove a negative, I could come and work in the Seychelles. So after months of fruitlessly trying to prove I didn't work for the CIA, and I decided to go to India. And part of it was just being interested in Indian culture. Also the sort of religious and spiritual traditions that come out of India. So rather than come back to the United States I decided to go to India. Speaker 1: Okay. So where did you go in India? Speaker 2: Well I was traveling around, I had a little girl then, Senita [ph.], and a partner, Lenny [ph.], and we all went to India. We got a house in Madras [Chennai, India] and we stayed at the Theosophical Society [Theosophical Society Adyar] and in exchange for teaching, they gave us free room and board, so I taught there. And then we used that as a base to travel around. Speaker 1: Okay. So Theosophical Society actually had a place where you can stay in? Speaker 2: Yeah they had a big compound in Madras. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It's probably I don't know. Speaker 1: Is this the same Theosophical Society that was founded in Britain [sic.] I guess? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Madam Blavatsky [Helena Petrovna Blavatsky] and, and-- Speaker 2: Yep, yep Chris [ph.] (unclear)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Unclear), yeah okay. All right. Okay. So, so what did you teach? Speaker 2: I taught, among other things, I taught--one of the things I taught was Tai Chi which was interesting but I also taught English and I taught Tai Chi that happened just accidentally 'cause in the morning I'd get up and exercise and that was my exercise and people saw me doing it and asked me if I would instruct them in that. And I think I contacted my teacher and asked him and he said you know 'cause I don't wanna teach without his permission. He said it was fine. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. So, so what did you--did you learn anything special in India? Speaker 2: Certainly. Although I think all learning is special. The--you know I spent a lot of time reading religious and spiritual text. Also I spent time doing--I went in on retreats, I went with a Buddhist, the apostle retreat with someone named (unclear) who's, who's well know from Burma [Myanmar]. And the retreats were quite powerful you know I learned something about myself and the nature of the mind that continues to in some way inform my life in how I see life. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. So this is, this is large like a personal journey you know rather than a--this isn't job oriented or? Speaker 2: Yeah although I think from my perspective a good life, a healthy life those divisions are extremely porous so what's called personal, what's called work, what's called political, what's called spiritual, what's called family. These things need to really radically inform each other. Speaker 1: Are you suggesting that alienated work is bad for us (laughter)? Speaker 2: Entirely yes. Speaker 1: Human alienation at work is a bad thing? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. I think you know we have to bring ourselves with that old saying wherever you go there you are. So we have to bring ourselves with integrity and so this sort of cart- compartmentalizing I don't think really works. I don't think we should aspire to that. Story_ID: 672420 Speaker 1: Now you were India until when? Speaker 2: I came back, I think it must have been--I forget the exact date, probably 1980. Speaker 1: Okay. And why'd you come back? I mean had you planned to come back or did you (unclear)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: No actually I thought I'd maybe even go back to Africa but I got sick in India and that's really--cut short my plans. Speaker 1: Okay. So did you come back to California or? Speaker 2: No, I was, actually I end up going to Detroit [Michigan]. My mom [Florcie Rimpson Powell] was a nurse and spent some time in Detroit. And then reconnected with Lenny [ph.] and Senita [ph.] and we went to Seattle [Washington]. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay then to Seattle. Okay, what did you do in Seattle? Speaker 2: Mainly I worked in at the legal services office there, Evergreen Legal Services. Also did some work in terms of transactional legal work for black businesses. Speaker 1: Okay. This is Evergreen Legal Services? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. All right. So basically providing legal assistance for people that couldn't afford-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Although I think of law as a potentially a good tool, so I never thought about law in the narrow sense you know. So give you an example, I got involved with some people in terms of the production of low income housing. So I think that law is in one of its best forms is really about problem solving, problem analysis and solving and sometimes the large self will line up with that and sometimes not. But in this case it seemed to me that what was really truncating people's life options were the lack of affordable housing and so a number of us including a guy named Sean Bleck [Sean R. Bleck] tried to figure out how to actually produce and as a result there were probably several thousand low income housing units produced in Seattle as a result of that work. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Is there a name for that, for that project? Speaker 2: I don't know if they had a particular name. I know it was Evergreen Legal Services. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 672421 Speaker 1: Okay so you were in Miami [Florida] from--I mean Seattle [Washington] from '79 [1979] to '81 [1981] then you went to Miami? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay, so what was going on in Miami? Speaker 2: Well interesting, one of the things that was going on in Miami is a black man had been killed and its riots in Miami and during that same time period they're looking for someone to head Greater Miami legal services [Legal Services of Greater Miami, Inc., Miami, Florida] and given the rioting, I didn't think the rioting was necessarily the best expression of protest, but I do think protest was important and so I applied and got the job and went down to Miami to be head of Greater Miami Legal Services. Speaker 1: Okay. And those, I remember the '80s [1980s] and '90s [1990s], Miami was one of the places in the country that seemed to have periodic riots where other sections of the country seemed to have done that already in the '60s [1960s]-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --but Miami, what- in Liberty City [Miami, Florida]? Speaker 2: Yeah, Liberty City. Speaker 1: --was (unclear). Speaker 2: Yeah and then again I thought that that was a good sign. The expression of it I wouldn't say was good but the people who still were engaged and cared, and so, and that's what drew me to Miami I mean the city, the issue with the Haitians, police brutality. I mean there were a bunch of stuff going on that was you know so it was-- Speaker 1: Yeah a lot of these issues reverberate today, you know concern about immigrants and yeah the Haitian boat people were coming over, fleeing oppression in Haiti but they were quarantined right in Miami? Speaker 2: Right, that's right. And we fought that and, and eventually made some head way so I think and it's just the difference between the way that we treating the Haitians compared to the Cubans was [simultaneous]. Speaker 1: Cubans welcomed with open arms, Haitians-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Yeah, so there's a lot of work for, a lot of work for you in Miami I guess? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. It was an intense, difficult, engaging time. Speaker 1: Is there any particular case that comes to mind that you can give us a narrative about? Speaker 2: You know I was head of the, head of this so I didn't actually have a caseload myself, but I felt like we did a lot of good stuff. We did important stuff in terms of education. We did stuff around economic development. I think the Haitian case that you made mention to was quite important. And I think the, the office was a very innovative and robust office. They're just doing constantly good work. Speaker 1: What was the major source of pain in Miami in those days? Was it police brutality or was it everything? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah it was structured. You know you had a, a place that was growing, very vibrant and as you suggested welcoming Cuban immigrants not saying they always had it easy, but totally disregard for the black population that had been there. So that just seemed that stratification was not easy you know that we're as a government, as a business, as a country, as a state was willing to invest so much in one population while totally ignoring the other and of course the tension between the populations also made it difficult to navigate. Story_ID: 672422 Speaker 1: Okay so, so you were with Greater Miami legal services [Legal Services of Greater Miami, Inc., Miami, Florida]. You were the head of that until 1983 or? Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: All right. So what did you do next? Speaker 2: So in 1983 I end up going out to University of San Francisco [University of San Francisco School of Law, San Francisco, California] to teach. Speaker 1: (Pause) Okay. So you were coming out as basically a law professor? Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: University of San Francisco. Okay. And all right. So all right. Well, I know that's not all you did (laughter). Speaker 2: Yea. No it's actually an interesting time 'cause it was--it's the start of critical race theory, critical legal theory that still influence academia today. So I got to be involved with people and in some small way shape the development of critical race theory. Speaker 1: Now what is critical race theory? Speaker 2: Basically saying it's, it's taking a critical view of law, it's questioning the idea that law can be objective and then looking at how law both constructs and actually distributes things on racial lines. So it's-(clears throat) and then it's actually extended beyond critical race theory to actually looking at everything that way. So that was a pretty significant move in terms of academia in how we sort of approach the academy. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. All right. Now were you writing at that point--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, was writing and teaching and interacting with some great people. (Clears throat) And again part of it was talking about looking at the impact of law on people's lives. Speaker 1: Who were some of the other people involved in the developing the critical race theory? Speaker 2: There was Kimberle Crenshaw, Chuck Lawrence [Charles R. Lawrence, III], there was--I'm trying--[HistoryMaker] Lani Guinier, I can see some of these people's face--later people like Cheryl Harris [Cheryl L. Harris]. Speaker 1: (Pause) Was Constance Rice [HistoryMaker Constance Rice] involved in this? Speaker 2: I don't think so. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I don't think so. Speaker 1: All right. Okay. So, so this is a movement that's spread amongst the university community nationwide, right? Speaker 2: Yeah and beyond. I think it's pretty widespread now even colloquially it's not limited to race or limited to laws. It's really a way of looking at the production of knowledge and influence of knowledge that's actually has a, had a huge effect. Speaker 1: Well define what that--can you kind of give us an idea of what that way is or how is it different from (unclear)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: It'll be hard to explain shortly but-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --basically the, the idea I mean first of all the contextualizing events so you can't just look at one thing, at one event, you have to contextualize it and if you contextualize it partially with stories and then everyone stands some place. There's no neutral place to stand so Justice Sotomayor [Sonia Sotomayor], she talked about the fact of being a Latino would influence, how that would influence her view of the law. The conservatives were upset. It was like no your personal biography should not affect how you judge things or critical race theory would say there's no such thing as having a- what's called a God's eye view that is where you can look at things without your personal biography affecting them. Speaker 1: Who is this guy who possesses this God's eye? I mean, I, I--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: No one. Speaker 1: I mean who is it, who is it really? I mean the--when we get you know you go to school and you're told this is, you know, North won the Civil War and the South will rise and all this other stuff you know, you--I mean whose eyes were you actually looking at the world through, I mean-- Speaker 2: Well you're looking at eyes largely through who was the power to create a sense of normativity and so and the normativity disappears and appears to be just the way things are. There's no--everything is to be looked at through a perspective and part of interacting with people is that when you interact with people who are quote, unquote different than you it helps not only something about their perspective but see something about your own perspective to see that you're engaged in standing some place and looking at the world from where you're standing. So, so that's part of the contribution of critical race theory. Story_ID: 672423 Speaker 1: All right. I think there was a, recently a conflict on the campus of--was it Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut]--around the lionization of Woodrow Wilson [President Thomas Woodrow Wilson]? Speaker 2: Um-hm, yep. Speaker 1: Yeah. Now would that be like a dramatization of that kind of-- Speaker 2: Well certainly yes--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --I mean people looking at him from a different-- Speaker 2: Yeah, then who these people are, right. I mean somebody's, one person's hero is another person's villain. And so he was president of the United States, he also was bigot and a racist and you know so how should we look at him? Well who are we? You know, that matters, right? So if you're self-satisfied in terms of where you are, and where life is and if you're part of the elite ruling class, you can overlook the fact that he you know was a racist. If you're--you know like some people overlook genocide, overlook misogyny, overlook--but women won't overlook misogyny, and you know people who are subject of genocide would overloo- not overlook that. So part of it is an expression of power. You say knowledge is a, is a production of power in part, it's not just a production of facts. Speaker 1: Yeah I was, I was in conversation the same year I interviewed you with a woman who told me that Woodrow Wilson was one of her heroes. I'm surprised that she said, "Oh it's just like Negroes," she said, "to look at the world through their own selfish motives rather than the larger picture." So she was suggesting I should come out of myself--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right, right, right. Speaker 1: --and use this other eye to look at the world. Speaker 2: Well she's also claiming a neutrality in herself, right. She's not recognizing her own limitations so she can see apparently your limitations but she's claiming a kind of normativity and objectivity from her perspective. Speaker 1: Okay, for me to try to see I mean you know Woodrow Wilson through the eyes of his friends and colleagues, does that dehumanize me any level you think? Or does it make me bigger? Speaker 2: Well it's a little bit more complicated because this guy named Habermas [Jurgen Habermas] who's a German philosopher he talks--he writes about sort of a dialogical intersubjective world that is that our worlds are made through the right kind of dialogue and sort of learning about each other's perspective so it's not--you don't just take someone's perspective. But like I said when I, when I began to understand that others have different perspectives based on a whole set of things values, metrics, history, it teaches me something about myself but I can't just simply jump out of my perspective into your perspective and that's why Herr Habermas calls it a dialogical process a process where people are constantly going back and forth. Speaker 1: That seems like quite a bit of mental gymnastics to project yourself into you know the what another, especially a distant other, might be thinking about when they act against you or you know in some other, or against someone else? Speaker 2: Yeah and like I said it's your power's not unimportant so it's not just people understanding each other, it's who has the power to impose one's perspective on others. Story_ID: 672424 Speaker 1: So you're teaching at University of San Francisco [University of San Francisco School of Law, San Francisco, California] now, what was--was the University of San Francisco pretty open place in terms of dialogue around these issues and I mean were--how were you accepted there? Speaker 2: Well yes, yes and no. I mean we had a good group of people as I mentioned Chuck Lawrence [Charles R. Lawrence, III] and a good friend of mine Trina Grillo so part of it is you have a critical mass of people to engage with and there was a woman who wasn't at--I'm trying to think if she, there was a woman named--oh, she was a different university but she was very much involved in this, Pat Williams [Patricia J. Williams]. So, so if you get a critical number of people you can both play off of each other, learn each other but also you can influence the institution. There's a friend, John Denver [ph.], so it was a special place just 'cause there was a great group of people there. And in retrospect realize- I realize, I think we all realize--we didn't realize at the time how special it was. Like anything you take it for granted. It's like having good health and you don't appreciate that sometimes until you start having health problems. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. So well, expound on that a little bit. I mean I--you just dropped something that's you know is an issue, right? I mean it's something that actually did happen. People got health problems. Speaker 2: People got what? Speaker 1: I mean people this affected your group. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. The interesting thing is the group was worth beginning of a movement and we got a chance to help shape the movement and we, we I would say liked, and in some cases, loved each and so earlier you asking about work personal life, it was one of these spaces where work personal life, the excitement of, of knowledge production and the, the deep visceral relationship about being in a place that's actually nurturing with loving people. It was wonderful right but it's like you just think well this is the way life is, the way it should be and the way it is and then as we started separating from each other and and losing that core and interacting with other people, we realize wait a minute this is not, this is not like it was as USF. And it was actually interesting time where a bunch of us talked about all going to the same university even if it was not the most prestigious university if we could all go there together. That never happened and maybe it should have happened or could have happened but I think there is also realization that it's hard to recapture the past. You know so you know when you go back some place where--excuse me--we've had fun memories, it's only a shadow of what it used to be. But these people some of, some of whom have passed now but they remain significant in my life and in terms of who I am and how I want to be in the world. Story_ID: 672425 Speaker 1: So in '87 [1987] are you--correct me if I'm wrong, you went to New York [New York], right? Is that true? Speaker 2: I did. I went--I don't remember the exact year but I, so I was, was teaching at USF [University of San Francisco School of Law, San Francisco, California] and then a headhunter came up to talk to me about ACLU [American Civil Liberties Union] and ostensibly looking for someone to be the national legal director. I gave him a list of names and after a while it became clear that his real interest was getting me to apply for a position which--with some persuasion and push from family and friends I agreed to do. Speaker 1: Okay. So you became the national legal director of the ACLU right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. And during that time, you wrote a piece called 'Public Rights of Racial Minorities' [sic. 'The Rights of Racial Minorities,' Laughlin McDonald and john a. powell]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Tell us about that? Speaker 2: Well, a couple of things. I, I wrote a lot there when I was there but it was actually a precursor to some of the work I'm doing now. But, so part of it is just a thing about what are the rights that different racialized groups have. And seems like a straightforward question but the question that's--way we normally ask that question is that if they have rights or if we have rights, they're the same rights as the dominant group and often times that can't be the case, right. I mean because it's contingent upon one group being just like the other groups so in other words saying it's like women have the same rights as men to not get pregnant, right? Well men aren't gonna get pregnant. So for, to extend that right to women in the same way ignores how the two groups are situated differently. And now if I was writing something like that I would probably not use the word minority because minority already presupposes it's a political construct and it, it carries with it certain messages and connotations that are problematic. Speaker 1: Yeah they're reduc- it's reductive yeah. Speaker 2: It's reductive but also says in a apparent democracy you are, you don't have power. But anyway but a lot of rights that we exercise in society, not all of them are exercised in a public space. And I think one of the big fights right now is about the public. Both who's in the public and how we envision the public. So you can think about public schools, public housing, public healthcare and in many ways the way the societies sort of organize and manage marginalized people was to basically say they're not allowed in these public spaces. So it's not surprising that one of the first civil rights laws was a public accommodation law of and even calling it public is a misnomer right so you're--a lunch counter you know. Think about the sit-ins which basically says we blacks have the right to be in this public space and be treated with the same dignity as other people. And, and it's sort of a fine line. It's like, is the store public or private? Is the lunch counter public or private? So many things that are obvious are actually not so obvious when you look at them carefully. Speaker 1: Yeah most public schools in the United States are filled with minorities in the cities. Every major city, the public schools are 80, 90 percent black or Latino--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right, right. Yeah, the, the as we sort of created an apparent opening for people of color into public schools, we also created an exit for whites so that we changed the labels but we still maintained the arrangement of whites and blacks and other people of color going to largely segregated schools. But you know so that--I've written about this--that couldn't just happen, we had to work at that, we had to create some mechanisms and we had to create a story to explain it. You know how is it that we can claim to be a open, free, integrated society and many of the issues that we're fighting with Brown are still with us just with slightly different labels. Story_ID: 672426 Speaker 1: So you were at ACLU [American Civil Liberties Union] 'til 1993. What was it like working in New York [New York]? Now you taught at Columbia [Columbia Law School, New York, New York] too, right-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --during the same period of time? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was, you know the thing is that I guess a couple of things. One, I don't know--I think when you're fully engaged in something. It's, there's, there's no residue for assessing it in some ways. By that I mean you know it's like let's say playing in the championship basketball game. At the moment you're playing, that's all you're doing, right? It's when you stop playing you say that was great. You don't, when you're out there on the court, you're not saying this is great and if you're saying that, you're not focusing on the game. Speaker 1: Okay (laughter). Speaker 2: Because when you focusing on the game, that's what you're doing you know it's like there's no you know-- Speaker 1: You playing basketball--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(unclear) you're playing basketball-- Speaker 1: --when you're in--basketball in the championship game instead of-- Speaker 2: That's exactly right. Speaker 1: Playing championship basketball. Speaker 2: So it's hard to--so you know and if you think about something that you did when you were fifteen if you thought about it when you were twenty you think about it differently when you're forty, you think about getting to the point when you're sixty. The event remains the same on some levels but your assessment of it keeps changing. So certainly the larger project of trying to make the world a fairer place they still use a nice platform. It continued I think in some ways to give me access to resources and power and influence in a useful way. Those things always come with a cost though you know. And that is if you get a title and resources in a large institution but you also get the institutional constraints, its culture and understanding. So there's--it's never a complete free ride. So part of the thing they sell you is not only to use the resources there and use them well, but also to deploy them in ways they never been deployed before. And to in some ways reshape the institution itself and that was sometimes unconsciously but all times consciously the project that I was engaged in. How do I take this institution which has a lot of resources and power and influence and make it more effective both in its advocacy but also its reach for marginalized people. Speaker 1: So what did you try to do? What did you try to do to make it more effective? Speaker 2: Well there are many things but the, the ACLU had defined itself in terms of civil liberties and civil rights was an afterthought and they saw those as pretty separate. I don't see them as so separate and and there was some (unclear) so for example because the ACLU has sort of grown up around free speech from my perspective, largely poorly understood by some people they would assume that you couldn't regulate the workplace in favor of a marginalized group. So for example, if someone said something, why isn't that just free speech and why would the government have a right to regulate it? They had approached this issue in terms of a hostile workplace environment for women and saw that by what you say as well as do but it's what you say can create a hostile workplace for women. So when I got there I argued that by analogy you had the same reach for race that you could have a hostile workplace based on speech for work--for race. Initially what people have a lot of respect for, it's like, no, that's just speech. I said, "Well how do you distinguish that from hostile workplace for gender?" And what it reflected was a number of things but also someone's experience and sensibility around gender that they didn't have their own race. So part of the thing was to center race and our understanding of civil rights and civil liberties in a way that had not been centered before. And I think you know, not without some costs, that's largely been done at the ACLU now. Its redefined--its mission is redefined, it's never done completely because you people are always contesting and but there is a much more robust understanding or civil rights and civil liberties and the implications for that for people of color. So that was part of the thing that I wanted to do. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Then there are other things for example. If you look at school cases virtually all the school cases that have been brought by major institutions like the ACLU have been in federal court. It was clear to me that we were losing the federal courts and we needed to have a state strategy and me and three other people created a theory of adequacy, education adequacy that actually focuses on state courts and I would say now the majority of cases dealing with education are filed in state court and many of them the majority of them also don't use equality as the touching point, but adequacy. And so anyway so there're a number of things like that where I think both change in the legal doctrine but also changed in the institution becomes important. Story_ID: 672427 Speaker 1: So you left in '93 [1993], right to become a Wasserstein public [Wasserstein Public Interest Fellows Program]--okay a fellow, right, of--well explain it? Speaker 2: I think what you're making reference to, to Wasserstein was actually Harvard [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and I did that I think, I think still, I don't know if I'm forgetting myself, but still while I was at the ACLU [American Civil Liberties Union]. I left the ACLU eventually to go to University of Minnesota [University of Minnesota Law School, Minneapolis, Minnesota] to start a new institution called Institute on Race and Poverty [Institute on Metropolitan Opportunity, Minneapolis, Minnesota]. Speaker 1: So this is in '93 [1993]? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. So what the Harvard fellowship occurred while you were with the ACLU? Speaker 2: I think. I mean my memory might not be serving me well so it's probably on my resume, that's probably the best way to get it 'cause I know I did it, but I can't tell you when (laughter). Speaker 1: Was the Harvard fellowship valuable I mean in terms of--? Speaker 2: Yeah, you know I mean you know again I hope I learned something, had a chance to interact with students there, saw some what some of their struggles were and got a chance to participate briefly in some of those. So yeah it was definitely useful. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So University of Minnesota, now how did this job come about? Speaker 2: Well it occurred to me that one of the institutional holds was the sort of think do tank. I sometimes refer to myself as a pracademic and the idea of actually linking good research with good practice has been an ongoing need and I felt it should be institutional expression of this. So after, I talked to a number of friends about the need for this. I remember particularly talking to Chuck Lawrence [Charles R. Lawrence, III] and he said, "Sounds like a great idea but I'm not gonna do it." So at some point it became clear that if it was gonna get done, I need to do it. So I started raising money and looking for a home and University of Minnesota came together. Speaker 1: Okay. So you formed the institute first and then got it funded and took it to University of Minnesota? Speaker 2: Yeah, so concurrently. I wouldn't have gone like you know, yeah I got a small grant, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. So that was your idea okay. All right. So how did things work out at the--I mean who, who funded it basically? Speaker 2: The first funding came from the Otto Bremer Foundation [Otto Bremer Trust] which is a foundation in Minnesota. Then we got funding from other groups including I think Ford ended up giving us some money but you know just being a nonprofit org we just hustle so we got some money from some local Minnesota foundations as well as some national foundations. And part of the tricky thing is that it's a new idea and people want to see a track record and new ideas don't have track records. Speaker 1: Okay. Now Minnesota is a--Minnesota is a place that in 1993 was experiencing an influx of poor African Americans from Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: I know this from the Chicago side. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And so what was, what was some of the dynamics you were dealing with? Speaker 2: Well Minnesota was perceived as a white city and white state and relatively well off and then you had large numbers of poor blacks from Gary, Indiana and Chicago coming in and so you obviously had some clashes and misunderstandings, which you still have. I mean the numbers I think when I was there Minnesota was 5 percent black, it's now 18 percent. So more than tripled in size. And you had you know basically good intentioned, liberal whites that didn't have any real experience with people of color in critical mass. Speaker 1: So is this increased just in the Minneapolis area or the whole state? Speaker 2: I think the whole state, but that's Minneapolis, that date is Minneapolis. I was just there so I had the occasion to look it up. But the whole state, I mean the whole country right but the whole state is, is growing more diverse quite fast. Story_ID: 672428 Speaker 1: All right. University of Minnesota [University of Minnesota Law School, Minneapolis, Minnesota]. What--so you're teaching, right, as well as--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I'm teaching and running an institute [Institute on Race and Poverty; Institute on Metropolitan Opportunity, Minneapolis, Minnesota]--starting and running an institute. And it was, it was again a, a good experience, the university was supportive. The dean of the law school was quite supportive. There were some other schools I looked at where they were not as thrilled with having an institute because it doesn't--it didn't fit as well with the academic ethos but that, that's changed. I think many more schools now are moving toward practice and, and academ- research. But we raised money and then we tried to draw on the research at the law school and beyond to affect people's lives. And then we tried to take what's happening in the real world to structure what research questions we'd ask and specifically looking at the intersection of race and poverty as opposed to race or poverty. Speaker 1: Did you have, you know, did you have support in the black community in-- Speaker 2: Yeah--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --Minneapolis [Minnesota] and Saint Paul [Minnesota]? Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean it was a good experience. And I still have good friends there. And it was for the most part well received although the work was not just in Minnesota, it was national as well. Speaker 1: Okay, oh that's right. You're looking at national picture, right. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: What are the critical lessons I guess from that time period? I mean what things did you learn about the intersection of race and poverty? Speaker 2: Well, I mean it's--they're quite robust and I think there're still a lack of understanding of interaction between race and poverty and--or even to put it slightly differently between the interaction between race and class of the United States. And getting it wrong has powerful implications so I think that one of the things I guess I would say is the importance of actually helping policymakers as well as the community and others there to really understand intersects between race and class and race and, race and poverty. That blind spot is a thick blind spot that people sort of guard jealously. That much more preference to see it one or the other and in terms of seeing one or the other in this climate and even back then, there's a preference for seeing class rather than race. There's aggressive effort on the part of white liberals in particular to not see race. That's not true for people of color who experience their lives as being deeply racialized. Story_ID: 672429 Speaker 1: The other major thing I'd say I learned [at the Institute on Race and Poverty; Institute on Metropolitan Opportunity, Minneapolis, Minnesota], and it effects what I do now, is as we sort of look at the dynamics between racialized groups we actually often don't tie that to the larger economy but as we look at competition between whites and non-whites, but we don't look at how the economy is structured for the elites, are impacted by racialized anxiety. Now it might be that in that restructuring the people who are hurt most are not non-whites and this is a thing you know you often get there's something like well this can't be about race 'cause it affected white people more than it affected black people. But it turned out that's not accurate. That racialized outcomes don't necessarily mean that the groups were injured most by it are non-white groups. So you can have something that, that largely impact whites even more than people of color, they're still deeply racialized. And this is from lack of understanding of that generally. Speaker 2: An example? Speaker 1: Well, they're, they're many. So if you think about a decision to--I'm thinking about--some, some things are obvious, so here's one. Think about something like closing swimming pools in the South. The people who are impacted by that the most were whites, right? But the reason the swimming pools were closed was to avoid interracial contact. But if you look and say well who, who is hurt more by that who just in terms of numbers, you might say well they're more whites that were impacted by that than blacks for a number of reasons. One because there might be greater number but, two, they're more likely to swim than blacks. But certainly that's a racialized concern. If you--in some places, not across the board, you might say they'll be places where whites in terms of raw numbers are greater care--greater need of subsidized healthcare than blacks so but the decision not to actually have healthcare in some states at least will be driven by concern about blacks, that blacks would (unclear) to get it. And so going back you know to the beginning of the 20th century sometimes when they created some of these draconian measures around voting, including literacy tests. In some instances whites were as affected in some cases even more affected than blacks. Whites couldn't read either. And yet what was driving that was not necessarily trying to punish whites it was actually--and even the whites who will be--lose that right they may be willing to give it up or not to actually punish, punish blacks. The last one I'll give is you think about the way we do student loans. So when I went to school [at Stanford University, Stanford, California] and started school, you didn't take out many loans. There were scholarships. There were government scholarships or whatever. Most of those have gone away. And I would assert again the sort of investment in schools including higher education is a deeply racialized--is driven by deeply racialized concerns but in hiring in particular the group that's most affected by that in terms of numbers are probably whites. So you can think of as many other examples where the concern and the design of a program might be race but the impact might be that people of color are more likely to be injured and there's the elites who will benefit from it are--want this because not because of, of their races but because they want lower taxes, deregulation, all these things which aren't necessarily driven by racial animus but driven by racial considerations. So sometimes what motivates things can be racial hostility, racial concerns. The impact of it may be that the distribution is not simple along racial lines, there may be the distribution may look like it has nothing to do with race. Story_ID: 672430 Speaker 1: Now in 2001 you published 'In Pursuit of the Dream Deferred' ['In Pursuit of a Dream Deferred: Linking Housing and Education Policy,' edited by john a. powell, Gavin Kearney and Vina Kay]-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --linking housing and education policies, right? That's while you were at--that's your last couple years at the University of Minnesota [University of Minnesota Law School, Minneapolis, Minnesota]? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Right. All right. Now how was that book received? Speaker 2: Well for people in education and housing, I think people are--it's still a very relevant book and you know part of it of course is sort of education policy is housing policy, housing policy is education policy. It's very simple when we recognize that but that's not the way we organize our housing or education policy. We treat them as distinct. Where you live determines where you go to school. And so the federal government for example will oftentimes build--not twenty years ago, but today--would build low income housing for people of color with families in failing school districts. Why would you do that? You know you said the district is not serving people and yet you're consigning people to this failing school district. So I've argued with limited success that when we site family housing, we actually should look at the schools before we site the housing. Story_ID: 672431 Speaker 1: You left the University of Minnesota [University of Minnesota Law School, Minneapolis, Minnesota] in 2002 to go to what they call The Ohio State University of Columbus [Ohio]. Was this essentially the same--your program just moved into Ohio State or did Ohio State already have something? Speaker 2: No, they didn't have anything. They asked me, they asked me to consult with them and then asked me to run it [Kirwan Institute for the Study of Race and Ethnicity, Columbus, Ohio]. And the one reason I went was that the--they had a more ambitious reach. Minnesota, I felt like these issues are certainly influenced by global dynamics and we need to be attentive to that. And Minnesota at the time was reluctant to do anything global. Ohio State was neutral. They said you know, you know as long as you do something in Ohio, what you do in the rest of the country or rest of the world is fine with us. Speaker 1: Okay. Ohio State being probably the largest university or one of the largest in the country, lots of resources-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Yeah. Speaker 1: --okay. All right. So while there you wrote 'Racing to Justice: Transforming Conceptions of Self and Other to Build an Inclusive Society' [sic. 'Racing to Justice: Transforming Our Conceptions of Self and Other to Build an Inclusive Society,' john a. powell] in 2012? Tell us about that book? Speaker 2: You know the--a couple of things, one of the things that I argue in the book is that we are--we organize our sense of self around several axis economic political and in the third axis which is probably least understood and developed is the axis around who we are, our collective sense of being. And that we are actually experiencing tremendous anxiety as we--around who we are, not simply around what we have and that we need to engage that in a very thoughtful and deliberate way. And the categories that we live in: white, black, Latino are all undergoing pretty significant change and we'll go- undergo significant change. Not necessarily positive, but not necessarily negative either. It's up for grabs and we need to be clear if we want to make it positive. So we're not just talking about distributing stuff, we're talking about recreating or reconstructing our collective identities as well. When we think about that we know that, but that's not how we experience life. You know I say I grew up in my first few years here in the United States as a colored boy and at some point I became a Negro and at some point I became black and some point I became African American. Those aren't just different labels, they're--they actually point to something different and I think we actually kind of go through an even more rapid profound change about who we are, about what whiteness means, what blackness means. And so anyway that's how do we do that in a way that actually builds a fair and inclusive society? Speaker 1: Yeah, I wrote down a quote of yours and I forget exactly. You were speaking at a seminar and you said that the process of being human--well that being human is a process. Being human itself is a process. It's not like, it's not something we were born with. We actually learned to celebrate our connections, right. Speaker 2: Right. That's right. I think we are connected but we don't celebrate 'em. Often times we fight against them. Speaker 1: Okay. So any--what's the- you think the most significant thing that happened while you associate with Ohio State? Speaker 2: Well, I'm not sure. I think one of the things we did, we created opportunity based mapping opportune--and that's actually taken off and it's used now all over the country by the federal government by many institutions. Speaker 1: Now what is that? Speaker 2: It's basically looking at the way we structure opportunity and in the way we give populations access to that opportunity. So we have actually understand--so we actually talk about race being socially constructive. This actually leans into how that construction takes place. So we actually don't for the most part look at the mechanism of that construction and opportunity mapping not only gives us a way of looking at that, but all gives us--also gives us a problematic method for reconfiguring in a positive way. And it, it excused the notice that you look at a single indicator you look at multiple indicators as a structure or system and see if they're producing opportunity or not and if populations have access to that opportunity or not. And that's why it's called opportunity mapping, opportunity base mapping. Speaker 1: Do--are there any municipalities buying into that kind of view of (unclear)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, they're hundreds. The, the big--there's a case called Thompson v. HUD [Thompson v. U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, 2000] where the federal government, federal courts adopted that model for the region of Baltimore [Maryland]. The whole state of Massachusetts have actually used opportunity mapping for housing and transportation decisions. So it's, it's being used quite robustly around the country. HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development] just announced a new regulation on something called Affirmatively Furthering Fair Housing and they used this model to construct what that means. Story_ID: 672432 Speaker 1: You came back to the Bay Area [San Francisco Bay Area, California] to UC Berkeley [University of California Berkeley School of Law, Berkeley, California] in what year, what? Speaker 2: I've been here, let's see it'll be four years in January so that'll be two thousand- so I guess 2012. Speaker 1: Two thousand twelve [2012], okay, all right. And the organization you head [HAAS Institute for a Fair and Inclusive Society, Berkeley, California] is basically a continuation of your work at Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio] or is it--? Speaker 2: No I mean it, it certainly builds on it but it's not a continuation in the sense that first of all it's organized around seven clusters and the clusters focus on populations as well as themes. So one cluster focuses on disability, another on race, another on religion, another on gender, another on poverty or economics, another on health. And the notion is that, so we just had a large conference on othering and belonging, 'cause I'm sort of looking at what is race have to do with, disability have to with, gender have to with sexual orientation and what we're really talking about both in the United States and abroad is how people are constructed and imagined to belong or not belong. So belonging or othering and what people are othered. And it gives a way of creating a conceptual framework to understand race, ethnicity, gender, religion as well as hopefully to create something that's more inclusive across all those different dimensions. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. So your research hopefully enables planners to create a more inclusive environment--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah it's not just planners though I'd say you know policymakers. I mean if you think about some of the struggles we're having now around Muslims and the Syrians, you know we start with how we construct people. You know are they us, are they part of us, are they fully human, or are they strange, are they alien? And the fact that we used to call undocumented immigrants illegal aliens, you just think about that phrase, illegal aliens, exactly. So you can't generate policies for someone that's an illegal alien 'cause you can't construct inclusive policies. So before you get to the policy matter, you have to actually recognize someone's common humanity and how we construct the other has powerful implications to how we understand and construct ourselves. So that's partially what the book is about. But it's actually, it's actually intuitive but an incredibly subtle concept because that's not how we experience things. We experience ourselves as being constructive. We experience some people are sort of naturally like us, it's just, it's all constructed. You know and we experience some people as being other which powerful implications to how we would treat them, whether they're homeless, whether they're ex-offenders, whether they're you know frat brothers or sisters. Story_ID: 672433 Speaker 1: So what do you project as I guess the future of your work? I mean what do you see happening--I mean what's your role and I guess goal you know? Speaker 2: Well the goal is implicit in the name of the institute [HAAS Institute for a Fair and Inclusive Society, Berkeley, California] the greater fair and inclusive society across all these different dimensions and to do it in a global and national level. What's required to do that is quite intense and you know now we're looking at stuff like the mind science and implicit bias and we're looking more at structures and less so on just the intent of individuals. We're looking at the interaction between countries and people around the world. The world is becoming smaller. I think this issue in some ways is, is as important if not more so I mean maybe the only thing that can compare with it is climate change because it's--we have millions of people moving around the world the number three and four hundred million people from south to the north. How will we respond, how will they respond? And right now things are not looking terribly positive and we don't have from my perspective a sort of conceptual spiritual political base to move forward and help away. And if we don't get it then I think we're toast. Story_ID: 672434 Speaker 1: We always ask this question, what are some of your hopes and concerns specifically about the black community today? Speaker 2: I would say three things: one, I'm, I'm someone who and I don't organize much around hope or despair, it's more like engagement to me is what is the crucible that we need to sort of move from; two, I think the black community is multiple. The--it's not a singular community and it's actually becoming in some ways more frayed as, as we move forward. At the same time I do think the African Americans in the United States have a perspective that could be used to actually inform how we might build and create a fair and inclusive society. But it's not given. So I'm hoping that we can build from that, learn from that, mean the sort of progressive impulse--libertarian impulse and and the country (cough) has often been best expressed through the experience of black Americans, not always, but often. So I hope that that expression but equally important that it takes hold and the country really does create space for all people and that that becomes part of a, a global dynamic. Story_ID: 672435 Speaker 1: So since we started this interview in 2002 a lot has happened. We have, we elected Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] president, something a lot of black people thought they'd never see. Some of the things that have happened during his presidency we thought we'd never see. We have Black Lives Matter movement that's a movement that we thought we'd never see. What--have you been surprised by all these? Speaker 2: Not really. No. Speaker 1: Okay. I mean you're in a position to study a lot of these so I just-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah I think yeah when you study things, I think trends--you see trends before they happen. So there are fewer surprises but hopefully more opportunities. So no I think we're--I think we're in for a pretty intense bumpy ride and some of the stuff I've written in the past sort of suggested that before it happened, before it became part of the public discourse. The earlier you can jump on these things, the better. So I think a mistake that many people have was not only not being able to anticipate Obama becoming president, but under--overstating what that meant in terms of an inclusive society along racial lines as much-as well as others. I think it has some people are disappointed. I think there have been some missed opportunities but also I think we did not create the infrastructure and the imagination for something to be much more robust. We sort of relied too much on Obama doing all the stuff by himself and I think he could have done more but I think we could have done more as well to support him and to help flush out a vision, a vision for action and one of the things I've written about in this regard is something called targeted universalism, to set universal goals but target the strategies based on how we're situated within structures. But I think we have to have a, a vision that's robust and inclusive. Speaker 1: Okay, seems that Michelle Alexander's 'New Jim Crow' ['The New Jim Crow: Mass Incarceration in the Age of Colorblindness'], preceded the Black Lives Matter movement I think in some ways it may have informed the movement. Do you have any thoughts about the criminalizing of black people by the police and the legal system and what? Speaker 2: Yeah. The--two things you know when I talk about belonging and othering, if, if blacks don't belong, bad stuff will happen to blacks, you know that's the, that's the, the first and primary good we give or withhold to people in society is membership and blacks' membership especially certain subgroups of blacks are questionable and if we don't fix that they'll be a lot of negative stuff that'll happen. And the criminalization is just one express of that and that's been happening since the 16th century and it's also a relationship between if you don't regulate markets for people, you regulate people for markets which is also--we're seeing that. Story_ID: 672436 Speaker 1: Tell us about your family now; you're not married now, but you were at one time right? Speaker 2: No, I've never been married. Speaker 1: You've never been married, okay--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: No--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: All right but you have a daughter? Speaker 2: I have a daughter and a son and a stepdaughter and a stepson. So I've had you know two long term relationships, but never been formally married. Speaker 1: Is there a reason why you never formerly married? Speaker 2: Well one reason--I mean it's so interesting, one I thought the institution of marriage was wrought with all kinds of problems and so it's not any reluctance to commit or be in a long term relationship but I just thought if, if you--and I did--if you believe the laws often times an oppressive sort of practice institution why would you invite that into your most intimate relationship? Then also at some point, I used to say that I wouldn't marry--if I were going to marry, I wouldn't marry in the--in any country that didn't allow gay marriage. So--and obviously we allow gay marriage now in the United States, but it took too long, so, so those are reasons but you know so it definitely informed how I sort of approach relationships. Story_ID: 672437 Speaker 1: Now when you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there anything you would do differently if you go back and change something? Speaker 2: Yes. One thing I would do is I wouldn't look back. (Laughter) No. Not really, I mean you know you sort of learn, but learning is to me is for the future not for the past, right. The past is already done. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. The last question we always ask. And here we are it, is, when you look back--no, (laughter) no but like what would you consider I guess to be your legacy today? Speaker 2: You know, I don't really know. So two things I'll say. You know they say legacy is usually for the people after they're dead so I hope I'll have too big of a legacy right now, I can tell you where, where I think slightly different, maybe a slightly surprising response, I think that the big problem, I think what the world needs now is, is a space where what I call there's a circle of human concern, life concern, and no ones outside the circle, that we actually take the issue of othering and belonging quite seriously and in my mind the world is becoming smaller and our, our religious philosophical and ethical practices have not caught up with our changing spatial human practices and so what that suggests to me is that we need new philosophical, political and religious practices. We need the most provocative thing I was saying regardless we need a new religion. And, and I know that's going to be jarring to some people. And I would even say people don't think of themselves as not religion--not religious are still informed by religious tenants, that we may be a secularly religious society but we are a religious society and to sort of help launch that project, I see that as one of my potential swan songs. Speaker 1: Okay. Well thank you very much. Thank you for your time. Speaker 2: You're welcome. Speaker 1: It's good to be back after all this time. Speaker 2: Yeah. Good to see you. Speaker 1: All right...